DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 365 991 



CS 214 167 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

REPORT NO 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Dyson, Anne Haas, Ed. ; Genishi, Celia, Ed, 

The Need for Story: Cultural Diversity in Classroom 

and Community. 

National Council of Teachers of English, Urbana, 
111. 

ISBN-0- 8141-3300-2 
94 

263p, 

National Council of Teachers of English, 1111 W, 
Kenyon Rd. , Urbana, IL 61801-1096 (Stock No. 
33002-0015; $14.95 members, $19,95 nonmembers) , 
Books (010) Collected Works - General (020) — 
Guides - Classroom Use - Teaching Guides (For 
Teacher) (052) 

MF01/PC11 Plus Postage. 

Classroom Communication; Community Characteristics; 
^Cultural Differences; Elementary Education; 
^Multicultural Education; Sex Differences ; *Story 
Telling; Student Needs; Teacher Role; *Teacher 
Student Relationship 

Community Ties; Cultural Sensitivity; Narratology; 
Story Telling by Children 



ABSTRACT 

Emphasizing the complex relationships among story, 
ethnicity, and gender, this book explores the nature of story — the 
basic functions it serves, its connections to the diverse 
sociocultural landscape of society, and its power in the classroom. 
In addressing concerns about how to most effectively serve 
increasingly diverse student populations, the book demonstrates 
through example the need for and the power of story. Chapters in the 
book are: (1) "Introduction: The Need for Story" (Anne Haas Dyson and 
Celia Genishi); (2) n Mul t i cul tural i sm, Community, and the Arts" 
(Maxine Greene); (3) "Life as Narrative" (Jerome Bruner) ; (4) "The 
Power of Personal Storytelling in Families and Kindergartens" (Peggy 
J. Miller and Robert A, Mehler) ; (5) "Multicultural Literature for 
Children: Towards a Clarification of the Concept" (Mingshui Cai and 
Rudine Sims Bishop); (6) "What Is Sharing Time For?" (Courtney B. 
Cazden) ; (7) "'The Blacker the Eerry, the Sweeter the Juice 1 : African 
American Student Writers" (Geneva Smitherman) ; (8) "Gender 
Differences and Symbolic Imagination in the Stories of 
Four-Year-Olds" (Ageliki Nicolopoulou and others); (9) " 1 And They 
Lived Happily Ever After 1 : Cultural Storylines and the Construction 
of Gender" (Pam Gilbert); (10) "Princess Annabella and the Black 
Girls" (Vivian Gussin Paley) ; (11) "'I'm Gonna Express Myself: The 
Politics of Story in the Children's Worlds" (Anne Haas J'yson) ; (12) 
"'All the Things That Mattered': Stories Written by Tea hers fcr 
Children" (Sal Vascellaro and Celia Genishi); (13) The contribution 
of the Preschool to a Native American Community" (Susa~ J. Britsch) ; 
(14) "Stories as Ways of Acting Together" (Shirley Bri.e Heath); (15) 
"Writing as a Foundation for Transformative Community in the 
Tenderloin" (Carol E, Heller): and (16) "Conclusion: "ulfilling the 
Need for Story" (Celia Genishi and Anne Haas Dyson). ,£S) 



THE NEED FOR 

STORY 

CULTURAL DIVERSITY 
IN CLASS ROOM AND 
COMMUNITY 

EDITED BY 
ANNE HAAS DYSON 
• CELIA CENISHI 

•ra-dS'v&i 0>.'K&i <l^Vl* -O^kX* .<3S* 

— — — - 



U » DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
OM«ce o» Educational Research and improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

ftf Triii document has been reproduced as 
received t»om oe'&on o» organization 
0'iQinating it 

H Mmo' cnanfjes nave been made to .mprove 
reproduction quality 



Points oi vie* 01 opinions stated m this docu 
meni do not n«c«**ar«hr represent ottinat 
OERi poaitton ot c-^cy 



• PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

BEST COPY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (FRlCl ' 



The Need for Story 



NCTE Editorial Board: Hazel Davis, Keith Gilyard, Ronald Jobe, Joyce 
Kinkead, Louise Wethcrbee Phelps, Charles Suhor, Chair, ex officio, and Mi- 
chael Spooner, ex officio 



4 



The Need for Story 



Cultural Diversity in Classroom 
and Community 



Edited by 

Anne Haas Dyson 

University of California, Berkeley 

Celia Genishi 

Teachers College, Columbia University 



National Council ot Teachers of English 

1111 West Kenvon Road, Urbana, Illinois olSOl-10% 



Dedicated to our favorite storytellers — our families 



Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reprint the following 
material: 

Lines from "The Cleaving/' copyright © WO by Li-Young Lee. Re- 
printed from The City in Which I Love You, by Li-Young Lee, with the permis- 
sion of BOA Editions, Ltd. 

"Life as Narrative/' by Jerome Bruner. Reprinted with the permission 
of Social Research. Copyright © 1987 by Social Research. 

Selections from You Can't Say You Can't Play, by Vivian Gussin Paley. 
Reprinted with the permission of Harvard University Press. Copyright © 
1992 by Harvard University Press. 

Staff Editors: Sheila A. Ryan and Mario Welshons 
Cover Design: Barbara Yale-Read 
Interior Design: Doug Burnett 

NCTE Stock Number: 33002 

© 1994 by the National Council of Teachers of English. All rights reserved. 
Printed in the United States of America. 

It is the policy of NCTE in its journals and other publications to provide a 
forum for the open discussion of ideas concerning the content and the teach- 
ing of English and the language arts. Publicity accorded to any particular 
point of view does not imply endorsement by the Executive Committee, the 
Board of Directors, or the membership at large, except in announcements of 
policy, where such endorsement is clearlv specified. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

The need for story : cultural diversity in classroom and community / 
edited by Anne Haas Dyson, Celia Genishi. 
p. cm 

"NCTE stock number: 33002"--CIP t.p. verso. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-8141-3300-2 : $19.95 

1. Storytelling — United States. 2. Multicultural education — 
United States. 3. Interpersonal relations. 4. Education — Social 
aspects — United States. 1. Dvson, Anne Haas. II. Genishi, Celia, 
1944- 

LB1042.N44 1994 

372.64'2— dc20 94-47953 

CIV 




o 



V 



Contents 



Acknowledgments vn 

1. Introduction: The Need for Story 

Anne Haas Dyson and Celia Genishi 1 

Connections between Story, Self, and Others: Why Do 
We Tell Stories? 

2. Multiculturalism, Community, and the Arts 

Maxine Greene ^ 

3. Life as Narrative 

Jerome Bruner 28 

4. The Power of Personal Storytelling in Families and 
Kindergartens 

Peggy J. Miller and Robert A. Mehlcr 38 

Ways with Stories: Whose Stories Are Told? Whose 
Stories Are Heard? 

5. Multicultural Literature for Children: Towards a 
Clarification of the Concept 

Mingshui Cai and Rudine Sims Bishop ^7 

6. What Is Sharing Time For? 

Courtney B. Cazden 72 

7. "The Blacker the Berry, the Sweeter the Juice": African 
American Student Writers 

Geneva Smitherman 80 

8. Gender Differences and Symbolic Imagination in the 
Stories of Four- Year-Olds 

Ageliki Nicolopoulou, Barbara Scales, and 

Jeff Weintraub 102 

9. "And They Lived Happily Ever After": Cultural 
Storylines and the Construction of Gender 

Pam Gilbert 124 



Weaving Communities through Story: Who Are We? 



10. Princess Annabella and the Black Girls 

Vivian Gussin Paley 145 

11. "I'm Gonna Express Myself": The Politics of Story in 
the Children's Worlds 

Anne Haas Dyson 155 

12. "All the Things That Mattered": Stories Written by 
Teachers for Children 

Sal Vascellaro and Celia Genishi 172 

13. The Contribution of the Preschool to a Native 
American Community 

Susan J. Britsch 199 

14. Stories as Ways of Acting Together 

Shirley Brice Heath 206 

15. Writing as a Foundation for Transformative 
Community in the Tenderloin 

Carol E. Heller 221 

16. Conclusion: Fulfilling the Need for Story 

Celia Genishi and Anne Haas Dyson 237 

Index 245 
Editor* 255 
Contributors 257 



RIG 



8 



Acknowledgments 

We wish to thank: 

Our contributors, fine storytellers all, who provided chapters of sub- 
stance and style 

Our support staff, including Urvashi Sahni, Heidi Grant, Margaret 
Ganahl, and Ruth Cooper, all of whom are blessed with keen eyes and 
gracious natures 

Michael Spooner, of the National Council of Teachers of English, who 
was unfailingly interested and supportive 

David Dillon, who, as editor of Language Arts, provided us with our 
first editorial forum, "Research Currents" in Language Arts, Three 
chapters are reprinted, with minor revisions, from that journal: Chap- 
tor 3, from 65(6), 574-583 (excerpted from Social Research 54 [1987], 
11-32); Chapter 6, from 62(2), 182-188; and Chapter 13, from 66(1), 
52-57. 



1 Introduction: 
The Need for Story 

Anne Haas Dyson 

University of California, Berkeley 

Celia Genishi 

Teachers College, Columbia University 

To introduce the major theme of our edited collection, we offer this 
classroom scene: 

Louise and her four- to seven-year-old children have been 
studying ocean creatures. Today Sonya has brought a basket of 
seashells. Anthony is very excited when he sees the shells and 
tells this story: 

Anthony: One time um I saw a little baby starfish in the tub. 

Louise: Oh my goodness! Did someone put it in there to play 
with you? 

Anthony: No. It just came out of the drainer. 

The other children begin to laugh, but Anthony is quite seri- 
ous. 

Louise: One thing I know about starfish is that they live in 
what kind of water: salt water or fresh water? 

Children: Salt water! 

Anthony: It was in the fresh water. 

Louise: 1 don't think 1 ever heard of a freshwater starfish. 

Shazcnda: A starfish came up the drain! [with great amuse- 
ment 1 

Anthony: 1 picked it up and showed it to my mommy and 
then it started moving. 

Shawnda: A STARFISH CAN'T COME UP NO DRAIN! 

Louise: It's an amazing story, Anthony, [said with appreciation, 
and Anthony, who has been quite distressed by the laugh- 
ing, smiles contentedly] 

Shmenda: 1 TELL YOU— 



i ) 



2 



Introduction: The Need for Story 



Louise: Shawnda, 1 know. I know that, and you know that, hut 
Anthony needs his story. 

And Anthony smiles at Shawnda, quite agreeing with Louise. 




e all have a basic need for story, for organizing our experi- 



ences into tales of important happenings. Stories, these ubiq- 



V V uitous discourse forms, are of great interest in language and 
literacy education, particularly in light of the increasing sociocultural 
diversity of students in our classrooms. Through stories, teachers learn 
of their children's cultures, of their diverse experiences, and of their 
connections to family and friends. Moreover, through sharing sto- 
ries — both children's own stories and those of professional authors — 
teacher and children create the potential for new connections that link 
them together inside a new tale. 

Through this book, we invite our readers to participate in the 
exploration of story — the basic functions it serves, its connections to 
the diverse sociocultural landscape of our society, and its potential 
power in the classroom. In the following sections, we briefly introduce 
these three key themes, which link the chapters of our book. 

Connections between Story, Seif, and Others: 
Why Do We Tell Stories? 

Stories first arise in the context of relationships, when small children 
acquire the potential to verbalize experiences for themselves and oth- 
ers (Stern 1985). With such verbal acts, children become at one and the 
same time narrated selves, who can tell the story of their own lives, 
and narrating selves, who share interpretations with others. Children, 
like adults, use narrative to shape and reshape their lives, imagining 
what could have or should have happened, as well as what did hap- 
pen. 

Stories, then, have interrelated evaluative and social functions, 
which is the first theme of our book. For example, as an evaluator, a 
commentator on significant life experiences, Anthony told about a 
surprising find — a baby starfish in the tub — and about sharing that 
find with his mom. He cast himself as a student experienced with 
starfish and as a family member whose experiences are shared with his 
mother. In telling about this past experience, Anthony was also shap- 
ing a new event. As a social actor, Anthony was entering into the 
ongoing classroom dialogue. He expected his story to be accepted and 
sincerely appreciated, as shown in part by his frustration with 
Shawnda's laughter. 



Dyson ami Genishi 



3 



The stories Anthony told to the class as a whole, which often 
presented a mild-mannered and polite Anthony, were quite different 
from the stories he told to his close friends, which sometimes pre- 
sented a tough-talking Anthony. The latter Anthony did not couch his 
experiences within affirming relationships with grown-ups — indeed, 
quite the opposite: 

Anthony: Oh yeah. My chest is strong! 'Member when a 
grown-up pushed me? I wasn't even — it wouldn't even 
hurt. 

Lamar: Oh veah. When James choked me 1 didn't even say 
nothing. I didn't even say, "Stop that. Stop that." I didn't 
even say that, see? Come over here and cho-choke me, 
James. 



Janice: Louise is right there. 
Tyler: Scared of the teacher! 
Lamar: No way. (Dyson 1993) 

The stories of Anthony the cooperative student, the mother's 
son, the tough kid — all reveal aspects of Anthony. Within and through 
stories, we fashion our relationships with others, joining with them, 
separating from them, expressing in ways subtle and not so subtle our 
feelings about the people around us. As Bakhtin (1981) argued, the 
stories we tell place us in the sociocultaral landscape in particular 
ways, which leads to another important theme of this book: the con- 
nections between stories, culture, and power. 

Ways with Stories: Whose Stories Are Told? 
Whose Stories Are Heard? 

In this book, we view culture as a shared way of interpreting the 
world — what Geertz (1973, 13) calls a shared "imaginative universe 
within which [ members' 1 acts are signs." In this sense, culture is for- 
mulated through public dialogue, as people enter into and continually 
negotiate "socially established structures of meaning" (12). Culture is 
thus not a static concept — a category for conveniently sorting people 
according to expected values, beliefs, and behaviors. Rather, it is a 
dynamic one; indeed, contemporary ethnographers have portrayed 
individuals as members of interrelated but distinctive "imaginative 
universes," including those rooted in experiences shared by those of 
common ethnicity or race, gender, class, and age (Clifford 1988; 
Rosaldo 1989). Amidst this complexity, individuals ate active and, at 



12 



4 



Introduction: The Need for Story 



least potentially, reflective about their own sense of cultural member- 
ship (Ferdman 1990). 

Stories are an important tool for proclaiming ourselves as cul- 
tural beings. In narratives, our voices echo those of others in the 
sociocultural world — what those others think is worth commenting on 
and how they judge the effectiveness of told stories. That is, we evi- 
dence cultural membership both through our ways of crafting stories 
and in the very content of our tales. 

Storytellers often craft the sensual and metaphoric, rather than 
the literal, properties of speech, as they work to convey their feelings 
about — their evaluation of — the world. Feelings, after all, are not re- 
ducible to specific words, but are often conveyed best through the 
musical and image-making features of language — by rhythm and 
rhyme, figures of speech, and revoiced dialogue. And ways of exploit- 
ing these artful (or "performative") features vary for peoples of differ- 
ent sociocultural backgrounds (Bauman 198b). 

Moreover, the images and rhythms of our stories — not simply 
the literary equipment for forming them — are rooted in our experi- 
ences as cultural beings. The ongoing discussions — indeed, argu- 
ments — about children's textbooks and school literature are all 
informed by this realization. In The Dialectic of Freedom, for example, 
Greene (1988, 127) writes of the need for granting "audibility to nu- 
merous voices seldom heard before ... of penetrating the so-called 
'cultures of silence' in order to discover what [ordinary but culturally 
diverse people] think and have thought" through historical docu- 
ments, literary texts, and artful objects of varied kinds. Stories have the 
potential for empowering unheard voices — but stories can also con- 
strain voices. 

For instance, in his story about defying pain and a grown-up, 
Anthony was enacting words that echo in the culture of school- 
children, who often enjoy proclaiming their own power agains f the 
adult world. Indeed, his friends easily and eagerly told their own 
such stories. However, at the same time that the children were using 
the stories to proclaim their identity as boys and "tough kids," those 
stories were also, in a sense, claiming them. That is, the boys were 
adopting dominant cultural storylines about how tough kids talk 
(Foucault 1977). 

Stories, and thereby aspects of children's selves, can be silenced 
if listeners (including teachers and peers) do not appreciate the diverse 
ways stories are crafted and the range of experiences they tap. 
Shawnda's expectation that Anthony's story fit the facts, be a proper 



13 



Dyson and Genishi 



5 



science storv, as it were, would have eliminated his story if not for the 
mediation of Louise; she understood Anthony's "need for story/' for 
some kind of social connection and feeling of mutuality. Moreover, if 
certain stories are never heard beyond a narrow circle — for example, 
if stories of toughness are never echoed or challenged in stories heard 
in the classroom forum — they will never be "dialogized," to use Bakh- 
tin's term. That is, thev will not be rendered a story among possible 
stories, other ways of being; in which case, they may not be a source 
of identification and power but of constraint, of limits. 

With this comment on the necessity of classroom dialogue, we 
enter into the third theme of our collection — the ways in which teach- 
ers and students might use stories to negotiate a classroom culture. 

Weaving Communities through Story: Who Are We? 

The storytelling self is a social self, who declares and shapes important 
relationships through the mediating power of words. Thus, in sharing 
stories, we have the potential for forging new relationships, including 
local, classroom "cultures" in which individuals are interconnected 
and new "we's" formed. Through stories by children, teachers, and 
professional authors, characters — given life through word pictures 
and verbal rhythms — enter the classroom, and in so doing they bring 
new life experiences and points of view. At the same time, those very 
images and rhythms reverberate in the memories of audience mem- 
bers, who reconstruct the story with the stuff of their own thoughts 
and feelings. In such ways, individual lives are woven together 
through the stuff of stories. 

Moreover, just as new language and experiences enter the class- 
room through children's stories, children themselves gain opportuni- 
ties to try on the language and experiences of others, to infuse 
themselves into new ways with words. Anthony's first unofficial class- 
room performances were raps and rhymes, but his stories were con- 
versational in tone; by the end of the year, though, he was trying out 
literary phrases learned in school: 

I was at the store. 

And suddenly, somebody came and talk to my mother. 
And she knew him. 

And on * bv one, she dropped some apple juice. 
And she had to clean it all up. 

"And suddenly [Anthony said the phrase with dramatic ur- 
gency!, somebody came and talk to my mother." And then, "one by 



ERLC 



6 



Introduction: The Need for Story 



one she dropped some apple juice." We don't ordinarily think of 
"some apple juice" as dropping "one by one," but Anthony has none- 
theless succeeded in transforming an everyday scene in the grocery 
store into an artful, crafted tale; and that tale has rhythms slower than 
those of his rap songs, and images gentler than those of his tough-guy 
hyperbole. 

This intermingling of voices and exploring of story possibilities 
can only happen in classrooms where stories themselves are allowed 
and, just as critically, when they exist within a larger classroom context 
of diverse story models, appreciative, respectful listening, reflective 
talking, and playful ways with words. That is, the official imaginative 
universe of the classroom must be a permeable one, for, in culturally 
diverse classrooms, students will collectively embody more ways with 
words, more lived worlds than their teacher. 

The Need for Story 

The following chapters people these key themes — the purposes, socio- 
cultural roots, and community-making powers of stories — with chil- 
dren, teachers, and parents from many backgrounds and in many 
present circumstances. While each section highlights one of the 
themes, all are interwoven throughout the book. 

Through our joint efforts, we, along with all contributors to this 
book, hope to help teachers listen more sensitively to the stories of 
their students and, moreover, to exploit the power of those stories for 
bringing children and their diverse experiences into the classroom and 
for forging new connections among students and teachers. To current 
concerns about our inaeasingly diverse student population and about 
the school's effectiveness in serving those students, we collectively 
declare through vivid example the need for and the power of story. 

References 

Bakhtin, M. (1981). Discourse in the novel In M. Holquist (Ed.), C. Emer- 
son and M. Holquist (Trans.), The dialogic imagination: Four t'ssrti/s by 
M. M. Bakhtin (259-422). Austin: University of Texas Press. (Original 
work published 1934-1935) 

Bauman, R. (1986). Story, performance, and event. Rowley, MA: Newbury 
House. 

Clifford, J. (1988). The predicament of culture: Twentieth century ethnography, lit - 
erature, and art. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 



15 



Dyson and Gcnishi 



Dyson, A. Haas. (1993). Social world* of children learning to write in an urban 
primary school. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Ferdman, B. (1990). Literacy and cultural identity. Harvard Educational Re- 
view, 60, 181-204. 

Foucault, M. (1977). Language, counter-memory, practice: Selected essays and 
interviews. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 

Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures: Selected essays. New York: Ba- 
sic Books. 

Greene, M. (1988). The dialectic of freedom. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Rosaldo, R. (1989). Culture and truth: The remaking of social analysis. Boston: 
Beacon Press. 

Stern, D. (1985). The interpersonal world of the infant: A vieze from psychoanaly- 
sis and developmental psychology. New York: Basic Books. 



1 



Connections between 
Story, Self, and Others: 
Why Do We Tell Stories? 



17 



11 



2 Multicuituralism, 
Community, and the Arts 

Maxine Greene 

Teachers College, Columbia University 

Maxinc Greene frame* this collection with an expansive vision of multi- 
cuituralism ami the role of the arts in the formation of a community — and 
self-ivithhi-a-community — that is open to difference and change. Using 
literature as her base, she offers affecting answers to our underlying ques- 
tion, "How do we create spaces for pluralism in our selves and our lives?" 

American teachers today are being asked to confront the chal- 
lenges of plurality and multiplicity in ways we have seldom 
considered before. We have spoken often, it is true, about indi- 
vidual differences; we have tried to take into account ethnic differ- 
ences when they have showed themselves in our classrooms. Our end 
in view, however, was ordinarily to draw our students (diverse though 
they might appear to be) into some sort of community. We strove for 
what Dewey called a sharing of experience, the kind of communica- 
tion in which learning might begin. Dewey did recognize the diversity 
of groups in our society and the fact that each group had its traditional 
customs, but he said it was this that 

forced the demand for an educational institution which shall 
provide something like a homogeneous and balanced environ- 
ment for the young. Only in this way can the centrifugal forces 
set up bv the juxtaposition of different groups within one and 
the same political unit be counteracted. The intermingling in the 
school of youth of different races, differing religion, and the 
unlike customs creates for all a new and broader environment. 
Common subject matter accustoms all to a unity of outlook 
upon a broader hori/on than is visible to the members of any 
group while it is isolated. (191h, 25) 

Me worked, therefore, for the school's assimilative forces and "steady- 
ing and integrative office/' 

Wondering at this today, we still suffer the erosion of community 
and reach out for a connectedness we feel has been lost. At once, we 
recognize that we are sharing a historical and cultural predicament 
with people all over the world. Try as we may to make things compre- 



13 



12 



Miilticiiltumlism, Community, and the Arts 



hensible, we are experiencing attacks on the familiar, "the irruption of 
otherness/' as one writer says (Clifford 1988, 13), of the unexpected. 
Whatever common experiences there are occur in contexts where new 
meanings keep germinating. We can recall Dewey struggling to chart 
a way from what he called the Great Society to the Great Community, 
saying that — when the way w r as open — democracy would come into 
its own, "for democracy is a name for a life of free and enriching 
communion. It had its seer in Walt Whitman" (Dewey 1954, 184). If this 
were so, and if Dewey also believed that "the moral prophets of hu- 
manity have always been poets even though they spoke in free verse 
or by parable" (1958, 348), it may be worthwhile to consult what 
Whitman had to say about communion. He wrote about the many 
shapes arising in this country, the "shapes of doors giving many exits 
and entrances" and "Shapes of Democracy • . • ever projecting other 
shapes." In "Song of Myself" (Whitman 1931, 53), he wrote: 

Through me the many long dumb voices, 
Voices of the interminable generations of prisoners and slaves, 
Voices of the diseas'd and despairing and of thieves and 
dwarfs, 

Voices of cycles of preparation and accretion, 

And of the threads that connect the stars, and of wombs and 

of the father-stuff, 
And of the rights of them the others are down upon. . . . 
Through me forbidden voices. . . . 

We cannot but wonder whether, in those affirmations regarding as- 
similation and integration, there were not, even seventy-five years 
ago, moments of recognition that there were indeed dumb and stifled 
voices — voices of women, of immigrants, of the "diseas'd and despair- 
ing" — that demanded a more complex, more troubling conception of 
community. 

Today, with the recent emergence of what is called multicultu- 
ralism, with all the attendant demands and confusions and potentiali- 
ties, we realize we have moved far beyond simplistic notions of 
melting pots and social balance wheels. We are challenged to come to 
terms with conceptions of difference and heterogeneity that go beyond 
w r hat Dewey seems to have had in mind. We are asked to acknowledge 
contingency, meaning the dependence of perspective and point of 
view 7 on lived situation, on location in the world. We are only begin- 
ning to realize the significance of perspectivism, of the rejection of 
objectivism, of fixed authorities, of standards residing in some higher 
realm — standards that apply to everyone and everything, like the 



13 



Maxine Greene 



13 



judgments of James Joyce's "indifferent God, paring his nails" (1947, 
473). Even as I write that and feel the change in tone, I cannot but 
introduce something that gives rise for me to the modern or post- 
modern notion of contingency again, a notion with which we have to 
come to terms. 

It involves the book called Lucy by Jamaica Kincaid, at a moment 
when Lucy (who has come from Antigua to be an au pair girl in New 
York with the liberal Mariah and her family) recalls having had to 
memorize and recite a poem about daffodils by a long-dead poet. She 
realized her two-facedness in the midst of it: "Outside, I seemed one 
way, inside, I was another; outside false, inside true. And so I made 
pleasant little noises that showed both modesty and appreciation, but 
inside 1 was making a vow to erase from my mind, line by line, every 
word of that poem" (1990, 18). She had forgotten it, it appears, until 
Mariah began talking about the daffodils pushing out of the ground in 
the spring, and how glad they made her feel to be alive. Shown the 
yellow flowers in a garden, Lucy finds herself wanting to kill them: "I 
wished I had an enormous scythe; I would just walk down the path, 
dragging it alongside me, and I would cut these flowers down" (18). 
Then she thinks that nothing could change the fact that, where Mariah 
saw beautiful flowers, she saw "sorrow and bitterness." This suggests 
what contingency may turn out to mean. Lucy had grown up aware of 
being a colonial (or a postcolonial) in the British Empire, compelled to 
read and admire traditional English poets, who came to represent all 
that was being imposed upon the island children in the Queen Victoria 
Girls' School. It is clear enough that no judgment of her "incorrect- 
ness" could be validated, simply because she saw no beauty in 
Wordsworth's daffodils. Are daffodils, because poems are written 
about them, to be considered objectively valuable, worthy of every- 
one's awe? Is there some fixed standard against which Lucy's response 
must be weighed? We are becoming increasingly aware of such ques- 
tions, even as we are becoming aware that there are no frameworks in 
which differences of response (like Mariah's and Lucy's, like the clas- 
sical music critic's and the rap singer's) can ever be finally resolved. 

1 believe we have to make space for a reality like Lucy's *.nd like 
that of the rap singer without, if we can avoid it, making either one 
"other," rendering either exotic or an object of amazement or compas- 
sion. I believe as well that we have to ponder the opening of our own 
lived spaces as members of a teaching community, people with distinc- 
tively shared concerns. Yes, indeed, as wc are repeatedly reminded, 
those concerns must include the kinds of pedagogies required for 



14 



Multiculhiralism, Community, and the Arts 



economic survival in the contemporary technological world and, we 
would hope, for the decisions people will face as they seek pathways 
through that world. But they must also include pedagogies that enable 
persons to become as persons, developing in networks or relation- 
ships, seeking their freedom, finding their voices, looking through the 
perspectives opened by subject matters upon a "reality" that is never 
quite the same. Certainly it can never be identical for everyone, no 
matter how "normal" particular descriptions appear to be to the ma- 
jority or to those in charge. 

Many have begun to discover that they can best reach students 
with such ends in view if they try to do so against the background of 
their own life stories, their own narratives. Narratives, we have come 
to realize, are the means by which we gradually impart meaning to the 
events of our own lives. There is, on all sides, a growing interest in 
narrative or in storytelling as a mode of sense-making (Bruner 1986, 
11-43). Numerous people in education are recognizing the importance 
of coming in touch with the patterns of their own self-formation if they 
are to find connection points with other human beings whose memo- 
ries may link with theirs at certain junctures and, perhaps, seem alien 
at others. And then there are the childhood recollections of images of 
being cared for and of caring, and of the diverse shapes such images 
can take. There are the impacts of class, color, gender, the marriage 
condition of parents, the setting — urban and high-rising, or rural un- 
der a big sky It is, as many have found, not only the events, the modes 
of action that must be recaptured; it is the landscape — perceived and 
felt and imagined — against which the activities have taken place. 

When I, for example, confront the challenges of multicultural- 
ism or the demands that long-overlooked words and voices should be 
included in our traditions and our curricula, when I am reminded how 
necessary it is to revise the perspectives taken upon our history, I 
cannot but think back to my own introduction to what was once called 
the great tradition and my association of certain works in that tradition 
with the wider world I wanted desperately to enter. I saw the great 
poets and playwrights and novelists as representatives of something 
larger, more radiant, more complex, more revealing than the petit bour- 
geois life of my family (although 1 did not call it that). There was 
something tempting, seductive, $tnm$e in what I saw as possible ways 
of being in a world somehow across the tracks from my desperately 
ordinary life. It must be admitted that those possible ways of being 
were those contained in and suggested by what we now speak of as 
the "Euro-centric canon." I had no means of realizing that the canon 



21 



Maxinc Greene 



15 



was a constructed one, a selection from the great range of human 
achievements made by powerful and authoritative white men. I had 
no means of suspecting that even they were convinced that they were 
giving voice to something universal, worthy of emulation, unarguably 
"real." 

So I read what was accessible to me; and the texts opened chan- 
nels in rny consciousness, roadways out of the everyday I do not 
believe I actually wanted to be Lady Macbeth (although I admired her 
fierce ambition, her audacity), but I did daydream about those shad- 
owed castles on the Scottish moors. I did not necessarily want to be a 
courtesan on the Paris streets that Baudelaire described with such 
bitter, exquisite clarity; nor did I want to be Emma Bovary. I liked 
thinking, though, about living on the edge of respectability (even in 
rain-washed Paris alleys). I certainly longed to experience passions the 
size and complexity of Emma Bovary's or Anna Karenina's. If I died a 
suicide — like Emma, Anna, and Edna Pontellier in The Azvakening — I 
would (I suppose I thought) attract a kind of tragic attention. (Arsenic, 
railroad wheels, the sea: all seemed better than Brooklyn streets or 
nursing homes.) What 1 wanted was to plunge out of the common- 
place, perhaps (if I learned enough) to transmute the commonplace 
into an alternative reality. So I read and collected visions, some from 
Emily Dickinson, some from the Brontes, a few from George Eliot 
(especially from Middlemarch) , occasionally (hesitantly) from Virginia 
Woolf. It must be admitted that most of my pictures of the possible 
were composed out of the stuff of novels by males — not only Flaubert, 
but Hawthorne, Melville, James, Hemingway, Fitzgerald. Only later 
was I forced to realize the degree to which my reality was constructed 
by such males — by what they saw and expected of the women they 
wrote about. Not all of what they wrote suggested something splendid 
and tragic, but the very fact that they paid attention created an ambi- 
ance quite other than what 1 found at home. 

It took quite awhile before I could even begin to come to terms 
with what Woolf pointed out in A Room of One's Own. Women, she said, 
"burnt like beacons" in the works of the poets; they were "heroic and 
mean; splendid and sordid; infinitely beautiful and hideous in the 
extreme; as great as a man, some think even greater. But this is woman 
in fiction. In fact, as Professor Trevelyan points out, she was locked up, 
beaten, and flung around the room" (Woolf 1957, 45). It took me a long 
time to realize that discrepancy, as it took me years to realize women's 
absence from history. I was not conscious of the fearsome silences 
where women's actual voices were concerned: silences like those Tillie 



9 ^ 



16 



Multiculturalism, Community, and the Arts 



Olsen (1978, 6) had in mind when she wrote of literary history "dark 
with silences/' of the "unnatural silences" of those who work too hard 
to express themselves, of those who do not have the word. I mention 
this now because the recognition of such silences played such an 
important role in my narrative. It was marked by the many occasions 
when I tried to speak in ways that pleased, in a tone like that of male 
colleagues — analytic colleagues, empirically oriented colleagues — not 
in my own existential, semiliterary style. (My colleagues said, "Soft, 
that is what it is. Soft cognition. That is what she has.") I was like 
Kincaid's Lucy in some manner — two-faced, making solemn calcula- 
tive noises. I say this because I need to suggest what it was like to learn 
to pay heed to the silences. I say it because I realize how it made me 
attentive to multiplicity, to perspectivism, to the importance of having 
enough courage to look through my own eyes — and, yes, speak in my 
own faulty voice. 

There were kindred experiences in museums when I was grow- 
ing up. I saw Botticelli, of course, and felt no objection to that naked 
Venus. I saw El Greco paintings, Turner's, Cezanne's, Monet's, and I 
simply (silently) claimed them as my own, as I did the writers in the 
"great tradition." They gave me a sort of litany, in fact, as time went 
on. Much later, I tried to flood domains of teacher education with talk 
about the images and texts I loved so well. I wanted to infuse my 
pedagogy with talk about the great European and American poets, as 
well as Dostoevski and Tolstoy and Chekhov and even (when I dared) 
Dante and Cervantes. Only later did I take heed of the vacancies in the 
paintings I loved so well: the ways women were rendered, made into 
figures of vanity, objects to be looked at (as the Elders peered at the 
bathing Susannah). Berger, in his Ways of Seeing (1984), reminds us that 
even today advertising, journalism, television depict women differ- 
ently than they do men. "The ideal spectator," says Berger, "is always 
assumed to be male and the image of the woman is designed to flatter 
him" (64). The woman, Berger keeps reminding us, is more often than 
not treated as a thing or an abstraction. The woman is frequently nude; 
the man, perhaps in uniform or staring from behind a hedge, perhaps 
dressed for a picnic on the grass, is clothed and covered and dignified. 
The woman may hold a mirror or an apple to confirm her narcissism 
or her fatal seductiveness. I could not see earlier in my life, largely 
because I was working so hard to join the great canonical community. 
I wanted those paintings to take me in, even as I wanted to internalize 
what they showed, because then 1 would belong. 



23 



Maxine Greene 



17 



I need to make this present now because it gives me some mode 
of understanding the obliteration of others, the silencing, the distor- 
tion. We need only recall Toni Morrison's The Bluest Eye (1972) and live 
again the fearful attacks on the psyche of the little black girl, Pecola 
Breedlove. She was brought up in a school that imposed the basal 
reader Dick and jane in all its terrible irrelevance to the life of a poor 
and unloved child. She wanted, above all else, to have blue eyes and 
look like Shirley Temple, because only then, she believed, would her 
human reality be acknowledged. Pecola is driven mad by that as much 
as the rape she suffers, but there is something about the distorting 
pressures of the basal reader and the Shirley Temple image that re- 
mains recognizable to me, even though my life has been far, far kinder. 

It is interesting to note, in Olsen's story "I Stand Here Ironing," 
a similar reference to Shirley Temple, this one in connection with the 
narrator's daughter, the child of "depression, war, and fear." Midway, 
the mother recalls the daughter fretting over her appearance, "thin and 
dark and foreign-looking at a time when every little girl was supposed 
to look or thought she should look like a chubby blonde replica of 
Shirley Temple" (Olsen 1976, 20-21). At the end, when she sums it up 
and finds she cannot "total" all that had happened, she thinks again 
that her daughter "was dark and thin and foreign-looking in a world 
where the prestige went to blondeness and curly hair and dimples, she 
was slow where glibness was prized." It takes time — it took me time — 
to realize the damage done by the culture's icons, especially to those 
who know no way of naming them and are offered no way of confirm- 
ing their own identities or, as Olsen put it, to know that they are more 
than dresses on the ironing board, "helpless before the iron." 

How do we solve the problem of inducting the young into what 
Dewey spoke of as a "homogenized and balanced environment" — or, 
better, accustom them to a "unity of outlook upon a broader horizon 
than is visible" to the members of isolated groups? Once we recognize 
that situation — "depression, war, and fear" perhaps, color perhaps, 
class perhaps — cannot but affect vantage point even on shared experi- 
ence, we can no longer take for granted the easy achievement of a 
"unity of outlook." I cannot but think of Spike Lee's film Do the Right 
Tiling and confront once more the racial prejudices, the conflicting 
lifestyles, the contesting meanings in one neighborhood in Brooklyn, 
New York. There is the appalling recognition of how difficult it can be 
to resolve the tensions that exist even among well-meaning Blacks, 
Italians, Koreans, Irish, not to speak of the misunderstandings among 



18 



Multiculturalism, Community, and the Arts 



age groups. No one is wholly right or wholly wrong in that film. And 
we are properly left with the ambiguities, asked to choose, unable to 
choose between the examples of Malcolm X and Martin Luther King. 
Inevitably this connects with the spectacle of Los Angeles not long ago 
and the specters of what is to come. 

West (1989) stresses the urgent importance of acknowledging 
the "distinctive cultural and political practices of oppressed people" 
without highlighting their marginality in a fashion that further margi- 
nalizes them. He writes of the need to examine all Eurocentric or 
patriarchal discourse in relation to the resistance of black and other 
long-silenced people. We have, he tells us, to look at their multiple 
contributions to the culture, especially where the popular arts are 
concerned. "Black cultural practices," he points out, 

emerge out of an acknowledgement of a reality they cannot not 
know — the ragged edges of the real, of necessity; a reality his- 
torically constructed by white supremacist practices in North 
America. .. . These ragged edges — of not being able to eat, not 
to have shelter, not to have health care — all this is infused into 
the strategies and styles of black cultural practices. Of course, 
all people have undergone some form of social misery, yet peo- 
ple of African descent in the United States have done so in the 
midst of the most prosperous and wealthy country of the world. 
(West 1989,93) 

It is not just a matter of seeing or of breaking through the condi- 
tions of our minds that imposes invisibility on so many. It is a matter 
of helping change the practices, doing something to mend the ragged 
edges. E. L. Doctorow's Ragtime (1975) comes back to me, along with 
the landscape of denial and manipulation it painted, one on which (I 
must admit) I lived many years of my early life. I am not sure if it was 
the 1954 Supreme Court decision and what I read about the so-called 
dolls experiment conducted over the years by Kenneth Clark that 
demonstrated the damage done to black children's identity by separa- 
tion and exclusion over the years. (Who can forget those children 
selecting out the white dolls as more beautiful, more acceptable?) 
There was Coles's wonderful Children ofCrfcb (1967) as well, making 
so many readers comprehend for the first time how Ruby and other 
brave black southern youngsters actually felt about themselves in a 
bland, white-dominated world. 

Doetorow wrote at the beginning of his book, referring to Now 
Roehello in 1906 (much before my time but profoundly relevant, even 
so): 



Maxine Greene 



19 



Theodore Roosevelt was President. The population customarily 
gathered in great numbers either out of doors for parades, pub- 
lic concerts, fish fries, political picnics, social outings, or indoors 
in meeting halls, vaudeville theatres, operas, ballrooms. There 
seemed to be no entertainment that did not involve great 
swarms of people. Trains and steamers and trolleys moved 
them from one place to another. That was the style, that was the 
way people lived. Women were stouter then, they visited the 
fleet carrying white parasols. Everyone wore white in summer. 
Tennis racquets were hefty and 'the racquet faces elliptical. 
There was alot of sexual fainting. There were no Negroes. There 
were no immigrants. (1975, 3-4) 

The story, of course, has focally to do with a decent, intelligent black 
man named Coalhouse Walker] who is cheated, never acknowledged, 
never understood, never seen. He launches upon his own fated strat- 
egy of vengeance, which ends when promises are broken and he is 
shot down in cold blood. 

Because of mv own blindnesses, my own incapacities to see and 
hear, 1 need (as some others do) to reflect back on my own landscape 
as a teacher. I need to create and re-create my own project in these days 
of pluralism and multiplicity. I realize that 1 am doing this not solely 
as a separate individual, autonomous, with my own unique vision of 
the world. I have begun to agree with those who say that the very 
notion of a unique individual was an eighteenth century construct, 
developed when laissez-faire theories and free enterprise systems 
were developing. In these different times, 1 have to perceive my sub- 
jectivity as open to the common, involved in intersubjectivity on all 
sides, entangled in languages that have come down to me in great 
skeins of intertextualily and patterns of thought and contexts that 
make my self-reflectiveness part of a whole. In any event, it has be- 
come vcrv important to me to fill the voids, the holes in my own 
experience when it comes to being with others and being in the world. 

All this appears at least as necessary as taking more and more 
books on diverse cultures out of the library, although that is essential 
too. When 1 face the astonishing gaps in my past readings, I remain 
incredulous. There are, for example, those Maxine Hong Kingston 
(1989) calls "China Men," who chopped trees and laid railroad tracks 
in the dust of the Sandalwood and Sierra Nevada mountains. 1 knew 
about the Chinese Exclusion Acts, I am sure, but I did not really 
understand what they entailed. And even today, 1 cannot understand 
whv I was not even curious about the men who built the railroads and 
were responsible, after all, for that moment in Utah, that moment of 



20 



Multiculturalism, Community, and the Arts 



the Golden Spike, when the tracks met coming from east and west I 
never knew about such a person as Ah Goong, described by Hong 
Kingston, whose papers were burned in the San Francisco fire, whose 

existence was outlawed by the Chinese Exclusion Acts The 
family called him Fleaman. They did not understand his accom- 
plishments as an American ancestor, a holding, homing ances- 
tor of this place. He'd gotten the legal or illegal papers burned 
in the San Francisco earthquake and fire; he appeared in Amer- 
ica m time to be a citizen and to father citizens. He had also been 
seen carrying a child out of the fire, a child of his own in spite 
of the laws against marrying. He had built a railroad out of 
sweat, why not have an American child out of loneinc? (Kine- 
ston 1989, 151) h h ' 8 

Do we not as teachers have at least to take that into account as 
we do the experiences of the mothers and daughters described by Amy 
Tan, of the Latin and Central American, the Mexican dreams and 
memories and endless journeys recounted by Octavio Paz, by Jorge 
Luis Borges, by Gabriela Mistral, by Gabriel Garcia Marquez, by 
Clarice Lispector, whose visions, whose realities, whose ideas of time 
and death and history were so lacking in the things I learned? And 
what of those bodies, those faces in the murals done by Diego Rivera 
and of Frida Kahlo's images, and of the Chicano syncretic uses of 
mainstream styles, their pop sculptures, their domestic altars? What of 
all these? I am not saying that one tradition should replace another; 1 
am not attempting to invent new hierarchies and absolutes. It is only 
a mode of seeking out ways of paying heed, connecting in some 
manner with the lived lives of diverse children., wanting to enter in 
and at once to remain themselves. 

There are more, so many more. There are the grandchildren of 
the Holocaust survivors. Ought we not to know some of what Cynthia 
Ozick (1989) has had to tell in The Shazel or in The Cannibal Galaxy ? The 
same Cynthia Ozick, writing about metaphor and memory, reminds us 
of how metaphor can translate memory into a principle of continuity 
when she writes about the transforming effects of memory. She speaks 
of dead writers who seem to contain our experience when we turn to 
them; and here, she writes, 

we have an exact counterpart of biblical memory: because you 
were strangers in Egypt. Through metaphor, the past has the 
capacity to imagine us, and wo it. . . . Those at the center can 
imagine what it is to be outside. The strong can imagine the 

weak. Illuminated lives can imagine the dark We strangers 

cm imagine the familiar heart of strangers. (Ozick 1989, 283) 



27 



Maxine Greene 



21 



Many of the same ideas occur to me when I ponder theories of teach- 
ing and education. And, certainly, if we are to become attuned to those 
places, become aware of those places where our selves and the selves 
of others are to be intertwined, we must be open to our own horizons, 
to the patterns and, yes, the vacancies in the landscapes against which 
our stories are told. 

When I speak of Ozick's work, or Morrison's, when I reach out 
to Kingston's work, or to Mary Crow Dog's autobiographical Lakota 
Woman, or when 1 try to summon up the sounds of mambo by referring 
to Oscar Hijuelos's The Mambo King* Sing Songs of Love, I am not 
suggesting that our students have read or should have read the works 
relevant to their own ethnic or religious or class identities; nor am I 
suggesting that they ought to if they want to know who they are. I do 
so because I want to suggest that teachers break out of the confine- 
ments of monologism, open themselves to pluralism, become aware of 
more possible ways of being and of attending to the world. 

There is little question, it seems to me, that Lucy will respond 
quite differently to the component parts of what is called "cultural 
literacy" by those insistent on defending the canon, the Word. "All 
significant human achievements 'are' many things," says Booth (1988, 
420), "and they are many things that their makers were unaware of and 
would deplore." He says as well that we all ought to become pluralist 
"because pluralism serves ends that are even more important than any 
conceivable comprehensive and coherent theory about our discourse." 
That is why we have to allow Lucy's readings to enter in, open the way 
to the Chinese child's memories of her grandfather's stories, presume 
that the Lakota adolescent's perspective is in some way shaped by the 
stories she had heard. 

Fischer (1986) tells us that ethnicity is reinvented and reinter- 
preted in each generation by each individual and that it is often some- 
thing quite puzzling to the individual. It is, in fact, an emotional 
component of identity "transmitted less through cognitive language 
or learning . . . than through processes analogous to the dreaming 
and transference of psychoanalytic encounters" (231). Each person — 
Chinese American, Hispanic American, Jewish American, African 
American — has to find a voice or style that does not violate the several 
components of her or his identity. Each one, Fischer suggests, must 
undertake a search for coherence grounded in a connection to the past, 
and the meaning abstracted from the past can become an ethic work- 
able for the future. Surely, any teacher interested in doing more than 
leveling students into conformity ought to pay heed to this. The vision 



22 



Multicultiiralism, Community, and the Arts 



Fischer speaks of, the grounds people discover, the ethical traditions 
they feel a part of: all this has much to do with their choosing them- 
selves as part of the American community — or members of the 
community-in-the-making, which may (or may not) become democ- 
racy. Fischer also makes the point that our new approaches to reading, 
which encourage the participation of readers in the production of 
meanings, may eventually activate in readers the desire for coninuinitas 
with others, "while preserving rather than effacing differences" (Fis- 
cher 1986, 232-233). 

There are many, inside and outside literary criticism and the 
"whole language" movement in teaching, that are taken with the idea 
that there are no preexisting, predefined meanings hidden in works of 
literary art. Rather, the reader who chooses to engage with The Bluest 
Eye or with Isabel Allende's Eva Luna or Lawrence Thompson's Imag- 
ining Argentina or Don DeLillo's Mao II must be willing to work to 
achieve the work as meaningful against the background of a lived, 
often contradictory world. Moreover, assuming the text to be an open 
text, susceptible to a range of interpretations, the reader is or may be 
provoked to look through multiple perspectives while the reading is 
progressing— and not solely, say, the perspective provided by the nar- 
rator (by the child Claudia, say, in The Bluest Eye, by the storyteller Eva 
Luna) or by the other characters in the book, each of whom will 
provide a different vantage point on what is happening. There are the 
perspectives of the book's author, of available critics — those who focus 
on the work itself, those who see the work in a live context, those who 
see the work as making a demand on attentive readers, appealing to 
their freedom and even their indignation. Booth (1988) has written that 
every student ought to come to respect the powers of at least two 
contrasting ways of looking at or grasping whatever work is being 
studied. He knows that only when alternative possibilities come alive 
"are we driven beyond imitation into thought" (337). 

Seeking eouunuuitas with others while preserving differences, 
we would like students to realize the sense in which the readers pre- 
sent to a given work have to lend Pecola Breedlove or Eva Luna or 
DeLillo's ]. B. Saiinger character, Bill Gates, their lives. That means that 
the tragic aunt's suicide in Hong Kingston's The Woman Warrior is in 
some sense the readers' suicide, as the way she fixes her hair is the 
readers', and the childbirth. After all, it is the readc s who bring those 
words, those letters printed on a neutral page, alive. It means that the 
Cuban musicians in The Manibo Kings Sing Songs of Love are given their 



on 



Maxine Greene 



23 



melancholy and heated lives by readers whose consciousness is 
pierced by Hijuelos's words. The scarred storyteller in Vargas Llosa's 
The Storyteller is given his "reality" as a Jew 7 who transforms himself 
into a member of an Andean Indian tribe, as is Fermina Daza, w r ho is 
loved and waited for for fifty years in Love in the Time of Cholera, by the 
amazing Gabriel Garcia Marquez. The materials of the readers' expe- 
rience, in consequence, cannot but be ordered on each occasion in 
unfamiliar ways. When that happens, readers see dimensions of that 
experience that are ordinarily invisible, hear aspects of it ordinarily 
lost in silence. Not only may there be a pull tow r ards eommunitas; the 
readers may be moved to new modes of self-definition in their very 
awareness of difference — difference between a familiar reader self and 
the self of Pecola or the Mambo player or Ozick's Rosa clinging to the 
shawl that hid a baby in a concentration camp. To obviate or deny such 
difference even in the name of universalism is to homogenize, to refuse 
the distinctiveness of the diverse persons surrounding us in this 
world. Also, it is oddly to insist that we coincide with our ordinary 
selves each day that we live, refusing difference by petrifying ourselves. 

Of course we have the most difficult choices to make, especially 
if we are committed to pluralism and, at once, to a recognition that 
something in common must be achieved, something life affirming and 
shared as it is kept alive. Some are fortunate to be working in magnet 
schools or other small schools that have already begun to shape com- 
munities in their rooms and corridors. Others are fortunate to work in 
schools where mingling already takes place, even among relative 
strangers. 

There will always be difficulty in affirming plurality and differ- 
ence while working to build a community. More than a century ago, 
men like de Tocqueville saw the dilemma in a culture whose coherence 
seemed endangered by individualism in conflict with overwhelming 
social conformity. Multiculturalism sharpens the dilemma in many 
ways, once the distinctiveness and passion of multiple voices are at- 
tended to, and once the need for conformity or, at least, common 
agreements becomes urgent. The community I hope we are seeking, 
however, ought not to be identified with conformity. As in Whitman's 
ways of saying, it is a community welcoming of difference and sensi- 
tive to need. Something life affirming in diversity must be discovered, 
even as something shared emerges out of the diversity, something thai- 
can be deeply — if only provisionally — recognized as constituent of a 
common world. 



5,) 



24 



Multiculturalism, Community, and the Arts 



Yes, the choices are difficult. There are, most of us realize, many 
bridges still to build — enabling the children of newcomers to develop 
the capabilities needed for coping with the society they are entering 
without threatening identification with their own. There are demands 
as well to enable young persons to understand and resist their own 
prejudices and stereotypes without making them regard them as 
purely private, idiosyncratic deficiencies. Multicultural approaches to 
teaching and curriculum must allow for the continuing expansion of 
the culture's conversation. They have to allow for a variety of ways to 
initiate different strangers into that conversation, even as they have to 
empower all kinds of persons to imagine what Ozick calls "the famil- 
iar hearts of strangers." It is with such urgencies in mind that I am 
moved to argue for including the several arts in the new curricula. Not 
only do engagements with the arts move persons to be present to inner 
and outer conditions; they provide occasions, as I have tried to say, for 
a reaching out towards alternative ways of being human, of being in 
the world. Also, informed engagements with literature, painting, film, 
drama, music, and the rest depend upon and provoke the release of 
imagination. Releasing imagination, they free persons to break with 
the taken-for-granted, with what appears to be "normal" and un- 
changeable; they arouse persons to reach towards the possible, to look 
at things as if they could be otherwise. 

Freire, whose pedagogy and view of heightened consciousness 
have moved countless learners to look beyond the given, surely has 
been concerned to challenge people to look at things that way. He has 
continually made the point, in calling for critical reflectiveness, that a 
person's culture ought always to be cherished and cultivated, but 
never absolutized. He has said that "if it were not for that, you would 
even find it hard to learn new things which, placed alongside your 
own personal history, can be meaningful" (Freire and Macedo 1987, 
126). Not only ought teachers to be seeking connection points (through 
art experiences and storytelling) between dimensions of their own 
personal histories and the personal histories of those they teach; stu- 
dents ought to be offered more and more time for telling their stories, 
sharing them with all of those around. Given an expanding conscious- 
ness of diversity and the importance of social justice and equality, their 
telling ought to be informed (at least now and then) with outrage at 
injustices and violations. Not only do teachers and learners together 
need to tell and choose; they ought to look towards untapped possibil- 
ity, explore what it signifies to transform. 



Maxine Greene 



25 



Realizing how entangled racial conflicts are with class inequities 
and the "ragged edges" of things, we can no longer remain in good 
faith if w r e ignore the social ills that erode mutuality of relationship, 
that promote envy and greed. Not only are communities eroding, 
along with families; there is also an eerie sense of hopelessness all 
around, an awareness of incoherence accompanying a loss of confi- 
dence in shared guidelines and norms. On the one hand, there are 
those who try to deal with the advent of strangers by receiving new- 
comers into their home and school places as generously as they can. 
On the other hand, there are those who fear destruction of the tradition 
or who fear that the shocks of popular culture (incivilities, addictions) 
will increase with the continuing arrival of strangers. They fear that 
old faiths will be shredded, with nothing to replace them. They envis- 
age flags blowing in tatters in an unfamiUar wind. It is there that 
attacks on multiculiuralism begin. 

We cannot predict the common world that may be in the mak- 
ing; nor can we finally justify one kind of community more than 
another. We can bring warmth into the places where persons come 
together, however. We can bring in the kinds of laughter that threaten 
monologism and rigidity. And surely we can affirm and reaffirm the 
value of principles like justice and equality and freedom and commit- 
ment to human rights, because without these we cannot even call for 
the decency of welcoming and inclusion. Only if more and more per- 
sons, in their coming together, incarnate such principles and choose to 
live by them and engage in dialogues in accord with them are we likely 
to bring about democratic pluralism and not fly apart in chaos and 
cacophony. All we can do is to speak with others as passionately and 
eloquently as we can about justice and caring and love and trust; all 
we can do is to look into each other's eyes and squeeze each other's 
hands. We want our classrooms to be reflective and just; we want them 
to pulsate with a plurality of conceptions of what it is to be human and 
to be fully alive. We want them to be full of the sounds of articulate 
young people, with ongoing dialogues involving as many as possible, 
opening to each other, opening to the world. And we want them to care 
for one another, as we learn more and more about caring for them. We 
want them to achieve friendships, as each one stirs to wide-awakeness, 
to renewed consciousness of possibility. 

With nothing resolved, I would end with a section from Li- 
Young Lee's "The Cleaving" (1990, 86-87), which deals with the two 
meanings of the term — and with the world: 



26 



Multiculturalism, Community, and the Arts 



What then may I do 

but cleave to what cleaves me. 

1 kiss the blade and eat my meat. 

1 thank the wield er and receive, 

while terror spirits 

my change, sorrow also. 

The terror the butcher 

scripts in the unhealed 

air, the sorrow of his Shang 

dynasty face, 

African face with slit eyes. He is 
my sister, this 

beautiful Bedouin, this Shulamite, 

keeper of sabbaths, diviner 

of holy texts, this dark 

dancer, this Jew, this Asian, this one 

with the Cambodian face, Vietnamese face, 

this Chinese 
I daily face, 
this immigrant, 
this man with my own face. 

Or this woman. Or this child. We can only open ourselves, imagine, try 
to heal and trv to see. 

References 

Berger, J. (1984). Whys offering. New York: Penguin. 

Booth, W. C. (1988). The company zee keep: An ethics of fiction. Berkeley: Uni- 
versitv of California Press. 

Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Clifford, J. (1988). The predicament of culture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni- 
versity Press. 

Coles, R. (1967). Children of crisis (Vol. 1). Boston: Little, Brown. 

Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and education. New York: Macmillan. 

. (1954). The public and its problems. Athens, OH: Swallow Press. 

. (1958). Art as experience. New York: Capricorn Press. 

Doctorow, E. L (1975). Ragtime. New York: Random House. 

Fischer, M. M. J. (1986). Ethnicitv and the post-modern arts of inemorv. In J. 
Clifford and G. H. Marcus (Eds.), Writing culture (194-233). Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 

Freirc, P., and Maccdo, D. (1987). Literacy: Reading the zvord a)id the world. 
South Hadley, MA: Bergin & Garvey. 



33 



Maxinc Greene 



Joyce, J. (1947). A portrait of the artist as a young man. New York: Viking Press. 

Kincaid, J. (1990). Lmy. New York: Farrar, Straus, & Giroux. 

Kingston, M. H. (1989). China men. New York: Vintage International. 

Lee, L.-Y (1990). The city in which I love you. Brockport, NY: BOA Editions. 

Morrison, T. (1972). The bluett eye. New York: Pocket Books. 

Olsen, T. (1976). 1 stand here ironing. In Tell me a riddle (9-21). New York: 
Dell. 

. (1978). Silences. New York: Delacorte. 

Ozick, C. (1989). Metaphor and memory. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 

West, C. (1989). Black culture and postmodernism. In B. Kruger and P. Mari- 
ani (Eds.), Remaking history (87-96) Seattle: Bay Press. 

Whitman, W. (1931). Leaves of grass. New York: Aventine Press. 

Woolf, V. (1957). A room of one's oirn. New York: Harcourt Brace. 



3 Life as Narrative 



Jerome Bruner 

New York University 

The primacy of narrative is highlighted in this chapter as Jerome Bruner 
practices "experimental psychology." He analyzes the life stories of four 
members of the Goodhertz family and in the process demonstrates how a 
literary look at everyday language gives us a new understanding of the 
phrase a well-examined life. 

I would like to try out an idea that may not be quite ready, indeed 
may not be quite possible. But I have no doubt it is worth a try. It 
has to do with the nature of thought and with one of its uses. It has 
been traditional to treat thought, so to speak, as an instrument of 
reason. Good thought is right reason, and its efficacy is measured 
against the laws of logic or induction. Indeed, in its most recent com- 
putational form, it is a view of thought that has sped some of its 
enthusiasts to the belief that all thought is reducible to machine com- 
putability. 

But logical thought is not the only or even the most ubiquitous 
mode of thought. For the last several years, I have been looking at 
another kind of thought (Bruner 1986), one that is quite different in 
form from reasoning: the form of thought that goes into the construct- 
ing not of logical or inductive arguments, but of stories or narratives. 
What I want to do now is to extend these ideas about narrative to the 
analysis of the stories we tell about our lives: "autobiographies." 

Philosophically speaking, the approach I shall take to narrative 
is a constructivist one — a view that takes as its central premise that 
"world making" is the principal function of mind, whether in the 
sciences or in the arts. But the moment one applies a constructivist 
view of narrative to the self-narrative, to the autobiography, one is 
faced with dilemmas. Take, for example, the constructivist view that 
"stories" do not "happen" in the real world but, rather, are constructed 
in people's heads. Or as Henry James once put it, stories happen to 
people who know how to toll them. Does that mean our autobiogra- 
phies are constructed, that they had better be viewed not as a record 
of what happened (which is in any case a nonexistent record), but 
rather as a continuing interpretation and reinterpretation of our expe- 
rience? just as the philosopher Nelson Goodman (l c )78) argues that 



Jerome Bruner 



29 



physics or painting or history are "ways of worldmaking," so autobi- 
ography formal or informal, should be viewed as a set of procedures 
for "life making." And just as it is worthwhile examining in minute 
detail how physics or history go about their world making, might we 
not be well advised to explore in equal detail what we do when we 
construct ourselves autobiographically? Even if the exercise should 
produce some obdurate dilemmas, it might nonetheless cast some 
light on what we might mean by such expressions of "a life." 

Four Self-Narratives 

Let me turn to the business of how a psychologist goes about studying 
issues of the kind that we have been discussing. Along with my col- 
leagues Susan Weisser and Carol Staszewski, I have been engaged in 
a curious study While it is far from done (whatever that may mean), I 
would like to tell you enough about it to make what I have been saying 
a little more concrete. 

We were interested in how people tell the stories of their lives 
and, perhaps simple-mindedly, we asked them to do so — telling them 
to keep it to about half an hour, even if it were an impossible task. We 
told them that we were not interested in judging them or curing them, 
but that we were very interested in how people saw their lives. After 
they were done— and most had little trouble in sticking to the time 
limits or, for that matter, in filling up the time — we asked questions for 
another half hour or so, questions designed to get a better picture of 
how their stories had been put together. Had we followed a different 
procedure, we doubtless would have obtained different accounts. . . . 
Many people, ranging in age from ten to seventy have now sat for 
their portraits, and their stories yield rich texts. But I want to talk of 
only four of them now: a family— a father, a mother, and their grown 
son and grown daughter, each of their accounts collected inde- 
pendently. There are two more grown children in the family, a son and 
daughter, both of whom have also told their stories, but four are 
enough to handle as a start. 

We have chosen a family as our target because it constitutes a 
miniature culture and provides an opportunity to explore how life 
stories are made to mesh with each other 

If you should now ask how we propose to test whether these 
four lives "imitated" the narratives each person told, your questions 
would be proper enough, though a bit impatient. The position 1 have 
avowed, indeed, leaves entirely moot what could be meant by "lives" 



30 



Life as Narrative 



altogether, beyond what is contained in the narrative. We shall not 
even be able to check, as Neisser (1987) was able to do in his studies of 
autobiographical memory, whether particular memories were veridi- 
cal or distorted in some characteristic way But our aim is different. We 
are asking, rather, whether there is in each account a set of selective 
narrative rules that lead the narrator to structure experience in a par- 
ticular way, structure it in a manner that gives form to the content and 
the continuity of life. And we are interested, as well, in how the family 
itself formulates certain common rules for doing these things. I hope 
this will be less abstract as we proceed. 

Our family is headed by George Goodhertz, a hard-working 
heating contractor in his early sixties, a self-made man of moral prin- 
ciples, converted to Catholicism in childhood and mindful of his obli- 
gations, though not devout. Though plainly intelligent and well 
informed, he never finished high school: "had to go to work." His 
father was, by Mr. Goodhertz's sparse characterization, "a drinker" 
and a poor provider. Mr. Goodhertz is neither. Mrs. Goodhertz, Rose, 
is a housewife of immediate Italian descent: family oriented, embed- 
ded in the urban neighborhood where she has lived for nearly thirty 
years, connected with old friends who still live nearby. Her father was, 
in her words, "of the old school" — arrogant, a drinker, a poor provider, 
and unfaithful to her mother. In the opening paragraph of her auto- 
biography she says, "1 would have preferred a better childhood, a 
happier one, but with God's influence, 1 prayed hard enough for a 
good husband, and she hicj answered me." 

Daughter Debby, in her mid-twenties, is (in her own words) 
"still unmarried." She graduated a few years ago from a local college 
that she never liked much and now studies acting. Outgoing, she 
enjoys friends, old and new, but is determined not to get "stuck" in the 
old neighborhood with the old friends of her past and their old atti- 
tudes. Yet she is not ambitious, but caught, rather, between ideals of 
local kindliness and of broader adventure, the latter more in the exis- 
tential form of a desire for experience than by any wish to achieve. She 
lives at home — in Brooklyn with her parents in the old neighborhood. 
Her thirty-year-old brother, Carl, is about to finish his doctorate in 
neurophysiology at one of the solid if not distinguished Boston-area 
universities. He is aware of how far beyond family expectations his 
studies have taken him, but is neither deferential nor aggressive about 
his leap in status. Like his sister Debby he remains attached to and in 
easy contact with his parents, though he lives on his own even when 
he is in New York working at a local university laboratory. At school, 



37 



Jerome Bruner 



31 



Carl always felt "special" and different— both in the Catholic high 
school and then in the Catholic college he attended. The graduate 
school he chose is secular and a complete break with his past. He is 
ambitious to get ahead, but he is not one to take the conventional "up" 
stairway. Both in his own eyes and, indeed, by conventional standards, 
he is a bit eccentric and a risk taker. Where Debby (and his mother) 
welcome intimacy and closeness, Carl (like his father) keeps people 
more at arm's length. Experience for its own sake is not his thing. He 
is as concerned as his sister about not being "tied down." 

And that, I now want to assure you, is the end of the omniscient 
auctorial voice. For our task now is to sample the texts, the narratives 
of these four lives — father's, mother's, son's, and daughter's — to see 
not what they are about, but how the narrators construct themselves. 
Their texts are all we have — although we may seem to have, so to 
speak, the hermeneutical advantage of four narratives that spring from 
a common landscape. But as you will see, the advantage that it yields 
is in narrative power and possibility, not in the ontology of verifica- 
tion. For one view of the world cannot confirm another, though, in 
Clifford Geertz's evocative phrase, it can "thicken" it. 

Let me begin the analysis with Burke's pentad (1945), his skele- 
ton of dramatism, and particularly with the setting or Scene of these 
life stories. Most psychological theories of personality, alas, have no 
place for place. They would not do well with Stephen Dedalus in 
Joyce's Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, for he is inexplicable 
without the Dublin that he carries in his head. In these four life narra- 
tives too, place is crucial and it shapes and constrains the stories that 
are told or, indeed, that could be told. Place is not simply a piece of 
geography an established Italian neighborhood in Brooklyn, though it 
helps to know its "culture" too. It is an intricate construct, whose 
language dominates the thought of our four narrators. For each, its 
central axis is "home," which is placed in sharp contrast to what they 
all refer to as "the real world." They were, by all their own accounts, a 
"close" family and their language seals that closeness. 

Consider the psychic geography For each of our narrators, 
"home" is a place that is inside, private, forgiving, intimate, predict- 
ably safe. 'The real world" is outside, demanding, anonymous, open, 
unpredictable, and consequently dangerous. But home and real world 
are also contrastive in another way, explicitly for the two children, 
implicitly and covertly for the parents: home is to be "cooped up," 
restricted by duties, and bored; real world is excitement and opportu- 
nity. Early on, the mother says of the children, "We spoiled them for 



32 



Life as Narrative 



the real world/' and the father speaks of "getting them ready for the 
real world." The son speaks of its hypocrisies that need to be con- 
fronted and overcome to achieve one's goals. It is a worthwhile but 
treacherous battlefield. The daughter idealizes it for the new experi- 
ence to be harvested there. Each, in his or her way, creates a different 
ontological landscape out of "the real world" to give it an appropriate 
force as the Scene in the narratives they are constructing. 

One thing that is striking about all four narratives is the extent 
to which the spatial distinction home-real world concentrates all four 
of them on spatial and locative terms in their autobiographical ac- 
counts. Take Carl. His account is laden with spatial metaphors: in/out, 
here/there, coming from/going to, place/special place. The movement for- 
ward in his story is not so much temporal as spatial: a sequential 
outward movement from home neighborhood to Catholic school to the 
library alone to college to the Catholic peace movement to graduate 
school and then triumphantly back to New York. In his Bildinigsroman 
of a life story, the challenge is to find a place, the right place, and then 
a special place in each of these concentric outgoings. For Carl, you get 
involved in things, or you feel "out of place." You "go to" Boston or to 
a course or a lab, and fellow students "come from" prestigious schools. 
Or "I started gaining a fairly special place in the department," and 
later "I ended up getting a fairly privileged place in the department." 
The "special places" allow, permit, make possible. "After about six 
months I really started settling in and enjoying the program and en- 
joying the opportunities it gave me." And later, about the students 
who get a special place, "The faculty are committed to shielding their 
graduate students from negative repercussions of failure." 

Two things are both surprising and revealing about Carl's lan- 
guage. One is the extent to which his sentences take self as object, and 
the other is the high frequency of the passive voice. With respect to the 
latter, some 11 percent of his sentences are in the passive voice, which 
is surprisingly high for such an action-oriented text. But they both are 
of a piece and tell something interesting about his world making. 
Recall the importance for Carl of "place" and particularly of the "spe- 
cial place." Whenever he recounts something connected with these 
places, the places "happen" and then he acts accordingly. His sen- 
tences then begin with either a passive or with self-as-object, and then 
move to the active voice. At a particular colloquium where he knew 
his stuff, "It allowed me to deal with the faculty on an equal footing." 
Or of his debating-team experience, "it taught me how to handle 
myself." Occasions in these "special places" are seen as if they had 



30 



Jerome Bruner 



33 



homelike privileges: allowing and permitting and teaching. It is as if 
Carl manages the "real world" by colonizing it with "special places" 
that provide some of the privileges of home. 

With Debby, thirty-seven of the first one hundred sentences in 
her life narrative contain spatial metaphors or locatives. The principal 
clusters are about her place in the family (the gap or span in ages); the 
life layout ("the house I was brought home to is the house I live in 
now"; or "I traveled, my relatives are all over the country"; or "I've 
been coming to the city by myself ever since I was fourteen"); the 
coming-back theme ("everybody except me has gone out and come 
back at one time or another"). 

So much for Scene, at least for the moment. Come now 7 to the 
agentive, to Burke's Actor. Rorty's typology (1976) turns out to be 
enormously useful, for in all four self-portraits the- tale moves from 
Actor as figure, figure becoming person, person becoming a self, self 
becoming an individual. Well into her fifties, even Mrs. Goodhertz has 
finally taken a job for pay, albeit working as secretary for her hus- 
band's heating-contracting business, motivated by the desire for some 
independence and the wish not to get "stuck" raising her elder daugh- 
ter's child. She remarks that it is "her" job and that she now "works." 
The transformation of her language as she runs through the chronol- 
ogy of her life is striking. When she speaks of her childhood, self is 
often an object ("everything was thrown at us"). But finally, by the 
time she takes her first job as a young woman, "I decided to take things 
in my own hands." Throughout her account, she "owns her own 
experience," to use Rorty's phrase. More than eight in ten of her 
sentences contain a stative verb— a verb dealing with thinking, feeling, 
intending, believing, praying — in contrast to five in ten for her more 
action-oriented husband. One is easily deceived, reading Mrs. Good- 
hertz's self-portrait, into thinking that she is accepting of fate, perhaps 
passive. Instead, she believes in fate, but she also believes that fate can 
be nudged by her own efforts. And we rather suspect that the style is 
cultivated, for a closer analysis of her language reveals a very high 
•'subjective level" as carried in those stative verbs. 

We must return again to Scene, or perhaps to what might better 
be called mhe-ni-$cem\ Both the elder Goodhertzes— unlike their chil- 
dren—construct their lives as if they constituted two sides of a deep 
divide. That divide is marked by an escape from childhood, an old life, 
indeed, an old secret life of suffering and shame as figures in unbear- 
ably capricious family settings. Personhood is on the other side of the 
divide. Mrs. Goodhertz gets to the other side, to personhood, by 



4.) 



34 



Life as Narrative 



"praying for the right husband" and getting him, of which more in a 
moment. Mr. Goodhertz crosses the divide by work, hard work, and 
by the grace of "the owner [who] took me under his wing." To him, 
achieving mastery of your work and, as we shall see, helping others 
help themselves are the two dominant ideals. For her, it is somewhat 
more complex. The linguistic vehicle is the ''but . . . " construction. She 
uses it repeatedly, and in several telltale ways, the most crucial being 
to distinguish what is from what might have been, as in talking about 
teenage drug taking: "... but 1 am blessed my kids didn't start in on 
it," or "I would have been stricter, but they turned out with less 
problems than others." The construction is her reminder of what might 
have been and, at the same time, a string on her finger to remind her 
that she is the agent who produces the better even on the other side of 
the . . . but. . . . Her courtship and marriage are a case in point. Yes, she 
was waiting for God to bring the right man, but in fact she decided the 
moment her eyes fell on Mr. Goodhertz that he was the man and knew 
not an instant's remorse in throwing over her then fiance. 

Their secret childhoods provide a unique source of conscious- 
ness for the elder Goodhertzes. It is a concealed secret that thev share 
and that provides the contrast to what they have established as the 
organizing concept of "home." Mrs. Goodhertz's knowledge of her 
macho father as a bad provider, a drinker, a philanderer is secret 
knowledge, quickly and hintingly told in her narrative in a way that 
brooked no probing. It was there only to let us know why she prayed 
for a good husband and better life for her children. Mr. Goodhertz goes 
into even less detail. But note the two following quotations, both about 
hopes for the children, each said independently of the other. Mr. Good- 
hertz: "I wanted to give them all of ...e things I didn't get as a kid." 
And Mrs. Goodhertz: "To a point, I think, we try not to make our 
children have too much of what he had." 

So Debby and Carl start on the other side of the divide. Each of 
them tells a tale that is animated by a contrast between a kindly but 
inert, entrenched, or "given" world and a "new" one that is their own. 
Carl is a young Werther. His tale begins with the episode when, as an 
aspiring young football player, he and his teammates are told by the 
coach to knock out the opposing team's star quarterback. He k^eps his 
own counsel, quits football, and starts on his own road. For Debby, the 
tale is more like the young Stephen Hero in the discarded early version 
of Portrait. She exposes herself to experience as it may come, "trying" 
in the sense of "trying on" rather than striving. Her involvement in 
acting is in the spirit of trying on new roles. Of life she says, "I don't 



Jerome Burner 



35 



like doing one thing . . . the same thing all my life, . . . shoved into a 
house and cooped up with four kids all day." If Carl's autobiography 
is a Bildiuigsromiw , Debby's is an existential novel. His account is linear 
from start to end, but it is replete with what literary linguists call 
prolepsis. That is to say, it is full of those odd flash-forwards that 
implicate the present for the future, as in "if I had known then what I 
know now" and "learning to debate would stand me in good stead 
later." His narrative is progressive and sequential: the story tracks 
"real time." It "accounts" for things, and things are mentioned because 
they account for things. Privileged opportunities "happen to" him, as 
we have seen, and he turns them into ventures. 

The exception to Carl's pattern is the dilemma of moral issues — 
as with the coach's murderous instructions or his becoming a consci- 
entious objector in the Vietnam war, inspired by the Berrigans. Then 
his language (and his thought) becomes subjunctive rather than instru- 
mental, playing on possibilities and inwardness. In this respect, he is 
his father's son, for Mr. Goodhertz too is principally oriented to action 
(recall that half his sentences contain nonstative verbs), save when he 
encounters issues he defines as matters of morality. Don't condemn, he 
would say, "you never know the whole story." And in the same spirit, 
Mr. Goodhertz's self-portrait is laced with literally dozens of instances 
of the intransitive verb to sec///, as if he were forever mindful of a 
feather edge separating appearance from reality. When Carl decided 
he would become a conscientious objector against the Vietnam draft, 
his father stood by him on grounds that Carl's convictions, honestly 
arrived at, were worthy of respect even though he did not agree with 
them. Carl unwittingly even describes his intellectual quest in the 
same instrumental terms that his father uses in describing his ducting 
work. Both emphasize skills and know-how, both reject received ways 
of doing things. Theirs is "instrumental" language and thought, as 
well suited to talking about heat ducting as to Carl's strikingly proce- 
dural approach in visual physiology. The father confesses to having 
missed intimacy in his life. So, probably, will Carl one day. Their 
instrumental language leaves little room for it in their discourse. 

Debby's highly stative language is specialized for the reception 
of experience and for exploring the affect it creates. It is richly adjecti- 
val, and the adjectives cluster around inner states. Her own acts are 
almost elided from her account. The past exists in its own right rather 
than as a guide to the present or future. In recounting the present, she 
uses vivid analeptic flashbacks — as in an unbid memory of an injured 
chicken on the Long Island Expressway, the traffic too thick for rescue. 



an 



36 



Life as Narrative 



Like so many of her images, this one was dense with plight and affect. 
It evoked her tenderness for helpless animals, she told us, then veering 
off to that topic. And so her order of telling is dominated not by 
real-time sequences, but by a going back and forth between what 
happens and what she feels and believes, and what she felt and be- 
lieved. In this, and her heavy use of stative verbs, she is her mother's 
daughter — and, I suspect, both are locked in the same gender lan- 
guage. Finally, in Debby's self-story, "themes and variations" are as 
recursive as her brother's is progressive, and hers is as lacking in 
efforts to give causes as his is replete with causative expressions. 

Recipes for Structuring Experience 

You will ask whether the narrative forms and the language that goes 
with them in our four subjects are not simply expressions of their inner 
states, ways of talk that are required by the nature of those internal 
states. Perhaps so. But I have been proposing a more radical hypothe- 
sis than that. I believe that the ways of telling and the ways of concep- 
tualizing that go with them become so habitual that they finally 
become recipes for structuring experience itself, for laying down 
routes into memory, for not only guiding the life narrative up to the 
present, but for directing it into the future. I have argued that a life as 
led is inseparable from a life as told — or more bluntly, a life is not "how 
it was" but how it is interpreted and reinterpreted, told and retold: 
Freud's psychic reality. Certain basic formal properties of the life narra- 
tive do not change easily. Our excursion into experimental autobiog- 
raphy suggests that these formal structures may get laid down early 
in the discourse of family life and persist stubbornly in spite of 
changed conditions. Just as Gusdorf (1980) argued that a special, his- 
torically conditioned, metaphysical condition was needed to bring 
autobiography into existence as a literary form, so perhaps a meta- 
physical change is required to alter the narratives that we have settled 
upon as "being" our lives. The fish will, indeed, be the last to discover 
water — unless it gets a metaphysical assist. 

My life as a student of mind has taught me one incontrovertible 
lesson. Mind is never free of precommitment. There is no innocent eye, 
nor is there one that penetrates aboriginal reality. There are instead 
hypotheses, versions, expected scenarios. Our precommitment about 
the nature of a life is that it is a story, some narrative however incoher- 
ently put together. Perhaps we can say one other thing: any storv one 
may tell about anything is better understood by considering other 



4;] 



Jerome Bruner 



37 



possible ways in which it can be told. That must surely be as true of 
the life stories we tell as of any others. In that case, we have come full 
round to the ancient homily that the only life worth living is the 
well-examined one. But it puts a different meaning on the homily. If 
we can learn how people put their narrative together when they tell 
stories from life, considering as well how they might have proceeded, 
we might then have contributed something new to that great ideal. 
Even if, with respect to life and narrative, we discover, as in Yeats' s 
line, that we cannot tell the dancer from the dance, that may be good 
enough. 

References 

Bruner, ]. S. (1986). Actual mimi>. po<<ible world*. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 

University Press. 
Burke, K. (1945). A grammar of motive*. New York: Prentice-Hall. 
Goodman, N. (1978). Way* of worldmakiug. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett. 

Gusdorf, G. (1980). Conditions and limits of autobiography. In J. Olney 
(Ed.), Autobiography: Essays theoretical and critical. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 

Neissor, U. (1987). Autobiographical memory. Unpublished manuscript, 
Emory University. 

Rorty, A. O. (1976). A literary postscript: Characters, persons, selves, indi- 
viduals. In A. O. Rorty (Ed.), The identity of persons. Berkeley: Univer- 
sity of California Press. 



38 



4 The Power of Personal 
Storytelling in Families 
and Kindergartens 

Peggy J. Miller 

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 

Robert A. Mehler 

University of Illinois at Chicago 

/// this chapter, Peggy Miller and Robert Mehler focus on a particular kind 
of conversational story, the story of personal experience. They illustrate an 
aspect of the social construction of self through the culturally diverse 
routines of storytelling and at the same time raise questions about the role 
that personal narratives might play in classrooms. 

This paper is concerned with conversational stories of personal 
experience — oral stories in which the narrator re-creates a re- 
membered experience from his or her life. We will examine the 
role that personal storytelling plays in early childhood socialization 
and self-construction, focusing primarily on the home and secondarily 
on the kindergarten classroom. We assume that the learning that oc- 
curs at home during the preschool years is not only important in its 
own right, but that it is relevant to what happens later in the class- 
room. We take it as a given that the more we know about the under- 
standings that young children create at home under everyday 
conditions, the better placed teachers will be to build upon and com- 
plement the strengths that children bring to the learning experience at 
school. Hence the first part of the paper will be devoted to home-based 
research on personal storytelling. 



An earlier version of this chapter was presented by the first author in a Division C 
invited address at the 1W1 annual meeting of the American Educational Research 
Association, Chicago. The research reported in this chapter was supported bv grants 
awarded to the first author by The Spencer Foundation and The Smart Foundation. 
We wish to express our gratitude to the families, teachers, and children who partici- 
pated in these studies. 



4,1 



Miller and Mchler 



39 



In the second part of the paper, we will present some findings 
from a recent ethnographic study of how personal storytelling is — and 
is not — practiced in kindergarten classrooms. Personal stories are 
quite different from written stories both in the channel of communica- 
tion and in other genre conventions. Despite these differences and the 
fact that the school's mission in the early grades is to introduce written 
language to children, many educators have believed that personal 
storytelling can serve as an effective bridge into schooling and early 
literacy (e.g., Bruner 1984; Rosen 1988). This intuition is reflected in 
approaches to reading and writing that build upon children's ability 
to articulate orally their personal experiences (e.g., Allen 1976; Calkins 
1982) and in the widespread use of show-and-tell or sharing time in 
the early grades. 

Our work on personal storytelling at home affirms these intui- 
tions in that it contributes to the growing body of empirical evidence 
that personal storytelling is an area of strength for many pre- 
schoolers — including preschoolers from low-income and minority 
backgrounds (Eisenberg 1985; Heath 1983; Miller and Sperry 1988; 
Snow et al. 1991; Sperry 1991). When we say an area of strength, we 
mean not just that young children are surprisingly skilled narrators, 
but that they are interested in personal storytelling, participating fre- 
quently and avidly (Miller 1989). In addition, they use personal stories 
as tools for expressing and making sense of who they are. 

Children's involvement in personal storytelling is also an in- 
volvement with other people, including more experienced members of 
the culture, who wittingly or unwittingly expose them to a complex 
and varied set of narrative practices (to be described below). Although 
it has long been recognized that myths and traditional tales, embody- 
ing the collective wisdom of a people, are powerful socializing tools, 
less attention has been given to the socializing potential of the less 
formal and more modest genre of personal storytelling. On first im- 
pression, personal stories may seem like idle tales, for they are told by 
ordinary people in the course of their everyday goings-on. 

Yet for many people they are not idle tales. A recent compilation 
of American family folklore (Zeitlin, Kotlin, and Baker 1982) contains 
numerous adult testimonials both to the humor and the deterrent 
value of parental stories of personal experience. Novelist Eudora 
Welty (1984) traces her dramatic sense — her appreciation that every- 
thing happened in scenes — to the stories of personal experience she 
overheard in conversation. Norman Maclean's (1976) autobiographical 
fiction originated, he says, in the stories he told his children when they 



40 



The Poiver of Personal Storytelling in Families and Kindergartens 



were young, stories that conveyed to them "what kind of people their 
parents are or think they are or hope they are" (ix). In Talk That Talk, an 
anthology of African American storytelling, Kathryn Morgan (1989) 
presents stories of her great-grandmother's experiences in slavery. 
Passed down orally through four generations, these stories continue to 
guide and inspire her: "Frankly, Caddy comes to my rescue even now 
when some obstacle seems insurmountable to me" (296). 

To these individuals, then, personal stories were significant in a 
variety of ways — as moral tales, models of exemplary lives, humor, 
dramatic art, seif-relevation. A basic thesis of this paper echoes these 
convictions: we shall argue that even when told informally and with- 
out didactic intent, even when not addressed directly to the young, 
personal stories play a powerful role in childhood socialization and 
are especially consequential for self-construction. 

A Discourse Model of Socialization 

This view of personal storytelling rests on two related assumptions 
about ordinary talk: (1) that it is a pervasive, orderly, and culturally 
organized feature of social life in every culture (e.g., Gumperz and 
Hymes 1972); and (2) that it is a major, if not the major, mechanism of 
socialization (e.g., Ochs and Schieffelin 1984). Research on language 
socialization (e.g., Schieffelin and Ochs 1986) and moral development 
(e.g., Shweder and Much 1987) has shown that the flow of social and 
moral messages is relentless in the myriad small encounters of every- 
day life. Although certain general properties of language make it an 
especially effective purveyor of meanings, little is known as yet about 
the socializing implications of particular, culturally constituted species 
of talk. 

Yet any model of socialization that takes language seriously as a 
socializing medium has to grapple with this problem. The model that 
we favor borrows heavily from Vygotskian theory (Rogoff 1991; Vygot- 
sky 1934/1987; Wertsch 1985) and from practice approaches to narra- 
tive (e.g., Bauman 1986; Ochs and Taylor 1992). In this model, 
institutions are organized in ways that bring novice and member to- 
gether recurrently for activities which are mediated by particular 
forms of discourse, which lead to social and psychological conse- 
quences for the novice. From this perspective, stories are seen as situ- 
ated communications. Like literacy, personal storytelling is not 
monolithic; rather, stories defined in particular ways are told for par- 
ticular purposes in particular contexts of use. 



47 



Miller and Mehler 



41 



Applied to the family— the institution in which early socializa- 
tion occurs— the model suggests that family members socialize young 
children into systems of meaning by involving them., intentionally or 
unintentionally, in particular kinds of discourse. The meanings that 
children create by participating in these verbal practices are con- 
strained by how messages are packaged in discourse, and thus the 
model requires that we identify and describe the types of everyday 
discourse that occur in families. As we shall see, one type of discourse 
that flourishes in families from many cultural traditions is personal 
storytelling. 

This model suggests that the child's habitual participation in 
personal storytelling has several consequences. One important conse- 
quence is the acquisition of narrative skills. Another, and the one most 
germane to the topic at hand, is self-construction. Obviously many 
sorts of discourse occur in families, and there is a sense in which 
self-construction is implicated in each. Why single out personal story- 
telling? Our rationale, developed elsewhere (Miller in press; Miller et 
al. 1990), is that the stories people tell about remembered experiences 
from their own lives provide an important, indeed a privileged site for 
self-construction because multiple sources of narrative-self-affinity 
(e.g., temporal, evaluative) converge in this narrative genre. 

Taking, then, personal storytelling as the type of discourse to 
examine as a medium of childhood socialization and self-construction, 
this model of socialization raises several important questions, all of 
which revolve around the notion of practice. Is personal storytelling 
routinely practiced in families from different backgrounds? How is it 
practiced vis-a-vis children? What are the implications of these prac- 
tices for self-construction in early childhood? Before we address these 
questions, the first author will relate how she came to study stories of 
personal experience. 

Personal Storytelling at Home 

Stories from South Baltimore 

I first got interested in personal storytelling when 1 was doing ethno- 
graphic research on early language socialization in South Baltimore, an 
urban, working-class community whose residents are descended from 
people of German, Polish, Irish, Italian, and Appalachian origin (Miller 
1982). The children 1 studied were two-year-old girls of unmarried 
mothers. Family income was very low, educational level was very low, 



43 



42 



The Pozvcr of Personal Storytelling in Families and Kindergartens 



and the children were growing up in extended families. Although 1 
had not gone to South Baltimore to study storytelling, it soon became 
clear that stories of personal experience were a major form of adult 
talk. 1 was impressed, as I listened, not only by the ubiquity of these 
stories, but by the vigor and skill with which they were told. Men and 
women alike were accomplished narrators, capable at times of in- 
spired performances. 

But as a woman studying children and child rearing, I spent 
more time with women and heard more stories and more intimate 
stories from them. 1 was not surprised to learn that pregnancy and 
childbirth were favorite narrative topics for women. The following 
excerpted example was told by a grandmother: 

Example 1 

I was in there twelve minutes ... 1 made it into the hospital, 1 
made it back, they cut my underwear off and I made it in the 
room, the doctor comes in and he said, "You'll be in here at least 
a couple more hours," 'cause the prior year I had had Agnes, 
and I was in there forty some hours, and he goes to walk out the 
door, and that was it. He said, "Well, old speedv!" 1 said, "Oh 
thank God!" [laughs] I was in the labor room, had her, and was 
back over in my room, and they were feeding the babies, and 
they come out and say, "What happened to the lady, now, 
where's she at?" And they said, "She already had the baby!" I 
was like a celebritv. 

While stories of pregnancy and childbirth occurred in everyday 
conversation, they were obligatory at baby showers, an all-female 
ritual event. On these occasions, mothers and grandmothers reveled in 
relating experiences that had occurred years or even decades earlier to 
an audience who had heard the tales many times before. Apparently, 
assuming the mother role remained a lasting touchstone of female 
identity. 

How ever, the maternal self was only one of many narrated 
selves that these women projected in their stories. Also prominent was 
the tough, angry, clever, assertive self: 

Example 2 

[The narrator was a factory worker who operated a machine 
that assembled boxes. | And my boss come bv the other day and 
wanted me to work it. And I said, "I'm not' doing it." . . J tell 
you why he wanted me to work because the floor ladv is going 
on vacation that week. The sprayer is going on vacation that 
week. Dorothy's going on vacation that week. She's the staeker 
in there. And I'm goin that week. And that's four of us out in 



43 



Miller and Mchlcr 



43 



one week and that's gonna kill him because Mildred's been 

missing a lot of time I'm not running it. I told him. 1 said, 

"There's no wav, Al." I said, "Na-uh." 1 said, "You asked who 
wanted to take their vacation first so Mildred took hers 'cause 1 
told her she could." I said, "but there's no way I'm gonna give 
up my week's vacation/' I said, "because I'm gonna tell you/' I 
said, "I really worked hard this year for that." 

Example 3 

1 was walkin on Charles Street— and the girl happens to be my 
girlfriend now. She big and fat, boy. She could sit on me and 
flatten me out, but I stuck up to her. Her name was Janie. And 
she hung with the bad people too, boy. And she says, "Look at 
the big-nosed B-I-T-C-H." And I turned around and I says, "Uh, 
you talkin to me? I SAID, ARE YOU TALK IN TO ME?" I says, 
"Well, you fat slob you, I put you in a skillet and strip you down 
to normal size, if you mess with me." 

In these and other similar stories, the narrator created an inter- 
personal drama around a self-protagonist who was bold, quick-witted, 
feisty, and protective of her rights and her dignity. These qualities were 
highly valued by women in South Baltimore and figured prominently 
in their theories of child rearing (Miller and Sperry 1987). 

But another feature of these stories deserves comment, namely, 
that they are strikingly effective tellings. The last story in particular is 
highly "performed" in the Hymes (1975) and Bauman (1986) sense, 
drawing attention to the storyteller's narrative skill and to the commu- 
nicative act itself. Note the strategic selection of narrative topics and 
the artful deployment of repetition, parallel constructions, taboo 
words, original metaphors, shifting rhythms, and modulation of vol- 
ume. These and other artistic effects function not only to convey the 
point of the story, but to create in the audience an appreciation of the 
performance. The self as narrator— the inhabited self as distinguished 
from the represented self-protagonist — is thereby affirmed. 

To summarize, from this initial work in South Baltimore 1 
learned that personal storytelling was habitually and avidly practiced 
by adults in this community and that it was a rich source of patterned 
messages about who the narrator is or claims to be. These impressions 
led me to wonder about the developmental implications of growing 
up in such a dense narrative environment and about how South Balti- 
more compared with other, culturally different communities. 

Since then we have undertaken further ethnographic research 
both in South Baltimore and elsewhere that speaks to these questions. 
We are currently engaged in a comparative study of the role that 



5 ) 



44 



The Power of Personal Storytelling in Families and Kindergartens 



personal storytelling plays in early childhood socialization. This study- 
includes four research sites in Chicago (low-income African American, 
middle-class African American, working-class white, middle-class 
white). A fifth group (middle-class Chinese in Taipei) permits a cross- 
cultural perspective on the American groups. What is emerging from 
this program of research is a pattern of both similarities and differ- 
ences in the narrative experiences of young children from different 
cultural backgrounds. In the next sections w f e will briefly outline some 
of our findings. 

Personal Storytelling Practices 

Given the key role accorded to discourse in our model of socialization, 
an important goal of this research has been to develop a clearer, more 
adequate conception of personal storytelling itself. In keeping with the 
model introduced earlier, our approach has been to treat stories not as 
disembodied texts — as we have in working the preceding examples 
rhetorically into this text — but as integrated performances, embedded 
in their immediate contexts of use (Miller and Moore 1989). Narrative 
practices are situated, socially conducted narrative activities that are 
meaningful within a culture, occur regularly, bear a family resem- 
blance to one another in their discourse form, and take place within 
the hearing of young children. 

In further defining narrative practices for comparative pur- 
poses, we found it necessary to make an analytic distinction between 
two sets of parameters (see Miller and Moore 1989 for further details). 
The first set concerns the particular version of personal storytelling 
that prevails in a given community or culture, that is, indigenous, 
genre-defining properties. The genre itself varies cross-culturally 
along many parameters. For example, Miller, Fung, and Mintz (1991) 
found that everyday personal storytelling was much more likely to 
function in an explicitly didactic manner in middle-class Chinese fami- 
lies in Taipei than in middle-class white families in Chicago. Chinese 
narrative practices were more likely to include explicit references to 
moral and social codes and to evoke from the child confessions and 
promises not to transgress in the future. 

In addition, all of the longest and most elaborate Chinese stories, 
but none of the American stories, were structured so as to establish the 
child's rule violation as the point of the story. For instance, one of the 
longest co-narrations in the Chinese corpus began with the caregiver 
directing the two-and-a-half-year-old child to tell Aunty (the re- 
searcher) why she had gotten spanked the day before. Through a series 



Miller and Mchler 



45 



of queries from the caregiver and responses from the child, it was 
established that the child had interrupted a church meeting and was 
punished for her misdeed. The story ended with the child's explicit 
commitment not to disrupt church meetings. This co-constructed story 
was thus bounded at the beginning by the caregiver's demand that the 
child confess and at the end by the child's promise not to transgress in 
the future. 

Although values pervaded the stories in the white middle-class 
American corpus, none forefronted the child's transgression in this 
way. For example, a two-and-a-half-year-old initiated a story about 
going to the dentist to have her tooth pulled and about the ensuing 
visit from the tooth fairy. A rule violation was referenced only once, as 
the final contribution to the co-narration: an older sibling said, "Mollie 
was eating bad food so she had to go to the dentist and he had to pull 
the tooth out." Both the placement of this contribution and the fact that 
no one commented or elaborated upon it, rendered the rule violation 
peripheral to the main action of the story. 

The second set of parameters has to do with whether and how 
personal storytelling is made available to children. For example, cen- 
sorship of story topic on behalf of children appears to differ, occurring 
less frequently in the poorer communities. However, there are also 
important similarities: personal storytelling occurred routinely as part 
of everyday family life not only in South Baltimore, but also in the five 
communities in our comparative study. In addition, children in all 
these communities were exposed to personal storytelling in several 
ways: stories were told with young children as co-narrators, about 
young children as ratified participants, and around young children as 
co-present others (see Miller in press for further details). By the age of 
two-and-a-half years, children participated verbally in these practices 
(Miller and Speirry 1988; Miller et al. 1990; Miller et al. 1992). 

The Narrated Self as Relational Self 

In addition to these findings concerning the widespread, frequent, and 
varied practice of personal storytelling during the preschool years, 
another insight gained from this work is that the narrated self is a 
relational self, that is, a self that is defined in relation to others. This 
was evident in all three types of exposure to stories. And it was evident 
at multiple levels of analysis. For example, we found that both 
younger (two-and-a-half years) and older (five years) preschoolers 
located the self in a social nexus when co-narrating or telling stories 
with another person (Miller et al. 1992). (Each age group in this study 



5: 



46 



The Power of Personal Storytelling in Families and Kindergartens 



consisted of three children from each of the following communities: 
low-income African American, working-class white, and middle-class 
white in Chicago and mic 5 lie-class Chinese in Taipei.) In other words, 
the child portrayed himself or herself as "being with" another person 
in some past event. At the same time, the child was "being with" 
another person in the present, that is, in the very act of co-narrating 
the past event. 

Moreover, these levels of relatedness were connected. This was 
evident, for example, in the use of social comparison as a means of 
defining self and other: not only did the majority of social comparisons 
of self and other occur when a sibling or peer participated in the 
co-narration, but the focal child was usually compared with siblings or 
peers in the recounted event. A link is thereby established between the 
event of narration (who participated in the co-narration) and the nar- 
rated event (what was talked about). In addition, at times the narrator 
altered her account of her own past experience, depending on what the 
co-narrator said. For example, after her mother challenged her version 
of a fight with another child, a two-and-a-half-year-old from West Side 
(a low- income African American community in Chicago) reversed her 
claim about who hit first. Andrea: "No, she fight me. 1 — I hit her 
BACK." Mother: "Because YOU hit her first. You don't hit her back, 
you hit her first." Andrea: "I hit her first. . . ." 

The relational nature of narrated selves was also apparent when 
personal stories were told about young children (Miller in press). In 
this practice, a family member addressed a story to another person in 
the child's presence, referring to the child in the third person. The 
narrator cast the child as the story protagonist and often drew him or 
her into the narration as a ratified participant by asking questions. 
When family members told stories in this way, they provided interpre- 
tations of the child's own actions, linking those actions to someone 
else's prior actions, to the child's subjective experiences, and to the 
interpersonal consequences. They personalized for the child the cul- 
ture's interpretive strategies by applying them to the child's own ex- 
periences. 

Even telling stories around the child — in which caregivers ad- 
dressed stories of their own personal experience to other people in the 
child's presence — is plausibly relevant to children's self-construction. 
Through this practice, children are exposed to narrated interpersonal 
dramas in which the most important people in their lives communi- 
cate who they are (Miller in press). For many children, these stories 
constitute a steadily available and constantly updated resource about 



Miller and / \ehlcr 



significant others. A child who has achieved a minimal ability to com- 
prehend oral stories and who is inclined to listen can gain access to 
otherwise inaccessible experiences: those that are temporally inacces- 
sible (What happened to my mother before I was born?), spatially 
inaccessible (How did my older brother fare in school?), and 
affectively-cognitively inaccessible (Why did my uncle punch my 
grandfather?). 

Implications of Personal Storytelling at Home 

In sum, our research on personal storytelling within a model of sociali- 
zation that privileges discourse practices led us to see that, although 
children from different cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds en- 
countered different definitions of personal storytelling and somewhat 
different norms of exposure, all participated in a complex, varied, and 
recurring network of narrative practices that mediated family-child 
relations on a daily basis. By the time they entered kindergarten, they 
had experienced several years of involvement in personal storytelling, 
both as listeners and narrators. It had become a mode of organizing 
their experiences that was second nature to them. 

From these studies we also learned something about the process 
of self-construction. When a type of discourse — personal storytel- 
ling — is taken as the unit of analysis and when it is examined as a set 
of situated practices, the narrated self emerges as a relational self. This 
insight, in conjunction with the finding of daily recurrence, suggests 
that personal storytelling is an important means by which young chil- 
dren, together with family members, experience and reexperience self 
in relation to other. They suggest that a comprehensive account of 
self-development would have to be much more dynamic than has 
previously been envisioned: it would have to take into account not 
only the child's moment-by-moment interpersonal encounters, but his 
or her participation in iterative narrations of those encounters, which 
are themselves embedded in moment-by-moment interpersonal en- 
counters. 

Personal Storytelling in Kindergarten Classrooms 

These are some of the implied*'. ? i ' o see for a theory of self-construc- 
tion. What about the implications for children as they move from the 
familv into hool? If, as we have argued, selves are relational, then as 
children enter school, they face the new task of understanding self in 
relation to teacher and fellow students and of coordinating who they 



The Power of Personal Storytelling in Families and Kindergartens 



are at home with who they are at school. How are these tasks accom- 
plished? Are they accomplished through the same type of narrative 
discourse that flourished in the child's preschool home environment? 
To answer these questions, we undertook an ethnographic study of 
kindergarten classrooms. 

The classrooms we studied are located in the same white work- 
ing-class community where we are studying personal storytelling at 
home. Daly Park (a pseudonym) is a largely Catholic community 
whose members are of Polish, Irish, and German descent, with a grow- 
ing minority of Hispanic families. Daily contact with kin is common, 
and intergenerational families often occupy separate floors in the same 
row house. Many of the parents grew up in Daly Park and attended 
the same elementary school that their children now attend. 

The second author made weekly observations in three of the six 
elementary schools in the community (one public and two parochial 
schools). These observations, which were audio-recorded, spanned a 
period of four months in one classroom and a yar and a half in the 
other two. The rationale for this design was twofold. First, we chose to 
study several classrooms in order to determine whether we could 
make generalizations about how personal stories were used in kinder- 
garten classrooms in this community. Second, the longitudinal design 
permitted us to observe the ongoing process of self-construction and 
of changes over the academic year. 

Among the three classrooms, we found a great deal of variation 
in the extent to which personal experience was incorporated into class- 
room talk. One of the parochial classrooms did not have any regular 
child-oriented speech events; the children's only official oral activity 
took the form of responses to tutorial questions posed by the teacher. 
In the public school classroom, show-and-tell occurred daily, but was 
not defined as a narrative activity. Instead, each child took a turn 
describing in a few brief sentences some object that he or she had 
brought from home. By contrast, in the second parochial classroom, 
personal storytelling occurred much more frequently and across a 
number of different events. Not surprisingly, variation in incidence 
seemed to be related to class size. The classroom where personal nar- 
rative occurred most frequently had a teacher-pupil ratio of 1:14. com- 
pared with 1:22 aiv* 1:25 in the other classrooms. 

Even in the su'uillcr class, many of the references to the children's 
personal experience consisted of narrative fragments or brief allusions 
to past events. Very few personal stories either by teacher or children 
were as complex as those told in homes, and almost none were as fully 



Miller and Mehler 



49 



performed. Tizard and Hughes (1984) and Wells (1986) reported paral- 
lel findings for talk in general for both working-class and middle-class 
children. Thus "talk of personal experience/' rather than "personal 
storytelling/' more accurately describes what we saw in this class- 
room. 

We identified several ways in which talk of personal experience 
functioned in this classroom. From the beginning of the school year, 
both teacher and students drew connections between the child's per- 
sonal experiences with others out of school and the moral and educa- 
tional lessons of the classroom. The teacher frequently made such 
connections during "bible-rug time/' a daily event when the whole 
class gathered together for opening prayers and discussion. Similar to 
sharing-time (Michaels 1981, 1986), this was a time when the children 
were encouraged to report on experiences that had happened outside 
the classroom. Although the event was defined in terms of an individ- 
ual child as speaker, it was also highly collaborative: the teacher not 
only held the floor for the student, but asked questions, evaluated the 
child's responses, and elaborated on the experience. During the proc- 
ess, she frequently interpreted the child's out-of-school experience 
with others in terms of the moral framework of the classroom, often 
by recasting the child's personal ("I") experience in collective ("we") 
terms. 

For example, after Mary had recounted her experience of having 
her tonsils removed, the teacher recast the experience in terms of 
evaluative generalizations about doctors and how they make "us" 
well: 

Teacher: Were you scared of that hospital? 
Child: No. 

Teacher: Do you think hospitals are mean places? 
Child: No. 

Teacher: No, or doctors? Are doctors mean? Are they mean to 
people? 

Child: They make us well. 

Teacher: That's right. They give us shots to make us well. 

In events like these, not only did the moral framework of the class- 
room get constructed through the joint participation of teacher and 
child, but the child's self got positioned and defined relative to the 
teacher as spokesperson for that framework. A link is thus made from 
the child's interpersonal experience with doctors outside the class- 



50 



The Power of Personal Storytelling in Families and Kindergartens 



room to the moral framework inside the classroom, from the child's 
(past) experience of self in relation to doctors to a self who aligns 
herself or himself in the (present) narrating event with the teacher's 
perspective on that past experience. 

At other times during the day, the teacher made connections in 
the opposite direction, that is, from a general lesson to the child's 
interpersonal experiences outside the classroom. For example, during 
a lesson about baptism, the teacher drew an analogy between the 
concept of God's family and the child's family, inviting each child to 
say who belonged to his or ner family. 

As the academic year progressed, we heard more talk about the 
children's past experiences in the classroom itself. Teacher and chil- 
dren recounted events that had happened to the class collectively (e.g., 
a field trip) or to individuals in the class. The teacher also concretized 
and affirmed the morals of written stories by linking them to one or 
another child's experience in the classroom. For example, while read- 
ing a book aloud to the whole class, the teacher contrasted the "nice" 
behavior of the story characters with the aggressive behavior of a 
student who had injured another child in the classroom two days 
earlier. Also, the children increasingly invoked the teacher's voice of 
moral authority in their commerce with one another, especially in the 
context of peer conflict and tattletaling. On these personally urgent 
occasions, they recounted a peer's misdeeds or justified their own 
actions by referring to the rules of the classroom. At the same time, 
they negotiated who they were in relation to others, aligning them- 
selves with or distancing themselves from one another and from the 
teacher. 

Another type of personal storytelling that increased across the 
school year reflected the children's growing awareness of their own 
history as learners in the classroom. Five months into the school year, 
three students were talking to one another as they sat around a table 
doing their worksheets. They discussed how the teacher had shown 
them the correct way of writing at the beginning of the year. They also 
compared themselves favorably with the younger, unschooled chil- 
dren at the local day care center. They then made a series of matching 
claims, accompanied by written demonstrations, about how they used 
to make their letters: Heidi: "I used to make a four when I was in . . . 
class. I used to go like that." Mary: "This is how I used to make a four." 
A bit later, Mary added, "I used to make my threes like that. Or like 
that. Now I make it like that." In this interaction, the children not only 
made autobiographical claims concerning the self as learner in the 



57 



Miller and Mehler 



51 



classroom, but established an alliance among peers through matching 
claims to similar autobiographical experiences as learners. Happily, in 
this instance the children seemed to see themselves as eager and able 
learners. 

In sum, these observations in three kindergarten classrooms in 
one urban, working-class community revealed that personal narrative 
occurred only in the classroom with the most favorable teacher-pupil 
ratio. That classroom did not provide as rich a context for personal 
narrative as did many families in the same community. Rarely if ever 
was storytelling practiced for its own sake during class, although such 
performances may well have occurred on the playground or in sub- 
rosa peer talk. When students and teacher did refer to the child's past 
experience, it was often in the service of an instructional goal. Ac- 
counts of personal experience were used to mediate between the 
child's experiences outside the classroom and the moral and educa- 
tional framework of the classroom. At the same time, the child got 
positioned in that framework in relation to teacher and fellow stu- 
dents. In addition, the children used narrative increasingly to organize 
their experiences in school and to negotiate an identity in relation to 
teachers and peers. Peer-produced autobiographies of the self as 
learner were especially interesting in this respect. 

Establishing a comfortable identity in school is surely part of 
what it means to get off to a good start in school. Although our 
findings suggest that recounting personal experiences is one route by 
which this goal can be supported, we do not mean to imply that it is 
the only route. It would be difficult to overemphasize the importance 
of students' day-by-day experiences of achievement and failure in the 
classroom, quite apart from whether those experiences are replayed in 
narrative. Nor do we mean to imply that talk of personal experience is 
necessarily positive for the child. There is just as much potential for 
undermining as for supporting identity, both at the content level (e.g., 
by repeatedly recounting experiences of failure, making invidious 
comparisons between the child's past experiences and peers' experi- 
ences or between home and school) and at the discourse level (e.g., by 
using stylos of discourse that interfere with those that children bring 
from home) (Michaels 1981, 1986). 

Despite these cautions, we believe that personal storytelling 
deserves more attention from researchers and teachers because it is a 
type of discourse that many preschoolers from diverse backgrounds 
know and appreciate. In particular, more attention should be paid to 
personal storytelling as highly performed verbal art. Storytelling for 



5 



52 



The Power of Personal Storytelling in Families and Kindergartens 



its own sake, as opposed to talk of personal experience, did not occur 
in "official" classroom talk during any of our observations. Yet it may 
well be important to the process of self-construction for those children 
whose impulse to narrate first takes root in personal storytelling at 
home. 



References 

Allen, R. V. (1976). Language experiences in communication. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin. 

Bauman, R. (1986). Story, performance, and event: Contextual studies of oral nar- 
rative. New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Bruner, J. (1984). Language, mind, and reading. In H. Goelman, A. A. 
Oberg, and F. Smith (Eds.), Awakening to literacy (193-200). 
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 

Calkins, L. M. (1982). Lessons from a child: On the leaching and learning of writ- 
ing. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 

Eisenberg, A. (1985). Learning to describe past experiences in conversation. 
Discourse Processes, 8, 177-204. 

Gumperz, J. J., and Hymes, D. (1972). Directions in sociolinguistics: The eth- 
nography of communication. New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston. 

Heath, S. B. (1983). Ways with words: Language, life and work in communities 
and classrooms. New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Hymes, D. (1975). Breakthrough into performance. In D. Ben- Amos and 

K. S. Goldstein (Eds.), Folklore: Performance and communication (11-74). 
The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton. 

Maclean, N. (1976). A river runs through if. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 

Michaels, S. (1981). "Sharing time": Children's narrative styles and differen- 
tial access to literacy. Language in Society, 10, 423-442. 

. (1986). Narrative presentations: An oral preparation for literacy 

with first graders. In J. Cook-Gumperz (Ed.), The social construction of 
literacy (94-116). New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Miller, P J. (1982). Amy, Wendy, and Beth: Learning language in South Balti- 
more. Austin: University of Texas Press. 

. (1989, October). Socialization through narrative. Paper presented at 

the meeting of the Society for Psychological Anthropology, San Di- 
ego, CA. 

. (in press). Narrative practices: Their role in socialization and self 

construction. In U. Neisser and R. Fivush (Eds.), The remembering self. 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 



5J 



Miller mid Mehler 



53 



Miller, P. J., Fung, H., and Mintz, J. (1991, October). Creating children'* selves 
in relational contexts: A comparison of American and Chinese narrative 
practices. Paper presented at the meeting of the Society for Psycho- 
logical Anthropology, Chicago. 

Miller, P. J., Mintz, J., Hoogstra, L., Fung, H., and Potts, R. (1992). The nar- 
rated self: Young children's construction of self in relation to others 
in conversational stories of personal experience. Merrill-Palmer Quar- 
terly, 38, 45-67. 

Miller, P. J., and Moore, B. B. (1989). Narrative conjunctions of caregiver 
and child: A comparative perspective on socialization through sto- 
ries. Ethos, r, 428-449. 

Miller, P. J., Potts, R., Fung, H., Hoogstra, L., and Mintz J. (1990). Narrative 
practices and the social construction of self in childhood. American 
Ethnologist, 17, 292-311. 

Miller, P. J., and Sperry, L. L. (1987). The socialization of anger and aggres- 
sion. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 33, 1-31. 

. (1988). Early talk about the past: The origins of conversational sto- 
ries of personal experience, journal of Child Language, 75, 293-315. 

Morgan, K. L. (1989). Caddy buffers: Legends of a middle class black fam- 
ily in Philadelphia. In L. Goss and M. E. Barnes (Eds.), Talk that talk 
(295-298). New York: Simon & Schuster. 

Ochs, E., and Taylor, C. (1992). Family narrative as political activity. Dis- 
course and Society, 3, 301-340. 

Ochs, E., and Schieffelin, B. B. (1984). Language acquisition and socializa- 
tion: Three developmental stories and their implications. In R, A. 
Shweder and R. A. LeVine (Eds.), Culture theory (276-320). New 
York: Cambridge University Press. 

Rogoff, B. (1991). The joint socialization of development by young children 
and adults. In M. Lewis and S. Feinman (Eds.), Social influences and 
socialization in infancy, (253-280). New York: Plenum. 

Rosen, H. (1988). The irrepressible genre. In M. MacLure, T. Phillips, and A. 
Wilkinson (Eds.), Oracy matters: The development of talking and listen- 
ing in education (13-23). Philadelphia: Open Press. 

Schieffelin, B. B., and Ochs, E. (1986). Language socialization. In B. Siegel 
(Ed.), Annual Review of Anthropology (163-191). Palo Alto, CA: An- 
nual Reviews. 

Shweder, R. A., and Much, N. C. (1987). Determinations of meaning: Dis- 
course and mora! socialization. In W. Kurtines and J. Gewirtz (Eds.), 
Moral development through social interaction (197-244). New York: 
Wiley. 

Snow, C. E., De Temple, J. M., Beals, D. E., Dickinson, D. K., Smith, M. W., 
and Tabors, P O. (19^1, April). The social prerequisites of literacy devel- 
opment. Svmposium presented at the annual meeting of the Ameri- 
can Educational Research Association, Chicago. 



6 J 



54 



The Power of Personal Storytelling in Families and Kindergartens 



Sperry, L. (1991 ). The emergence and development of narrative competence in 
African-American toddlers from a rural Alabama community. Unpub- 
lished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago. 

Tizard, B., and Hughes, M. (1984). Young children learning. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 

Vygotsky, L. (1934/1987). Thinking ami speech (N. Minick, Trans.). New York: 
Plenum. 

Wells, G. (1986). The language experience of 5-year-old children at home 
and at school In J. Cook-Gumperz (Ed.), The social construction of lit- 
eracy (69-93). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

VVelty, E. (1984). One writer's beginnings. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer- 
sity Press. 

Wertsch, ]. V. (1985). Vi/gotskif and the social formation of mind. Cambridge, 
VIA: Harvard University Press. 

Zeitlin, S., Kotlin, A., and Baker, H. (1982). A celebration of American family 
folklore: Tales and traditions from the Smithsojiian collection. New York: 
Pantheon. 



ERJC 



6; 



Ways with Stories: 
Whose Stories Are Told? 
Whose Stories Are Heard? 



5 Multicultural Literature 
for Children: Towards 
a Clarification 
of the Concept 

Mingshui Cai 

University of Northern Iowa 

Rudine Sims Bishop 
The Ohio State University 

Mingshui Cai and Rudine Sims Bishop take on the challenge of defining the 
concept of multicultural literature. They acknowledge the need for a broad 
range of literatures representing many vantage points, and they also argue 
for the literature of parallel cultures, whose members articulate the 
necessary "insider's perspective." 

Multicultural literature is a concept in search of a definition. It 
would he difficult to pinpoint its origin, but it may be safe to 
assume that the term nniltkultuial literature came after the 
advent of the multicultural education movement in the 1960s (Banks 
1979). With the advance of multicultural education in the last decade, 
multicultural literature has begun to flourish. Many publishers of chil- 
dren's books, responding to this trend, have created fliers listing the 
"multicultural" titles they publish. Their definition of multicultural 
literature is implicit in the selection of books included on their lists. 
Typically such lists contain a wide variety of works, including trans- 
lations of popular board books for preschool children into languages 
other than English, stories about European immigrants to the United 
States, stories set in countries in all parts of the world, nonaction about 
peoples and places, and literature about racial or ethnic groups within 
the United States. Educators and librarians have variously defined 
multicultural literature as works that focus on "people of color" (Kruse 
and Horning 1990, vii) or "books other than those of the dominant 
culture" (Jenkins 1973, 50). What all these definitions have in common 
is an agreement that multicultural literature is about some identifiable 
"other" — persons or groups that differ in some way (for example, 



Multicultural Literature for Children 



racially, linguistically, ethnically, culturally) from the dominant white 
American cultural group. With so much variety, however, it becomes 
difficult, if not impossible, to discern the defining characteristics of 
multicultural literature. 

This problem may exist because, as it is generally conceived, the 
definition of multicultural literature is contingent not on ifs literarv 
characteristics, but on the purposes it is supposed to serve. The litera- 
ture is one component of the multicultural education movement and 
is generally intended to further the goals of that movement. Multicul- 
tural education is essentially a reform effort intended not only to 
combat intolerance and foster a sense of inclusion, but to fundamen- 
tally change education and society. According to Banks (1991), the 
most important goal of multicultural education is "helping students to 
acquire the competencies and commitments to participate in effective 
civic action in order to create equitable national societies" (28). Even 
more explicitly, Nieto (1992) places multicultural education in a socio- 
political context and defines it this way: 

Multicultural education is a process of comprehensive school 
reform and basic education for all students. It challenges and 
rejects racism and other forms of discrimination in schools and 
society and accepts and affirms the pluralism (ethnic, racial, 
linguistic, religious, economic, and gender, among others) that 
permeates the curriculum and instructional strategies used in 
schools, as well as the interactions among teachers, students 
and parents, and the very way that schools conceptualize the 
nature of teaching and learning. Because it uses critical peda- 
gogy as its underlying philosophy and focuses on knowledge, 
reflection, and action (praxis) as the basis for social change, 
multicultural education furthers the democratic principles of 
social justice. (208) 

If multicultural literature is to serve the cause of educational reform, 
then clarifying the concept and identifying its characteristics is not an 
intellectual exercise, but a vital necessity. 

It is interesting to note that, among the curricular components of 
multicultural education, the label "multicultural" seems to be reserved 
for literature and to a lesser extent the arts. Professional educational 
journals do not generally contain references to "multicultural social 
studies" or "multicultural history." This may be because literature and 
the arts reach beyond the intellect to appeal to the affect. Some time 
ago, Dorsey (1977) pointed out the importance of literature in a plural- 
istic society. The juxtaposition of diverse cultural groups, he argued, 
inevitably leads to interference in communication among groups, 



Cai and Bishop 



59 



which can be overcome only if individuals can transcend their own 
cultural limitations: 

Sociology and anthropology never seek this end. Their function 
is to rationalize alien social structures without disturbing the 
student's commitment to his own. Literature seeks and attains 
a deeper empathy with the alien, an empathy which challenges 
one's own most basic presuppositions. (18) 

At present diversity is everywhere tolerated in theory, punished 
in practice, and nowhere justified or justifiable beyond an ap- 
peal to solipsism. But America has no choice. Only a genuinely 
pluralistic society can henceforth prosper here. It must be nur- 
tured in our diverse hearts. And for that we need literature, 
which is the language of the heart. (19) 

Literature, then, is expected to play a unique role within the context of 
multicultural education. 

Pedagogical Definitions 

Generallv, educators (e.g., Norton 1987; Austin and Jenkins 1983) who 
are committed to using literature as a means of furthering the cause of 
multicultural education share Dorsey's view. They offer long lists of 
the values of multicultural literature. Defining the term, however, is a 
more complicated problem. When we conceive multicultural literature 
in terms of the purposes it might serve in the curriculum, we are 
approaching the theoretical problem of definition from an educator's 
perspective. We are less concerned with the nature of the literature 
itself than with the way it can function in school settings. In this sense, 
multicultural literature is a pedagogical term, rather than a literary one. 
Rather than suggesting unifying literary characteristics, the term im- 
plies a goal: challenging the existing canon by expanding the curricu- 
lum to include literature from a wide variety of cultural groups. 
Controversv over the classic canon exists in the academic literary 
community as well. Viewed in a global context, the controversy is 
among countries over what constitutes the world canon of classics. 
Within the United States or other English-speaking countries, the con- 
troversy is between the dominant and nondominant groups. The ques- 
tion raised is: Should the literary works of the best writers from 
nondominant groups such as African Americans, Hispanics, Chinese 
Americans, and women also be included in the canon of American 
literature and taught in English departments? Multicultural literature 
programs in precollege settings can be seen in part as a continuation 
or duplication of the efforts to include ethnic literatures in the curricu- 



B7> 



60 



Multicultural Literature for Children 



lum in colleges. The difference is that English departments do not 
typically offer multicultural or multiethnic literature courses; they of- 
fer "world literatures" or ethnic or "minority" 1 literature courses. 

In the strictest sense of the term, multicultural literature should 
include the literature of the dominant cultural group, just as world 
literature should also include American literature. Taken literally both 
multicultural literature and world literature are identical with litera- 
ture per se — the literary creation of humanity. The significance of the 
labels lies in their indication of the pluralistic nature of American 
society and of the world, and thus of the rationale for including litera- 
tures from historically underrepresented, nondonvnant groups and 
countries in the curriculum. 

That this is so can be seen in a definition of multiethnic 2 litera- 
ture bv Carlson (1972) and accepted by Norton (1987): "Multiethnic 
literature is the literature about a racial or minority ethnic group that 
is culturally and socially different from the white Anglo-Saxon major- 
ity in the United States, whose largely middle-class values are most 
represented in all American literature" (503). Tlr definition is self- 
contradictory. If multicultural literature is the literature about a "racial 
or minority ethnic" group, whv is it called »////f/cultural? How does it 
differ from "minority or ethnic" (for example, Mexican American or 
African American) literature? In the third edition of Through the Ei/es of 
a Child, Norton (1991) changes Carlson's definition to: "Multicultural 
literature is literature about various minority ethnic groups that are 
culturally and socially different from the white Anglo-Saxon majority 
in the United States" (530). Here, the term does not indicate the multi- 
cultural nature of any single work, but of a category of works. It is an 
educator's term, used to imply a challenge to the domination of one 
cultural group and its literature in the curriculum. 

A Literary Definition 

Given the great variety represented by books placed under the rubric 
"multicultural," it is difficult to define multicultural literature in terms 
of literarv features such as theme, structure, language, or style. Dasen- 
brock (1987), however, in a piece on multicultural literature in English, 
offers a two-part definition that does focus on the intrinsic nature of 
the literature itself. He uses the term multicultural literature "to in- 
clude both works that are explicitly about multicultural societies and 
those that are implicitly multicultural in the sense of inscribing readers 



Cai and Bishop 



61 



from other cultures inside their [the works'] own cultural dynamics" 
(10). 

The word "societies" in the first part of Dasenbrock's definition 
refers to societies in the English-speaking world, which use the same 
language, but have diverse cultural heritages. But what he means by 
"a multicultural society" is unclear. Does it refer to a whole country 
with multiple cultures or an ethnic group whose members, by virtue 
of the nature of their interactions with other groups, may assimilate 
more than one culture and may therefore be biculturai or even multi- 
cultural? Given the second part of Dasenbrock's definition, multicul- 
tural literature would include almost all literature that is written in 
English. The first type is subsumed under the second: "the explicitly 
multicultural is also implicitly multicultural" (10). 

The linguistic medium is the defining element here. Dasenbrock 
states that "literature in English has become increasingly cross- or 
multicultural, as writing about a given culture is destined — because of 
its language, English, and its place of publication, usually London or 
New York — to have readers of many other cultures" (10). The four 
books he analyzes as typical examples are by writers from diverse 
cultures and areas: R. K. Narayan (Indian), Maxine Hong Kingston 
(Chinese American), Rudolfo Anaya (Mexican American), and Witi 
Ihimaera (Maori). Although these authors are all writing about their 
own cultures, presumably with both a Western or dominant majority 
audience and a "local" audience in mind, according to Dasenbrock's 
definition, multicultural literature may also include texts about West- 
ern or dominant majority cultures with references to "minority" or 
"Third World" societies, or with members of such groups as their 
intended audience. 

From an educator's perspective, this kind of multicultural litera- 
ture may not be in tune with the goals of multicultural education, for 
some literary works bv writers of mainstream cultures either in the 
English-speaking world in general or in the United States in particular 
mav "inscribe" readers from dominated groups "inside their own 
textual dynamics" for the purpose of indoctrinating them with main- 
stream cultural values. In fact, many literary works, including such 
classics as Shakespeare's Merchant of Venice or Mark Twain's Huckle- 
berry b'uiu, mav fit Dasenbrock's definition, but exhibit anti-Semitism 
or racism. 

Advocates of multicultural literature are well aware that such 
literature may be tainted by racism and other negative attitudes, most 



62 



Multicultural Literature for Children 



obviojsly shown in the stereotyping of people of color and in the 
presentation of ethnocentric perspectives. The criteria they set up for 
selecting multicultural literature invariably include "avoiding stereo- 
types" and "presenting minority perspectives" (e.g., Council on Inter- 
racial Books for Children 1974; Klein 1985; Rudman 1984; Norton 
1991). That well-written books may need to be examined for such 
nonliterary factors demonstrates the tension between pedagogical and 
literary approaches to defining the term multicultural literature. 

At this point, it may be best to hold onto the pedagogical defini- 
tion because it is already widely circulated in educational institutions 
and serves as a banner in multicultural education. For purposes of this 
paper, the pedagogical definitions — those referring to literature about 
underrepresented groups — will serve as an important foundation. 
Keeping in mind the tension between pedagogical and literary aspects 
of the term, however, we have attempted to move toward clarifying 
the concept of multicultural literature by suggesting that it is an um- 
brella term that includes at least three kinds of literature: world litera- 
ture, cross-cultural literature, and "minority" literature or literature 
from parallel cultures." 1 

"World Literature" 

As we pointed out earlier, the term leorhi literature, logically inter- 
preted, would include all literature, as would the term multicultural 
literature. We have also tried to make clear, however, that these terms 
as they are generally used today in the United States are essentially 
pedagogical, or even political, implying at the very least an intent to 
include the literatures of underrepresented peoples, American and 
otherwise, in the curriculum of schools in the United States. From that 
perspective, we would narrow our own definition of "world" litera- 
ture to include folktales, fiction, and the like from non-Western coun- 
tries or other underrepresented groups outside the United States, 
generally peoples from the Southern or Eastern Hemispheres. We 
would include in this category adaptations by American writers, but 
not necessarily the European classics such as Hans Christian An- 
dersen's tales, because they are hardly underrepresented in the litera- 
ture curriculum. Thus Snyder's retelling of the Japanese tale The 8o\/ of 
the Three-Year Nap (1988) would be categorized as world literature, as 
would translations of books which originated in relevant places, such 
as Schami's A Handful of Stars (TWO), an autobiographical novel set in 



63 



Cni and Bishop 



63 



Damascus, Syria, in spite of the inadequacy of the label, this could be 
a useful category, because many educators who define multicultural 
literature in terms of its focus on members of nondominant cultural 
groups in the United States still include folklore and other literature 
from what might be considered the "root cultures" of those groups. 
Educators who write about African American literature, for example, 
usually include African folktales in their discussions, and those who 
write about Chinese American literature include Chinese folktales. 

Cross-Cultural Literature 

One way to circumscribe the conflict between pedagogical and literary 
definitions is to narrow the conceptual boundary of Dasenbrock's 
definition of multicultural literature to include only (1) literary works 
explicitly about interrelations among people of different cultures, 
without apparent focus on the unique experience of any one culture or 
cultural group, and (2) those about people from a given cultural group 
by a writer from another cultural group. We may term these kinds of 
literarv works "cross-cultural" literature. This label suggests that there 
exist cultural gaps in the world that need to be crossed and, more 
importantly, that there may be gaps between the author's cultural 
perspective embodied in the literary work and the cultural perspective 
of the people his or her work portrays. 

In children's literature, a large number of books fall into the first 
subcategory. Their intention seems to be to inculcate acceptance of 
cultural diversity or to foster constructive intercultural or interracial 
relationships. The depth and scope of Iheir explorations vary, as does 
the extent to which they are successful in engendering the desired 
effects. An example of the most superficial is Baer's picture book 
entitled 77/f's Is the Waif We Co to School: A Book about Children around the 
World (TWO), which compares the different ways children go to school 
in twentv-two countries. The subject is interesting and the illustrations 
are appealing to young children, but although the book may be infor- 
mative about cultural differences, it does not touch the heart. A more 
touching book of this kind is Friedman's Hozv My Parents Learned to Eal 
(1984). It tells how a child's American father, a sailor, met her Japanese 
mother, a schoolgirl, in Japan and overcame the barrier of cultural 
difference to get married. But the difference, the center of the plot 
conflict, is only reflected in ways of eating — with chopsticks or with a 
knife and fork. 



63 



64 



Multicultural Literature for Children 



Unlike these two books, some others deal with cross-cultural 
issues in the United States, such as the difficulties a child from an 
ethnic minority group encounters in adjusting to a new cultural envi- 
ronment or to serious interracial conflicts. An example of the former is 
Surat's Angel Child, Dragon Child (1989), which is about a Vietnamese 
girl's difficulties associating with her classmates after her family 
moved to the United States. Many examples of the latter type are older 
books published during the 1960s and early 1970s when the Civil 
Rights Movement of that era was receiving much attention. A typical 
example is The Empty Schoolhouse (Carlson 1965), a story about school 
desegregation. A more recent book that deals with interracial tensions 
is Spinelli's 1991 Newbery Medal winner, Maniac Magee (1990), which 
features a white, larger-than-life hero who, despite becoming alienated 
from both the black and white communities in a small Pennsylvania 
city, manages to bring both communities together. 

Still other books in this category seem to promote acceptance of 
diversity by simply visually focusing on or including characters from 
differing racial or cultural backgrounds or by building a story about 
such characters on some topic unrelated to racial prejudice or other 
such conflicts. Their intent seems to be to promote respect for racial 
and cultural diversity. Such a book is Jones's Matthew and Tilly (1991), 
which focuses on the friendship between a white boy and an African 
American girl. They have a spat over a broken crayon, but discover 
that they miss each other and that their friendship is more important 
than anything so trivial. 

The second type of cross-cultural children's literature, for the 
most part, contains works by white writers about the experience of 
people from parallel cultures. They do not simply center around inter- 
relations between cultures; they attempt to depict the unique experi- 
ence of characters from parallel cultural groups by reflecting the 
consciousness and sensibility of people who are members of those 
groups. One example is Levine's picture book / Hate English (1989), 
which portrays a Chinese girl's attitude towards the English language 
when she moved to the United States from Hong Kong with her family. 
Another is the popular Knots on a Counting Rope (Martin 1987), a story 
about a blind Native American boy and his grandfather. Both books 
are written from the perspective of the main characters and try to 
delineate their thoughts and feelings, as well as their experiences. The 
defining feature of this category is the authors' attempt to look at the 
experience of a member of a parallel cultural group other than their 
own from inside that experience. Authors do not always succeed. In / 



I" V 

( 0 



Cai and Bishop 



65 



Hate English, we hear a false note oversimplifying the theme of iden- 
tity. In the British colony of Hong Kong, English is the instructional 
language in most schools, and the girl seems to have learned the 
language quite well. Slapin and Seale (1989) criticize Knotson a Count- 
ing Rope as being marred by the author's ignorance of the cultures of 
native peoples and its catering to romanticized mythology about Na- 
tive Americans. 

Banks (1979) proposed a hierarchical typology of cross-cultural 
competency, that is, "skills and understandings necessary to function 
cross-culturally" (249). We may use this typology to evaluate the cross- 
cultural competence of writers and see if they are able to represent a 
culture from its unique perspective. Banks has four levels of compe- 
tence: (1) "the individual experiences superficial and brief cross- 
cultural interaction; (2) the individual begins to assimilate some of the 
symbols and characteristics of the 'outside' ethnic group; (3) the indi- 
vidual is thoroughly bicultural; (4) the individual is completely assimi- 
lated into the new ethnic culture" (251). The fourth level represents the 
ultimate cross-cultural competence. It occurs only "when the primor- 
dial individual has been almost completely resocialized" and becomes 
one with the "host culture in terms of behavior, attitude, and percep- 
tions" (250). The acquisition of the cultural perspective, as we under- 
stand it, marks the attainment of this level. Banks's typology was 
designed to set up goals of cross-competence for students, yet we may 
wonder who among white writers writing about minority experience 
can claim to have attained that level. 

The authors' level of cross-cultural competency usually is not 
clearly shown in picture books or shorter books. The test lies in the 
longer books, which cover a wider range of experiences. The authors 
often betray their alien perspective in small details, the representation 
of which requires a native's (often unconscious) sensibility more than 
acquired knowledge. The white authors' ethnocentric attitude is also 
revealed in these subtle details, in spite of their good intentions. For 
example, as Thompson and Woodard (1985) point out, in The Empty 
Schoollwuse the narrator's remarks about skin and hair betray "the 
subtle and probably unconscious perspective which presents a young 
black girl in terms of self-hatred and a feeling that white is preferable 
to dark" (43). Emma Royall says, "Her [Lullah's] skin is like coffee and 
cream mixed together and she has wavy hair to her shoulders. Me, I'm 
dark as Daddv Jobe and my hair never grew out much longer than he 
wears his." That this comparison implies appraisal is footnoted by her 
comment on her brother: "Little Jobe looks like me and Daddy Jobe, 



71 



66 



Multicultural Literature for Children 



but he's a handsome boy all the same." What sounds like appreciation 
of her little brother's features is in fact racial self-deprecation. 

The Slapin and Seale book (1989) contains a review of another 
novel, Wallin's Ceremony of the Panther (1987), which demonstrates the 
difficulty of attaining a high level of cross-cultural competency. Even 
though the reviewer recognizes that the author's sympathies are 
clearly with the people about whom he writes and judges the book to 
be well written, the reviewer still finds it not quite on the mark: 

For a Native reader, the rhythm is off; . . . there are jarring notes. 
For example, "The old Miccosukee world was a dangerous 
place [compared to what, I wonder], full of spirits and enemies 
and magical warfare." He tells us that Grandmother Mary "had 
been a great medicine woman," and refers to her "spells." Na- 
tive rites are no more "spells" than are the ceremonies of the 
Judeo-Christian tradition. (Slapin and Seale 1989, 370) 

The final judgment of the reviewer is that Wallin "has attempted to 
draw contrasts between modern and traditional ways of living with- 
out being able to give the spirit and feel of it" (372). 

Parallel Culture Literature 

The final category we propose is parallel culture literature. This is 
literature written by authors from parallel cultural groups to represent 
the experience, consciousness, and self-image developed as a result of 
being acculturated and socialized within those groups. Like language 
and art, literature is an essential part of a people's heritage. In this 
sense, parallel culture literature is the literature of a cultural group. 
"Outsiders" may write about a cultural group, may do so with great 
skill, and may produce a meritorious work, but their works do not 
belong to the group unless they have been accepted as a group mem- 
ber. A history of the literature of a parallel culture will not include 
books by these "outsiders." We distinguish national literatures in the 
same way. Can a successful book about American culture by an Aus- 
tralian be considered American literature? Of course not. The contro- 
versy around insider-outsider difference that haunts children's 
literature is not so prominent in adult literature. How many white 
writers have ever entered the annals of the adult literatures of Ameri- 
can peoples of color? 

Parallel culture literature, it should be pointed out, is not the 
same as the second subcategory of cross-cultural literature. This was 
made clear in an earlier analysis. In an examination of the repre- 



72 



Cai and Bishop 



67 



sentation of African American experience in 150 realistic fiction books 
for children, Bishop (Sims [Bishopl 1982), divided the surveyed books 
into three categories: social conscience books, melting-pot books, and 
culturally conscious books. The categories were derived from an 
analysis based on three factors: intended audience, presumed concept 
of African American culture, and the author's implied sociocultural 
perspective. Social conscience books, all of which were written by 
white writers, mainly dealt with black-white conflicts such as those 
centered on desegregating schools and communities. Most of those 
books were marred by ignorance, paternalism, or racism. The melting- 
pot books centered on racial and cultural integration or homogeniza- 
tion. Some of these were marred by paternalism, and all excluded any 
unique African American cultural perspective. Both types of books, in 
terms of the categories we propose in this chapter, would be consid- 
ered cross-cultural or intercultural. The third of the Sims [Bishop] 
categories, the culturally conscious books, tried to capture something 
of the uniqueness of African American experience. Twenty-eight per- 
cent of those books were written by white authors and in the present 
classification would also be considered cross-cultural. This type of 
cross-cultural literature is distinguished from the literature of a paral- 
lel culture by the authors' alien ethnic identity and often also by 
varying degrees of the authors' alienation from the perspective of the 
native culture they write about. 

A cultural group's perspective is its world outlook, shaped by 
its shared experience, "collective memories and frames of reference" 
(Blauner, cited in Sims [Bishopl 1982, 9). A literary work is inevitably 
informed and infused with the author's perspective, reflected in "the 
choice of detail to include, the descriptions of things and people, the 
things that are emphasized or de-emphasized" (Sims [Bishopl 1984). 
This perspective is not easy to define in abstract terms because it is not 
only registered in apparent values, beliefs, and attitudes, but is also 
embodied in subtle perceptions, feelings, emotions, gestures, and be- 
haviors. A perspective in this sense cannot be learned solely from 
books about a cultural group; it can be acquired only from experience, 
from immersion in that culture. Yet in the Sims [Bishop] survey, only 
47 percent of the books about African Americans were written from an 
"insider's perspective." 

To stress the difficulty of acquiring a cultural group's perspec- 
tive does not mean to deny outsiders the right to portray that cultural 
group. It is meant to emphasize the need for outsiders to fill in the 
cultural gap themselves before they can close it for others. It is also 



68 



Multicultural Literature for Children 



meant to point to the fact that literature from parallel cultural groups 
has a unique role to play in multicultural literature programs, because 
writers from those groups best represent their own cultures. To pro- 
mote understanding of parallel cultural groups and to help students 
from those groups develop a sense of cultural identity and value their 
cultural heritage, we should first choose works from the literatures of 
parallel cultures. Well-intended and well-written cross-cultural books 
will also help, but they must be chosen with care and caution. 

The 1982 analysis may have offered a guide for examining books 
about other groups, and it may yet be useful for those examining 
books about other parallel cultures in the United States. Placing the 
earlier analysis in the larger context of multicultural literature, how- 
ever, demonstrates that many works of cross-cultural literature may 
not serve the purposes of multicultural education, for instead of dis- 
pelling ignorance and prejudice, as they intend, they may reinforce 
them. 

The value of parallel culture literature in multicultural educa- 
tion should be clear, particularly in the social context of the United 
States. Multicultural education was introduced as an answer to the 
challenges of a culturally diverse society. From a global perspective, 
multicultural education may promote cultural awareness and appre- 
ciation among young people of the world, including the United States. 
But the more immediate concern for this country is interracial relation- 
ships. With their truthful reflection of reality and their immediate 
relevance to social issues, parallel culture literatures would contribute 
greatly to realizing the objectives of multicultural education. If as 
Dorsey pointed out, "literature is the language of the heart," the litera- 
ture of a parallel culture opens the group's heart to the reading public, 
showing their joy and grief, love and hatred, hope and despair, expec- 
tations and frustrations, and perhaps most importantly, the effects of 
living in a racist society. Voices from the heart, once heard, can change 
other hearts. 

Conclusion 

Our purpose in this paper has been to clarify the concept of multicul- 
tural literature as it is commonly used in educational circles. If multi- 
cultural literature is to serve the cause of multicultural education, then 
we must be clear about the meaning and connotations of the term. We 
have offered what we hope is a useful classification system. Literature, 
because it is composed of imaginative works of art, resists any easy 




Cai and Bishop 



69 



categorization, and our categories will inevitably leak. Our purpose, 
however, is not to provide exercises in classification, but to clarify, 
perhaps to delimit, the concept of multicultural literature. When all the 
books "other than those of the dominant culture" (Jenkins 1973, 50) are 
lumped together under the label of multicultural literature, publishers 
and educators alike may feel satisfied that they a~e helping to meet the 
goals of multicultural education, when in fact they may be only begin- 
ning. When "multicultural book lists" are overwhelmed with folktales, 
historical fiction, and cross-cultural literature, the voices of contempo- 
rary parallel cultures may be drowned out. Without those voices, it is 
easy to lose sight of the goals of multicultural education, and the 
function of multicultural literature within that context, which is, after 
all, to open students' (and teachers') minds and hearts so that they 
learn to understand and value both themselves and people, perspec- 
tives, and experiences different from their own. Building a just and 
equitable society requires no less. 



Notes 

1 . The use of the term minority is problematic and will, whore possible, 
be avoided. In those cases where we have used the word, we place it in 
quotation marks to indicate our discomfort. Nieto, in Affirming Diversity: The 
Sociopolitical Context of Multicultural Education (1992), presents her rationale 
for avoiding the term and articulates reasons with which we agree. She points 
out that the term minority, as it has typically been used in the United States, 
connotes low status. Historically the term has been used to refer only to racial 
minorities and not to describe while ethnic groups, such as Swedish Ameri- 
cans, who also constitute numerical minorities. Such usage confers lower 
status on the groups so labeled. She further points out that, even in situations 
where such groups ore no longer in the numerical minority, the term minority 
is frequently still applied, thus retaining its pejorative connotation (for exam- 
ple, "majority minority" schools, instead of primarily black). This connection 
between minority and low status causes Nieto to label the term offensive (17). 

2. The terms ethnic and minority are often used interchangeably in the 
literature on multicultural education, as are the terms multiethnic and multi- 
cultural. Here, we follow the usage of the person being cited. Banks, in 
"Shaping the Future of Multicultural Education" (1979), offers an important 
distinction. He defines an ethnic group as "an involuntary group which 
shares a heritage, kinship ties, a sense of identification, political and economic 
interests, and cultural and linguistic characteristics" (238). It is one kind of 
cultural group. In Teaching Strategic* fo) Lihnic Studies (1991 ), Banks defines an 
"ethnic minority" group as having "unique physical and/or cultural charac- 
teristics that enable people who belong to mainstream groups to identify its 
members easily and thus to treat them in a discriminatory way" (14). In this 



7- 



70 



Multicultural Literature for Children 



sense, the term minority is itself sometimes used in a discriminatory way, as 
Nieto points out (see Note 1 ). 

3. The term parallel cultures is borrowed from Virginia Hamilton, who 
used it in her acceptance speech when she received the Boston Globe-Horn 
Book Award for Anthony Burns: The Defeat and Triumph of a Fugitive Slave 
(1988). (See The Horn Book, LXV(2), March/April, 1989.) Hamilton used the 
term this way: "If this were the life of any ordinary individual not of a parallel 
culture who became enormously famous . . . " (183). Although the term may 
not be perfectly suited as a substitute for the uncomfortable term minority, it 
has the advantage of according equal status to the cultures designated as 
parallel. (One concern might be that, as Hamilton used the term and as I have 
used it in the past, it clearly refers only to groups other than the dominant 
white cultural group so that, alongside its connotation of equality, there is 
also a sense in which it designates "otherness" in relation to the dominant 
culture.) The relevant definition of parallel is not the geometric one, referring 
to lines that never meet, but the one referring to likeness or similarity or to 
comparisons that show likeness. For example, we can speak of parallel cus- 
toms in different societies or finding parallels between and among cultures. 



References 

Austin, M. C, and Jenkins, E. (1983). Promoting world understanding through 
literature, K-8. Littleton, CO: Libraries Unlimited. 

Banks, J. A. (1979). Shaping the future of multicultural education, journal of 
Negro Education, 48, 237-252. 

. (1991). Teaching strategies for ethnic studies (5th ed.). Needham 

Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon. 

Carlson, R. K. (1972). Emerging humanity: Multiethnic literature for children 
and adolescents. Dubuque, IA: William C. Brown. 

Council on Interracial Books for Children. (1974). 10 quick ways to analyze 
children's books for racism and sexism. New York: Author. 

Dasenbrock, R. W. (1987). Intelligibility and meaningfulness in multicul- 
tural literature. PMLA, 702(1), 10-19. 

Dorsey, D. (1977). Minority literature in the service of cultural pluralism. In 
D. Fisher (Ed.), Minority language and literature. New York: Modern 
Language Association of America. 

Hamilton, V. (19 ( S8). Anthony Burns: The defeat and triumph of a fugitive slave. 
New York: Knopf. 

Jenkins, E. (1973). Multiethnic literature: Promise and problems. Elementary 
English, 50, 693-699. 

Klein, C (1985). Reading into racism: Bias in children's literature and learning 
material*. London: Routledge & Kegel n Paul. 

Kruse, G. M., and I Iorning, K. T. (1990). Looking into the minor: Considera- 
tions behind the reflections. In M. V. Lindgren (Ed.), The multicolored 



Cat and Bishop 



mirror: Cultural substance in literature for children and young adult*. Fort 
Atkinson, WI: Highsmith. 

Nieto. S. (1992). Affirming diversity: The sociopolitical context of multicultural 
education. New York: Longman. 

Norton, D. E. (1987). Through the eyes of a child: An introduction to children's 
literature (2nd cd.). Columbus, OH: Charles Merrill. 

. (1991 ). Through the eyes of a child: An introduction to children's litera- 
ture (3rd ed.). Columbus, OH: Charles Merrill. 

Rudman, M. (1984). Children's literature: An issues approach (2nd ed.). New- 
York: Longman. 

Sims IBishop], R. (1982). Shadoxo and substance: Afro-American experience in 
contemporary children's fiction. Urbana, 1L: National Council of Teach- 
ers of English. 

. (1984). A question of perspective. The Advocate, 3, 145-1 4b. 

Slapin, B., and Scale, D. (Eds.). (1989). Books without bias: Through Indian 
eyes. Berkeley, CA: Ovate. 

Thompson, J., and Woodard, G. (1985). Black perspectives in books for chil- 
dren. In D. MacCan and G. Woodard (Eds.), The black American in 
books for children: Readings and racism. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press. 

Children's Books 

Baer, E. (1990). This is the way toe go to school: A book about children around the 
world (S. Bjorkman, Illustrator). New York: Scholastic. 

Carlson, N. S. (1965). The empty schoolhousc. New York: Harper. 

Friedman, I. R. (1984). How my parents learned to eat (A. Say, Illustrator). Bos- 
ton: Houghton Mifflin. 

Jones, R. (1991). Mat their and Tilly (B. Peck, Illustrator). New York: Dutton. 

Levine, E. (1989). / hale English (S. Bjorkman, Illustrator). New York: Scholas- 
tic. 

Martin, B., Jr. (1987). Knots on a counting rope. New York: Holt. 
Schami, R. (1990). A handful of stars (R. Lesser, Trans.). U.S. edition, New 
York: Dutton. 

Snyder, D. (1988). The boy of the three-year nap (A. Say, Illustrator). Boston: 

Houghton Mifflin. 
Spinelli, J. (1990). Maniai Magee. Boston: Little, Brown. 
Surat, M. (1^89). Angel child, dragon child. New York: Scholastic. 
Wallin, L. ( 1987). Ceremony of the panther. New York: Bradbury. 



7* 



72 



6 What Is Sharing 
Time For? 

Courtney B. Cazden 

Harvard University 

Courtney Cazden highlights the critical role of teachers as responded to the 
stories children tell. She suggests that teachers may find themselves more 
receptive to children whose cultural backgrounds are similar to their won, 
because they share with those children cultural norms for storytelling. Tims 
she argues .for the importance of teacher sensitivity and self-awareness. It is 
these qualities that yield classrooms with space for a diversity of children 
and stories. 

jerry: Ummm, two days ago, ummm, my father and my father's 
friend were doing something over the other side, and my sister 
wanted uhhh, my father's friend to make her a little boat out of 
paper, and the paper was too little. He used his dollar and, ummm, 
my sister undoed it and we, ahhh, bought my father and my mother 
Christmas presents. 

Teacher: A man made a boat out of a dollar bill for you?! Wow! That's 
a pretty expensive paper to use! 

Sharing Time, a routine event in many primary grade classrooms, 
is of special interest for several reasons. First, it may be the only 
opportunity during official classroom air time for children to 
create their own oral texts: to say more than a short answer to teacher 
questions and to speak on a self-chosen topic that does not have to 
meet criteria of relevance to previous discourse. Second, because one 
purpose of Sharing Time is to allow a sharing of personal experiences, 
it is often the only official classroom air time when out-of-school 
experiences are acceptable topics in school. Otherwise, talking to the 
teacher about out-of-school life may be restricted to transition mo- 
ments such as before school or while waiting in line. In fact, a teacher 
shift from listening to not listening to such stories is a clear marker that 
school has officially begun: "I can't listen now, Sarah, we have to get 
started" (that is, we have to enter a different discourse world in which 
what you're talking about, no matter how important to you, is out of 
bounds). Third, in addition to Sharing Time's unique features in ox- 



73 



Courtney B, Cazdcn 



73 



pected length and topic of children's speech, it is of interest as a 
context for producing narratives — perhaps the most universal kind of 
text. 

Given these features of what might seem a routine and unimpor- 
tant part of the school day, important questions can be raised. What 
kind of narratives do children tell? Are there differences in the stories 
that seem related to different home backgrounds? What is the role of 
the audience — teacher and other children? In a series of studies begun 
by Sarah Michaels in California and continued with me in the Boston 
area, we have tried to answer these questions. I will report here only 
what we have learned about the kinds of responses that teachers 
make. 1 

Most teachers make some response — either a comment or ques- 
tion — to each Sharing Time narrative. The responses we observed can 
be placed along a dimension of the extent to which teacher and child 
share a sense of appropriate topic and appropriate way to tell about it. 
At one end is the enthusiastic appreciation of Jerry's teacher: 

A man made a boat out of a dollar bill for you?! Wow! That's a 
prettv expensive paper to use! 

At the opposite end is another teacher's negative reaction to Deena's 
day: 

Deem: Urn, 1 went to the beach Sunday, and to McDonald's, 
and to the park. And 1 got this for my birthday. My 
mother bought it for me. And, um, I had, urn, two dollars 
for mv birthday and 1 put it in here. And 1 went to where 
my friend named Gigi — 1 went over to my grandmother's 
house with her. And, um, she was on my back, and I — and 
we was walking around by my house, and, um, she was 
heavy. She was in sixth or seventh grade — 

Teacher: (interrupting] OK, I'm going to stop you. 1 want you 
to talk about things that are really, really very important. 
That's important to you, but tell us things that are sort of 
different. Can you do that? 

Between these extremes are a variety of responses. I have or- 
dered them into four categories, but readers are encouraged to con- 
sider alternate orderings and their reasons for them. 

First, and closest to the appreciation end, are cases where the 
teachei has clearly understood the story and simply comments or asks 
a question for further information, as Carl's teacher did: 

Carl: Well, lasi night my lather was at work. He— every Thurs- 
day night thev have this thing, that everybody has this dol- 



74 



What Is Sharing Time For? 



lar, and it makes up to a hundred dollars. And my — and 
you've gotta pick this name out . . . and my father's name 
got picked. So he won a thousand dollars — a hundred dol- 
lars. 

Teacher: Tell us what he's gonna do with it. 
Carl: He's gonna pay bills. 

A second type of response leads to an extended collaboration 
between questioning teacher and reporting child that results in a more 
complete story about an object or event than the child would have 
produced alone. Here is an example about making candles: 

Mindy: When 1 was in day camp, we made these candles. 
Teacher: You made them? 

Mindy: And, uuh, 1, I tried it with different colors, with both 
of them, but one just came out. This one just came out 
blue, and I don't know what this color is. 

Teacher: That's neato. Tell the kids how you do it from the 
very start. Pretend we don't know a thing about candles. 
OK, what did you do first? What did you use? Flour? 

Mindy: Urn, there's some hot wax, some real hot wax, that 
you just take a string and tie a knot in it and dip the string 
in the urn wax. 

Teacher: Oh, you shaped it with your hand, mmm. 

Mindy: But you have — first you have to stick it into the wax, 
and then water, and then keep doing that until it gets to 
the size you want it. 

Teacher: OK, who knows what the string is for? 

When Mindy's teacher says, "Tell the kids how you do it from the very 
start. Pretend we don't know a thing about candles," she seems to be 
speaking from an implicit model of literate discourse — the way one 
should write to an unseen and unknown audience. In response to 
questions, Mindy was encouraged to be clear and precise and to put 
more and more information into words, rather than relying on shared 
background knowledge about candles or contextual cues from the 
candles she was holding, to communicate part of the intended mes- 
sage. 

A third response is a question that expresses the teacher's per- 
plexity, her inability to keep track of the thread of the story as the child 
tells it. In a third classroom, Leona told a long story about her puppy — 
about incidents at breakfast one morning and how lie always tries to 
follow her to school, and then a more acute problem: 



SO 



Courtney B. Cazden 



75 



Lcona: IcontinuingJ And we took him to the emergency and 
see what was wrong with him. And he got a shot. And 
then he was crying. And la-last yesterday — and now they 
put him asleep. And he's still in the hospital. And the— the 
doctor said that he hasta — he got a shot oecause he was 
nervous — about the home that I had. And he could still 
stay, but he thought he wasn't gonna be a — he thought he 
wasn't gonna be able to let him go. He — 

Teacher: [interrupting] Who's in the hospital, Leona? 

Sometime later, we asked Leona's teacher about her problems in un- 
derstanding Sharing Time stories. She answered from her experience 
as mother as well as teacher: 

It's confusing when vou listen, because their timeframe is not 
the same as ours. When my son was six, he would suddenly talk 
about something from months earlier, and I could understand 
because I'd been there; I could make the connection. It's differ- 
ent in class. It's hard to make the connection with so many 
different individuals. 

When we consider the problems teachers face in "making con- 
nections" in time for an on-the-spot response, story topics can make a 
big difference. Some stories, such as Jerry's paper boat and Carl's 
hundred dollars, are about widely shared experiences with publicly 
familiar scripts. But even Carl's explanation about lotteries has exten- 
sive problems of vague words: tliis thing, tliis dollar, it makes up to, this 
name. But adult listeners would get enough cues to some kind of 
lottery to clarify the vagueness on their own. The same might be true 
of Leona's puppy in the hospital, but she faced the difficult discourse 
problem of keeping straight the referents to two same-sex characters — 
the doctor and the puppy, and we know from other research (Bartlett 
and Scribner 1981) that this causes problems for young writers 
throughout the elementary school years. Other stories, such as Deena's 
special day, are about the more idiosyncratic events of family living. It 
is impossible for the teacher, listening to such stories, to clarify rela- 
tionships on the child's word alone. 

Fourth and last, and closest to the negative end, is a response by 
the teacher that shifts the topic to one the teacher either understands 
better or values more highly. After the teacher's request for informa- 
tion about who is in the hospital, Leona explains that her puppy is 
there because he is "vicious." This leads to a discussion of the meaning 
of vicious and then a retelling by Leona of the hospital episode, ending 
with "I'll tell you Monday what happened." The teacher, presumably 
still not understanding that Leona's concern for her puppy is a matter 



76 



Wliat Is SI mring Time For? 



of his life or death, ends with a comment on dogs' need for house 
training. 

Similarly, Deena's teacher follows her interruption of Deena's 
account of her day with a question about the scene of Deena's first 
sentence, the beach: 

Teacher: [continuing] And tell us what beach you went to over 
the weekend. 

Deena: I went to um-uin — 

Teacher: Alameda Beach? 

Deena: Yeah. 

Teacher: That's nice there, huh? 
Deena: 1 went there two times. 

Teacher: That's very nice. I like it there. Thank you, Deena. 

The teacher's topical shift to the beach could have two motiva- 
tions that, in this case, converge. The beach is the scene mentioned in 
Deena's first sentence and thus might be considered bv the teacher as 
the topic that should have been sustained throughout. Alternatively, 
going to the beach may represent the kind of familiar scenario that the 
teacher either finds more appropriate, or just more comprehensible, 
than activities among family or friends. Being able tc Mck up an older 
and larger child ("And, urn, she was on my back . . . and, urn, she was 
heavy"), no matter how important to the child, may seem to the 
teacher ordinary or even trivial. 

Here is another example where the teacher's attempt to change 
the focus of the child's narration is due not to anv lack of comprehen- 
sion, but rather to a conflict between child and teacher about the 
highlights of a family outing: 

\'anc\f: I went to Old Ironsides at the ocean. (Led bv a series 
of teacher questions, Nancv explains that Old Ironsides is 
a boat and that it's old. The teacher herself offers the real 
name, The Constitution. Then Nancy tries to shift the focus 
of her story. | We also spent our dollars and we went to an- 
other big shop. 

Teacher: Mm. And what did you learn about Old Ironsides? 

Xancy: [Led bv teacher questions back to Old Ironsides, 

Nancv supplies more information about the furnishings in- 
side and the costumes of the guides, and then tries to shift 
focus again.) 1 also went to a fancy restaurant. 

Teacher: 1 laha! Very good! 

yjancu: And I had a hamburger, trench I lies, lettuce and a — 



Courtney tf. Cazdcu 



77 



Teacher: [interrupting] OK. All right. WhatV -Arthur's been 
waiting and then Paula, OK? 

Narratives are a universal meaning-making strategy, but there is 
no one way of transforming experience into a story. In the words of a 
British educator (Rosen 1982), narratives are "first and foremost a 
product of the disposition of the human mind to narrati/e experience 
and to transform it into findings which as social beings we may share 
and compare with those of others" (9). But while "the story is always 
out there," Rosen says, 

the important step has still to be taken. The unremitting flow of 
events must first be selectively attended to, interpreted as hold- 
ing relationships, causes, motives, feelings, consequences— in a 
word, meanings. To give order to this otherwise unmanageable 
flux wo must take another step and invent, yes, invent, begin- 
nings and ends for out there are no such things This is the 

axiomatic element of narrative: it is the outcome of a mental 
process which enables us to excise from our experience a mean- 
ingful sequence, to place it within boundaries, to set around it 
the frontiers of the story, to make it resonate in the contrived 
silences with which we may precede and end it. . . .The narra- 
tive edits ruthlessly the raw tape. (10-11) 

Our potentiality and disposition to construct narratives is similar to 
our potentiality and disposition to acquire language. In Rosen's words: 

If we are programmed to learn a language, we must still be 
exposed to a language in order to learn it and its socially consti- 
tuted use. In the same way, however universal our human bent 
for narrati/ing experience we encounter our own society's 
modes for doing this. There is no one way of telling stories; we 
learn the storv grammars of our society, our culture. (11) 

Differences of cultural background and differences in age be- 
tween teacher and child will affect how the raw tape of experience is 
edited and transformed; and sometimes a teacher's comments reveal 
these differences. Deena's teacher asked Deena to talk only about 
"things that are really, really very important . . . things that are sort of 
different." Nancy's teacher expressed the same idea in other words to 
one of Nancy's peei "If you have something that was special for you, 
that you would like to share with us, but we don't want to hear about 
TV shows and regular things that happened." But who is to say what 
is "important," "different," and "special" or just "regular" to someone 
else? And don't our finest writers (see Welty 1984) often make stories 
out of the most ordinary events of daily life? 



78 



What Is Sharing Time For? 



How then should teachers think about their role at Sharing 
Time? The first question to ask is: What are the primary purposes for 
Sharing Time anyway? To build a community of children through the 
sharing of out-of-school experiences? To give children practice in 
speaking before a group? To serve as oral practice in the kind of 
compositions that children will later be expected to write? The best 
course of action for individual teachers will depend on their answer to 
this question. 

If a teacher values a growing sense of community among chil- 
dren, then it may be better to divide the class into small groups for 
Sharing Time, as Moffett and Wagner (1976, 73-74) suggest. That way, 
there can be more informal questioning by other children, and more 
sharers can get a chance. If, on the other hand, the primary purpose is 
seen as oral preparation for writing, then the important question is 
whether it would be more effective to work with a child in a conference 
over an actual written text (as described by Graves 1983), rather than 
try to change patterns of oral narrative style. In conference, the child 
is no longer a performer to a mixed audience of teacher and peers. A 
long story that takes up a disproportionate amount of class time in oral 
rendition would be valued as a written composition, and the teacher 
can give a more considered response. 

Teachers, like physicians and social workers, are in the business 
of helping others. But as a prerequisite to giving help, we have to take 
in and understand. A Piagetian psychologist (Duckworth 1982) speaks 
of the importance of teachers "understanding learners' under- 
standings." A British sociologist (Bernstein 1972) puts the same idea in 
different words: "If the culture of the teacher is to become part of the 
consciousness of the child, then the culture of the child must first be in 
the consciousness of the teacher" (149). Important elements of that 
consciousness are our expectations about text structures and our pre- 
supposed knowledge about what texts are about. We usually think of 
the importance of these "contexts in the mind" (Cazden 1982) when 
we are teaching children to read, but they are just as important when 
the texts are oral instead of written and when the interpreter is not a 
reading child but a listening teacher. 



Note 

1. Michaels reports her studv of a California classroom that 

included Doona and Mindy. Michaels and Cazden (1984) and Cazden, 
Michaels, and Tabors (1985) report our research in Boston-area classrooms 



Courtney B. Cazden 



that included Carl and Leona. Separate from our research, Dorr-Bremme 
(1982) analyzes the social organization of Sharing Time as well as Worktime 
in another Boston-area classroom that included jerry and Nancy. 



References 

Bartlett, E. J., and Scribner, S. (1981). Text and content: An investigation of 
referential organization in children's written narratives. In C 
Frederiksen and J. F. Dominic (Eds.), Writing: The nature, development, 
and teaching of written communication: Vol. 2. Writing: Process, develop- 
ment, ami communication (153-168). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Bernstein, B. (1972). A critique of the concept of compensatory education. 
In C. B. Cazden, D. Hymes, and V John (Eds.), Functions of language 
in the classroom, (135-151). New York: Teachers College Press. 

Cazden, C. B. (1982). Contexts for literacy: In the mind and in the class- 
room, journal of Reading Behavior, 74,413-427. 

Ca/den, C. B., Michaels, S., and Tabors, P. (1985). Self-repair in sharing time 
narratives: The intersection of metalinguistic awareness, speech 
event and narrative style. In S. Frcedman (Ed.), The acquisition of writ- 
ten language: Revision and response. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Dorr-Bremme, D. VV. (1982). Behaving and making sense: Creating social or- 
ganization in the classroom. Doctoral dissertation, Harvard Univer- 
sity. (University Microfilms No. 82-23, 203) 

Duckworth, K. (1982). Understanding children's understanding. In V. Wind- 
ley, M. Dorn, and L. Weber (Eds.), Building on the strengths of children. 
New York: City College. 

Graves, D. I L (1983). Writing: Teachers and children at work. Exeter, NH: 
1 leinemann. 

Michaels, S. (1981). "Sharing Time": Children's narrative styles and differen- 
tial access to literacy. Language in Society, 10, 423-442. 

Michaels, S., and Cazden, C. B. (1984). Teacher/child collaboration as oral 
preparation for literacy. In B. B. Schieffelin (Ed.), Acquisition of liter- 
acy: Ethnographic perspectives (132-154). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Moffett, J., and Wagner, B. J. (1976). Student-centered language arts and read- 
ing: A handbook for teachers (2nd ed.). Boston: Houghton-Mifflin. 

Rosen, 1 1. (1982, April). 77/t' nurture of narrative. Paper presented at the an- 
nual meeting of the International Reading Association, Chicago. 

Weltv, E. (1984). One writer's beginnings. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer- 
sity Press. 



7 "The Blacker the Berry, 
the Sweeter the Juice": 
African American 
Student Writers 

Geneva Smitherman 

Michigan State University 

Differences in cultural discourse styles have been viezoed primarily as 
problems, as "mismatches" with the discourse styles valued in school. 
Geneva Smitherman provides a pozverful alternative vision. She details her 
careful studies of African American students' zcritingfor the National 
Assessment of Educational Progress, and she demonstrates that, for teacher- 
raters of the 1980s, the use of an African American discourse stifle 
correlated positively zeith higher scores 

Written literacy among African American students continues to 
be of major concern to educators, policy makers, researchers, 
and the lay community. African American students have con- 
sistently scored lower than their European American counterparts in 
all rounds of the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) 
since its inception in 1969 (NAEP 1980; Applebee, Langer, and Mullis 
1985). And even in that decade of remarkable progress for African 
American student writers, 1969 to 1979, where 1979 NAEP results 
indicated that they had improved twice as much as their white coun- 
terparts, African American students still were not writing on a par 
with white students, as the 1979 NAEP results also indicated. 

The upward surge first evidenced in 1979 continued in the 
1980s, though not with the same dramatic level of improvement. Ac- 
cording to NAEP, from 1984 to 1988, "Black and Hispanic students 
appeared to show consistent improvements at all three grade levels, 
although the changes were not statistically significant" (Applebee et 
al. 1990, 9), Although black students' scores still do not parallel those 
of whites, there is some slight encouragement in NAEP's finding, 
particularly in light of their conclusion that generally in 1988 the 
nation's students "continued to perform at minimal levels on the . . . 



Geneva Smitherman 



81 



writing assessment tasks, and relatively few performed at adequate or 
better levels" (Applebee et al. 1990, 6). 

The topic of the African American Verbal Tradition — both its 
discourse modalities and its grammar — is frequently at the heart of 
discussion and concern about African American student writing. Of 
particular significance is the extent to which Black English Vernacular 
(BEV) patterns of syntax and discourse are reproduced in writing. A 
significant related issue concerns the potential correlation between a 
student's use of such BEV patterns and evaluation of his or her essay 
by writing instructors. This chapter addresses both issues by focusing 
on BEV discourse patterns. 1 An earlier publication discussed these is- 
sues with a focus on BEV grammar (see Smitherman 1991). Both the 
chapter presented here and the earlier article used essays written by 
NAEP's national representative sample of seventeen-year-old African 
American students from 1969 to 1988-89. 

National Assessment of Educational Progress 

NAEP is a federally funded survey of the educational attainments of 
youth and adults at four age levels: nine, thirteen, seventeen, and 
twentv-six to thirty-five. Its purpose is to measure growth or decline 
in educational achievement in ten subject areas: writing, reading, lit- 
erature, science, mathematics, citizenship, music, art, social studies, 
and career and occupational development. Administered at five- and 
ten-vear intervals since its inception in 1969, NAEP offers the advan- 
tage of a scientifically selected national representative sample, uni- 
form scoring procedures and guidelines, a nationally administered, 
standardized test format, and a high degree of reliability and validity. 
For example, the percentage of exact agreement on the rating of the 
1984 papers from seventeen-year-olds ranged from 89 percent to 92 
percent, with corresponding reliability coefficients of .89 and .91 (Ap- 
plebee, Langer, and Mullis 1985, 68). The writing task time is fifteen or 
sixteen minutes, depending on the task, and students submit first 
drafts. Previously administered by the Education Commission of the 
States, NAEP has been under the purview of the Educational Testing 
Service since 1984. 

The students assessed reflect national, representative groups, in 
a random sample, stratified by race-ethnicity, social-educational class, 
region of country/ urban-rural, gender, and other demographics. From 
1969 to 1979, approximately 8,100 students were assessed. From 1984 
to I9KS, approximately 18,000 students were assessed. 



82 



"The Blocker the Berry, the Sweeter the juice" 



NAEP's essay tasks represent three types of rhetorical modali- 
ties: (1) imaginative-narrative, (2) descriptive-informative, and (3) per- 
suasive. For the imaginative modality, in the 1969 and 1979 NAEP, 
students were given a picture of a stork and told to make up a story 
about it. The prompt was comprised of three possible opening lines: 
(1) "I'm telling you, Henry, if you don't get rid of that thing, it's going 
to eat up the cat!"; (2) "But mother, I (7/// telling the truth! It laid an egg 
in the Chevy"; and (3) "Last night a very odd-looking bird appeared 
in the neighborhood." In 1984, students were given a picture of a box 
with a hole in it and an eye peering out. They were told to "imagine" 
themselves in the picture, to describe the scene and their feelings about 
it, and to make their descriptions "lively and interesting." There was 
no imaginative task in 1988. 

For the descriptive-informative task, the 1969 and 1979 students 
were asked to describe something they knew about, a familiar place or 
thing, in such a way that it could be recognized by someone reading 
the description. For 1984 and 1988, they were given the topic "Food on 
the Frontier" and asked to write an essay discussing reasons for the 
differences between food on the frontier and food today. Finally, for the 
persuasive modality, in 1984 and 1988 the students' task was to write a 
letter to the recreation department in their city or town, trying to 
convince the head of that department to buy either an abandoned 
railroad track or an old warehouse to create recreational opportunities. 
(We were unable to obtain the persuasive essays for 1969 and 1979; 
thus this longitudinal comparison was not possible.) 

Issues in the Study 

As a womanist linguist concerned about the educational plight of 
African American vouth, 1 began this line of research ir. 1981, building 
on my dissertation research comparing the speech and writing of black 
students (Smithennan 1969). My study was one of the first to examine 
the "dialect interference" hypothesis, the notion that spoken language 
bv blacks is a source of interference in their production of written 
Standard English. Analyzing oral and written samples from a group of 
African American junior high students for use of BEV syntactical pat- 
terns, the studv concluded that, while both speech and writing exhib- 
ited features of BHV, the students used significantly more BEV 
grammar in speech than in writing. Subsequent work by researchers 
such as Whiteman (1976), Scott (1981), Wright (1984), Chaplin (1987), 
and mv own earlier work on NAEP (Smithennan and Wright 1983; 



S3 



Geneva Smitherman 



83 



Smitherman 1985) raised issues concerning comparisons of African 
American and European American student writers, methodological 
concerns about differential topics, audiences, task conditions for 
speech and writing, the importance of BEV discourse over BEV syntax 
in writing, and the relationship between the "students' right to their 
own language" and teacher ratings of student writing. The following 
crucial questions are examined in the research presented here: 

1 . Can black student writing be characterized by an identifiable 
discourse style rooted in the African American Verbal Tradi- 
tion? 

2. If so, does use of this discourse style correlate with use of 
patterns of BEV grammar? 

3. What effect, if any, does use of an African American dis- 
course stvle have on teacher ratings of black student writing? 

4. Given writing with both BEV discourse and BHV grammar, 
does one dimension have greater effect on tester ratings 
than the other? x& 

Some responses to these questions emerged from the research of 
Scott (1981) and Chaplin (1987). Scott controlled for the methodologi- 
cal shortcomings in earlier studies (for example, unequivalent topics, 
modalities, and audiences) by using African American college fresh- 
men's speeches and essays on identical topics, produced under iden- 
tical conditions. The essays were edited by freshman composition 
instructors for BEV, mechanics, spelling, and punctuation. Scott then 
asked the writing instructors to evaluate edited and unedited versions 
of the students' essays. When she compared the ratings of edited 
essavs with ratings of corresponding unedited essays, no significant 
difference was found. Scott concluded that other factors such as dis- 
course patterns were probably influencing the ratings. 

Chaplin used 1984 NAEP essays for her work. (I lers is believed 
to be the only other research on African American student writing in 
NAEP.) She compared African American and European American 
eighth- and ninth-grade students in NAEP and African American stu- 
dents in the 1986 New Jersey High School Proficiency Test in an at- 
tempt to identify discourse patterns differentiating black and white 
students. She focused on the construct of field dependency-inde- 
pendencv, that is, the thinker's-writer's relationship to the event, idea, 
phenomenon, or "field" under discussion. The field dependent 
thinker's-writer's stvle demands involvement with and a lack of dis- 
tancing from the phenomenon being studied, analyzed, or communi- 
cated about. There is a tendency to see things whole, rather than 




84 



The Blacker the Berry, the Sweeter the Juice 



segmented. The field independent thinker's-writer's style demands 
distance from and a lack of involvement with the field. There is a 
tendency to view things in parts or segments. 

African American psychologists have long theorized that Afri- 
can Americans employ a field dependent style and European Ameri- 
cans a field independent style (e.g., Wilson 1971; Williams 1972; 
Simpkins, Holt, and Simpkins 1976). Cooper (1979) did the pioneering 
research on linguistic correlates of field dependency, bringing together 
the insights of African American psychologists and communication 
scholars. While the notion of differing cognitive styles, varied along 
racial-cultural lines, has caused controversy, it is imperative to under- 
stand that we are not talking about cognitive style in the "genetic 
inferiority" sense used by Bereiter and Engleman (1966) or Jensen 
(1980). Rather, field dependency-independency emanates from differ- 
ent cultural orientations and world views, a view in concert with the 
theoretical frameworks of Humboldt (1841), Sapir (1929), Volosinov 
(1930), Whorf (1956), Vygotsky (1962), and more recently Hymes 
(1974). It can be argued that we may not sufficiently understand the 
exact nature of the field dependency-independency constructs, yet a 
great deal of research substantiates that these constructs are reliable 
indicators of differing cultural experiences and cosmologies. Critically, 
and futuristically as U.S. society becomes increasingly diverse, we 
must arrive at a genuine acceptance of the fact that difference does not 
mean deficiency. 

Chaplin used black and white teacher raters to assess the African 
American and European American students' use of field dependency- 
independency as a discourse style in their essays. Her analysis led to 
the following observation: "[F]or more of the Black than White student 
writers, there was an identifiable field dependent style" (Chaplin 1987, 
26). Without being given an imposed structure or racial identification 
of the student writers, Chaplin's readers identified two discourse fea- 
tures in the black student writing that marked field dependencv: cul- 
tural vocabulary-influence and conversational tone. According to 
Chaplin, cultural vocabulary-influence represented culture-specific 
words, idioms, and phrases, the language that has "helped them to 
shape reality" and thus "become a part of their writing" (48). Conver- 
sational tone she defined as producing an essav that reads like "re- 
corded oral language or a conversation" (37). Although Chaplin states 
that there were more similarities than differences in the black and 
white students' writing, she does conclude that "conversational tone, 



Geneva Smitherman 



85 



cultural vocabulary and Black Vernacular English were used more 
often by Black . . . students" (1990, 18). 

In terms of implications for writing instruction, Chaplin advises 
that, since "Black students . . . seemed . . . less able to distance them- 
selves from cultural influences," such instruction "should be con- 
ceived within the context of an understanding and appreciation of the 
Black experience" if we are to "maximize the potential that Black 
students have for writing development" (1990, 21). Chaplin's work has 
buttressed my own claims about a discernible African American dis- 
course style of writing which I began to explore in analyzing the 1969 
and 1979 NAEP essays. Those explorations were extended and devel- 
oped, and the use of a black discourse style became the focal point in 
the present study. 

Sample and Methods 

In developing the methodology for this study, 1 felt it critical to com- 
pare African American student writers with one another, rather than 
with European American student writers. The research literature is 
quite definitive about the existence of an African American Verbal 
Tradition, with varying degrees of survival within the race (see, e.g., 
Herskovits 1941; Dillard 1972; Lincoln 1990; Thompson 1983; Labov 
1972; Asante 1990; Smitherman 1986; Gates 1988). Our focus here was 
to analyze the degree to which this tradition survives in the writing of 
black students across a generational time span, rather than to assess 
the degree of borrowing from this tradition by European American 
students. Further, although black students are often disproportion- 
ately represented in "basic" writing courses, I felt it imperative to 
analyze a variety of black student writers, not just those deemed 
"basic" or "remedial." Because there is diversity of performance 
within race, writing norms can be derived from African American 
student performance. 

In our study of 1969 and 1979 NAEP essays, we analyzed black 
discourse, using holistic scoring for field dependency. The discourse 
analysis involved only the sample of narrative-imaginative essays and 
employed general, impressionistic ratings of field involvement by a 
social psychologist, a graduate student in English, and me. We rated 
the essays holistically using a "field involvement score" based on the 
rater's assessment of the degree of distance of the writer from his or 
her subject matter. Some of the stylistic-linguistic features that this 
measurement involved were the presence of interaction between the 



91 



"The Blacker the Berry, the Sweeter the Juice 



writer and others, dialogue in the essay that clearly involved the 
writer, the attribution of human qualities to nonhuman things, and 
other signals that the writer was in the environment of the communi- 
cation context he or she created. 

For the present work, using 1984 and 1988-89 NAEP essays, we 
extended and refined that earlier methodology. Several writing in- 
structors experienced in teaching African American students and one 
other sociolinguist, who specializes in Black English Vernacular stud- 
ies, worked with me to construct a model of African American dis- 
course to use in analyzing the essays. First, ail became conversant with 
work on field dependency-independency, including Cooper's and 
Chaplin's studies and my 1985 NAEP study. Then each instructor 
independently read the same 25 essays, noting any features that struck 
him or her as discernibly African American. Next, the group members 
came together to discuss and compare our lists. We repeated this same 
procedure twice, thus ending up with a model based on independent 
assessment, discussion, and 85 percent agreement about the black 
discourse features in 75 essays in the NAEP sample. Each time we 
came together for discussion, we found ourselves coming up with 
similar concepts, different labels and terminologv to be sure, but es- 
sentially the same characteristic conceptual features. We established 
the following set of criteria for African American discourse in black 
student writing: 

1. Rhythmic, dramatic, evocative language. Example: "Dark- 
ness is like a cage in black around me, shutting me off from 
the rest of the world." 

2. Reference to color-race-ethnicity (that is, when topic does 
not call for it). Example: "I dont get in trouble at school or 
have any problems with people picking on me I am nice to 
every one no matter what color or sex." 

3. Use of proverbs, aphorisms, Biblical verses. Example: "Peo- 
ple might have shut me off from the world cause of a 
mistake, crime, or a sin. . . . Judge not others, for you to will 
have your day to be judge" 

4. Sermonic tone reminiscent of traditional Black Church 
rhetoric, especially in vocabulary, imagery, metaphor. Exam- 
ple: "I feel like I'm suffering from being with world. There 
no lights, food, water, bed and clothes for me to put on. 1m 
tighten, scared of what might happened if no one finds me. 
But 1 pray and pray until thev do find me." 

\ Direct address-conversational tone. Example: "I think vou 
should use the money for the railroad track. ... it could fall 



Geneva Smitherman 



off the tracks and kill someone on the train And that is very 
dangerius. Dont you think so. Please change your mind and 
pick the railroad tracks. For the People safelty O.K." [From 
letter-writing, persuasive task] 

6. Cultural references. Example: "How about slipping me 
some chitterlings in tonite" 

7. Ethnolinguistic idioms. Example: "...a fight has broke 
loose"; "It would run me crazy . . ." 

8 . Ve rba 1 i n ven t i veness, u n i q u e n o m en cla t u re . Exa m pie: " I Th e 
settlers] were pioneerific"; "|Thc box] has an eye look-out" 

L >. Cultural values-community consciousness. Expressions of 
concern for development of African Americans; concern for 
welfare of entire community, not just individuals, as for 
example several essays in which students expressed the 
view that recreational facilities would have to be for every- 
body, "young and old, and the homeless among Blacks" 

10. Field dependency. Involvement with and immersion in 
events and situations; personalizing phenomena; lack of 
distance from topics and subjects. 

The research team used holistic scoring to rank each essay in 
terms of the degree of African American discourse in the essay. We 
used a 4-point Likert-type scale, from 1 ("highly discernible African 
American style") to 4 ("not discernible African American style"). Each 
of the 1^84 imaginative essays (N = 432) and a subsample (N = 435) of 
the 1984 and 1988 persuasive essays were coded independently by two 
members of our research team. In the case of a discrepancy in coding, 
a third member coded the essay. The total number of essays coded was 
8<v. For 780 of the essays, or in 90 percent of the discourse sample, the 
two raters agreed independently on the discourse score assigned to the 
essay. (For sample essays from 1969 through 1988, see Appendix B.) 

Each of the essays had also been given a primary trait score or a 
holistic score, or both bv NAEP teachers — raters trained and experi- 
enced in holistic scoring and general writing assessment. A holistic 
score is an assessment of overall writing competency, what NAEP 
describes as "a global view of the ideas, language facility, organization, 
mechanics, and syntax of each paper taken as whole" (Applebee et al. 
1990. 84). Further, with holistic scoring, papers are evaluated relative 
to one another, rather than against specific criteria, as is the case with 
primary trait scoring. In 1969 and 1979, NAEP raters used a 4-point 
scale for both types of scoring. In 1984 and 1988, NAEP raters used a 
6-point scale for holistic and a 4-point scale for primary trait scoring. 



88 



The Blacker the Berry, the Sweeter the juice 



Scotc 

4 Elaborated. Students providing elaborated responses went 

beyond the essential, reflecting a higher level of coherence and 
providing more detail to support the points made. 

3 Adequate. Students providing adequate responses included the 

information and ideas necessary to accomplish the underlying 
task and were considered likely to be effective in achieving the 
desired purpose. 

2 Minimal. Students writing at the minimal level recognized some 

or all of the elements needed to complete the task, but did not 
manage these elements well enough to assure that the purpose of 
the task would be achieved. 

1 Unsatisfactory. Students who wrote papers judged as 

unsatisfactory provided very abbreviated, circular, or disjointed 
responses that did not even begin to address the writing task. 

0 Not Rated. A small percentage of the responses were blank, 

indecipherable, or completely off task, or contained a statement to 
the effect that the student did not know how to do the task; these 
responses were not rated 



Figure 1. NAEP primary trait scale. 

In primary trait assessment, papers are evaluated according to 
features of specific writing tasks. This score reflects the measure of 
student success in accomplishing the assigned purpose of the writing 
(Applebee et al. 1990, 6). Here, matters of mechanics, grammar, and 
syntax are subordinated to fluency and execution of the writing task 
(see Figures 1 and 2 for sample scales). 

For analysis, our team's discourse scores and NAEP's rater 
scores were compared to ascertain the degree of correlation, if any, 
between use of an African American discourse style and the primary 
trait and holistic scores assigned to an essay by raters. 

Next, the discourse scores were analyzed to examine the corre- 
lation, if any, between the production of BEV syntax and the use of a 
black oral discourse style. BEV syntax was measured by the percent- 
age of realization of patterns established in the literature as BEV gram- 
matical patterns. These variables with examples from the NAEPessavs 
are shown in Figure 3. 

The Pearson statistical procedure was used for the correlational 
analysis, with .05 established as the level of significance. 



Q f 



Geneva Smitherman 



Score 

6 A 6 story demonstrates a high degree of competence (appropriate 

for grade level) in response to the prompt, but may have a few 
minor errors. A story in this category generally has the following 
features: 

■ Is well developed with a clear narrative structure 

■ Contains considerable detail that enriches the narrative 

■ Clearly demonstrates facility in the use of language 

■ Is generally free from errors in mechanics, usage, and sentence 
structure 

=> A 5 storv demonstrates clear competence in response to the 

prompt, but may have minor errors. A story in this category 
generally has the following features: 

■ Is developed with a clear narrative structure 

■ Contains details that contribute effectively to the narrative 

■ Demonstrates facility in the use of language 

■ Contains few errors in mechanics, usage, and sentence structure 

4 A 4 story demonstrates competence in response to the prompt. A 

story in this category generally has the following features: 

■ Is adequately developed, but may have occasional weaknesses 
in narrative structure 

« Contains details that contribute to the narrative 

■ Demonstrates adequate facility in the use of language 

■ May display some errors in mechanics, usage, or sentence struc- 
ture, but not a consistent pattern or accumulation of such errors 

3 A3 storv demonstrates some degree of competence in response to 

the prompt, but is clearly flawed. A story in this category reveals 
one or more of the following weaknesses: 

■ Is somewhat developed, but lacks clear narrative structure 

■ Contains few details that contribute to the narrative 

■ Demonstrates inappropriate use of language 

■ Reveals a pattern or accumulation of errors in mechanics, usage, 
or sentence structure 

2 A 2 storv demonstrates only limited competence and is seriously 

flawed. A story in this category reveals one or more of the 
following weaknesses: 

■ Lacks development and /or narrative structure 

■ Contains little or no relevant detail 

■ Displavs serious or persistent errors in the use of language 

j ■ Displays serious errors in mechanics, usage, or sentence stnicture 

| 1 A 1 storv demonstrates fundamental deficiencies in writing skills. 

j A story in this category reveals one or more of the following 

| weaknesses: 

j ■ Is undeveloped 

j ■ Is incoherent 

j ■ Contains serious and persistent writing errors 

! 

Figure 2. NAEP holistic scale (imaginative essay modality). 




90 



The Blacker the Berry, the Sweeter the Juice 



Variable 

ed Morpheme 
Main-verb past (MV + 0) 

Ma in- verb-perfect 
(Have/Mad + MV + 0) 

Verbal adjective (V + 0) 

Passive (be + MV + 0) 

s Morpheme 

Noun-plural (N + fl pi) 

Noun-possessive (N + 0 poss) 
Third-person singular (V + 0) 

Hypercorrection 
(N pi + s) 

Copula 

Be + main verb (0 + MV) 

Be + noun (0 + N) 

Be + adjective (\) + adj) 

Be + preposition (fl + prep) 

Be + adverb (0 + adj) 

Subject -Verb Agreement — Pi e^cnl 
(Subj pi + is) 

Subject-Verb Agreement — Pa<t 
(Subj pi + was) 

PerU\ tive Done!} tare 

<fl have/has/had + MV) 



Example from NAEP Essay 



Frontier i/sv corn and meat for there basic 
food. 



They have work hard ... to keep the crops 
growing good to eat. 

I am writing because I am concern of the 
recreational project ... in our town. 

1 am lock in an apartment with darkness 
looking through this little hole. 



Pioneers didn't have such thing ... to keep 
their foods. 

Today way is . . . easier. 

But our environment of today do have 
refrigeration and things . . . can be stored. 



But today people* are able to get 
re frige raters and food still spoil. 



I feel like someone _ ivatihing me 
throwing at me. 

He a real good citizen. 

I think it great to have some place 

to play. 

I feel really good about what around 
me 

But it out door. 



a bird and egg /s in that car. 



The pioneers then wa> no different than 
what we do today. 



. . . the food to mostley allreadv ' 
been cooked and caned for vou . . . 



(continued* 



3G 



Geneva Smitherman 



91 



(continued) 



Variable 

Irregular Verb* 

Multiple Negation 



It F.xpletive 
(It + V + N) 

Undifferentiated Third-Pcrwn 
Plural Pronoun 



Pronominal Apposition 
(N subj + I 5 subj) 



Example from NAEP Essay 

But back then they eat a lot of health food. 

So 1 have gain* my opinions about what 1 
think you should do. 

Last night there was a straight-looking 
new bird in the neighborhood no one never 
seen before uoiehere. 



It is a lot different things that would 
brighten up our community. 



. . . soon are later they will quiet that job 
because they will have alot of money in 
the bank for they family and they self. 



People in the old day they do not have 
refrigeration . . . 



Figure 3. Black English variables. 



Results 

Let us begin with a summary of the findings relative to discourse 
analysis and primary trait and holistic scores in NAEP 1969 and 1979. 
Analysis indicated the following: 

1 . There was no statistically significant decline in field depend- 
ency from 1%9 to 1979. This finding contrasted with the 
significant decline in BEV syntax in the narrative mode over 
the decade (Smitherman and Wright 1983; see also Appendix 
A). 

2. There was no correlation between use of BEV syntax and 
field dependency; that is, high users of BEV syntax do not 
necessarily use field dependent style, nor are those writers 
who use low BEV syntax predictably field independent. 

3. There was no correlation between rater score and field de- 
pendency By contrast, BEV syntax correlated significantly 
and negatively with rater score for both primary trait and 
holistic scoring. Even when all variables (sex, year, essay 
type, field dependency score) were faetored into the equa- 



31 



92 



"The Blacker the Berry, the Sweeter the juice" 



tion, BEV syntax remained the most significant predictor r f 
rater score. 

Next, we turn to the 1984 and 1988 results of discourse analysis, BEV 
syntax, and rater scores. As detailed above, our present NAEP study 
used a fully developed, explicit set of criteria for identifying varying 
degrees of black discourse in the 1984 imaginative essays and the 1984 
and 1988-89 persuasive essays. Correlations were run between (1) the 
discourse score and BEV syntax, and (2) the discourse score and holis- 
tic and primary trait scores. 

In the case of the first relationship, results tend to support the 
tendency we observed in 1969 and 1979, namely, that BEV syntax and 
BEV discourse are not co-occurring variables. No correlation was 
found between a discernibly African American discourse style and the 
production of BEV syntax. In fact, of the three sets of essay data 
subjected to discourse analysis, correlations were found between BEV 
grammar and non~ African American discourse style. Although only one of 
these analyses reached statistical significance, it is interesting to note 
that the correlations are all positive. That is, when overall BEV syntax 
was high, the discourse scores tended to be high also. A high discourse 
score on our rating scale indicated an essay that did not have a discern- 
ibly African American discourse style, thus suggesting that the produc- 
tion of BEV grammar goes up as the writing becomes less "black" 
rhetorically. Although we must propose this as an observed trend, not 
a conclusion (see Table 1), it is interesting to note that this observation 
coincides with that of researchers who posit that "talking black" does 
not have to encompass features of BEV grammar (e.g., Taylor 1992; 
Hoover 1978; Smitherman 1986). 

In the second possible relationship — between discourse score 
and holistic and primary trait scores — results for 1984 and 1988-89 
were highly significant, in contrast to the 1969 and 1979 findings. In 



Table 1. Correlations between BEV Syntax and Discourse Style, 
1984 and 1988 



Essay Year and Type 


R-Value 


P- Value 


1 C J84 Imaginative 


.0361 


.45* 


I%4 Persuasive 


.1436 


.05** 


1^88 Persuasive 


.0044 


.95* 


* - \'ot statistically significant. 






** - Statistically significant at .0^ or less. 







Geneva Smithennan 



93 



the 1980s, the more discernibly African American the discourse, the higher 
the primary trait and holistic scores; the less discernibly African American 
the discourse, the lower the primary trait and holistic scores. This finding 
was statistically significant for all three data sets and for both holistic 
and primary trait scoring (see Table 2). What the negative correlations 
in Table 2 indicate is that the higher the discourse score, the lower the 
rater's score. As mentioned, a high discourse score indicates an essay 
written in a non-African American discourse style. As it turns out, 
these essays were assigned lower rater scores, whether assessed by 
using primary trait or holistic scoring criteria. This finding held re- 
gardless of the degree of BEV grammar in a given essay, at least with 
primary trait scoring. 

As an illustration of this finding, note the opening sentences in 
the two essays below. The writers are responding to NAEFs 1984 
imaginative essay prompt, a picture of a box with a hole in it and an 
eye looking out, requiring the writers to "imagine" themselves in the 
picture and to describe the scene and their feelings in a "lively and 
interesting" way. Essay 582200 begins this way (see Appendix B for 
entire essay): 

Well, a bov is in a box outside, may be in his or her back and 
looking through a square hole. He or she look like hear she is 
hiding from someone. Maybe he or she is 5 year old and some 
one is trying to find him/her to beat him or her up. 

In terms of its degree of African American discourse, we rated this 
essay a 4, that is, distinctly non-black style. NAEP raters gave the essay 
a primary trait score of 1, and a holistic score of 2, both low scores. By 



Table 2. Correlations between BEV Discourse and Holistic and Primary 
Trait Scores, 1984 and 1988 



Essay Year and Type 


Scoring Method 


R-Value 


P-Value 


1984 Imaginative* 


I' 


-.1660 


.00!** 




H 


-.1783 


.000** 


1984 Persuasive 


n 


-.3260 


.009** 


1988 Persuasive 


p 


-.1%7 


.002** 




H 


-.3^24 


.000** 


P - Primary trait. 








M - Holistic. 








* - Imaginative Usk not given in 


19S8. 






^Liti^ticallv significant at .05 or lower. 







94 



"The Blacker the Berry, the Sweeter the ]uice" 



contrast, essay 590877 begins this way (refer to Appendix B for entire 
essay): 

I see little kids playing around me some on the swings, and 
some on the sliding bord. The kids are enjoying themselfs. As 
for me I'm in this box because I'm afraid of all of the other kids 
in the park. 

We gave this essay a black discourse score of 1, that is, distinctly black 
style. NAEP raters gave the essay a primary trait score of 3 and a 
holistic score of 5, both high scores. 

Now, clearly both of the above essays begin with departures 
from Edited American English. Yet the latter essay exhibits greater 
fluency and power, and it is clear that this writer is on her or his way 
somewhere towards a product that will be rhetorically effective. In 
sum, what our analysis of essays by several hundred African American 
student writers indicates is this: given a paper with both BEV grammar 
and BEV discourse, the greater the degree of black discourse, irrespec- 
tive of the degree-amount of BEV grammar, the higher will be the 
rating in primary trait scoring, that is, scoring for fluency-accomplish- 
ment of the rhetorical task. 

Finally, the imaginative-narrative essay continues to be black 
students' strong suit. These essays were consistently assessed higher 
by NAEP raters than were the 1984 or 1988 persuasives. Further, the 
imaginatives also exhibited higher levels of African American Verbal 
Tradition style, as indicated by the fact that greater numbers of these 
essays received discourse scores of 1 or 2 by our research team than 
was the case with our discourse rating of persuasives. 

Conclusions and Implications 

The title of this chapter contains an age-old black proverb whose 
message speaks to the power of blackness in skin color, rhetorical 
fluency, and cultural affinity. For 1984 imaginative and 1984 and 1988 
persuasive NAEP essays, a team of experienced writing instructors 
was able to identify a discernible black discourse style and establish 
criteria for rating the "blackness" of student essays. The team achieved 
a 90 percent agreement for 867 essays. Results indicated that students 
who employed a black expressive discourse style received higher 
NAEP scores than those who did not. In the case of primary trait 
scores, this finding held regardless of the frequency of BEV syntax 
(fairly low anyway, and continuing to decline over time; see Appendix 
A and Smitherman 1991). 



Geneva Smitherman 



95 



There are several clear implications here for writing instructors 
and others concerned about African American students' written liter- 
acy. First, capitalize on the strengths of African American cultural 
discourse; it is a rich reservoir which students can and should tap. 
Second, encourage students toward the field dependency style, which 
enables them to produce more powerful, meaningful, and highly rated 
essays. Third, design strategies for incorporating the black imagina- 
tive, storytelling style into student production of other essay modali- 
ties. Fourth, deemphasize your and your students' concerns about 
BEV grammar; overconcentration on these forms frequently sup- 
presses the production of African American discourse and its rich, 
expressive style. 

As cultural norms shift focus from "book" English to "human" 
English, the narrativizing, dynamic quality of the African American 
Verbal Tradition will help students produce lively, image-filled, con- 
crete, readable essays, regardless of rhetorical modality— persuasive, 
informative, comparison-contrast, and so forth. I am often asked "how 
far" does the teacher go with this kind of writing pedagogy. My an- 
swer: as far as you can. Once you have pushed your students to 
rewrite, revise; rewrite, revise; rewrite, revise; and once they have 
produced the most powerful essay possible, then and only then should 
you have them turn their attention to BEV grammar and matters of 
punctuation, spelling, and mechanics. 

Finally, if you are worried about preparing your students for the 
next level ("Well, that might be okay in my classroom, but then what 

about when they pass on to Mrs. X's class "), consider the NAEP 

results reported here from the perspective of the teacher-raters of the 
1980s and beyond. They contrast sharply with those teacher-raters in 
the 1969 and 1979 NAEP, where African American discourse style had 
no effect on rater scores. The fact that rater scores in 1984 and 1988 
positively correlated ivith black discourse styles speaks favorably for the 
social and educational efforts of groups such as the Center for Applied 
Linguistics, the National Council of Teachers of English, the Confer- 
ence on College Composition and Communication, and others who, 
over the past twenty years, have worked to sensitize teachers to the 
linguistic-cultural norms of the African American speech community. 
Many people now appear to be receptive to and subliminally aware of 
the rhetorical power of the African American Verbal Tradition, and in 
some quarters they oven consciously celebrate it. Public schools and 
college teachers, too, now appear to understand that "the blacker the 
berrv, the sweeter the juice." 



96 



The Blacker the Berry, the Sweeter the Juice" 



Appendix A: Overall BEV Scores 

Overall BEV Scores, 1969 to 1988-89 



Essay Type 



Year 



BEV Mean 



1969 to 1979 

Imaginative 
Imaginative 
Informative 
Informative 
Persuasive 

1984 to 1988-89 

Imaginative 

Imaginative 

Informative 

Informative 

Persuasive 

Persuasive 



1969 
1979 
1969 
1979 
Not available 



J 984 

Not given in 1988 
1984 
1988 
1984 
1988 



Mot statistically significant. 
= Statistically significant at .05 or lower. 



.11 
.09* 
.10 
.14** 
Not available 



.11 



.10 

.06** 

.09 

.05** 



Appendix B: Sample Essays 

Imaginative, 1969, #53 

1 am a sad sad bird. Nobody wants me because I am so wierd-looking. 
But some day just like the Negro they will realize that I am something. May 
be I do have a long beck. They shouldn't juge me that way. I might look dumb 
to them but Ihave some sense. They just wont give me change to show it. 
They just left me out here all by myself. They don't relize. that I'm blood and 
skin. I'm just as good as any other bird. 

Field dependent essay, a discernible black style; NAEP rater score (2), low 
score. 

Imaginative, 1979, #148 

Last night a very odd-looking bird appeared in the neighborhood. 
Then suddenly upon seeing this odd-looking bird a kaos arose before serveral 
families. This was one of the biggest controversies in several years due to the 
fact that this town almost became a ghost town. It came to be that the 
appearance of this bird in the town was a runaway from the California state 
zoo. And their authorities had come to search for this bird and was offering 
a reward well over the town's income for a whole year. This incident was 
news making in more than thirty-eight states thoughtout the country. The 



Geneva Smitherman 



97 



reason the odd bird's valuability was that it was theonly of its kind left in 
existence. And it was carrying youn'g ready for a full life in a matter of two 
to three weeks. Nevertheless money to those authorities who were searching 
for this odd looking bird, was no object. Although the bird wich was last seen 
in the small village was not found there, the town's fame and popularity rose 
to everyone. The town was far away from being a ghost town. 
Field independent essay, not a discernible black style; NAEP rater score (3), 
high score. 

Imaginative, 1984, #582200 

Well, a boy is in a box outside, may be in his or her back and loking 
through a square' hole. He or she look like hear she is hiding from someone. 
Maybe he or she is 5 year old and some one is trying to find him/her to beat 
him or her up. There for a hour the person in the box stay there and it is 
getting dark. The person looking for the kid in the box knows where the kid 
is a waiting for that person to come out. 

NAEP primary trait score (1), holistic score (2), both low; discourse score (4), 
not a discernible black style. 

Imaginative, '1984, #590877 

1 see little kids playing around me some on the swings, and some on 
the sliding bord. The kids are enjoying themselfs. As for me I'm in this box 
because I'm afraid of all of the other kids in the park. In a distinance I see a 
baseball field and some men playing and over by the park is a Basketball 
court where other kids are playing. And in the picnic grounds theirs a family 
having a picnic. The kids are playing catch with their father while the mother 
I think is setting up the picnic area. In another section of the park theirs a 
crowd of people watching these two guys "break" dancing. "Break" dancing 
is a new form of dance combining some gymnistics with some regular dance 
moves. It is a real sight to see. Also I see some girls on the sidewalk jumping 
rope double dutch style thats when you use two ropes. The girls are very 
good to. It is a hot day so I see that the swimming pool is doing good today 
I would be over their myself If I wasn't shy. It's a very hot in this box but I'm 
so afraid to come out. f see that a fight has broke loose by the swings. Two 
little kids are fighting over one see all the other kids have already taken all 
the other swings and their two kids and only one swing let t. I think that the 
kids have settled their argument now. 

Now here comes a big black man over by me now. He says that my 
mother is here to pick me up so I could go home By. 

NAEP primary trait score (3), holistic score (5), both high; discourse score (1), 
a highly discernible African American style. 

/Vrsims/zv, 1984, #050238 

1 think that If the ABandoned RailRoad track was not there, that we 
can use the money that we have saved could go on the things we need for the 
community center. So that the children can have many & more things to do. 
The RailRoad could Be destroyed so that they can make a play ground out of 



1"3 



98 



The Blacker the Berry, the Sweeter the juice 



It. And the ware house could have some toys In It Also Just in case It get cold 
or Rain. Therefore they could have toys Inside and outside. 

N AEP holistic score (2), low score; discourse score (4), not a discernible black 
style. 

Persuasive, 1988, #520462 

How are you doing? Fine I hope! 

I'm writing you this letter in reference to you making your purchase 
in buying the warehouse. 

I think that in buying the old warehouse, we could paint it and fix it 
up and make it out of a gym for the kids during the week and on weekends 
and on Fridays we could have Bingo and maybe once or twice a month on 
Sundays we could give a super. 

During the week we could have the children come here after school 
and do their homework and then let them plav a little basketball, until about 
5:30 p.m. 

On Fridays at about 7:00 we could set up for Bingo and sell the cards 
8 for $10 and that way we could help pay for the pot and have 14 games and 
cherry betts. 

Every first or last Sunday in the month we could give a super for the 
community and sell each plate for $3 to $5. 

If you have any questions, please feel free to call me at 288-8263. 

Sincerly, 
Ms. Zenitta 

NAEP holistic score (4), high score; discourse score (1), a highly discernible 
black style. 



Note 

1. This chapter is a revised version of my presentation at the Colum- 
bia University Conference on African American Language and Communica- 
tion, New York, October 26, 1991. The research on which this chapter is based 
was funded by the National Council of Teachers of English Research Founda- 
tion with grants in 1981, 1982, and 1989. Special thanks to Joshua Bagakas, 
Michigan State University statistician, for assistance with statistical design 
and analysis; to Jules Good i son, director of the National Assessment for 
Educational Testing Service, and his staff, without whose help this project 
could not even have been started, much less finished; to family members Sam 
and Kathy Brogdon and Bobbi White for those grueling, twelve-hour days of 
work at ETS in the summer of 1989; to my Michigan State University research 
assistants Chanille Bouldes, Tyronda Curry, Angeletta Gourdine, and Ronnie 
Hopkins for assistance with data entry and coding and most of all for their 
patience; to Schavi Ali, Denise Trout man -Rob in son, and Wanda harrier for 
assistance with coding and for their wisdom and sound advice; and to my 
former secretary, Debbi Sudduth, for persevering. Any mistakes or shortcom- 
ings are entirely my own. 



I'M 



Geneva Smitherman 



References 

Applebee, A., Langer, J., and Mullis, I. (1985). Writing trends acres* the dec- 
ade, 1974-84. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 

Applebee, A., Langer, J., Mullis, I., and Jenkins, L. (1990). The writing report 
card, 1984-88. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 

Asante, M (1990). African elements in African-American English. In J. Hol- 
loway (Ed.), Africanisms in American culture (19-33). Bloomington: In- 
diana University Press. 

Bereiter, C, and Engelmann, S. (1966). Teaching disadvantaged children in the 
preschool. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Chaplin, M. (1987). An analysis of writing features found in the essays of stu- 
dents in the National Assessment of Educational Progress and the New jer- 
sey high school proficiency test. Unpublished manuscript, Rutgers 
University, Department of English, Camden, NJ. 

. (1990). A closer look at black and white students' assessment es- 
says, hum English Bulletin, 38, 15-27. 

Cohen, R. A. (1969). Conceptual styles, cultural conflicts and non-verbal 
tests of intelligence. American Anthropologist, 71, 828-856. 

Cooper, G. (1979). The relationship between errors in standard usage in written 
compositions of college students and the students' cognitive styles. Unpub- 
lished doctoral dissertation, Howard University, Washington, DC. 

DillardJ. (1972). Black English. New York: Random House. 
Gates, H. L., Jr. (1988). The signifying monkey. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 

Herskovits, M. (1941). Myth of the Negro past. New York: Harper. 
Hoover, M. (1978). Community attitudes towards black English. Language 
in Society, 7, 65-87. 

Humboldt, W. V. (1841). Ueber die Verschiedenheiten des Menschlichen 
Sprachbaues. Gesammelte Werke, VI [On the varieties of human lin- 
guistic structures. Collected works]. Berlin. 

Hymes, D. (1974). Foundations in sociolinguistics. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press. 

Jensen, A. R. (1980). Bias in mental testing. New York: Free Press. 

Labov, W. (1972). Language in the inner city. Philadelphia: University of Penn- 
sylvania Press. 

Lincoln, C. E. (1990). The black church in the African American experience. Dur- 
ham, NC: Duke University Press. 

National Assessment of Educational Progress. (1980). Writing achievement, 
1969-79 (Report No. 10-W-01). Denver, CO: Education Commission 
of the States. 



100 



"The Blacker the Berry, the Sxoeeter the Juice 



. (1985). The reading report card, progress tozoard excellence in our schools: 

Trends in reading over four national assessments, 1971-1984. Princeton, 
NJ: Educational Testing Service. 

Sapir, E. (1929). Language: An introduction to the study of speech. New York: 
Harcourt, Brace. 

Scott, J. (1981). Mixed dialects in the composition classroom. In M. 

Montgomery (Ed.), Language variety in the south: Perspectives in black 
and zriiite. Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama Press. 

Simpkins, G., Holt, G., and Simpkins, C. (1976). Bridge. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin. 

Smitherman, G. (1969). A comparison of the oral and written styles of a group of 
inner-city black students. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Univer- 
sity of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 

. (1985). /\ description of structure and discourse in selected black student 

writing from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (Final Re- 
search Report). Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 

. (1986). Talkin and testifi/in (rev. ed.). Detroit: Wayne State University 

Press. (Original work published by Houghton Mifflin, 1977) 

. (1991). Black English, diverging or converging: The view from the 

National Asse sment of Educational Progress. Language and Educa- 
tion, 5, 1-15. 

Smitherman, G., and Wright, S. (1983, March). Black student writers, storks 
and familiar places: What can zee learn from the National Assessment of 
Educational Progress? Paper presented at the annual convention of 
the Conference on College Composition and Communication, De- 
troit. [Also, (1983, December). Interim Research Report. Urbana, IL: Na- 
tional Council of Teachers of English.] 

Taylor, O. (1992, June). Presentation at African American English in Schools and 
Society Conference. Stanford University, Stanford, CA. 

Thompson, R. R (1983). Flash of the spirit: African and Afro-American art and 
philosophy. New York: Random House. 

Volosinov, V. N. (1973). Marxism and the philosophy of language. New York: 
Seminar Press. (Original work published 1930) 

Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: M.l.T. Press. 

Whiteman, M. (1976). Dialect influence and the zvriting of black and white 

working-class Americans. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, George- 
town University, Washington, DC. 

Whorf, B. (1956). Language, thought and reality. Cambridge, MA: M.l.T. Press. 

Williams, R. L (1972). The Pitch 1(H): A culture-specific test. St. Louis: Wash- 
ington University. 

Wilson, R. (1971). A comparison of learning style* in African tribal groups with 
Afro-Anwrican learning situations and the channel* of cultural connection: 



Geneva Smitherman 



101 



An analysis of documentary material. Unpublished doctoral disserta- 
tion, Wayne State University/ Detroit. 

Wright, S. (1984). A description of the variance between the oral and written lan- 
guage patterns of a group of black community college students. Unpub- 
lished doctoral dissertation, Wavne State University, Detroit 



1 



102 



8 Gender Differences and 
Symbolic Imagination 
in the Stories of 
Four- Year-Olds 

Ageliki Nicolopoulou 

Smith College 

Barbara Scales 

University of California, Berkeley 

Jeff Weintraub 

Williams College 

Agehki Nicolopoulou , Barbara Scales, and Jeff Weintraub turn our 
attention to another source of difference in students' stories — gender They 
portray the striking differences in the narrative styles of four-year-old 
boys and girls. These differences in symbolic imagination raise thought - 
provokhig questions about the ways in which young children construct 
their social worlds — and the ways in zvhich teachers might further and 
expand those worlds. 

Most scholars and practitioners in the field of education are, for 
understandable reasons, more interested in stories written for 
children, which they read or which are told to them, than in 
stories that children themselves compose and tell. But of course the two 
subjects are not unrelated: when children tell stories, they reveal some- 
thing important about who they are and how they see the world. By 
grasping the forms of symbolic imagination expressed in the stories 
that children tell, we can improve our understanding of how children 
comprehend and respond to the stories told to them and what kind of 
impression these stories make on them. But part of what makes chil- 
dren's storytelling so revealing, it is important to add, is that it plays 
a vital role in their own efforts to make sense of the world and to find 
their place in it. As both Bruner (e.g., 1986, 1990) and Paley (e.g., 1981, 
1984a, 1984b, 1988, 1990) have emphasized in different ways, the sto- 



ERIC 



Nicolopoahvi, Scales, and Wehitraub 



103 



ries children tell are themselves cognitive tools, and children's use of 
fantasy is a crucial element in their attempts to master reality. 

One philosopher has argued that, if we listen carefully to chil- 
dren, we can see the ways in which they are little philosophers: they 
ponder the deepest metaphysical and ontological problems in their 
own way in an attempt to bring cognitive order to the universe (Mat- 
thews 1980). In a parallel fashion, this chapter will urge that we take 
children seriously as little artists. They use stories and other forms of 
symbolic expression in order to represent the world — to themselves 
and each other — and thereby to make sense of it. Simultaneously, they 
use their stories as a way of expressing certain emotionally important 
themes that preorrupy them and of symbolically managing or resolv- 
ing these underlying themes. In constructing their stories, they draw 
in various ways on images and conceptual resources present in their 
culture, but they do not just passively absorb them— and the messages 
behind them. It seems clear that, even at the age of four, they are able 
to appropriate them and to some degree to manipulate them for their 
own symbolic ends. But once again, to see how they do it, we have to 
listen to them carefully. 

The Study Plan 

The present discussion is based on the analysis of a set of spontaneous 
stories told by a group of four-year-olds. The larger concern behind 
this investigation is to explore the different ways in which children use 
symbolic constructions to represent and organize reality — and, in this 
case, the ways in which these differences come to be structured by 
gender. Our findings suggest that, even at this early age, the boys and 
girls involved visualize and represent the world — and especially the 
world of social relations— in strikingly distinctive ways. Their differ- 
ing orientations are expressed in their active use and imaginative 
elaboration of two distinctive and gender-related narrative styles that 
permeate this body of stories. Underlying these narrative styles are 
different forms of symbolic imagination, different emerging images of 
social reality, and different ways of coming to grips with that reality. 
They represent, among other things, quite different approaches to the 
symbolic management of order and disorder. In addition to broaden- 
ing our knowledge of narrative diversity among young children, it 
seems likely that grasping these differences can help us understand 
tendencies toward the developmental emergence of different cognitive 
and cult <ral styles in men and women. 



104 



Gender Differences and Symbolic Imagination 



The Children and Their Stories 

The stories we have been analyzing were composed by children at- 
tending a half-day nursery school affiliated with the Child Study Cen- 
ter of the University of California, Berkeley. The group involved was 
the class of four-year-olds, of which one of the authors, Barbara Scales, 
is the head teacher. The class consisted of 28 children, 14 boys and 14 
girls. 

The family backgrounds of the children in this group were pri- 
marily middle to upper-middle class, mostly professional or academic. 
In most cases, both parents worked outside the home. To prepare for 
some of the discussion later on, we want to emphasize that the nursery 
school attempts strongly and deliberately to create an egalitarian and 
nonsexist atmosphere; and we have every reason to believe that most 
of the children come from families which share this orientation. 

The stories were collected by using a variant of a storytelling 
and story-acting technique pioneered by Vivian Paley. One optional 
activity in' which any child in the school may choose to participate 
every day is to dictate a story to the teacher who is supervising the 
inside area that day The teacher records the story as the child tells it. 
At the end of each day, all the stories dictated during that day are read 
aloud to the entire group at "circle time" by the same teacher. While 
the story is br : ng read, the child-author and other children, whom he 
or she chooses, act out the story. This story-acting practice is aimed at 
fostering communication and the development of a common culture 
within the group of children by having them listen to and even actively 
participate in each other's stories. 

The analysis is based on the complete set of 582 stories collected 
during the entire academic year 1988-89, which included stories told 
by all 28 children. About 60 percent (347) of these stones were dictated 
by girls and about 40 percent (235) by boys. (This corpus of stories is 
drawn from the "Child Study Center Archives of Children's Play Nar- 
ratives" at the Institute of Human Development of the University of 
California, Berkeley.) 

Interpretive Analysis: Narrative as Symbolic Form 

Material of this kind constitutes an especially rich source of data for 
research that explores the role of narratives in children's construction 
of reality and personal identity. This is true above all because of their 
voluntary and spontaneous composition and because the children's 
storytelling activity is embedded in the ongoing framework of their 



Nicolopoulou, Scales, and Weintraub 



105 



everyday group life — in the "real world" of their classroom mini- 
culture. Furthermore, because of "circle time," these are stories that 
children tell not only to adults, but to other children as well. 

From a methodological standpoint, the question is what kind of 
approach can best take advantage of the possibilities offered by this 
material. While a considerable amount of work on children and narra- 
tives is being done now in the overlapping disciplines of psychology 
and linguistics, studies that deal with children's own stories are decid- 
edly in the minority. Even in these cases, the stories are usually gener- 
ated under conditions that sharply limit their spontaneous character 
(often for well-considered methodological reasons, to be sure). Fur- 
thermore, for several decades the great bulk of this research has tended 
to focus more or less exclusively on formal elements of the stories — 
most typically their narrative structure — and to neglect their symbolic 
content (for some reviews, see Mandler 1983; Romaine 1985; Slobin 
1990; Stein and Glenn 1982). We are necessarily speaking in broad 
terms here, and there are significant exceptions, but even when atten- 
tion is paid to the symbolic content, it is usually in an incidental and 
unsystematic way (e.g., Sutton-Smith 1981). On the other hand, some 
investigations deriving from a psychoanalytic perspective obviously 
focus quite heavily on symbolic content (e.g., Bettelheim 1977; Pitcher 
and Prelinger 1963), but these analyses tend to neglect the formal 
elements of the stories and the cognitive styles they embody. 

However, a rigid divorce between form and content in the analy- 
sis of children's narratives makes it difficult to capture precisely those 
features which render them important and emotionally engaging for 
children. The child's story is fragmented into elements that, taken in 
isolation, do not fully capture the point of telling and listening to 
stories. Studies of children's narrative competence, for example, are 
often strangely abstracted from the uses to which children put this 
competence and their purposes in doing so. Overcoming this fragmen- 
tation—reassembling the phenomenon of story as a living whole — re- 
quires an approach that can integrate the formal analysis of children's 
narratives into a more comprehensive interpretive perspective. In par- 
ticular, it requires that we treat narrative form as a type of symbolic 
form, whose function is to confer meaning on experience, rather than 
conceiving it only in terms of linguistic structure. As Bruner has co- 
gently put it, "The central concern is not how narrative text is con- 
structed, but rather how it operates as an instrument of mind in the 
construction of reality" (1992, 233). 



in 



106 



Gender Differences and Symbolic Imagination 



Thus the interpretive framework we have developed to analyze 
these stories attempts to capture both their form and their content and 
to bring out the relationship between them. In working out our ap- 
proach, we have drawn on a range of sources, including several of the 
contributors to this volume. One especially useful source of guidance 
has been the mode of cultural interpretation championed by Geertz, 
an anthropologist (e.g., 1973), and the broader "interpretive turn" in 
the human sciences for which he has been a particularly influential 
spokesman. The guiding insight of this perspective is that the interpre- 
tation of meaning is not only a key requirement for the study of human 
life, but is simultaneously a central condition of human thought and 
action itself. Accordingly, our starting point is the premise that the 
children's stories are meaningful texts that, if analyzed carefully, can 
tell us a great deal about the ways that children grasp the world and 
social relationships. The crucial concern of an interpretive analysis is 
thus to elucidate or decode the structures of meaning that the stories 
embody and express — reconstructing not only the surface meanings of 
the stories, but also certain deeper patterns that organize and inform 
them. When they are approached in this way, children's spontaneous 
stories, as well as other expressions of their symbolic imagination, can 
offer us an invaluable and privileged window into the mind of the 
preschooler. 

Gender-related Narrative Styles in Children's Stories 

When we first set out to examine these stories, we did not have gender 
differences in mind, nor were we searching for different narrative 
styles. They emerged in the course of the analysis, and indeed took us 
by surprise. It had been suggested that the use of this storytelling and 
story-acting practice seemed to generate greater cohesion and solidar- 
ity among the children, and it was this phenomenon of social cohesion 
we wished to study Our original intention was to trace the ways that 
themes were transmitted and elaborated within the group and became 
part of the children's common culture. 

But as we read systematically through the entire corpus of the 
stories, one profound complication in this picture became increasingly 
apparent to us: namely, that the stories divided overwhelmingly along 
gender lines. Despite the fact that the stories were shared with the 
entire group every day, boys and girls told different kinds of stones. 
In fact, the kinds of stories boys and girls told differed systematically 
and consistently not only in their characteristic subject matter, but also 



11C 



Nicolopoulou, Scales, and Weintraub 



107 



in the overall narrative structure and symbolic imagination they em- 
ployed. 

We discovered, in other words, that this body of stories is domi- 
nated by two highly distinctive narrative styles, divided to a striking 
extent along gender lines, that contrast sharply (and subtly) in their 
characteristic modes of representing experience and in their underly- 
ing images of social relationships. In fact, these narrative styles em- 
body two distinctive types of genuine aesthetic imagination 
(surprising as it may seem to assert this of four-year-olds), each with 
its own inner logic and coherence. In particular, underlying and unify- 
ing many of the surface themes in the stories is a preoccupation with 
issues of order and disorder; here we are indebted to the theoretical 
lead provided by Douglas, another anthropologist (particularly in 
Douglas 1966). In general— to anticipate our overall conclusions — the 
girls' stories show a strain toward order, while the boys' stories show 
a strain toward disorder, a difference that is expressed in both the form 
and content of the stories. 

The subsequent discussion will flesh out what we mean in 
speaking of a "strain toward order" and a "strain toward disorder," 
formulations we have arrived at through a very flexible appropriation 
of some ideas in Dewey's Art as Experience (1958). But let us caution 
immediately against a possible misunderstanding: both styles involve 
ways of bringing order to experience. As Douglas makes clear, an 
image of disorder always implies a background image of order against 
which it is conceived; and, furthermore, the disorder of the boys' 
stories itself represents a kind of order. The key point is that the styles 
of the boys' and girls' stories represent two very different approaches 
to the symbolic management of order and disorder. 

In this chapter we can only sketch out some of the most charac- 
teristic features which define and distinguish these two narrative 
styles and the cognitive and symbolic modes they embody. Although 
the basic patterns are rather clear once they have been mapped out, the 
subtleties and nuances involved produce a much richer and more 
complex picture than we can fully present here. To complicate matters 
further, individual children are often able to put their own unique 
stamp on the styles they employ. But here is a beginning. 

The Girls' Stories: A Strain toward Order 

Lei us first characterize the girls' stories in terms of both form and 
content. The girls' stories, but not those of the boys, tend to have a 
coherent plot with a stable set of characters and a continuous plot line. 



no 



108 



Gender Differences and Symbolic Imagination 



One way in which the girls give their stories this coherence is by 
structuring their content around stable sets of social relationships, espe- 
cially (though not exclusively) family relationships. In fact, the extent 
to which the girls' stories, but not those of the boys, revolve themati- 
cally around the family group is overwhelming. Not all the girls' 
stories contain an explicit depiction of family relationships, but most 
of them do. And while the girls also represent stable and harmonious 
relationships in other ways, the portrayal of the family group is their 
prototypical mode of doing so. Therefore, it can serve as a useful focus 
for illustrating some of the most characteristic and pervasive features 
of their distinctive style. Thus the prototypical girl's story introduces 
a cast of characters who are carefully situated in a set of kinship 
relationships. Here is an example: 

Once upon a time there was a cat and a dog. And they lived in 
a warm snug house. And there was a mommy, a daddy, a sister, 
and another sister that was the big sister, and there was a 
brother that was the big brother, and there was a baby. And all 
the kids played together until it was dinner lime. And then they 
had a lovely dinner of spaghetti and me.itballs. (Martha, 4-4) 

This story brings together almost all the elements that are typical 
of the most distinctive form of girls' stories: it revolves around a family, 
it meticulously articulates their kinship relations, and it takes place in 
the home, which is both a specific physical setting for the story and also 
the center of order ("a warm and snug house"). Another important 
element that often gives the girls' stories their coherence and continu- 
ity is their depiction of the rhythmic, cyclical, and repeated patterns of 
everyday domestic family life, which the girls like to recount: 

Once upon a time there's a mom, a dad, and there's a baby and 
a brother and a sister. The mother and father go to work and the 
big sister and big brother take care of the baby. Then the mother 
came home from work and their father came home from work. 
They ate dinner, and went to sleep, they woke up, and then the 
mom came and fed them breakfast. (Folly, 4-8) 

Thus we often find that the family — after all its members have 
been carefully enumerated — goes to the park and comes back home. 
Or the parents go to work (this often specifically includes the mother) 
and the kids go to school, but then they come back home. Or they come 
home and have dinner and go to bed and wake up and have break- 
fast — and so on. (Boys' stories, on the other hand, very rarely depict 
cyclical or rhythmic action, whether in a family setting or in any other 
context.) 



114 



Nicolopoulon, Scales, and Weintraub 



109 



In short, those examples show that girls' stories focus on stable 
setting* and stable relationships; they contain relatively little description 
of action — particularly sudden or violent action. As we will see, the 
boys' stories are very different in these respects. 

In addition, girls' stories — again, unlike the boys' — often in- 
clude romantic or fairy-tale images of kings and queens, princes and 
princesses, and so on. But it is striking that they are assimilated to 
the family romance, since they characteristically get married and 
have babies. In addition, when the girls talk about animals, they often 
bring them into the family by making them into pets. 1 lere is another 
example: 

Two queens and two princesses lived in two houses. Once they 
shared the house with the queens and the princesses, two prin- 
cesses came and wanted to marry two princes. And two kings 
came and wanted to marry the queens. Five ponies came and 
been their pels; two rabbits were the ponies' friends, and they 
were the other pels; the two zebras are the princesses' pels. The 
end. (Dora, 3-11) 

This story also illustrates a tendency toward formal symmetry 
(two queens, tieo kings, tioo princesses, two princes, ttoo zebras, and so 
on — marred, in this case, only by the five ponies) that is common in 
the girls' stories but very rare in the boys'. And let us point out another 
important contrast: boys may occasionally mention families, but in 
their stories practically no one ever gets married. (There were just three 
exceptions in the hundreds of stones we have.) But girls are fond of 
marriages and babies: 

Once upon a lime there was a princess named Beauty. And she 
had two sisters and one dad and a mom. And then she went to 
a castle where a beast lived, and his name was Vincent. And 
then they gel married. Then she has a baby. (Sonia, 4-11) 

Thus the idea! world of the girls' stories tends to be centered, 
coherent, and firmly structured. Princes and princesses, brothers and 
sisters, even animals and beasts can all be enfolded harmoniously 
within the most stable system of social relations, those of the family 
unit. This is an orderly world. And, in fact, whenever order is dis- 
rupted or threatened, the girls are typically quite careful to reestablish 
it before ending the story — most characteristically by absorbing any 
threatening elements within the family unit: 

Onee upon a time there was a mom. The mom was playing with 
two babies and there was a dad. The dad went to work. And the 
mom went lo work. And then there came a dinosaur in a boat. 



115 



110 



Gender Differences and Symbolic Imagination 



It rode into water in the house. The parents came back home. 
The babies were gone. The dinosaur robbed the babies. The dad 
came home and said, "Babies, we're home. It's your Birthday!" 
Then the dinosaur branged them home and they were friends. 
The babies blew out the candles. They were two years old. The 
end. (Polly, 4-3) 

The crucial point is that the girls' stories are not just orderly; they show 
a positive strain toward order. 

The Boys' Stories: A Strain toward Disorder 

In contrast, the four-year-old boys' stories show a strain toward disor- 
der. Their stories are far less likely than the girls' to have either a stable 
cast of characters or a well-articulated plot; nor do they develop their 
themes in the steady and methodical manner of the girls' stories. 
Rather than the centered stability of the girls' stories, the boys' stories 
are marked by movement and disruption and often by associative 
chains of exuberant imagery. One might say that, if the girls' stories 
focus on creating, maintaining, and elaborating structure, the boys' 
stories focus on generating action and excitement; and the restless 
energy of their stories often overwhelms their capacity to manage it 
coherently. Thus their stories are more likely than the girls' to verge on 
the chaotic and often seem to begin or end almost randomly. The 
vigorous action that dominates the content is typically linked to an 
explicit emphasis on violence, conflict, and the disruption of order. 

Let us begin with content. The boys' favorite characters tend to 
be big, powerful, and often deliberately frightening; warriors of all 
sorts are particularly fancied, along with monsters and huge or threat- 
ening animals. Besides the monsters, their stories are full of bears, 
tigers, dinosaurs, and so on — all of which are rather rare in the girls' 
stories. The animals that girls introduce into their stories tend to be 
cute and nonthreatening ones such as butterflies or bunnies. Non- 
violent but scary elements such as ghosts and skeletons are also com- 
mon in the boys' stories. The impulse toward disorder that lies behind 
their preoccupation with physical violence also comes out in bursts 
of extravagant, deliberately startling, and eve i grotesque imagery. 

If the explicit depiction of the family group is a prototypical 
feature of the girls' stories, the corresponding motif in the boys' stories 
is the explicit — and generally enthusiastic — depiction of active vio- 
lence. For example, here is a storv that no girl in the sample would 
have told: 



llo 



Nicolopoulou, Scales, and Weintrauh 



Once upon a time there was a Triceratops, and a Tyrannosaurus 
Rex came. He bit Triceratops. But an Anatosaurus duckbill was 
watching another Anatosaurus eating plants. Tyrannosaurus 
Rex came and watched them. The duckbills run away. A No- 
dosaurus came and ate plants. A Voltursaurus came and they 
fight. All of the dinosaurs fight. Tyrannosaurus fights Tricera- 
tops. All the dinosaurs are dead except two dinosaurs: Tyranno- 
saurus is not dead and Triceratops is not dead. They become 
friends and smile. (John, 4-9) 

As with content, so with form. As wo noted earlier, the boys' 
stories, in comparison with the girls', tend to be lacking in overall 
formal coherence, as well as stability and continuity of time and space. 
The typical boy's story consists, rather, of a string of dramatic and 
powerful images and events, often juxtaposed in loose association. The 
characters, rather than being firmly linked together, are often intro- 
duced sequentially into the story for the sake of action and thrilling 
effect. The story just quoted is exceptional in having a clear resolution; 
in general, the boys are much less concerned than the girls to bring 
their plots to resolution. Instead, what marks the boys' stories is a 
consistent striving toward action, novelty, and excess. As the next story 
brings out well, the boys often strive for escalating images: 

Once upon a time there was a bear that went to the forest. Then 
a big wolf opened up his mouth. Then a beam of light came into 
a bunny's heart. Then he was a Vampire bunny. And soon some 
monsters came. A giant alligator came. And crocodile came to 
get the alligator. A big egg was rolling around. It belonged to the 
alligator. A tiger ran and ran and ran after a bat. And he was sate 
from the tiger. (Toby, 4-3) 

As these two stories illustrate, the setting is often vague or 
amorphous in the boys' stories; either it is not specified, or the action 
seems to shift from one unrelated setting to another. Very few stories 
center on an explicitly delineated setting, especially the home. Insofar 
as the boys' stories have a plot, it is very frequently dominated by 
fighting and destruction. However, as we have noted, physical vio- 
lence is not the only means by which disorder can be generated. 
Rule-breaking is another common theme in the boys' stories; and the 
story just quoted brings out their fondness for startling and disruptive 
i imagery. 

In short, the world of these stories is a world of violence, disrup- 
tion, and disorder. What they express is a positive fascination with 
disorder. 



1!7 



112 



Gender Differences and Symbolic Imagination 



Now lot us emphasize another point. Both tht* boys and the girls 
draw images from popular culture (including material transmitted bv 
television, videos, and children's hooks), but what is interesting is that 
they do so selectively, Thev have* already developed a differential sen- 
sitivity and preference for the elements presented to them by their 
cultural environment; they appropriate different elements and find 
ways to weave them into distinctive imaginative styles. I ; or example, 
whereas the girls are particularly fond of princes and princesses and 
other lairv-lale characters, the bovs favor cartoon action heroes such 
as Superman, I le-Man, Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, and so on. 'The 
next story brings together many of the characteristic elements of the 
boys' stories: 

Once upon a lime .1 teenage ninja lurlle with a gun shot down 
.1 rock. Leonardo cuts ili.it rock into hall pieces, Leonardo has 
Iwo swords. And I lie guv up high shoots the gun at Leonardo. 
A girl conies and has .1 gun in her pocket and shoots. She rides 
something very last, and it runs and has two legs, and it's lunnv. 
A doggv-guv conies; he is a teenage ninja turtle, bill he doesn't 
have any shell on his back. Hoggv lakes out his gun and shoots 
the guv up high. I lis name is C'one-a-lest, and he shoots back at 
Doggv. And 1 1 lev light. Thev hear a voice say, "Doggy guy." It 
was a lion. Anything happened. And it was a saber tooth tiger. 
It roars and it doesn't see the lion or the guvs down below and 
it lell. The end. (John. 4 S) 

"Anything happened": a typical boy's touch. In short, while the girls' 
stories are structured so as to maintain or restore order -cognitive, 
symbolic, and social - the boys' stories revel in movement, unpre- 
dictability, and disorder. 

This brings us to another signilicant point, (liven what we saw 
in the girls' stories, what is particularly striking about the boys' is the 
absence ol stable social relationships and their frequent lenuousness 
when thev are mentioned. The boys do sometimes identify characters 
as friends. In tact, this is the relationship they mention most commonly, 
though still far less commonly than the girls dwell on family relation- 
ships. Hut at least at the ago of tour, they do not yet seem to have* 
developed a very powertul image of male friendship. In their stories, 
friendship is often a vague or transitory relationship, and at all events 
it is no guarantee ol stability or harmony I lore is an especially telling 
illustration: 

( )iu e upon .t lime Ihere was ,> monstiM and Ihere w.is ,1 pig; and 
the monster wanted to kill the pig but I hi* pig ran loo tasl anil 
got nwav. I lien the pig went into the loresl and s.iu a live 




Nicolopoulou, Scales, and Weintraub 



113 



chicken and they were friends. But they were fighting because 
the chicken was the greatest, so the pig went to the park; but the 
chicken couldn't because he was roasted by the pig and ated 
him all up. (Paul, 4-8) 

Summary 

The stories told by the boys are systematically different from those told 
by the girls, and the opposition goes beyond surface dissimilarities in 
attitudes or plot elements. The stories display two distinctive forms of 
symbolic imagination and involve quite distinctive ways of repre- 
senting society and social relationships. It is not too much to say that 
these four-year-olds have already developed two distinct aesthetic 
styles. The style informing the girls' stories tends toward what might 
be called "socialist realism/' while the style of the boys' can usefully 
be termed "picaresque surrealism." What they involve, at the deepest 
level, are two sharply different approaches to the symbolic manage- 
ment of order and disorder. 

Some Illustrative Statistics and Their Interpretation: 
Structures of Meaning and Symbolic Reworking 

Now that we have sketched out the basic patterns, let us offer some 
figures to illustrate some of the points we have been making. Summa- 
rized below 7 is the frequency (technically, the mean proportions) of two 
of the most pervasive and significant content themes that run through 
the stories: explicit depictions of the family group and of active vio- 
lence. 



This is a simple comparison, but it makes a strong point. The reader 
will notice that the contrast between the boys' stories and the girls' 
stories is so striking that it hardly seems to require much comment. 
Obviously, the relative frequencies support the argument we have 
been making. 

But, in fact, in certain important ways these figures actually 
understate the contrast involved. When we explore the deeper patterns 
behind these statistical comparisons, the real differences stand out 
even more sharply. 

In the first place, the specific themes captured in these figures 
are, in both cases, only the most conspicuous manifestations of larger 



Family group 
Active violence 



Boys 

14% 
62% 



Girls 

54% 

18% 



114 



Gender Differences and Symbolic Imagination 



symbolic orientations. These figures for depictions of the "family 
group/' for example, are based on a coding scheme that used fairly 
stringent criteria. If more lenient criteria for family themes are used, 
then the gap between the boys' and girls' percentages increases; and 
this holds even more strongly if we code for "stable and harmonious 
social relationships," rather than for the more specific category of 
family situations. 

For a story to be coded as depicting a "family group," for exam- 
ple, it required explicit mention of a family situation involving at least 
two forms of kinship relation — a mother, a father, and at least one 
child, or one parent with several children. If we add stories that men- 
tion only one kinship relationship (such as brother-sister or mother- 
child), the relative frequency for the boys' stories goes to 20 percent 
and for the girls' stories to 65 percent. Furthermore, many of the girls' 
stories which do not explicitly construct an entire family situation 
include one implicitly, and they are noticeably more likely to do so 
than the boys' stories. But even more important is the fact noted earlier 
that the explicit portrayal of the family group is only one of the ways 
that the girls emphasize stable and harmonious social relationships in 
their stories. Often they dwell on relationships of this sort which very 
much resemble a family situation, and these shade off into relation- 
ships which seem to constitute, in this respect, the functional equiva- 
lent of a family situation. Here is an example of what we mean, and 
we have chosen what we think is one of the less obvious examples: 

Once upon a time there were three bees, throe butterflies, and 
three ponies that were playing near the ocean. They went 
home and ate dinner. After dinner the butterflies, the bees, 
and the ponies went to bed. When they woke up the bees and 
the butterflies flew over the ocean, and the ponies went into the 
ocean. The end. (Polly, 4-2) 

Correspondingly, we coded for "active violence" when charac- 
ters in the stories explicitly fought, hurt, killed, ate, or actively threat- 
ened each other, or when they were explicitly depicted producing 
physical destruction. If the criteria are relaxed in various ways — for 
example, if physical destruction is depicted without an explicit agent 
being specified — then the boys' totals go up disproportionately {W 
percent versus 20 percent). But again, physical violence is only one of 
the means that the boys use to generate disorder in their stories. 
Furthermore, the figures for the girls' stories mask the fact that the 
ways they use violence in their stories and the attitude displayed to- 



Nicolopoalou, Scale*, and Weintraitb 



ward it tend to bo very different from the boys' approach. For example, 
girls mention violence quickly rather than describing it in detail — 
often using the passive voice — and their accounts tend to lack the 
enthusiasm characteristic of the boys' stories. 

This last point brings out the really crucial consideration, both 
methodologically and theoretically: the coding of specific themes or 
elements, though necessary, will always be inadequate by itself in this 
kind of research because an interpretive analysis is indispensable even 
to code intelligently. In many ways, in fact, the boys' and the girls' 
stories are so different in structure and intent that it is no simple matter 
to design uniform coding schemes which fully capture what is going 
on in both of them. In particular, even if the same element appears or 
is mentioned in a girl's story and a boy's story, its significance is often 
different in the two cases because it is used differently and fits into a 
different structure of meaning. Let us give an example. The following 
boy's story is one of the 14 percent which we coded as depicting a 
family group: 

Then. 1 was a dad and a mom and two babies. They went to the 
park and there was a monster and he ate the family up. After he 
ate the family the monster died because there was too much 
family and he was fat. (Andrew, 4-4) 

It is obvious that, in this story, the family imagery is not used to 
establish order and security, but rather to express the typical boy's 
fascination with violence and disorder (and it is hard not to suspect 
some ironic intent). Here is a milder, but equally instructive example 
from the same 14 percent; the family is associated v\ ilh order and rules, 
but precisely in order to reject them: 

Once upon a time there was a bumblebee, then a yellow jacket 
eame. They plaved. Then their mother came and said "clean up 
your room, brush your teeth, put on your pajamas, and go to 
bed, turn off the light, and pull up the covers/' They didn't do 
that because they didn't want to. They wanted to play some 
more. Then a ghost came and took them on a ride. (Tom, 4-4) 

The methodological point is that thematic elements cannot be 
taken in isolation and simply aggregated; each element can be under- 
stood only in the context of the larger structure of meaning within 
which it is embedded. In other words, as we ha just indicated, what 
is required is an interpretive analysis that can elucidate these struc- 
tures of meaning and grasp how they give significance to the particu- 
lar elements, And when we undertake such an interpretive analysis, 



116 



Gender Differences and Symbolic Imagination 



the systematic differences between the boys' and the girls' stories are 
even more striking than the figures themselves reveal. 

These contrasting structures of meaning are brought out espe- 
cially vividly if we analyze what happens when a girl introduces a 
typical "boy's" element or theme into her story or vice versa. In each 
case, these elements are modified to conform to the characteristic 
model of the gender-specific narrative style. 

We have already seen examples of how this is done. When a 
potentially threatening or disruptive animal enters one of the girls' 
stories, it is characteristically rendered nonthreatening. This is fre- 
quently done by identifying the animal as small or a "baby" Even the 
occasional monster can be neutralized with the cautionary comment 
that it is "a nice monster" or "a baby monster." Significantly, animals 
can be rendered nonthreatening by making them into "pets" — that is, 
by bringing them into the family and its framework of stable social 
relationships. In boys' stories we also see this kind of symbolic rework- 
ing, but in the opposite direction. The classic boy's counterpart to the 
"nice monster" is probably the "Vampire bunny" which appeared in a 
story quoted earlier. 

This process of symbolic reworking provides one of the most 
convincing indications that we are dealing with a genuine contrast 
between two styles of aesthetic imagination — each constructing the 
world in accord with a distinctive symbolic intention — rather than a 
mere distribution of story traits. (Along similar lines, special insights 
can be gained from the analysis of "marginal stories" — that is, stories 
by both boys and girls that fit less sharply than most into one of the 
two gender-related narrative styles, and even incorporate some ten- 
sion between them. Space limitation^ preclude further discussion here, 
but it is worth noting that, once the main outlines of important narra- 
tive styles are identified, "marginal stories" should not be viewed as 
an embarrassment, but instead merit special attention as a key to 
refining the analysis.) 

Convergence and Divergence in the Symbolic 
Management of Order and Disorder 

Before closing, we would like to emphasize one additional point, 
which in the space available can only be asserted rather than demon- 
strated. In this discussion, we have stressed the contrast, in both 
themes and formal structure, between the narrative styles informing 
the boys' and the girls' stories. But this is not to suggest that the 




Nicolopoulou, Scales, and Wcintraub 117 



preoccupations expressed in these stories, and the underlying issues 
they address, have nothing in common. On the contrary, what a close 
analysis of the stories reveals is that both boys and girls are preoccu- 
pied with issues of danger and disorder. What is different is the way 
they deal with them. The girls deal with threatening or disruptive 
elements by muffling or suppressing them: burying them under a 
structure of order, alluding to them indirectly, or, as we have indicated, 
incorporating any disturbing or potentially unpredictable figures into 
the structure of the family unit. In contrast, the boys deal with these 
elements by dwelling on them explicitly, elaborating them, and inten- 
sifying their dangerous and thrilling aura. As we put it earlier, the 
boys' and girls' stories represent two very different approaches to the 
symbolic management of order and disorder. 

The girls' approach is exemplified by the crucial (and especially 
revealing) fact that they are usually careful not to end their stories until 
all potentially disruptive elements have been neutralized or re- 
solved — in particular, until the family has come back home or has 
otherwise reestablished its grip on order. The fundamental divergence 
in this respect between the symbolic imagination underlying the girls' 
stories and the boys' could not be illustrated more sharply than by the 
contrast between the last two stories we will quote. Here is a girl's 
story: 

Once upon a time there was an old, old house. A family was 
living in it. There was a baby, a mother, a father, and a sister. 
And all the kids played Candvland. And one day when the 
family was out shopping, there was a fire on the street to their 
house. When they came back home and saw that their house 
wasn't there, they went to find another one. (Martha, 4-5) 

The home is the locus of order, so having it burn down is disturbing. 
The girl is not going to end her story until she has the family find 
another one. On the other hand, here is a boy's story about the home: 

Once upon a time there was a moose. His name was Moose- 
moose. And he lived in a person's house. And he knocked a 
telephone off the wall. And he broke the house. And he ripped 
up the skeleton and he knocked the table out. And he broke the 
windows. Then he knocked down the house again. And then he 
drew on his face. And he turned the lamp on, and he let the 
birds out of the cage. The cud. (Bobby, 4-7) 

The story ends with chaos triumphant: a classic boy's story. But 
it is interesting to note that the house is always around to be destroyed 
a second time. 



118 



Gender Differences and Symbolic Imagination 



Some Lessons and Implications 

This analysis has, we hope, vindicated our suggestion that we can 
learn a good deal by taking children seriously as little artists and by 
recognizing the genuinely aesthetic impulse behind their storytelling 
activity. The expressive imagination that animates their stories is a 
resource they employ for making experience intelligible and rendering 
it emotionally manageable and satisfying. Furthermore, underlying 
the different narrative styles that they use and elaborate are distinctive 
ways of visualizing reality, distinctive modes of ordering and inter- 
preting the world. Exploring and elucidating these distinctive visions 
ran deepen our understanding of the active role of children's symbolic 
imagination in their construction of reality and in the formation of 
identity, including gender identity. While the line of research on which 
this chapter is based needs to be further extended and refined, it is 
already clear that the findings reported here have implications for a 
wide range of issues in development and education. 

The most striking implication of these findings is simply the 
extent to which systematic gender differences in social and symbolic 
imagination have begun to crystallize even at the young age of four 
years. A range of work in a number of fields lends support to our 
judgment that the contrasting narrative styles we have identified are 
not peculiar to our data and that they do, indeed, point to deeper 
differences in symbolic imagination and in cognitive and sociocultural 
styles. While surprisingly little systematic study of gender differences 
in children's spontaneous stories has been undertaken (the major ex- 
ception being the work of Paley), the distinctive gender-related pat- 
terns delineated in this study appear to be broadly consistent with a 
number of other findings from research on gender differences in chil- 
dren's play (e.g., Black 1989; Paley 1984a, 1984b; Sachs 1987) and in the 
narrative and conversational styles of children and adults (e.g., Good- 
win 1990; Goodwin and Goodwin 1987; Sheldon 1990; Tannen 1990a, 
1990b). More tentatively, our findings would seem to have some bear- 
ing on the recent line of discussion, associated above all with the work 
of Gilligan (e.g., 1982; Gilligan and Attanucci, 1988), which has argued 
that men and women follow somewhat different paths of moral devel- 
opment and that women's moral imagination and moral reasoning are 
much more likely to be anchored in a concern with stable patterns of 
social ties and obligations. Our results also appear to resonate, in 
suggestive ways, with certain patterns identified in Chodorow's 
analysis of the social formation of gender differences in emotional and 
personality development (e.g., 1978, 1989). 



Nicolopoitlou, Scales, and Weintraub 



119 



Because the subject of gender differences in development is so 
complex and contentious, a cautionary note is in order. The fact that 
the four-year-old boys and girls in this study already display such 
distinctive styles of representing and grasping reality, and that they 
spontaneously reproduce and elaborate these differences in a class- 
room setting devoted to building up a common culture among them, 
is a significant phenomenon that demands further consideration. By 
themselves, however, these findings do not tell us where these differ- 
ences come from, nor do they necessarily suggest that such differences 
are immutable. But they do bring out both how far and how deeply 
the processes of gender differentiation have already developed in the 
first four years of life, and they underscore the complexity of the 
dynamics involved in the formation of gender identity. 

At the same time, these findings highlight the need to approach 
the social formation of mind and personality in a way that does not 
treat the child as a passive bystander in this process. In constructing 
their stories, both the boys and the girls draw on images and other 
elements that are presented to them by their cultural environment and 
that shape their imagination and sensibility in profound and subtle 
ways. But we also find that, when given the opportunity, they are able 
(and eager) to use these elements to put the world together in quite 
distinctive ways. 

One larger implication of this striking fact is to remind us that 
the formative effect of culture is neither simple, unmediated, nor one- 
way. Quite practically, this means that the impact on children of the 
various cultural materials to which they are exposed — from TV shows 
to children's books to classroom curricula — will never be direct or 
uniform because, even at a very young age, the children bring to these 
materials their own distinctive interpretive frameworks, underlying 
concerns, and modes of appropriation. Thus the projects of adults who 
try to shape and advance children's development — from parents to 
teachers — encounter the multiple projects (themselves culturally 
shaped) that the children themselves are trying to pursue. The results 
of these encounters are neither simple nor easily predictable. Without 
having some sense of the inner logic of the children's own projects, 
adults cannot take for granted what the effects of their interventions 
will be. 

The situation on which our research is based may provide an 
instructive example. The patterns we have identified seem to emerge 
from the complex and mutually reinforcing interaction of two ongoing 
processes. First, the children's distinctive narrative styles express un- 




120 



Gender Differences and Symbolic Imagination 



derlying differences in their emerging cognitive modes and symbolic 
imagination. Second, at the same time, the use of these different styles 
is probably part of an effort by the boys and girls to mark themselves 
off from each other symbolically into different groups and to build up 
a sense of cohesion and shared identity within each subgroup. There- 
fore, the use of the storytelling and story-acting practice to build up a 
common culture within the classroom may also, ironically, have pro- 
vided the children with a framework for the articulation of differences 
within this common culture. There is some indication — though at pre- 
sent this can only be tentatively suggested — that the narrative styles of 
the children's stories, rather than becoming more similar, actually po- 
larized in certain ways during the year, precisely as the boys and girls 
became more familiar with each other's styles. (A dialectic of this kind 
would be consistent with the pattern suggested by Davies [19891 in her 
stimulating analysis of the dynamics of preschool children's symbolic 
construction of gender identities. The lesson, once again, is the need 
for studies to take seriously the complexity of the relationship between 
culture and individual development. 

All these considerations lead back to the recognition, which is a 
unifying theme of this volume, that understanding narrative diversity 
is a matter of considerable practical significance for education. This is 
especially true because children's narrative styles involve not only 
different ways of representing reality, but — simultaneously — different 
modes of grasping and understanding it. The cognitive and symbolic 
modes for which these narrative styles serve as vehicles constitute 
important resources for children in learning and development. But at 
the same time, these different tools for mastering reality carry with 
them different emphases and sensitivities, different strengths and 
weaknesses. 

This diversity can emerge along a number of axes. For example, 
studies such as those inspired by the work of Heath (e.g., 1983) ar J 
Michaels (e.g., 1981) have analyzed the different narrative styles 
brought to school by children from culturally distinct communities 
and have showed the impact of these narrative styles on the children's 
different routes to literacy and to broader educational success (or lack 
thereof). The outcomes are crucially affected by the extent to which 
educational practice can recognize, develop, and build on their distinc- 
tive strengths (and also recognize and address their distinctive gaps 
and weaknesses). But community of origin is certainly not the only 
source of narrative diversity within and between classrooms — as at- 
tested by the boys and girls discussed in this chapter, whose notable 



1 o *-» 



Nicolopoulou, Scales, and Weintraub 



121 



differences emerged within a context of very similar family and socio- 
economic backgrounds. The results of our study underline the need to 
address the dimension of gender in understanding the sources, forms, 
and implications of narrative diversity. 

Here again, it is important to add a note of complexity. Not only 
does narrative diversity emerge along a number of axes, but under- 
standing it is not simply a matter of dividing children into sharply 
demarcated subgroups. Children— like adults— need not be restricted 
to a single narrative mode, but are likely to have a range available to 
them for various purposes. One of the aims of education ought to be 
to help develop the range and richness of the narrative styles they can 
master and effectively employ. But if we are to foster and encourage 
this development in effective and educationally rewarding ways, it is 
important to recognize and appreciate the distinctive kinds of founda- 
tions on which it can build. 

In the long run, of course, mapping out the emergence of gender 
differences unavoidably raises an even deeper question: Why do they 
occur? This is a big and difficult subject, w^hich we can be excused for 
not attempting to address here. But we will venture to say that, in 
order to formulate intelligent questions about what causes gender 
differences in development, it is important to understand these differ- 
ences and their developmental emergence in depth. The type of analy- 
sis presented in this chapter can contribute to that goal. It may be that 
appreciating and understanding the imaginative gulf between boys 
and girls suggested by this research can help us think about ways of 
starting to bridge it. 



References 

Bettclhcim, B. (1977). The uses of enchantment: The meaning and importance of 

fairy talc*. New York: Vintage. 
Black, B. (1989). Interactive pretense: Social and symbolic skills in preschool 

play groups. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly. 35, 379-397. 
Bruner, J. S. (1986). Actual mind*, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 

University Press. 

. (1990). Act* of meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

. (1992). The narrative construction of reality. In H. Beilin and P. Pit- 
fall (Fds.), Piaget's theory: Prospects and possibilities (229-248). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Chodorow, N. (1978). The reproduction of mothering: Psychoanalysis and the so 
ciology offender. Berkeley: University of California Press. 



122 



Gender Differences and Symbolic Imagination 



. (1989). Being and doing: A cross-cultural examination of the sociali- 
zation of males and females. In Feminism and psychoanalytic theory. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 

Da vies, B. (1989). Frogs and snails and feminist talcs: Preschool children and gen- 
der. North Sydney, New South Wales: Allen & Unwin. 

Dewey, J. (1958). Art as experience. New York: Capricorn. 

Douglas, M. (1966). Purity and danger. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 

Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books. 

Gilligan, C. (1982). /;/ a different voice: Psychological theory and women's devel- 
opment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Gilligan, C, and Attanucci, J. (1988). Two moral orientations: Gender differ- 
ences and similarities. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, .34, 223-237. 

Goodwin, M. H. (1990). Tactical uses of stories: Participation frameworks 
within girls' and boys' disputes. Discourse Processes, 73, 33-71. 

Goodwin, M. H., and Goodwin, C. (1987). Children's arguing. In S. U. 

Philips, S. Steele, and C. Tanz (Eds.), Language, gender, and sex in com- 
parative perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Heath, S. B. (1983). Ways with words: Language, life, and work in communities 
and classrooms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Mandler, J. (1983). Representation. In J. H. Flavell and E. M. Markman 

(Eds.), Cognitive development. Vol. 3 of P. Mussen (Ed.), Handbook of 
child psychology (4th ed.). New York: Wiley. 

Matthews, G. (1980). Philosophy and the young child. Cambridge, MA: Har- 
vard University Press. 

Michaels, S. (1981). Sharing time: Children's narrative styles and differen- 
tial access to literacy. Language in Society, 10, 423-442. 
Paley, V. (1981). Wally's stories. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Universitv Press. 

. (1984a). Mollie is three: Growing up in school. Chicago: Universitv of 

Chicago Press. 

. (1984b). Boys and girls: Superlwroes in the doll comer. Chicago: Univer- 
sity of Chicago Press. 

. H988). Bad guys don't have birthdays. Chicago: University of Chicago 



ress. 



. (1990). 77/c boy who would be a helicopter: The utes of storytelling in the 

classroom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Pitcher, E. G., and Prelinger, P. (1963). Children tell stories: An analyst of fan- 
tasy. New York: International Universities Press. 

Romaine, S. (1985). Children's narratives. Linguistics, 23. 83-104. 
Sachs, J. (1987). Preschool boys' and girls' language use in pretend play. In 
S. U. Philips, S. Steele, and C. Tanz (Eds.), Language, gender, and sex in 



1 9 3 



Rir 



Nicolopoulou, Scales, and Wehitmub 



123 



comparative perspective (178-188). Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Sheldon, A. (1990). Pickle fights: Gendered talk in preschool disputes. Din- 
course Processes, 73, 5-31. 

Slobin, D. I. (1990). The development from child speaker to native speaker. 
In j. W. Stigler, R. A. Shweder, and G. Herdt (Eds.), Cultural psychol- 
ogy: Essays on comparative human development (233-256). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Stein, NL L, and Glenn, C. G. (1982). An analysis of story comprehension in 
elementary school children. In R. O. Freedle (Ed.), Nezv directions in 
discourse processing (Vol. 2). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Sutton-Smith, B. (1981). The folkstories of children. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press. 

Tannen, D. (1990a). You just don't understand: Women and men in conversation. 
New York: William Morrow. 

. (199oL). Gender differences in topical coherence: Creating involve- 
ment in best friends' talk. Discourse Processes, 23, 73-90. 



1^ 



124 



9 "And They Lived 
Happily Ever After": 
Cultural Storylines 
and the Construction 
of Gender 

Pam Gilbert 

James Cook University of North Queensland 

Pam Gilbert extends and expands the theme of gender differences in 
indents' stories. She argues that dominant ways of reading and writing 
stories help to construct and maintain the hierarchical dualism between 
femininity and masculinity. Through critical discourse in tlie classroom, 
teachers and students can zvork toward reconstructing tliis polarization and 
expanding the cultural possibilities, as well as the symbolic imagination, of 
girts and boys. 

One day there was a little girl called Kathleen, She found a gold pot. 
It was a useful pot. She rubbed it, A genie came out of it. The genie 
said "You have three wishes." 

"I wish I had the prettiest dress in the whole world." 
"But now it's your second wish." 
"1 wish I had long blonde hair/' 
"I wish I was a princess in a castle." 

Then she got her three wishes. Then she was happy In the castle the 
next day she got married with a handsome prince and they lived 
happilv ever after. 
THE END 

Eight-year-old girl (in Dwyer 19 e )2) 

Ace is going for a walk in the forest. Suddenly the Cobra planes start 
tiring. Ace runs tor shelter. He tells the Boss. He said, "Go to bed." 



I wish to thank Loan no [3a I lev and Bromvvn Dwver lor making tho texts from their 
rosea rch available tor this paper. 



161 



Pam Gilbert 



125 



Deep goes diving. He blew up the Cobras' underwater base. Ace 
calls Complex. He says, "I'm on my way." They go into the Cobra's 
house. Ace and Complex go to the Cobra's base and gel into a plane. 
They find a Cobra plane. They shot it down. They shoot the Cobra 
base. Metalhead touched metal. He blew it up. 



hether we are reading or writing, talking or listening, it is 



difficult to ignore gender: to not notice how language prac- 



V V tices are used differently by women and men, to not notice the 
different ways in which women and men are described, to not notice 
that girls' and boys' stories in classrooms can sometimes be very 
different. 

For educators, the gendered nature of classroom language prac- 
tices has been of concern for some time (see Sheridan 1983; Gilbert 
1989). Over the past twenty years, issues of language access, particu- 
larly access to teacher talk, to classroom linguistic space, and to so- 
cially powerful discourse forms, have been a particular focus of 
research (Swann and Graddol 1988; Poynton 1985; White 1986). How- 
ever, more recently the language system for which access has been 
sought has come under increasing scrutiny, and with this scrutiny has 
come an interest in the way in which language practices are involved 
in the social construction of gender. 

The opportunity to learn to talk and write and read in the domi- 
nant practices of a society, and the access to be able to do such talking 
and writing and reading, are both valuable. But such opportunities 
need also to be accompanied by social understandings of how these 
practices have become dominant, how their dominance has been 
maintained, and whose voices and lives have consequently bee*; mar- 
ginalized or silenced. The language system is not a gender-free zone, 
and access to social language practice needs also to be accompanied 
by a critical reflexivity which allows for the possibility of dialogue and 
debate with dominant and entrenched meanings. 

This chapter will argue that a positive approach to classroom 
storying must not only take account of the different ways in which 
groups of children access certain text typos and topics — and how gen- 
der is implicated in this difference — but that it must also take account 
of the meanings that text types and topics allow if they are used. If our 
goal in the classroom is towards a greater expansion of human poten- 
tial, then the entrenched polarization of much popular thinking about 



Eight-vear-old boy (in Dwyer 1992) 




131 



126 



"And They Lived Happily Ever After 



women and men needs to be reread. A closer consideration of the role 
that storying plays in the construction and regulation of this polariza- 
tion may, this chapter would argue, be helpful. 

School Storying 

Storying is one of the most important and popular of school language 
practices; yet for many educators, the space and privilege allocated to 
story reading and story writing in classrooms raise an interesting 
dilemma in terms of gender equity. On the one hand, young women 
are often very competent with stories, becoming noticeably more flu- 
ent readers and writers in the early years of schooling than their male 
counterparts (Sheridan 1982; Dwyer 1992). But on the other hand, this 
competence (perhaps compliance) with early school literacy tasks can 
be questioned in terms of the social value it provides. 

For example, girls generally take up a very narrow range of 
writing positions from which to write school stories, and these are 
commonly positions that rely upon a hierarchical construction of male- 
female relationships. Poynton (1985) claims that the stories that girls 
write at school are remarkably stereotypical in topic choice and char- 
acter construction; that they draw predominantly upon a narrow 
range of topic areas such as home activities, dress and appearance, 
romance, and fantasy worlds; and that they are often inhabited by such 
characters as fairies, witches, literary figures from children's stories, 
talking animals, and commercial toys. By detailing some of the differ- 
ences between girls' texts and those written by boys, studies by Tuck, 
Bavliss, and Bell (1985), Romatowski and Trepanier-Street (1987), Kam- 
ler (1992), as well as earlier work of mine (Gilbert 1989), produce 
similar findings about the gendered features of girls' writing. 

However, the significance of this gender difference in children's 
story writing has not often been explored. While research studies 
constantly report evidence of sex difference in children's writing com- 
petence and styles, only relatively recently have educators begun to 
question the effect of this difference upon young women. For instance, 
in her discussion of the job prospects that might be related to the 
writing competence of high school girls, White (1986) details the supe- 
rior Achievement of girl writers and then suggests that such school 
literacy competence does not appear to lead to social power and suc- 
cess beyond school walls: 

Considering the disparity between women's early achieve- 
ments in literacy and their subsequent paid employment, we 



■«> iw/ »W 



Pam Gilbert 



127 



need to ask why it is that thousands of able girl writers leave 
school and go into secretarial jobs, in the course of which they 
will patiently revise and type the semi-literate manuscripts of 
their male bosses, or else return in droves to the primary class- 
room, there to supervise the production of another generation 
of pen-wise girls. (562) 

Poynton (1985) goes further than this when she argues that the 
competence girls demonstrate with particular styles — notably story- 
telling and narrative genres — is almost irrelevant in the world beyond 
the school. Girls' genre competence is, she suggests, "positively dis- 
abling": 

Telling fairy stories, even telling good fairy stories very well . . . 
simply doesn't count. The positions of real power and influence 
in our society necessitate command of genres for which boys' 
educational experience provides an appropriate preparation 
and girls' doesn't . . . girls' genre competence at primary school 
is not merely irrelevant but positively disabling. (36) 

What social value is placed upon the literary competence young 
women develop through writing fictions? Or, if we ask the question 
rather differently, what has been the effect of maintaining a gendered 
distinction between who is "good" at story writing and who is good 
at, sav, exposition? Between who will be the writers of "fictions" and 
the writers of "facts"? Are fiction and narrative, as Threadgold (1992) 
suggests, "the technologies which make . . . [girls] compliant subjects 
of patriarchy" by keeping them away from the realms of mathematics 
and science, and the "academic language of theory" (17)? Is story 
writing a social practice that helps to regulate a hierarchical, gendered 
order where girls will be pen-pushers for the (male) thinkers and 
builders? 

This is an important and disturbing question, and a related 
aspect of it is to ask critical questions about how competence with 
story writing is itself questionable in terms of the value it offers to 
women. If we accept that language practices are social practices — that 
learning to read, to write, to talk are about learning how to operate 
within our culture — then story writing, as a language practice, is a 
social activity. What, however, are students learning about "the social" 
when they road and write stories? My argument in this chapter is that, 
amongst other things, they learn to construct femininity and masculin- 
ity within a hierarchical dualism. By entering into story worlds, and 
by being inserted into the storylines of their culture, students come to 
know what counts as being a woman, or being a man, in the culture to 



1 n n 



128 



"And They Lived Happily Ever After" 



which the stories belong. They come to know the range of cultural 
possibilities available for femininity and masculinity — and the limits 
to that range. Storying becomes increasingly a cultural, rather than a 
personal, practice. 

When they construct stories, young writers enter into familiar 
and well-known sets of systematically organized relationships of se- 
quence, ordering, and signification which carry the social values of 
their culture. Inevitably an understanding of gender becomes an im- 
portant aspect of these social values, although it is not immediately 
obvious as a constructed set of social relationships. Through constant 
repetition and layering, story patterns and logic become almost "natu- 
ralized" as truths and common sense, and this, according to Walker- 
dine (1990), is one of the powerful ways in which constructions of 
gender are authorized and regulated. Walkerdine suggests that "femi- 
ninity" and "masculinity" are but fictions — but fictions which come to 
be regarded as real and true because of the way they are legitimated 
and endorsed in social practice: 

It is not that we are filled with roles and stereotvpes of passive 
femininity so that we become what society has set out for us. 
Rather, I am suggesting that femininity and masculinity are 
fictions linked to fantasies deeply embedded in the social world 
which can take on the status of fact when inscribed in the 
powerful practices like schooling, through which we are regu- 
lated, (xiii) 

It is through fictions or stories that our understanding of gender 
is constantly made and remade and acquires this factual status. Stories 
play a powerful role in the construction of femininity and masculinity 
and are firmly implicated in the construction of social meaning. 

Storying and Social Meaning 

A study of the stories that dominate in a culture at any particular 
time provides rich evidence of the values and social practices of that 
culture. Stories can show us whose histories have been authorized 
and whose have been silenced; whose lives have been acclaimed and 
whose have been devalued; whose names we will remember and 
whose we will never know. Stories can also show us how cultures have 
"read," and thus given meaning to, human relationships: how thev 
have made sense of such diverse activities as reproduction, aggression, 
low, and anger; how they have sorted the flux of human experience 



J 



Pam Gilbert 



129 



into orders and sequences; how they have made decisions about what 
counts as "living happily ever after" — and what counts as "living 
unhappily ever after." 

This is most obviously demonstrated through any historical or 
cross-cultural study of storying, as in, for instance, Zipes's study of the 
social history of selected folk tales (1983), or Dixon's analysis of British 
children's literature (1978a; 1978b), or the classroom workbook called 
Changing Storks, prepared by the Inner London Education Authority 
English Centre (Mellor, Hemming, and Leggett 1984). Research and 
materials such as theirs demonstrate how stories have been appropri- 
ated by dominant political ideologies of class, race, and gender, and 
how aspects of characterization and narrative logic have been adapted 
accordingly. 

Stories can be changed, but they can be changed only within 
certain cultural and historical parameters of acceptability if they are to 
be authorized and legitimated. The narrative "logic" that will allow 
story tellings and readings to be made so that sequences of events can 
be read as connected and credible is a cultural and historically specific 
"logic." We learn this logic as part of learning the story worlds of our 
culture. However, as any study of the rewri tings of traditional tales for 
contemporary children demonstrates, a selection is made as to which 
contemporary social meanings will be included, and this selection can 
indicate which social values dominate and are assumed to be cultural 
"truths." 

For instance, in Dahl's very popular and commercially success- 
ful retelling of a number of traditional tales — Revolting Rhymes 
(1984)— he humorously and parodically plays with several of the fe- 
male character constructions. His "Little Red Riding Hood" becomes 
almost a "Sloane Ranger" figure: an upper-class trendy who will kill, 
without scruple, for a fur: 

But what a change! No cloak of red, 
No silly hood upon her head. 
She said, "Hello, and do please note 
''My lovely furry WOLFSKIN COAT." (40) 

And to repeat the message, this "Miss Hood" makes another 
appearance in Dahl's version of "The Three Little Pigs." In this one, 
she is phoned (while in the middle of drying her hair) by pig number 
three, who begs her to help him in his struggle with the wolf. Miss 
Hood is delighted to be of assistance. '"My darling Pig,' she said, 'my 



1 3 7j 



130 



"And They Lived Happily Ever After" 



sweet / that's something really up my street'" (46). However, the help 
she provides means that she acquires a brand new pigskin traveling 
case. 

Dahl's female character for Red Riding Hood has been drawn 
from a rather different set of discourses than the earlier oral tales (with 
their gutsy peasant heroine who escapes from the wolf), or the gentri- 
fied bourgeois retellings by Perrault and Grimm (with their pretty, 
empty-headed little girl character who is completely fooled by the 
wolf). But Dahl's selection is obviously culturally gendered. "Miss 
Hood" in his stories is treacherous and vain; she is pampered, spoilt, 
and self-indulgent; and luxury clothing items are her particular fetish. 
We recognize and can make sense of the transformations or closures in 
Dahl's stories because we have the appropriate cultural knowledge to 
recognize the narrative logic he relies upon. The changes that Dahl 
makes to his stories come from a particular set of cultural values about 
women and can be read by us because those cultural values are com- 
monly espoused and often repeated. 

But there are ways of constructing stories about women that we 
seldom see. These are stories that are difficult to write and difficult to 
understand. The conventions are unfamiliar, the narrative transforma- 
tions or closures not so comfortable. We do not know how to "tell" 
some stories — nor, sometimes, do we know how to "hear" others — as 
many marginalized groups have discovered throughout history. We 
have no well-worn patterns to follow. How, for instance, were women 
to tell the stories of their lives as women, when so few stories existed 
for them to read? When so little narrative space existed within which 
such storytellers and such stories could be heard? Ways in which we 
might organize and transform a series of events into "a story" are 
dependent upon the cultural paradigms of possibility available to us; 
they are dependent upon the social understandings accessible at spe- 
cific historical moments. 

Storying and the Construction of Gender 

Within cultures which divide people into groups dependent upon 
their biological sex, issues of gender are inevitably involved in story- 
ing. What comes to count as appropriate social practice for a "girl" or 
a "boy/' a "woman" or a "man," becomes part of a culture's stories — 
bedtime stories, TV stories, movie stories, or advertisement stories; 
stories that are written, spoken, enacted, or constructed with visual 



13C> 



Pani Gilbert 



131 



images; stories that soothe, disturb, delight or terrify. Consider these 
lines from a poem called "Sacrifices" (Haley 1979): 

A tale in a school reading book: 

a bell that could not be cast 

unless a virgin's blood tempered the metal: 

the bell-caster's beautiful daughter 

threw herself into the mould 

thus saving her father from the wrath of the emperor. 

We learn how to "be" women or men, girls or boys, mothers or 
fathers, wives or husbands, sisters or brothers, aunt? or uncles, grand- 
mas or grandpas partly in response to the stories that we hear and 
participate in. Through the continual layering of such stones, we learn 
how to participate in our culture. We learn appropriate ways to read 
and make sense of experience and discover the ways in which we are 
"read" ourselves as gendered subjects. And we learn appropriate ways 
to talk and to write, although the "appropriate" ways may not always 
be satisfying. An Australian author, in her semiautobiographical novel 
Kcwpic Doll (Hanrahan 1984), relates the female protagonist's unease 
with the forms of language available to her. The woman senses their 
inadequacy and grasps at the recognition that the language practices 
around her do not let her say the things she might want to say: 

Bobby Henderson talks to the taxi driver as if they arc friends. 
How can he be a man so easily? He knows the right language, 
they are men together, blistered lips smiling — Yeah, they say 
and Too bad, mate. I've stopped being me. 1 am a person pre- 
tending, everv word 1 say is wrong. (68) 

However, the story patterns that surround us are often seductive 
in their appeal because, as Walkerdine (1990) suggests, they connect 
with fantasies: with deeply held desires we have to be loved, to be 
wanted, to be cherished. Davies (1992) sees desire as firmly implicated 
in storyline and suggests that centrally involved in learning to become 
a male or a female is the learning of "the appropriate patterns of 
desire": 

Because story provides a substantial and detailed manifestation 
of the culture, it is through story that children can learn the 
patterns of desire appropriate for their gender. They discover 
what positions are available to members of their sex and how to 
live the detail of those positionings and they come to under- 
stand and take up as their own the particular patterns of desire 
relevant to their gender. (1) 



132 



And They Lived Happily Ever After' 



For contemporary Western women and girls, many of the stories 
that dominate in the popular and commercial sphere are stories that 
support, and construct desire for, a dualistic construction of gender. 
Within such a framework, femininity is linked with qualities like self- 
lessness, heterosexuality, beauty modesty, gentleness, and love — 
qualities of femininity which we learn to desire and seek. 

Stories from magazines, newspapers, TV quiz shows, soap op- 
eras, popular films, jokes, gossip, pulp fiction, and radio talk-back 
programs become the "fictions" of daily life that construct the "facts" 
of femininity: 

How to stay alluring through summer heat . . 

Rape Victim's Horror Story 

Will Rachel keep her man? 

fvlandy's heartbreak . . . 

Those telltale signs of age. Check yours out. 

How to find Mr. Right. Twenty tips and suggestions. 

Every mother's worst nightmare. Lesley breaks her silence. 

Secrets of a 70-year-old marriage . . . 

Shape-up secrets for summer 

ARE YOU A FOOL TO FORGIVE A CHEAT? 

Three amazing plastic surgery stories . . . 

Di's beauty secrets 

Story promotions such as these support a construction of femi- 
ninity which is clearly centered on heterosexuality, along with the 
characteristics that will make a woman heterosexually desirable. 
"Femininity" in stories like these becomes equated with heterosexual 
attractiveness, an obvious precursor to romance. The feminine woman 
is desired because she is desirable to men, and the characteristics that 
will make her desirable are "knowable" through the stories of her 
culture: through the constructions of women offered on MTV clips, 
billboards, magazines, films, and novels. 

Not surprisingly, these "stories" occur in different but related 
form in student texts. One of the stories that Dalley (1991) collected 
from a teenage schoolgirl writer demonstrates the girl writer's inter- 
nalization of the male gaze and the concomitant construction of desir- 
able "femininity": 

. . . Taran began to think about his quest. He had been ordered 
by the king to rescue his daughter — a fat, selfish and extremely 




Pain Gilbert 



133 



spoilt girl around 18 years old. The thought of going on a 
dangerous mission for someone such as Mirian, made Taran 
wince, especially seeing as it was almost time for her to marry 
some poor unfortunate man — likely to be Taran. (165) 

The story then becomes an account of the transformation of the "fat," 
"spoilt/' and "selfish" girl into a shapely romantic woman whom 
Taran will then desire: whom he will be able to fall in love with. This 
is the final frame of the story: 

He gazed at her as the light flickered across her pretty face. Her 
blue gown fitted her beautifully, highlighting Mirian's wom- 
anly figure. . . . 

"|Y]ou must of wondered why I look like 1 do now, when 1 was 

so fat/' [Mirian replied] getting straight to the point. 

"Well, the thought had crossed my mind, once or twice," he 

shrugged. 

"Well, if we could move to the lounge room, 1 shall tell you all 
about my 'adventures/ and you can tell me about yours." 
"Lead on," Taran answered, feeling strangely happy to be with 
her, as he followed Mirian through another door. "What a won- 
derful night this is turning out to be," thought Taran to himself. 
"Especially with such a wonderful woman." (168) 

This young woman writer has located her school story very 
comfortably within traditional romantic storylines and the narrative 
logic and appropriate "feminine" characteristics that accompany such 
a storyline. Like the story from the eight-year-old girl at the beginning 
of this paper — where a girl's three most precious wishes are seen to be 
for a pretty dress, long golden hair, and the title of Princess — this story, 
too, accepts the cultural importance of signifiers like material clothing 
and body inscription. And just as the transformation for the eight- 
year-old girl brought heterosexual fulfillment ("In the castle the next 
day she got married with a handsome prince and they lived happily 
ever after"), so too does it for this fifteen-year-old girl writer. Her 
female character has become a "wonderful woman" desired by the 
hero. Another feminine fantasy is fulfilled. 

Resisting the Romantic Storyline 

The romantic storyline is a powerful one for narrative construction, 
and it dominates as a "logic" in stories that involve female and male 
relationships. Consequently, as 1 have argued in earlier work (1988), 
young women have difficulty constructing narrative action and se- 
quences that do not return to this line for final resolution and transfor- 



130 



134 



"And They Lived Happily Ever After" 



mation. It is important for us to remember, however, that young writ- 
ers learn the conventions of this storyline as they become increasingly 
immersed in children's fiction, TV stories, film texts, advertisement 
stories, and social life. A study of the writing of early writers is often 
a salutory reminder that it is possible and common for young female 
writers to construct texts that do not turn upon male intervention for 
success, or safety, or happiness — that do not slot characters and action 
into a familiar preromantic storyline. 

Stories like the following from young girls as beginning writers 
are not at all unusual. For instance, in these stories from a seven-year- 
old, 1 girls can be adventurous — even violent: 

The Spirit of Anadore 

Once upon a time there was a land called Anadore. Now I will 

tell you a secret of Anadore. 

THERE WAS A MONSTER IN THAT LAND! 

And one day a little girl was walking. Her name was Shirley 

and she saw this great big shadow, and she was so scared she 

couldn't move. 

And she knew it was the monster. 

So she forced her body to move, and she ran home and got a 
knife. 

Then she killed the monster. THE END 

They can be brave and receive help from supernatural forces (at this 
stage ungendered forces!): 

The Crystal Cave 

I was walking down to my grandma's and on the way 1 saw a 
cave. I went in. I went deeper into the cave. I saw a witch. She 
was bad! I saw a horse in the cave. It let me get on its back. It 
was a magic horse. It killed the witch and 1 rode away on the 
horse. 

And they can write about "gendered" beings in "ungendered" ways: 
The Magic Rainbow 

Once upon a lime there lived a little boy. I le stayed up late al 
night till 11:30. One day it was raining and he saw a rainbow. It 
sucked him up and he saw lots of scary monsters and he 
screamed and his mum on earth heard him and she came to the 
rescue. She was just in time because one of the monsters was 
there. When they were home the little bov went to bed. THE 
END 

Very young girl writers may have no "storied" sense of transfor- 
mation or narrative closure, and even though their stories may have 



14.) 



Pam Gilbert 



135 



story world characters, the narratives do not necessarily insert their 
characters into a cultural storyline for narrative logic. 2 

The Rabbit 

Once a rabbit was walking along in a deep dark forest, until it 

started raining. 

It rained and rained. 

Then he came to a sunny place and he met a little girl playing 
with a ball. 

However, this changes as students become increasingly familiar 
with cultural stories. If, as Cohan and Shires (1988) suggest, stories 
structure the meanings by which a culture lives, then we could expect 
that the stories that students construct will themselves typify the cul- 
tural meanings they encounter. An analysis of teenage girls' storying 
can then become an interesting indication of the way in which girls 
have "read" the storylines of their culture and taken up positions 
within such cultural storylines. It seems to be difficult for young 
women writers to conceive of a narrative logic which will not ulti- 
mately have their female characters move along a romantic storyline 
and be read from within the cluster of traits associated with romantic 
femininity, even when their initial story frame would have made it 
possible to make other "readings" and to follow other storylines. 

For instance, consider these first six paragraphs of an adventure 
story written for a school English assignment by a fifteen-year-old 
Australian girl. The story is typical of many from the class, as Dalley 
(1991) found in her work on adolescent storying: 

Aqua-Kingdom 

On an early Saturday afternoon Sky decided to go for a walk up 
to Eagles' Hill. Nobody had been up there for years because 
there was a rumour that there was a room full of eagles on the 
top. Sky wanted to prove this rumour wrong, so she packed a 
picnic lunch and set off. As she got further and further up the 
hill she began to get a bit scared. It was getting darker and 
darker by the minute. She had been walking for a while until 
she saw a small black room on top of the hill. She looked behind 
her and thought of turning back but she couldn't see more than 
two feet in front of her face, so she decided against it. 

She walked up to the door and peered into the keyhole but 
could see only darkness. She circled the room, but couldn't see 
any windows or doors. 

She went back around the front and hesitantly opened the door. 
Nothing happened. She looked inside and all she saw was four 
black, blank walls and a red door opposite her. 



141 



136 



"And They Lived Happily Ever After" 



She walked in and closed the door behind her. She went up to 
the red door and stopped. "How could there be another door 
when I checked outside and there weren't any?" she thought to 
herself. Only one way to find out, and with that she opened the 
door. 

When she looked out the door, she saw the most breathtaking 
sight she had ever seen. Before she had time to take a good look 
she was sucked out of the doorway into a long dark tunnel. She 
practically floated down the tunnel and could see a bright light 
at the end. She closed her eyes as the light was getting too bright 
and seconds later flew out and landed on a pile of junk. Her 
eyelids felt very heavy so she closed them and fell into a very 
deep sleep. . . . 

So far so good. These opening paragraphs could be read as an 
attempt to construct the female heroine of the story as brave, inde- 
pendent, and strong. We could read her as careful and practical, but 
still fearless and courageous, and we could read these opening para- 
graphs as setting a scene for a lone adventurer on a journey of discov- 
ery. But because the protagonist is a woman, the reading is overlaid 
with a narrative expectation that this independence and adventurous- 
ness are almost "un feminine" traits within the conventional story 
paradigm and that they will be transformed into more "appropriate" 
(desirable?) feminine traits through the movement of the story. The 
gender of the main character almost predisposes us to expect the 
imminent intervention of a male character. Unlike the lone male ad- 
venturer, the lone female heroine is a rare event in our cultural stories. 
By changing the name of the character to, say, "Ged," and then all the 
subsequent pronouns to "he" or "him," I would argue that we change 
the frames through which those six paragraphs might be read. 

In the paragraphs that follow in "Aqua-Kingdom," Sky wakes 
from her "very deep sleep" and is met by a "striking young girl" who 
tells her where she is and directs her to a cottage wherein waits — "the 
Prince"! 

The door was opened by a handsome young man. "Hello/' he 
said, "May I help you?" 

Sky is advised by Shotsi (the handsome young man) that she will have 
to stay for some time with him (in his cottage!) before transport back 
to earth can be arranged. And, as might be guessed, during the en- 
forced stay the two "grow very fond of each other": 

Sky was regretting the day she had to go. The night before Sky 
was due to go Shotsi admitted to being in love with her and he 



142 



Patn Gilbert 



137 



wanted her to stay and marry him. Sky was ecstatic with hap- 
piness and joy and eagerly accepted. They were married one 
week later and Sky was an official Aqua-ite. She could even 
grow a tail now. Shotsi fixed it up so that Sky's parents wouldn't 
notice she was missing so Sky's life was now perfect. THE END 

The young adventurer has now been transformed into the romantic, 
feminine woman (a "little mermaid" figure?). The male character "ad- 
mits" to being in love with her — at which admission she becomes 
"ecstatic with happiness and joy." He also takes charge of her life 
("Shotsi fixed it up so that Sky's parents wouldn't notice she was 
missing"). 

The romantic storyline provides a familiar and comfortable logic 
for this young woman's story, and within many young women's nar- 
ratives, readers can similarly trace the transformation of interesting 
and often independent young people into characters who are physi- 
cally weak, vulnerable, and dependent upon masculine strength and 
aggression — in other words, into female characters who are het- 
erosexually desirable and can take up places within the romantic para- 
digm. This should not be surprising to us. The preparation of young 
girls for their insertion into the romantic storyline through comics and 
early reading has been well documented (Davies 1989; Walkerdine 
1990), as has the gendered narrowness of teen romance fiction and 
television stories for young women readers and viewers (Christian- 
Smith 1990; Gilbert 1993). Locating a space from which to write stories 
that challenge dominant cultural meanings— that try to construct 
other versions of "happy ever after" endings, and other versions of 
"being a woman" — is not an easy task. 

Towards the Telling of Other Stories 

Young women will continue to find it comfortable and easy to read 
and write stories that we might regard as "sexist" (that follow roman- 
tic storylines and are narrowly constructed in terms of topic selection, 
character construction, choice of text type) as long as the dominant 
cultural stories from television, popular print, movies, advertising, 
and contemporary social practice construct femininity and masculin- 
ity in this way and legitimate and authorize such "fictions" as "facts." 

One of the subject positions that is very familiar to us all is the 
stereotypically gendered one. Most of us have had considerable expe- 
rience of being positioned as gendered subjects, and we are able to 
read, write, talk, move, and dress in ways that invite us to be "read" 



143 



138 



"And They Lived Happily Ever After' 



as a stereotypical woman, or as a stereotypical man. But this is obvi- 
ously not the only subject position available to us, nor is it necessarily 
a preferred one. As Weedon (1987) suggests: 

Many women acknowledge the feeling of being a different per- 
son in different social situations which call for different qualities 
and modes of femininity. The range of ways of being a woman 
open to each of us at a particular time is extremely wide but we 
know or feel we ought to know r what is expected of us in 
particular situations — in romantic encounters, when we are 
pandering to the boss, when we are dealing with children or 
posing for fashion photographers. We may embrace these wavs 
of being, these subject positions whole-heartedly, we may reject 
them outright or we may offer resistance while complying to 
the letter with what is expected of us. (86) 

And this must apply to our female students. The women stu- 
dents who "read" cultural stories are not a seamless, coherent, or 
single group. They come from diverse cultural and material back- 
grounds, and they live and experience "femininity" differently. They 
can take up many different positions as young women. Nor is there a 
seamless, coherent, or single construction of femininity available to 
them. There are many ways to read "femininity" and many different 
women as readers and meaning makers. It is within this diversity of 
sign and image, of reader and readings, that there lies space for alter- 
native constructions to be made of being a "woman," alternative sto- 
ries to be told, and alternative forms of female "desire" to be 
constructed. 

But a space must be fought for and constantly protected, given 
the sheer weight and dominance of so many stories that would not 
acknowledge that "difference," that construct femininity narrowly 
within a dualistic ordering of gender, that position women within a 
romantic storyline of possibility. As this chapter has argued, some 
readings of cultural stories become dominant and authorized because 
they are constantly repeated. These dominant readings form the major 
storying paradigms and are often "naturalized" as the common-sense 
lore of our culture. The other "quieter" stories are more difficult to 
hear: more difficult to find. In classrooms, we need deliberate strate- 
gies which will open out the constructedness of stories: the sets of 
social conventions upon which they have drawn and the cultural set 
of meanings through which they are read. 

Comparison and juxtaposition can make it possible to read the 
historical specificity of manv common and familiar stories; contempo- 
rary retellings of traditional tales, fables, or fairy tales are valuable 



14* 



Paw Gilbert 



139 



source texts here (see Mellor, Hemming, and Leggett 1984). Similarly, 
the paradigms of possibility that exist in different story construc- 
tions—say, the construction of a "quality" children's literary text, or a 
teen romance novel, or an early graded reader, or a "60 Minutes" story, 
or a Woman's Day feature — can be explored. What is likely to be in- 
cluded in each of these stories, and what is not? And why? How 
culturally and historically specific are decisions like these (see Gilbert 
1992)? 

A focus on the way in which different social readings of stories 
can be made can also help to undermine their naturalized "common- 
sense" qualities: their "factual" and authorized status. What might 
it mean to make a "feminist" reading of a story, and how can that 
be done? Or how can we make a reading that could produce class 
inequalities? What meanings might we produce if we read stories as 
a language teacher? as a person of color? as a literary scholar? as a 
psychoanalyst? as a parent? The possibility of multiple "readings" is 
a powerful challenge to a text's authority, particularly if the conditions 
of possibility that can produce those readings become also an object of 
attention (see Mellor and Patterson 1991; Mellor 1992). 

The challenge is to find classroom structures that will support 
such endeavors, and Dwyer's work (1992) with year three story writ- 
ers is valuable here. She found that female writers drew upon different 
story paradigms, depending upon whether they were in all-female 
writing groups or in mixed writing groups, and suggests that the 
range of subject positions available to young readers and writers is 
influenced by their peer groupings. Her argument is that the discur- 
sive networks brought into play by particular social groupings influ- 
ence story production. 

The same argument might well be made for reading. My work 
with teenage girl readers (in Gilbert and Taylor 1991) indicated that 
girl readers who had access to broadly based literary textuality (and 
the readings that are often learnt with such access) could make read- 
ings of teen romance novels which foregrounded and challenged the 
narrow parameters of such texts. They were positioned differently by 
their discursive histories and so had access to a range of reading 
frames. 

We need access to other stories for our students — and to other 
ways of working with narrative in the classroom. We need to fore- 
ground the paradoxical value of girls' competence with storying; the 
way in which storying works to regulate acceptable social construc- 
tions of gender; the richness of being able to make multiple readings 



140 



And They Lived Happily Ever After" 



of stories. And we need to foreground how stories feed into and play 
upon deeply held desires — and to question what purposes those de- 
sires serve. A positive pedagogy for classroom storying must include 
ways to encourage and support young women as they make explora- 
tions with narrative form and to help them gain access to other sto- 
ries — to other ways to read themselves as gendered subjects, to other 
ways in which female desire might be constructed. 

The storylines which dominate as authorized and common sets 
of social meanings in Western culture do not support women (or men) 
in a full and varied development of their potential as social subjects. 
They obscure the richness of human diversity and the plurality of 
social subjectivity. They deny us dignity and value. 

As one storyteller claims, after an incident in which a "sturdy" 
peasant girl has outwitted a rich and lecherous squire and a foolish 
and frightened father, there are other ways for us to live "happily ever 
after" than to insert ourselves into dominant cultural storylines. 

As for the girl, some say she married, some say not. It matters 
little. What is certain is that she lived happily ever after. * 

Notes 

1. With thanks to Rebecca Gilbert for these three stories. 

2. With thanks to Lara Jane Phillips for this story. 

3. From "The Squire's Bride" in Riordan's collection entitled The 
Woman in the Moon and Other Tale* of Forgotten Heroine* (1985). 

References 

Christian-Smith, L. (1990). Becoming a woman through romance, New York: 
Routledge. 

Cohan, S., and Shires, L. (1988). Telling stories: A theoretical analysis of narra- 
tive fiction. London: Methuen. 

Dahl, R. (1984). Revolting rhyme*. London: Puffin Books. 

Da Hey, L. (1991 ). Regulating gender through genre: A study of the construction 
of gender in school narrative writing tasks at the year ten level. Unpub- 
lished bachelor of education honors thesis, School of Education, 
James Cook University of North Queensland, Townsville. 

Davies, B. (1989). Frogs and snails and feminist tales: Preschool children and gen- 
der. Svdnev, New South Wales: Allen and Unwin. 



14a 



Pam Gilbert 



141 



. (1992). Beyond dualism and towards multiple subjectivities. In L. 

Christian-Smith (Ed.), Text* of desire. London: Falmer Press. 

Dixon, B. (1978a). CaHtiug them young 1: Sex, race and class hi children's fic- 
tion. London: Pluto Press. 

. (1978b). Catching them young 2: Political ideas in children's fiction. Lon- 
don: Pluto Press. 

Dwver, B. (1992). The construction of narrative xvithin one year three classroom. 
Unpublished master of education thesis, School of Education, James 
Cook University of North Queensland, Townsville. 

Gilbert, P. (1988). Stoning the romance: Girls as resistant readers and writ- 
ers. Curriculum Perspectives, 8{2), 13-18. 

(with Rowe, K.). (1989). Gender, literacy and the classroom. Carlton, 

Victoria: Australian Reading Association. 

. (1992). On place, parameter, and play: Exploring the cultural possi- 
bilities of genre work. English, in Australia, 99, 19-26. 

. (1993). Dolly fictions: Teen romance down under. In L. Christian- 
Smith (Ed.), Texts of desire: Fiction, fantasy, and femininity. London: Fal- 
mer Press. 

Gilbert, P., and Taylor, S. (1991). Fashioning the feminine: Girls, popular culture 
and schooling. Sydney, New South Wales: Allen and Unwin. 

Haley, E. (1979). Sacrifices. In C. Ferrier (Ed.), Hecate's daughters. St. Lucia, 
Queensland: University of Queensland. 

Hanrahan, B. (1984). Keivpiedoll. London: Chatto and Windus. 

Kamler, B. (1992). Constructing gender in the process writing classroom. In 
P. Gilbert (Ed.), Gender, stories and the language classroom. Geelong, Vic- 
toria: Deakin University Press. 

Mellor, B. (1992). English and reading practices. Unpublished doctoral disser- 
tation, University of Western Australia, Perth. 

Mellor, B., Hemming, J., and Leggett, J. (1984). Changing stories. London: In- 
ner London Education Authority English Centre; Scarborough, West- 
ern Australia: Chalkface Press. 

Mellor, B., and Patterson, A. (1991). Reading fictions. Perth, Western Austra- 
lia: Chalkface Press. 

Poynton, C. (1985). language and gender: Making the difference. Geelong, Vic- 
toria: Deakin University Press. 

Riordan, J. (Ed.). (1985). The woman in the moon and other tales of forgotten 
heroines. New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. 

Romatowski, J., and Trepanier-Street, M. (1987). Gender perceptions: An 

analysis of children's creative writing. Contemporary Education, 59(1), 
17-19. 

Sheridan, E. M. (Ed.). (1982). Sex stereotypes and reading. Newark, DE: IRA. 



147 



142 



And They Lived Happily Ever After" 



Swann, J., and Graddol, D. (1988). Gender inequalities in classroom talk. 
English in Education, 2(1), 49-65. 

Threadgold, T. (1992, May). Poststructuralist theory and the teaching of Eng- 
lish. Plenary paper presented at the annual conference of the English 
Teachers' Association of New South Wales. 

Tuck, D. , Bayliss, V., and Bell, M. (1985). Analysis of sex stereotyping in 

characters created by young authors, journal of Educational Research, 
78(A), 248-252. 

Walkerdine, V. (1990). Schoolgirl fictions. London: Verso. 

Weed on, C. (1987). Feminist practice and poststructuralist theory. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell. 

White, J. (1986). The writing on the wall: Beginning or end of a girl's ca- 
reer? Women's Studies International Forum, 9(5), 561-574. 

Zipes, J. C983). 77/t' trials and tribulations of Little Red Riding Hood. London: 
Heinemann. 



14 



Weaving Communities 
through Story: 
Who Are We? 



14:) 



10 Princess Annabella 
and the Black Girls 



Vivian Gussin Paley 

University of Chicago Laboratory Schools 

Vivian Patch' embeds a tale within a tale as she shows how stories not 
only enchant the listener, but also affect the way stories of everyday 
classroom life evolve. Artfully crafted story, too, weaves a continuous 
thread between the teacher's remembered self and the developing selves 
of her African American kindcrgarttwrs. 

Mv life in the classroom has come full circle. I entered Miss 
Evelyn's kindergarten class when I was five and stayed reso- 
lutely outside her inner circle, losing myself in a dark and 
silent forest. Now, more than half a century later, I sit with my own 
circle of kindergarten children, telling them of a magical bird called 
Magpie, who finds himself in just such a forest about to rescue just 
such a child as I might have been. 

Something is very strange dozen there, thought Magpie. He swooped 
through the tree tops and circled the ancient castle walls. "I don't hear any 
birds!" he said. "Is it possible?" 

Magpie zoas right. There were absolutely no birds in the forest below: 
not even the tap dap-tap of a woodpecker could be heard. A forest zvithout 
birds? This greatly disturbed the large black and white bird. It is like a lake 
zvithout fisli or a child zvithout a friend. (Paley 1992) 1 

The manner in which I imagined myself lost must have varied 
in each fantasv but, always, at the point of greatest despair, a beautiful 
princess appeared to take my hand. She looked exactly like a girl in 
the class named Dor \' whose blue eyes and long blond hair blurred 
mv vision with lot ; tg. Dorothy, in turn, bore a startling resemblance 
to the teacher's doll that stared down at us from atop the bookcase. 

Miss l-velyn treasured both the doll and Dorothy but apparently 
not me; she advised my mother to keep me at home until first grade 



146 



Princess Annabella and the Black Girls 



because I was too shy to join the group. When I later caught up with 
Dorothy, she was surrounded by adoring friends and, except in my 
fantasies, I still felt myself to be outside the circle. 

Poor Miss Evelyn, with her untouchable doll and preference for 
certain kinds of pretty little girls. She did not know that those of us 
watching from the outside had the same feelings and fantasies as our 
more popular classmates. Nor did I fully understand these matters 
myself until I learned to see the children as they saw themselves, 
forever inside the unfolding scenes of a story. 

I am no longer lost in the woods, though it took me awhile to 
find my way out. Recently, I have even regained the habit of making 
up stories, a practice that preserved my peace of mind when I was 
young. The characters have changed, but the themes of loneliness and 
rescue are recognizable. 

Going to my desk early each morning, I prepare my new Magpie 
chapter much as the children mayiie in bed upon awakening, trying 
to hold on to another dream, one they can use to begin the school day. 
My narratives are not so fleeting but they serve the same purpose: to 
smooth the passage into the magic circle. 

When I read my chapter to the children, it joins all the other 
stories being told and played in every corner of the room. Together the 
children and 1 create an ongoing mythology that connects us to one 
another and establishes the continuity of our days. 



Magpie hovered over the castle tower watching for signs of life. Snd- 
denly a child's sad voice drifted through an open ivindow. The bird landed on 
the sill and peered into a small room lit by a single candle. Seated on a stone 
floor zoas a young girl slozoly brushing her doll's hair 

"Pretend I'm your mother, little Maruska," the girl said, "and you 
thought I was dead. But then I came alive agai)i and it f s your birthday/' A 
large tear traced a shiny path down the girls cheek and splashed onto the doll's 
face. "Poor baby/' sighed the girl. "Father will think you are crying too/' 

1 haven't yet decided what the doll in my story looks like, but I 
have bright a new doll with brown skin and curly black hair to 
school. There are several girls in our classroom who could be her 
sisters, but no one dresses the doll in lacy things and carries her about. 
Nor is she ever rocked, undressed, and put to bed. Our new black doll 
has found her way into no child's heart. 



Vivian Gussin Palcy 



147 



The rejection of the black doll worries me. It is one of two dolls 
I have recently purchased for the doll corner. The other is white and 
not nearly as beautiful; I wanted the black doll to be even prettier than 
Miss Evelyn's doll. The new white doll is an instant success and the 
black doll is lost in a silent forest. 

Still, it is only a doll, I tell myself. If it were a child, there would 
be tangible ways to bring her into the circle of play. The problem is that 
1 remember how Miss Evelyn's doll dominated my dreams; I cannot 
pretend the black doll is unimportant. The pictures of happy black 
children on our walls do not make up for the exclusion of the black 
doll in the doll corner. I want the black girls to like the black doll, but 
they don't care to accommodate me. 

Kendra, Mary Ann, and Julie are the three black girls in our 
class. Their coloring is in the range of butterscotch to mahogany, but it 
is the new white doll they prize. Suddenly, I know that the little 
princess that Magpie is about to meet must be the color of a young 
robin's back. 



Magpie watched the child a moment longer. Her skin reminded him of 
the soft brown of a young robin and her hair the black of a raven's tail. Where 
lie came from the children zoere more the color of the pale peaches that grew 
in Princess Alexandra's courtyard. 

He gave a low whistle. "Excuse me, but are you in trouble? May 1 come 

in?" 

"What?" The startled child hugged her doll in alarm and turned to the 
window. "Oh, a pretty bird!" 

"My name is Magpie. Can 1 help you?" 

"I don't think anyone can help me, Magpie. Since no one can bring my 
mother back to life, there is nothing to be done." The girl wrapped her doll in 
a large lacy shawl that trailed along the floor and then she stood up. "But you 
are welcome to come in. My father and I are very fond of birds." 



The children's attention has been easily captured, not because 
the princess is brown as a robin, but because her mother is dead and 
she is lonelv in a silent forest. Her black identity has made no impres- 
sion, I am certain, for Kendra has not asked, "Is she black?" 

This is something Kendra always questions when a black person 
passes us in the hallway or looks out at us from the pages of a book. 
"Is she black?" Even when the person is as dark as a robin's back, 



15^ 



148 



Princess Annabella and the Black Girls 



which Kendra herself is, the question must be asked. Clearly, my 
princess will need a stronger racial identity. 

These are matters of increasing concern to me for there are fewer 
black children in our school than in the past. I am not sure why this is 
so: some point to economic factors and population shifts, others to 
nearby magnet schools. But I think also that many black parents have 
begun to question the benefits for their children of a mostly white 
classroom during the early school years. 

Lacking black children, I put up more black faces on the walls: 
Martin Luther King, Jr., Harriet Tubman, Rosa Parks, and others. I 
invite Kendra's mother to help us celebrate Kwanzaa, but Kendra, 
Mary Ann, and Julie look away. They are not eager to tell us what they 
know. Kendra does remember to inform us, however, that her name 
comes from an African storybook, and I enter the idea into my next 
Magpie chapter. 



'7s this your ensile?" Magpie asked. 

The girl nodded. "I am Annabella and my father is Prince Kareem. 
That's an African name. We're descended from African kings and queens. 
Would you like to meet father? He spends a great amount of time studying 
birds." 

Kendra still does not ask if Annabella is black. She listens to my 
story and smiles at the white doll in her lap. For Kendra, I think, my 
Princess Annabella is not black at all. She is blond and blue-eyed, for 
this is the way Kendra, Mary Ann, and Julie draw all their princesses, 
and these are the images that enter their play. 

"You be Snow White and I'm Cinderella," is the way they often 
begin. "And this is our baby that's lost in the woods under a spider 
web and then we bring her home to live with us." The baby is always 
the white doll. 

Would these three draw yellow-haired princesses if thev went to 
an all black school? Perhaps. But that doll corner would be full of black 
children and black dolls, and Kendra would not have to ask if someone 
is black. 

Nonetheless, Kendra, Mary Ann, and Julie must make use of 
what they have: a classroom of nineteen white children, three black 
girls, one Indian girl, a Japanese boy, and two white teachers. Luckily, 



153 



Vivian Gussin Paley 



149 



we know something Miss Evelyn hadn't discovered: how to fill the 
day with stories, the children's, and now my own as well. 

In my new role as storyteller, I can create image and identity to 
suit my teaching and private purposes. Thus, when Princess Anna- 
bella arrives in Magpie's Kingdom of Tall Pines and finds her white 
counterpart, Princess Alexandra, they will be represented as 1 tell the 
story by our new dolls. Henceforth, the black doll is to be called 
Princess Annabella and the white doll, Princess Alexandra. They shall 
be seated on my lap as their story unfolds. 



Even/ day after school, Alexandra walked home with Annabella. One 
day, as they strolled along, hand in hand, Alexandra said, "I wish we were 
sisters." Annabella smiled and replied, "Its even nicer to be friends. But we 
can pretend to be sisters. Let's pretend we're walking in the forest and . . ." 

"And pretend ice have no mother or father," Alexandra continued, 
"and then we find a baby bear who is lost and we take him home. Mamska 
can be the bear." Annabella bent down to take up a handful of moss. "And zee 
pick blueberries for supper," site said. She had never actually picked blueber- 
ries but zvhen she played with Alexandra it often seemed the nicest thing they 
could pretend to do. "Pretend this is the blueberries," she told her friend, 
giving her the moss. 



I hold up Princess Annabella, the doll, and speak to her. "Would 
you and your new friend, Princess Alexandra, be too worried if a witch 
named Beatrix tried to trap you?" 

"Is it a bad witch?" several children ask. 

"Only when she's jealous," I reply. "Actually Beatrix is the one 
who saved Magpie when he was still in his shell and lost in the forest. 
I'll tell you that story another time." The children look at the black and 
white dolls on my lap and are not worried. I am about to give these 
dolls an identity. TTieir real story is going to be revealed. There is no 
more important event, to each child, than the uncovering of someone's 
unique story. 

Beatrix heard the girls from behind her tree and she <oas jealous. "I hate 
those girls" she told Magpie and he zeas troubled. "But, Beatrix, they've done 
nothing bad to you." 



150 



Princess Annabclla and the Black Girls 



''Yes, they have," she snapped angrily. 'They love each other and 
pretend things together and I have no friend but you, Magpie, which isn't the 
same. Those girls wake me mad. I just know I'm going to do something 
mean." Magpie flew around Beatrix's face. "Tell me what," he urged, but the 
young witch shook her head. "Never mind, I haven't decided," she replied. 
"Go away now. I want to be alone." 

However, Beatrix had already begun her mischief. As soon as Magpie 
-was gone, she uncovered the hole she'd been digging next to the path the girls 
took through the forest. The hole would soon reach her underground tunnel. 
"Nozv, zohat would make Annabclla leave the path?" Beatrix asked herself as 
she dug. One more jab with the shovel and she suddenly knew: a blueberry 
bush! Annabclla was always pretending to pick blueberries. 

Noxv, as she piled more branches over the hole, Beatrix was sorry her 
mother wasn't there to see the trick she was about to play on the princesses. 
She blinked three times and a bush filled zoith ripe blueberries appeared. That 
zvas easy, she thought. The problem was hozv to make only Annabclla fall into 
the trap. 

As it happened, however, both girls tumbled into the hole; actually, one 
fell and the other jumped. Annabclla had spied the blueberries first. "Oh, look! 
I didn't know there zoere . . . oh, help, I'm falling!" Alexandra watched zoith 
horror as her friend disappeared through the branches. "Wait for me!" she 
called. "I'm coming too!" The girls dropped onto a pile of leaves and got up 
quickly. "This trap must have been meant for an animal," Alexandra said. 

"No!" screamed Beatrix, leaping out in front of them. "I made it for 
Annabclla. And you spoiled everything, you naughty Alexandra. I don't 
knozv why Magpie likes you!" 



The princesses, of course, will become Beatrix's friends. This is 
expected, since they are all within Magpie's circle of love. However, 
what I have not anticipated is the effect my story has upon the black 
girls. It is as if they have been waiting for a sign from me. The Kwanzaa 
celebration was not the sign, nor was the Martin Luther King, Jr., 
observance. For these five-year-old girls, a black doll had to come alive 
and invite them into the magic circle. 

The next morning Kendra draws her first school picture of a 
black girl. 'This is Princess Annabella," she tells me as she embellishes 
the figure with dangling earrings and purple shoes. "I'm making her 
dark like me and Mama. My brother he isn't dark like this. Grandma 
Kelsey says he's our white baby but she's just joking 'cause he's really 
not. He's just light colored like my daddy, is all." 



153 



Vivian Gussiu Palcy 



151 



Here is a different Kendra than I have known, speaking casually 
of dark and light and telling family jokes. Soon her stories, the ones 
she dictates for us to act out, will take a new direction as well. A few 
days earlier Kendra had told this story: 

Once upon a time there was a little baby and it lived alone 
and it crawled into the woods. And it never come back. And it 
found a castle. And it never came back home. And it was lost. 
And it was sad. 

Kendra's pre-Annabella story had a profound effect upon my 
own storytelling. Her lost baby crawling through the woods, was soon 
followed by my own lost child, Princess Annabella. I had been telling 
other Magpie stories, mainly involving a tiny creature named Prince 
Orange Flower, who lived inside the cactus flowers of the Great De- 
sert. But after Kendra told her sad story, Magpie flew over the silent 
forest. 

My instincts were not mistaken. Kendra integrated my new 
theme into her next story: 

Once upon a time there lived a princess. And she went in the 
woods. And she went far away. And she found a castle. And she 
went inside. And she went upstairs and it was her own room. 
And then she heard something. 

It is at this point in my story that Princess Annabella meets 
Princess Alexandra, and their story personae blend into the reality of 
the new dolls. All three black girls begin to play with Annabella the 
doll, and the princess enters their stories. Mary Ann comes closest to 
retelling my original story: 

Once upon a time there was a princess named Annabella. 
And there was Magpie. And Beatrix. Magpie told the daddy 
you should come quickly. Your child has fallen into a trap. Then 
Magpie didn't even wait 'cause he flied down and he caught 
Princess Annabella and said you're a naughty girl to Beatrix. 

Julie's stories are never elaborate, and they will change in only 
one respect. There is always a little girl who meets a number of small 
animals and plays with them. But now her little girl is a black princess. 
Her story ends with "So that little girl was Princess Annabella." 

It is Kendra, however, who seems most affected by the black 
princess, and she is compelled to give us the gift of hair. Yes, hair. The 
way her hair looks is important to Kendra, to her sisters and her 
mother, to her grandmother and her aunts. Kendra's hairstyle changes 
every week, and she often examines herself in the doll-corner mirror. 



152 



Princess Annabella and the Black Girls 



But she never speaks about her hair, not even to Julie and Mary Ann, 
as far as I have heard. Hair is part of her home life, not connected to 
this classroom. Perhaps it is in the same category as Kwanzaa. 
Now, Kendra allows the subject of hair to enter her story: 

Once there was a girl. She went to the hairdresser. And the 
usual hairdresser wasn't there. And she wanted new hair be- 
cause hers was short. And they curled her new hair and her 
little sister danced around. But the hairdresser was really a 
jealous Beatrix. Princess Alexandra wa3 waiting outside and 
they ran home to Magpie. 

When we act out Kendra's story, as we do all the stories the 
children tell, 1 ask if she is to be Annabella, the big sister. "No," she 
replies, "'cause I'm too young to get new hair until I'm older like my 
sister is." 

But in her other stories, Kendra is Princess Annabella and she 
carries with her the black doll wrapped in a pink blanket. She has 
also begun to draw many figures with brown faces and black hair. 
Sometimes they stand beside a large bird with black and white wings. 
Julie and Mary Ann watch Kendra and begin their own forms of 
self-expression. They trace their hands and color them carefully with 
brown crayon, circling each finger with a sparkling ring. Our walls fill 
with brown hands and brown faces. 

What is my own story in all of this? Is the subject racial identity 
or is it high drama in the Kingdom of Tall Pines? Both, I suppose, and 
anything else I wish to explore as I search for a new classroom voice. 
I am learning to savor small events and familiar characters, but I stand 
ready to carry along any new concept on the wings of fantasy, just as 
the children do in their play. 

My Magpie stories have taken their characters on many unex- 
pected paths since the dolls were given new life. We are long past our 
Kwanzaa celebration, and it is nearly time for Abraham Lincoln's 
birthday. Martin Luther King, Jr., has been returned to the picture file 
and a bearded Mr. Lincoln replaces him on the bulletin board. His 
deep-set eyes look out at us from under a stovepipe hat, and we know 
he is worried about slavery. What does it mean to be told that some 
black people were slaves? Is there a connection to Kendra, Mary Ann, 
and Julie? 

Magpie flew down to the pirate ship. He found the little prince below 
deck in a cage ivith a tall dark man. 'This is Kwanzaa," whispered Prince 



157 



Vivian Gussin Paley 



153 



Orange Flower. "He's a runaway slave, from a place called America. He 
escaped on a ship going to Africa but these pirates stopped the ship and took 
him prisoner along with all the money." 

Kwanzaa shook his head sadly. "My life is full of bad luck," he said. 
"The pirates had never seen a brown-skinned person before and thought Vd 
be a fine looking pirate. But 1 refused. They look meaner than the man who 
ozimed me when I was a slave." 

Magpie began to pick at the lock. "How did you become a slave, 
Kwanzaa?" he asked. 

"My brothers and sisters and I were digging for clams one day on the 
beach of our little village when we were stolen away by a slave ship and 
brought to a New Orleans slave market." Kwanzaa s eyes filled with tears. "I 
never sazo my family again." 



In due course, Magpie rescues Kwanzaa and the little prince, 
and the former slave has many opportunities to continue his story 
while I keep the Magpie narrative going at a comfortable pace. My 
mistake in the beginning was in covering too much territory too 
quickly. The children like a great deal of dialogue and enjoy staying 
inside a given story for a longer time than I had realized. 



"/ knezo that if I zoas going to escape I had to learn to read and write," 
Kwanzaa told the girls as they helped build the ship in zohich he would return 
to Africa. "Another slave taught me to read the same way Abraham Lincoln's 
mother taught him to read, using the only book we had — the Bible." 

"Who is Abraham Lincoln?" asked Princess Annabella. 

"He is the American president, a good man, I can tell you, and he hates 
slavery." 

Alexandra zoas surprised. "Then zvhy does he allow it? My father 
would never permit slavery in the Kingdom of Tall Pines." 



And so our story continues. There is much to explain, but it must 
make sense within the continuing story Perhaps I can, at some point, 
incorporate the idea of George Washington refusing to be made a king. 
Alexandra's father would be astonished to hear this. Why would 
someone refuse to be a king? 

We are making paper-strip log cabins on Lincoln's birthday. 
Suddenly Kendra begins to sing: 



154 



Princess Annabella and the Black Girls 



Kwanzaa is the time to celebrate 
The fruits of our labor, ain't it great 
Ain't it great, celebrate 
Celebrate Kwanzaa, Kwanzaa 
Celebrate Kwanzaa, Kwanzaa. 

Kendra did not sing her song for us on the day her mother came 
to school, but two months later she is ready to teach us her secret. Soon 
a dozen or more children are singing with her as they all paste down 
brown strips in the shape of a log cabin. 

As I walk past her table I see that she is drawing Abraham 
Lincoln in his tall hat next to the log cabin. And Mr. Lincoln has brown 
skin. 



Note 

1. Excerpts from the story included here appear, sometimes slightly 
modified, in Vivian Gussin Paley, You Can't Say You Can't Plaif (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1992). 



153 



11 "I'm Gonna Express 
Myself": The Politics 
of Story in the 
Children's Worlds 

Anne Haas Dyson 

University of California, Berkeley 

In the complex facial worlds of an urban classroom, children play mul- 
tiple roles: they are students in the official world, and peers and neigh- 
borhood friends in unofficial ones. Here Anne Haas Dyson focuses on 
how story composing helps children negotiate a place amidst this com- 
plexity. She illustrates that, at their most powerful, children's stories 
function as a kind of textual crossroad, atloioing children to bring 
worlds together in intellectually, socially, and emotionally satisfying 
ways. 

Louise has asked her third-grade students to compose "About the 
Author" pages for their new classroom-published books. The 
class will present these books at the upcoming publisher's party. 
William, Ayesha, and Rashanda, all friends, are meeting with 
Louise to discuss what kinds of information might be in such a 
section. None of them wants to write about information that is, 
in Rashanda's words, "personal business." William proposes to 
write, "I love to get in fights." Louise is a bit taken aback and asks 
him to think about his audience — parents, teachers, and other 
classroom visitors who will be coming to the party. William does 
not relent. "That's too bad they don't like it," he says, "I'm gonna 
express myself." 

William and Louise are here enacting a familiar theme in adult- 
child relationships — an adult worrying about what a child 
will say in front of visiting relatives, curious neighbors, or 
strangers in public places. Language is a tool for the presentation of a 
social self, and part of growing up is learning how to deal with the 
expectations of diverse others for that self. Or so Louise was trying to 
tell William. 



i 



156 



I'm Gonna Express Myself" 



William worked awhile at his desk. Then he solemnly handed 
his "About the Author" page to Louise . . . and they both started to 
laugh. William had written that when somebody tries to "mess" with 
him, he "just walks away." William had turned his tough guy pose into 
one perfectly attuned to the audience — a rhetorical twist that both 
child and adult found clever. 

In language arts education, we do value, as William seemed to 
know, child "voice" or "self-expression" and child "ownership" of 
text. But individuals, including children, do not have but one voice, 
nor do they, as solitary selves, "own" their texts. 

As Bakhtin (1981) discusses, when authors compose a text, be it 
in speech or in writing, they also compose a social self. In story com- 
posing especially, they transform the everyday world, using its very 
voices as raw material to create an arranged, a crafted world that 
reaches out to others, their audience, in particular ways. While there 
are differences in the folk traditions of storytelling and the newer 
traditions of story writing, in both, composers use the performative or 
artful tools of repetition and rhyme, figures of speech, expressive 
sounds, and dialogue itself to capture their feelings and attitudes 
toward other people and the world (Tannen 1989). That affective qual- 
ity — revealed in the details of setting, character, and action and in the 
sound and rhythm of the words themselves — entices the other, the 
audience (Bruner 1986). 

This social interaction between composer and audience takes 
place against a landscape of social and power relations. Interactional 
partners reach out to each other as members of certain social groups 
with particular values, authority structures, and language norms. Wil- 
liam, for example, threatened to "express" himself in a way that might 
alienate an audience of visiting adults and impress an audience of 
peers, who sometimes admire such boldness. 

As William's actions suggest, in the classroom the social act of 
composing, be it in oral or written words, exists within a complex 
classroom community. There is the official classroom world governed 
by the teacher, but there is also the unofficial world of peers and that 
of the children's respective home communities, which may re-form in 
the classroom amidst networks of peers. Each social world has inter- 
secting but nonetheless distinctive traditions or valued ways of using 
language. Thus children's language repertoires include stories, songs, 
jokes, and other language genres that reflect the folk traditions of their 
community, the popular media that pervade their lives, and also the 
written literature they have experienced at school and at home. 




Anne Haas Dyson 



157 



In this chapter, I focus on how stories help children negotiate 
their place in the complex social worlds of the classroom. As Louise, 
the children's teacher, noted, 'The richness of children's language life 
is in story." This richness, though, is not in any story. Particularly 
powerful stories may come about when children's stories function as 
a kind of crossroad: when they bring feelings, experiences, and lan- 
guage from the unofficial classroom worlds of peers and neighbor- 
hoods into the official classroom community and when those stories 
are themselves ways for children to make use of artistic tools and 
reflective processes valued in the official world. 

To illustrate the social and political complexity of stories, I draw 
on data collected during an ethnographic project in William's K-3 
school, an urban school serving a socially and culturally diverse popu- 
lation (Dyson 1993). Demographically the school served mainly two 
neighborhoods: 52 percent of the children came from an African 
American neighborhood and the others from an integrated but primar- 
ily European American neighborhood; about 27 percent of the children 
were Anglo, but there were also small pi .entages of children from 
many different heritages. Louise had taught a K-l during the first year 
of my project and expected to do so in the second year as well. But after 
a fall leave for a family trip, she returned to find the school in the midst 
of staffing problems, especially in the third grade. So Louise, who had 
never before taught that grade, found herself in charge of William and 
his peers. In the next section, I introduce readers to Louise's class. I 
then rely on her children, especially William, to reveal the potential 
power of classroom story composing. 

Louise's Third Grade 

Louise had a small class of twenty children, thirteen girls and seven 
boys (a bov-girl ratio that bothered William). Twelve of the children 
were African American, five were European American, one was Chi- 
nese American, one Korean American, and one biracial (African 
American and European American). 

Upon her entry into the class, Louise initiated a writing pro- 
gram, as she had in the K-l class. The children had a regular writing 
period; often they chose their own topics, but sometimes Louise as- 
signed topics related to ongoing social studies or science themes. The 
children wrote drafts, conferred with her and peer partners, and regu- 
larly shared their work. Louise taught lessons about all aspects of 



162 



158 



"I'm Gonna Express Myself" 



composing, among them, brainstorming, paragraphing, revising and 
editing, and the organization of varied genres. 

As a teacher, Louise stressed child reflection and decision mak- 
ing across the curriculum; she wanted the children, as composers, to 
make choices about what and how to write and to reflect on those 
choices. She was also open to child talk and reflection on topics they 
initiated. Her children were interested in the social and political world 
outside the classroom. Among the topics they discussed were AIDS, 
drugs, war, racism, apartheid, consumer boycotts, rap, varied popular 
movies and popular songs. 

Relative to the K~1 children, the third graders were more fluent 
as writers. While the younger children told and drew much more than 
they wrote, the older ones could easily and happily write for thirty 
minutes or more; and they were often rather quiet as they did so — no 
loud sound effects and dramatic, audible dialogue as stories unfolded. 

At the same time, the third graders were also warier not only 
about school, but also about the world in general, and with good 
reason, as the list of topics above suggests. Too, a number had been 
retained, and the children worried about "flunking" and being older 
and larger than everyone else, not to mention disappointing their 
parents. The little children all automatically signed thank-you letters 
to school personnel and visitors with "Love" and their name; the third 
graders dispensed a written "Love" much more carefully. 

Moreover, peer group symbols of the "in" and the "not in" were 
much stronger in the third grade — kinds of music, ways of talking and 
dressing, even certain products could have social and symbolic mean- 
ing. ("Coke," for example, "was [for William and his friends] a white 
man's drink," because its sponsors "don't support South Africa.") 
During class music study, the younger children had taken to sym- 
phony music as if it were an adventure in raw emotion — eyes widen- 
ing with crescendos, anticipating something grand, and then crinkling 
with their giggles when the musical climax arrived. The third graders 
of varied sociocultural backgrounds made clear that such music was 
"boring"; they preferred rap and soul. 

Such efforts on the part of children to define their own social 
worlds as peers are common in our society and, indeed, may be inher- 
ent to the institution of schooling, where the imposition of authority 
seems to give rise to a counterforce, some kind of resistance, visible or 
not, on the part of children (D'Amato 1987; Roberts 1970). Tensions 
between adults and children, however, may be more visible when 
adults and children differ in cultural and social circumstance, when 



Anne Haas Dyson 



159 



children have experienced school failure, and, moreover, when chil- 
dren are members of a minority group that has experienced racism in 
its historical, social, and economic forms (Ogbu 1987). 

In Louise's classroom, both the challenges and the satisfaction, 
for teachers and children, of negotiating boundaries between the offi- 
cial world managed by teachers and the unofficial worlds managed by 
children were visible in the children's actions and reactions during the 
daily writing time. After all, this was the time when children, in Wil- 
liam's words, were supposed to "express themselves." In the following 
sections, I illustrate how children could use stories to take over and 
resist, as well as to connect with, the official school curriculum. I want 
especially to demonstrate the potential of artful story and verse per- 
formed on classroom stages for bringing at least some children's offi- 
cial and unofficial worlds together in satisfying and powerful ways. 

William: The Discovery of a Literary Comedian 

Charles, Crystal, and Bianca are sitting around a table writing. 
Charles has written about his best friends, with a bit of help 
from his friends at the table. 

Crystal: Dag! That's your best friends? That's all your best 
friends? 

Onirics: No, not— ain't all my best friends. I got lotsa more 
best friends. They just all my best best, especially William. 
You should know, William is my best, best, best friend. 

Crystal: I like William. William used to make me scared at first 
grade. 

Bianca: He was 

Crystal: He was like— he came up to me and I was like, 
* "MO:::MY:::!" 

A handsome child, William was tall and large-boned. He was 
older than the average third grader, having been retained in first 
grade, which embarrassed him. Once he advertently let slip his age 
(almost ten) to his friend Darren, and when Darren expressed surprise, 
William immediately said "I'm turning nine. I xoish 1 was turning ten." 
In the K-l, 1 had heard children discussing "big William," and perhaps 
this notoriety for his physique contributed to his tendency to slump in 
his chair— and his utter dislike for sitting on the rug, where he never 
did seem to get quite comfortable. 

William was socially sensitive in the peer world. His large size 
and his vocal resistance to unappealing directions (like sitting on the 



160 



"I'm Gonna Express Myself" 



rug) could be misleading. He paid attention to his friends, which 
included boys, like Charles, Darren, and Patrick, and girls, like Crystal 
and Ayesha; he knew their favorite rap groups and games, their par- 
ents and cousins, their after-school schedules and weekend plans. 

He himself was into cars, going hunting, rap music, and draw- 
ing. He usually had a picture he was working on just inside his desk, 
ready for any available free moment. William was aware of the bound- 
ary symbolized by what's hidden just inside the desk and what's 
placed for display on the desk — the boundary between the official and 
unofficial classroom worlds. He sometimes deliberately played with 
that boundary, as the opening anecdote suggested. If he were in a 
playful, peer-oriented mood, he might repeat Louise's Standard Eng- 
lish phrases in nonstandard English underneath his breath or, when 
writing a polite social thank-you to a visitor, he might recite a quite 
rude one. Like children the world over (Opie and Opie 1959), he very 
much enjoyed turning the adult world on its head. 

William and his classmates, especially Ayesha, Crystal, and Dar- 
ren, were also politically and culturally conscious. They were espe- 
cially interested in African American historical and popular heroes. 
Relevant books in the school library, though, were limited in number 
and generally quite old. The children passed the same library books 
among themselves repeatedly. (One day Darren told Ayesha, who 
claimed that she was going to keep reading a book about Martin 
Luther King, Jr., until she died, "You ain't gonna go to this school that 
long. You gotta send your kids here and let them bring it home. And 
then their kids. . . .") 

William and his classmates seemed to enjoy the daily writing 
time, although William in particular was not interested initially in its 
procedures of editing and revising. Eventually, with prodding, he 
would circle potential misspelled words, consult with an adult or a 
dictionary, and enter his work on the computer for final drafts. Some- 
times he shared his writing during class meetings after writing time; 
sometimes he did not. In the next sections, I examine the social pur- 
poses of William's composing, which initially did not involve stories 
at all. 

Curricular Coexistence and Potential Takeovers 

Although William had difficulty spelling — his texts were sometimes 
hard to decipher — he regularly wrote texts of seventy-five words or 
so about his "best friends," his liking football, sports cars, and draw- 



163 



Anne Haas Dyson 



161 



ing, his supposed disliking of girls (a public show), his enjoyment of 
humor: 

I like jokes. Do you know why? Because they are fun to do and 
you can make girls and boys and women and men laugh and a 
lots of kids. 

Most of his energy and his crafting went into detailed drawings of 
vehicles, sports heroes, and friends. In his texts, he was one of the 
guys, so to speak, who teased girls, told jokes, and played sports. He 
wrote in a conversational style, collegially addressing the you's of his 
peers. 

The dominant social purpose of William's writing, and of many 
children in the class, seemed initially to be to declare himself as a 
competent kid who was a member of important social groups (like 
"the guys"). Such writing was not only appealing to the children, but 
it was also useful for Louise. Beyond getting her children writing, such 
texts allowed her a means for learning about her children's social lives 
and personal interests. 

And yet the children's social agenda could coexist with the 
official curriculum, without necessarily wholeheartedly engaging 
them in it. Consider, for example, the following essay about girls: 

We have too much girls in our class, and I don't like girls at all. 
Just my mom. Do you know why 1 hate girls? Because they hate 
football. So 1 hate girls. Now do you see? I'm sorry, but I do. I 
wish girls liked football. (Spelling and punctuation corrected 
for ease of reading; William added last sentence after talking 
with Louise.) 

William's piece might seem like an ideal text for critical reflec- 
tion, particularly about images of girls. And, indeed, Louise did talk to 
William about his text. Was the point that he really didn't like girls? 
Some girls, she pointed out, like football. The point, William agreed, 
was that he really liked football and that he wished girls in their class 
did. While William did add the last sentence, his piece was not written 
for clear communication (or for artful performance, for that matter). It 
evolved in the midst of ongoing teasing between William and Crystal, 
who in fact liked each other. Crystal, sitting across from William as he 
wrote, giggled at his texts and wrote her own: 

Sometimes I wish that my Dad did not like football because 
they always watch football, baseball, and basketball. Because 
me and my mom never get to watch any T.V. with my brother. 
My brother is only 7 months and he is very cute to me. All boys 



16:; 



162 



"I'm Gonna Express Myself 



are bad because it's just a nerve in their head. I don't know 
[why] every boy has the same thing in their mind. 

Indeed, for Crystal, such unofficial social purposes — as teasing 
others — could overtake the curriculum and threaten peace in the class- 
room community. She sometimes couched her teases in fictional sto- 
ries; she then used the daily sharing time for classroom manipulation 
on a grand and, from my point of view, rather bold scale. Breaking the 
classroom rule about checking with children before writing about 
them, she would read stories naming certain classmates as her friends 
or sisters, designating certain others as their "boyfriends" and, once, 
still others as "wimps." (Crystal's "wimps" were April and Manrisa, 
two children whose social backgrounds and sense of humor were 
different from Crystal's. April in particular complained, and com- 
plained loudly, about the insulting designation.) 

While William wrote no such stories, his texts and Crystal's 
were, in social purpose, similar. They used their texts to declare and 
manipulate their social relationships in peer worlds. While using 
friends as characters is a potentially helpful strategy for text develop- 
ment, both children — indeed, many children in the class — sometimes 
literally stuffed as many peers' names as possible into their pieces. The 
goal was direct manipulation, not subtle exploration. William's texts 
in particular did not seem to capture the humor and the social insight 
(the play with social boundaries) that was so visible just under the 
surface of the onicial curriculum. 

And, in fact, it was drawing upon that language life just under 
the surface of the official curriculum that seemed to transform his 
writing. Before looking at that transformation, I introduce William's 
literary potential through presenting a text written as a piece of resis- 
tance (and is, I think, something of a piece de resistance). 

Curricular Resistance 

Right before writing time one day, a child came into Louise's room, 
hand in hand with the day's playground teacher. The little girl accused 
William and a classmate of calling her a racially charged name. Wil- 
liam immediately denied the charge. The playground teacher could 
not talk now; she had a class full of children waiting for her. The 
accusing child and the two boys would have to confer with her during 
the lunch period so that they could all have their say. Louise assured 
William that she understood that he felt the charge was unfair and that 
she (Louise) was not angry, nor was she accusing anybody of anything; 



IS? 



Anne Haas Dyson 



163 



the problem would have to be talked out later. Right now, the children 
were to write a piece — in any genre they so chose — about rain, a kind 
of class celebration of the recent deluge in the midst of the California 
drought. 

William was not consoled. He was angry. Tears streaming down 
his face, he took his paper and wrote a personal essay. He resisted the 
assignment, but he did so in a poignant way. Following are extended 
excerpts from his long (237 words) text: 

I don't like rain because I don't like water and I hale salt water 
because it tastes too salty and with salt you could die. Sometime 
I like Rain. Like I said I hate when people accuses me for 
nothing because then I get in trouble and I will be grounded for 
nothing all I will be (cleaning?) water not salt water. Just water. 
But don't let me change the subject. But I don't like to get in 
trouble [for] something that 1 didn't do. Now ain't that dumb, 
the dumbest thing I heard in my whole life. I know you don't 
want to get in trouble. . . . Rain make me mad because I hate it. 
It just put a curse on me and it's like I have a chocolate head 
with no brains and no blood. It makes me cry And when I go 
home do you know what happen? / get a whipping from my mom 
if I <tet in trouble and I cry so the bed gets zvet like rain, (emphasis 
added) 

William's piece, a private one, was different from his usual ex- 
pressive texts about sports, friends, vehicles. The difference was not 
simply the emotionally charged nature of the content, but also the 
presence of performative tools for giving shape to a feeling. One such 
tool was the intermingling of "voices" speaking, as it were, on differ- 
ent subjects. As William "changed the subject" (an organizational flaw 
Louise often discussed), he captured the tension between the dutiful 
student writing about rain and the worried child feeling wronged and 
wanting to make clear to his teacher the fate awaiting him. Another 
such tool is the use of figures of speech, as in the closing analogy, 
where the two voices meet: "I cry so the bed gets wet like rain." 

Form, content, function are inseparable in William's piece. He 
expresses his feelings, but he also represents them in the very form of 
his writing. Still, this was not a piece for the public arena, nor was it 
one that Louise did or, in my view, should have discussed for its 
literary tools. She dealt with his feelings and the incident, and yet 
those tools are there. It is not that William deliberately used such 
performance techniques; rather, as Bakhtin (1981) might suggest, it is 
that William seemed to find himself in a certain place with a certain 



163 



164 



"I'm Gonna Express Myself" 



stance toward the world, and that stance made available to him tools 
he controlled. That stance and those tools — those of the performer 
taking control of an unruly world through language (Bauman 1986) — 
first emerged in humorous, not poignant ways. The critical text, unlike 
the crying piece, was not a piece of curricular resistance, but a kind of 
"crossroad" that engaged William wholeheartedly in both official and 
unofficial worlds, as I explain in the next section. 

Textual Crossroads 

William's performative powers emerged on the public stage clearly — 
and suddenly — when he wrote the first of three interconnected stories 
about his uncle and his pets. The first piece, written in March, was 
motivated by the arrival in the classroom of two pet birds. The birds 
reminded William, he had said, of his uncle's "cussing bird," a phrase 
that got the whole class laughing, as Louise recalled. Perhaps it was 
that laughing, that appreciation from the classroom community as a 
whole, that led William to write the first of his storie.^ about his uncle's 
pets. His decision also could have been influenced by Louise's use of 
diverse sorts of stories in the curriculum, including a particularly 
popular anthology, 777/A: that Talk: An Anthology of African- American 
Storytelling (Goss and Barnes 1989); there were, she was saying implic- 
itly and explicitly, all kinds of stories. Or, maybe, it was the accumula- 
tion of days of writing, bringing with it comfort with pencil and paper 
and an assurance of a public forum for presentation of work. 

Whatever the reasons, William began writing what he first 
called "true stories," the kind "my mom likes." "True stories" was a 
phrase used by the observed K-l children too — "This is a true story," 
a child might say, and then tell a story that could not be true, an 
exaggerated, humorous, and performative tale that often revealed the 
cleverness of the teller. (For an extended discussion of such stories in 
the African American oral tradition, see Smitherman 1986 and also 
Heath 1983.) 

William, however, did not tell his true "cussing bird" story; he 
wrote it — a long story for him, 210 words (although subsequent ones 
would be longer). In doing so, he drew upon the performative skills 
suggested by his "cry rain" piece, which actually was written after the 
cussing bird. He seemed to anticipate his peers' giggles, as he quickly 
and with great concentration wrote about his uncle (whom he displays 
as not too bright) and himself (a disparaged but eventually respected 
character in his own tale). 



16J 



Anne Haas Dyson 



165 



William spent quite a bit of time with his uncle, who cared for 
him when his mother's work schedule kept her away long hours. His 
uncle, he felt, could be awfully bossy, and William took no small 
delight in a story of the teasing uncle who, in the end, was put in his 
place: 

My Uncle and the Cussing Bird 

OK this how it started. My uncle wanted a bird so bad, he tried 
to get one out of the sky. Now that's dumb. So one day he was 
hoping that he can get a bird free. And I said to my Uncle Glen, 
"How are vou going to do that?" And he said, "I don't know." 
So two months later a box came, and it said bird. And my uncle 
started screaming and teasing me. He was saying, "Oh yes. I 
have a bird. Ha, ha, ha ha, ha. I have a bird. Ha, ha, ha ha, ha. 
And he opened it, and the bird was dead. And he started to cry. 
The whole couch was wet with tears. I tried onions but he 
started to cry more. Then, he started to cry more. The next week, 
more and more boxes, and he kept saying, "Ha, ha, ha ha, ha." 
And one day a box came — Yes yes yes! The bird said "I'm 
polly-want-a cracker." [And] he said, "F . you big mouth." 
And my uncle never wanted a bird again. Do you know what 
he wanted? A fish. (Piece given conventional spelling and punc- 
tuation for ease of reading) 

Through this story, William aimed to perform, to artfully enter- 
tain others, or so suggested both his performative language, rooted in 
storytelling traditions, and his eagerness to take the classroom stage 
with his work. 

To elaborate, William's story was more crafted than any of his 
earlier pieces. There was an opening orientation to his uncle and the 
situation ("My uncle wanted a bird so bad, he tried to get one out of 
the sky"). William not only carefully sequenced a series of events, he 
captured the affective quality of the experience. He used evaluative 
comments ("Now that's dumb"), extended, expressive dialogue, and 
even a well-placed interruption of the story's rhythm ("Yes yes yes!"). 

Moreover, the two stories that followed were carefully scripted 
to match the initial story of the cussing bird. After that bird came the 
biting fish, just as had been predicted in the last line of the initial tale 
("Do you know what he wanted? A fish."): 

In the last story, the cursing bird liked to cuss. Let's see what 
happens in this storv. It was 1990 and my uncle wanted a fish. 
So one day me and my uncle went fishing and my uncle caught 
a fish. 



1.7-.) 



166 



I'm Gonna Express Myself 



In the biting fish story, the tension between William and his 
uncle as c, imes a more dominant role. Moreover, the new performative 
features that were evident served to highlight this tension. For exam- 
ple, William shifted verb tenses, which contrasted the reported teasing 
of his uncle and the characteristic it typified: 

He took it [the fish] home. He started to tease me. But that was 
nothing big. He does it all the time. 

He also incorporated voices from popular media and folk sayings, 
which enlivened his tale in expressive ways. When William taunts his 
teasing uncle, the uncle chases after him. His uncle catches him when 
he falls over a big rock. William yells out: 

"Well people all over the world. I'm going to die. If you want to 
see me before I die come see me at 2829 or call me at 754-9295." 
I got out and said, "I'm not going to die." And I started to say, 
"I'm a free man oh yeah." Then I broke out saying and started 
to sing, "If it wasn't for bad luck 1 wouldn't have no luck at all." 

The "biting fish" also introduced a slapstick sort of humor, 
which may be why William started calling them "comedy stories." 
This sort of humor increased in the last of the stories, set up in the 
concluding lines of the "biting fish." Since a package came with a 
fish — which jumped up and bit his hand — his uncle decided he didn't 
want a fish anymore: "And do you know what he wanted? He wanted 
a dog." 

In the last story, "The Bad Dog," William plays numerous tricks 
on his uncle at a party — a party to which his uncle had, in no uncertain 
terms, not invited him. William then reveals, in true, "true story" 
fashion, that he himself has been the clever person behind the obnox- 
ious pets. It is William's turn to laugh: 

"Remember when you was laughing at me? Now ha ha ha. And 
remember all those pets? Here they are." 

The fish jumps up and bites his uncle, the bird curses at him, and then 
a box arrives for his uncle. Yes. It is a dog who comes out and bites 
him. William gloats: 

"Do you want a dog now? Do you know why all that stuff 
happened to you? Why? Because 1 set you up that's why." Do 
you know what he wanted? Nothing. The end. 

All three stories were huge classroom hits. Indeed, William an- 
ticipated that they would be. He finished his "cussing bird" piece right 



17. 



Anne Haas Dyson 



167 



as the class was leaving for its weekly library period. William was 
enormously disappointed: 

William: That's why I want to read it on the rug, so everybody 
can hear it. But'she said we have to go the library. Maybe 
she'll let us read them when we come back. 

He did read the piece after the class came back from the li- 
brary — and many times after that, at his classmates' own request. This 
anticipation— and desire for— success on the official classroom stage 
may have supported a change in the quality of William's participation 
in, as well as the products resulting from, the daily composing time. 

William was drawing on language from unofficial worlds — the 
language of popular media and of folk traditions— but he also was 
entering into the official activities of composing, including planning, 
drafting, reflecting, and, in William's case particularly, performing. 
Moreover, his stories became part of the official culture of the class- 
room, even as they drew on unofficial sources; the stories were talked 
about by other children, requested as stories to hear again, and even 
imitated by his classmate Paul. 

William's increased investment in the official world and his 
reflectiveness about his texts and their social meaning were in fact 
displayed at the very publishing party whose guests William had 
seemingly disregarded. At the party, William read his cussing bird 
piece to the invited guests with enormous pleasure. However, he made 
a key adjustment for the audience, as he explained to Louise and his 
classmates as they chatted after the party guests had left: 

William: I had, like, to put something different in the cussing 
bird story When 1 had the F word, I had to say something 
different* I was gonna say, "He said the F word." But I 
said, "never mind." [William had read that "Me said a bad 
word."l 

I Amine: That was smart. You have to consider your audience. 

For his classmates, of course, he emphasized the tough talk and 
slapstick; indeed he deliberately planned to do just that. When William 
finished his first story about the cussing bird, he immediately com- 
mented on the next tale: 

William: That's gonna be the next one I'm writing about— a 
fish. This is a true story ... A true story about a fish. It's 
gonna be re::al rad. A lot of cussing and a lot of biting. 

And it was, real rad that is. 



172 



168 



"I'm Gonna Express Myself 



This cussing and biting highlights the role of William's stories as 
kinds of crossroads — as texts that were supported by, and supporting, 
William's action in multiple social worlds. Such crossroads are them- 
selves built by crossing textual, social, and cultural boundaries, as I 
explain in the closing section of this chapter. 

Stories: Artful Tools tor Crossing Boundaries 

William, like all story composers, crafted everyday voices; he embold- 
ened, exaggerated, and intermingled them to make his points, to "ex- 
press" his feelings about the world. But he did not use "neutral words" 
in that composing (Bakhtin 1981, 293), but words voiced by someone 
in some social situation. Child authors like William, or grown-up ones, 
craft voices that in theme, style, or structure are linked for them, and 
for their readers, to specific situations and to the values and authority 
structures of those situations. 

Thus authors not only play with the boundary between the real 
and the imagined, they also play with social and cultural lines influ- 
enced by age, status, sex, class, race, ethnicity, and on and on. Artful 
stories do not smooth out or hide tensions, nor do they directly ma- 
nipulate them — they craft them for display. And they do so by inter- 
mingling voices drenched in cultural meaning. Curses and pleas, 
television come-ons and playground put-downs, literary allusions and 
rap song rhythms — all can coexist in the story. 

Moreover, these social and cultural boundaries may be crossed 
not only within children's stories, but also in the very fact that those 
stories exist within the official classroom world. Contrary to the oft- 
assumed opposition of vernacular or peer ways with words to school 
ways (e.g., Labov 1982; Ogbu 1987), stories are vehicles for bringing 
diverse voices into the classroom itself. Thus William brought into the 
official classroom world "true stories" that captured part of his iden- 
tity outside the classroom. Indeed, the importance of a composing link 
to families and, in some cases, to cultural or racial identity, was clearly 
evident in other children's successful interactions, both in official and 
unofficial worlds. (For a discussion of the theoretical link between 
composing and cultural identity, see Ferdman 1990.) For example, 
Ayesha regularly wrote rhythmic verse and story poems about African 
American heroes; her texts earned her classroom appreciation — and 
also her mother's. 

In the class pleasure in William's stories, the children themselves 
came together, which is the last and most important social and cultural 



I 7 > 



Anne Haas Dyson 



169 



boundary I note. That is, social and cultural boundaries were crossed 
not only within William's tales, but in the very coming together of 
William and his classmates to enjoy his stories. Those stories may have 
been classroom favorites, in part at least, because their sharing in a 
classroom forum touched common chords in the children. For the 
diverse details of the children's lives, when crafted, can reveal their 
connections. 

They were all, at the very least, children in an adult-governed 
world. And in that world, where politeness and kindness are the 
ostensible values, William pushed hushed emotions beyond the point 
of embarrassing self-revelation ("personal business," in Rashanda's 
terms); his bold voices were crafted, in fact, with language tools valued 
in the official school world. This delight in tough talk in polite places 
(this legitimate way to "express myself") is common in childhood. 
Teasing the adult world through language is a cross-cultural if not 
universal pleasure of childhood (Opie and Opie 1959). 

Further, the children all enjoyed the music of language itself— its 
rhythm and rhyme, an enjoyment that is also a near universal in 
childhood. Many children took pleasure in rhyming their talk as much 
as possible, an interest that may have been strengthened by the popu- 
larity of rap. In fact, William's and Ayesha's own pleasure in a story 
poem that April presented was particularly poignant because both 
children had expressed explicitly to Louise a desire not to sit by that 
child. And yet when April shared the text that follows, William and 
Ayesha were the most vocal of all in their calls for her to "read it 
again." (The piece is not only carefully crafted, it is also rather slap- 
stick in its humor and, perhaps, a child's version of a Robert Louis 
Stevenson classic.) 
My Shadow 

I saw my shadow sneaking 
over to my bedroom door 
1 spied on him, then quickly 
I walked over with my sore. 

I wrestled with my shadow. 

I kicked him half to death. 

I called him names like "Pinocchio," 

and "Little Beth deSeth." 

I gave him all my socks 
they say 

Well mavbc one or iwo. 



f "1 « 
I ( k 



170 



"I'm Gonna Express Myself" 



But when my shadow walked out the 

door with me, 

I hit him with my shoe. 

In short, in a classroom like Louise's, classrooms which contain 
a diversity of children and a diversity of stories, both professional and 
child made, and a classroom stage upon which to perform, children 
themselves may discover both their differences and, in those very 
differences, their similarities. While not discounting the importance of 
all the kinds of genres children do and must learn to compose, it is in 
crafted texts and especially in stories that children may bring in the 
complexity of their lives. And in the sharing of those texts, they may 
find that they are all children, governed at times by unreasonable 
adults; they are all — or so we hope — dreamers who want to grow up 
to be powerful, respected people; and they are all susceptible to being 
wound up in the music of language, if just for a moment. 

Such discoveries of commonality are not automatic — and they 
inevitably come mixed with the classroom tensions (for teacher and 
children) suggested by the description herein of curricular coexistence, 
takeovers, and resistance. But still, I believe, as I know Louise does too, 
that those moments of being all wrapped up together inside a crafted 
tale are important for children's sense of themselves as interconnected 
people, "fellow planeteers" (to use a child phrase I love) who, soon 
enough— as Darren suggested— will have their own children needing 
teaching, guiding, and of course a healthy dose of stories. 

References 

Bakhtin, VI. (1981). Discourse in the novel. In M. Holquist (Ed.), C. Emer- 
son and M. Holquist (Trans.), The dialogic imagination: Four essays by 
M. M. Bakhtin (259-122). Austin: University of Texas Press. (Original 
work published 1934-1935) 

Bauman, R. (1986). Story, performance, ami event. Rowley, MA: Newburv 
1 louse. 

Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

D'Amato, J. D. (1987). The belly of the beast: On cultural differences, 

castelike status, and the polities of schools. Anthropology and Educa- 
tion Quarterly, IS, 357-360. 

Dyson, A. I laas. (1993). Social w rids of children learning to irritc in an urban 
primary school. New York: Teachers College Press. 



173 



Anne Haas Dyson 



171 



Ferdman, B. (1990s). Literacy and cultural identity. Harvard Educational Re- 
vieu\60, 181-204. 

Goss, L., and Barnes, M. (1989). Talk that talk: An anthology of African-Ameri- 
can storytelling. New York: Simon & Schuster. 

Heath S B (1983). Ways with words: Language, life and loork in communities 
'and classrooms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Labov. W. (1982). Competing value systems in inner-city schools. In i P. Gil- 
more and A. A. Glatthom (Eds.), Children in and out of school (148- 
171). Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics. 

Ocbu 1 (1987). Variability in minority school performance: A problem in 
' search of an explanation. Anthropology and Education Quarterly, lb, 
312-334. 

Opie, 1., and Opie, P. (1959). The lore and language of school children. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

Roberts, J. (1970). Scene of the battle: Group behavior in urban classrooms. Gar- 
den City, NY: Doubleday. 

Smitherman, G. (1986). Talkin and testifyin: The language of black America. De- 
troit: Wayne State University Press. 

Tannen D (1989). Talking voices: Repetition, dialogue and imagery in conversa- 
tional discourse. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 



L ( Ki 



172 



12 "All the Things That 
Mattered": Stories 
Written by Teachers 
for Children 

Sal Vascellaro 

Bank Street College of Education 
Celia Genishi 

Teachers College, Columbia University 

Sal Vascellaro and Celia Genishi explore the links between teachers' 
lives, stories, and teaching. The setting is a children's literature course 
that Vascellaro teaches, and literature and talk about it are the vehicles 
that help form a community of writers whose audience is the children in 
their classrooms. 

In Lionni's story for children, Frederick (1967), the mice prepare for 
winter by laboring through the golden sunny days, gathering corn, 
nuts, and wheat, working day and night — except for Frederick, who 
spends these days storing the rays of sunlight, gathering the colors and 
words of summer. As the trials of winter emerge, the stored food, 
obtained through sweat and sacrifice, gives out, and it is then 
Frederick who sustains them. He does this by telling stories, stories 
themselves nourished by the sun's warm and powerful rays, the colors 
of things alive and growing, and by the longed-for words of other 
seasons. 

In this section of our chapter, the first author describes the 
course he teaches, for which the final assignment is to write stories for 
children. (Thus he writes about the course in the first person.) The 
course is part of a master's degree program at Bank Street College for 
students already teaching or preparing to teach young children, three- 
year-olds through third grade. Given this age focus, the study of pic- 
ture books with their poetic, concentrated text is central to the course, 
and most frequently students write their own stories as picture books. 
This assignment is given as a way to synthesize what they have gained 



ERLC 



17? 



Vasccllaro and Genishi 



173 



from listening to, reading, reflecting on, discussing, and writing about 
stories for children. It is also seen as a different way for students to 
connect deeply with the child's voice within themselves. When the 
students first hear the assignment, many cringe but take some comfort 
in that it comes late in the course, during the last nights of class. 

On these last nights, when the stories are to be read aloud, the 
class of twenty-five students seems unusually quiet. They are obvi- 
ously nervous. Even seemingly light-hearted, poised students appear 
tense. Some students want to read first— or last. I draw up a list. The 
moment is very intense. And as they read, we notice and feel a change 
in the class., in ourselves and with each other. Students describe the 
experience of the last night, each saying something special: "It was a 
special part of me that I was sharing with others, hoping that it might 

touch them as well 1 felt like you could probably see the gleam in 

my eyes as I read my story. ... I don't think I realized how personal 
the experience of sharing one's writing can be." "Everyone offered 
comments that gave me even more insights into my own childhood 
and mv writing process. Their responses really brought my story to 
life in a way that reading it to non-teachers never would have." 
"We learned a lot about each other those two nights, about our inter- 
ests, what and who we care about, and about our lives, our childhood 
and families, our past and present." "I felt ay experience as a child 
was transformed into something alive in the moment. I also felt the 
story allowed the child in me to have a public voice connecting to 
others It was a liberating experience." "The interplay with class- 
mates I came to know during the course on the days we told our stories 
to each other was a golden moment for me, the feeling of unity with a 
group of colleagues, fellow teachers." 

At the end of one "last night," one student, overwhelmed by the 
experience of everyone's story, asked if this was unusual, if they in fact 
were exceptional writers and thinkers. It did seem unusual, and they 
did seem exceptional; yet this event had happened each of the eight 
times I had taught the course. Each time the group felt that same 
powerful sense of the moment as these private worlds became public 
through their stories, most of which were about their own childhoods. 

At a certain point, it became clear that the objectives for this 
assignment had been realized in unanticipated ways. In hearing 
these stories, I had seen experiences from my own life flash before 
riU\ some lived through, others dreamed of and yearned for. What 
were the possible meanings of this assignment for all of ub? In this 



1 ~> 



174 



"A// the Things That Mattered 



chapter we will explore these meanings by discussing two questions 
in particular: 

What about the course had led the students to the unique ways 
in which they formulated and shaped their stories? 

What had these windows into each other's realities, these per- 
sonal meanings, molded by the conventions of children's stories 
and directed outward to children and adults, to do with teach- 
ing or becoming a teacher? 

The Course: Personal Meanings in a Public Forum 

Writing for children as part of the teacher education program dates to 
the very beginnings of Bank Street College when its founder, Lucy 
Sprague Mitchell, gave writing exercises as a way for her students to 
understand and hear the qualities of a young child's language. It was 
an attempt to open their eyes to what children enjoy and, typical of 
Mitchell's experimental approach, it was firmly grounded in observ- 
ing children and systematically recording their behavior and their 
language. Marcus (1992) describes this process in his biography of 
Margaret Wise Brown, who was a student of Mitchell: "It was one 
thing to strive for an intellectually complex understanding of chil- 
dren's behavior and development; it was quite another to reconstitute 
within oneself even a semblance of the actual framework of child- 
hood — to see the world, as it were, through a 3-year-old's eyes" (60). 
Although her course was on a child's language, the sheer number and 
variety of "exercises" amounted to an in-depth experience in writing 
for children. Mitchell's own student, Claudia Lewis, continued 
Mitchell's course and expanded the experimental study of children's 
language into a study of children's literature. Lewis also asked stu- 
dents to write for children, and, like Mitchell, she presented exercises 
that focused on understanding children and their language. 

We felt that if the students opened their eyes to what children 
enjoy, if they try it themselves, they would be in a better posi- 
tion to create meaningful stories for children about their every- 
day experiences, as well as to stimulate children's use of 
language in discussions and in the telling of their own ''sto- 
ries/' 1 

In planning the course, I included topics that had historically 
been a major aspect, such as the relationship between a child's lan- 
guage and children's literature. Also included were topics one would 
find in many children's literature courses, such as criteria for selecting 



ERLC 



17 i) 



Vascellaro and Genishi 



175 



books, major trends, poetry, folklore, storytelling, nonfiction, and the 
relationship between children's literature and literacy. 

The course was also influenced by a presentation given by Vera 
Williams, a prominent writer for children, during a May 1989 chil- 
dren's literature institute at Teachers College, where she discussed the 
relationship between her own life and the stories she writes. 2 Williams 
spoke specifically about her book, A Chair for My Mother (1982), a story 
of a child who lives with her mother and grandmother, a family with- 
out a father. Together they struggle, persevere, and save to buy the 
most beautiful chair in the world, even after fire destroys their apart- 
ment. The story evokes Williams's childhood in the 1930s, a period of 
widespread poverty, when it was common to see families' possessions 
on the street. Although daily existence was a financial struggle, Wil- 
liams's mother bought a chair, not the plush, beautiful one in the book. 
Unlike the family in the written story, even with scrimping they lived 
in fear of its being repossessed. With resentment, Williams as a child 
demanded to know "Why did you buy it?" A Chair for My Mother, a 
storv of memorv and desire, is a gift for the author's mother, a gift she 
could not give her in life— "the path she took and the path she wished 
she could have taken." As Williams spoke about her life and story, it 
became clear how important it would be to convey how the powerful 
wellsprings of fiction rise from one's lived experience. 

Because literature presents a semblance of our shared human 
experience and our unique experiences as peoples and individuals, 
students were asked to dig deeply into their own memories of them- 
selves as children. I wanted the course to evoke strong feelings that are 
so much a part of life experience— loneliness, pain, sorrow, loss, and 
also excitement, fun, wonder, and serenity. 

Lewis became the model for the way literature was presented to 
the students: putting the story in the forefront and, when possible, 
reading it entirelv, not intruding critically on the presentation, and 
eliciting an open-ended response. As a result, students were offered 
opportunities to have powerful encounters with these books, opportu- 
nities to experience the stories aesthetically. Rosenblatt (1978) views 
this tvpe of response as an event in time, a dynamic transaction be- 
tween the reader (the listener) and the text— both essential agents in 
making the literary work come alive: 

The reader brings to the text his past experience and present 
personality. Under the magnetism of the ordered symbols of the 
text, he marshals his resources and crystallizes out the stutf of 



16 J 



176 



"All the Things That Mattered 



memory, thought, and feeling a new order, a new experience, 
which he sees aa-the poem (the literary work]. This becomes 
part of the ongoing stream of his life experience, to be reflected 
on from any angle important to him as a human being. (12) 

Through this aesthetic response to a literary work as opposed to a 
more analytic response which Rosenblatt calls an "efferent" stance, 
readers are more alive to the experience of the moment of encounter 
with the text. They are sensitive to all that is evoked by the sounds and 
nuances of words, the flow of language, while actively moving from 
detail to totality and, at the same time, integrating feelings, ideas, 
attitudes, and life meanings and experiences— "a fuller arc of his re- 
sponses" (43). 

To offer these opportunities for aesthetic response, to evoke a 
powerful response, I selected many stories that grew from and ex- 
pressed a significant emotion, stories like A Chair for My Mother that 
the WTiter "needed" to tel!, and read these aloud throughout the four- 
teen weeks of the class. Since many picture books offer minimal text 
with sensorial images, with the rhythmic flow of language that 
Mitchell had found to be so satisfying for children, they are poetic if 
not strictly poetry. From these evocative texts, students were con- 
stantly "constructing" the worlds of stories written for children, being 
forced to confront the child within them, their own childhood. By 
being offered these opportunities for an aesthetic response, students 
would in turn, I hoped, through the insight and conviction gained 
from their lived experience in the course, also offer these same oppor- 
tunities to their own students. Schools so frequently seem to demand 
the efferent response, even to poetry. 

It later became apparent that the students' childhood experience 
was also alive through being read to, since the authenticity of one's 
early experience of literature is frequently evoked through the inti- 
macy of the human voice. Students frequently describe how reading 
aloud to their own students is one of the most intimate and pleasurable 
experiences they have as teachers, perhaps because they sense the 
same feelings in their children. The graduate students were frequently 
surprised that being read to, either by me or their fellow students, 
was such a central component of the course, and many felt it the 
experience through which they gained the most insight into language, 
style, meanings, and source of appeal for children. As one student said! 
"1 just couldn't believe we were supposed to listen and rk t expected 
to do something except take it all in, think about it, discuss our re- 
sponses, and then do our own research." They were also surprised 



Vascellaro and Genishi 



177 



how, during the final sessions, their own stories seemed different, 
somehow transformed, through the hearing of their own voice reading 
them publicly. 

As I read more and more to the students and we discussed our 
responses, it became clear how, by putting the aesthetic and evocative 
aspect of the literature in the forefront, the students' own life stories 
were inextricably a part of the process. It also grew clear that, as one 
children's writer (Wells 1990) says so well, "Other people's books are 
the best teachers of writers" (139). 

The process of reaching the final assignment begins on the first 
night of class, when the students are asked to introduce themselves 
and tell about theii favorite book as a young child and describe why 
it was so meaningful to them. Carla Poole, a course assistant, felt that 
students see right away that their personal experiences have a promi- 
nent place in the course, and when I refer to their selections and 
comments in future sessions on the meanings of stories for children, 
the "students are surprised and realize that they have been put in the 
position of having something important to say." Simply asking for the 
students' response to a story or asking what they see as the appeal 
helps them begin to get the message that their ways of perceiving are 
integral to making the literary work come alive. 

When the students shared their own book selections in small 
groups, instead of beginning with a didactic discussion of why they 
selected the book, they frequently told the story they had selected and 
just as frequently told their personal story, such as "when I was a child 

my family also moved a lot and " In these small groups, students 

articulate their thoughts as active, responding readers. Poole felt that 
this merging of personal and professional knowledge in discussing a 
story was similar to the adult writer expressing experience through a 
child's eye and that such experiences enable one to evolve as a teacher. 
Because 1 told many stories about the author's lived and felt story and 
its relationship to the written story, like that of Williams's A Chair for 
My Mother, students understood these written stories differently, from 
an author's perspective. (At least two students trace the birth of their 
own storv to hearing this one.) And finally, Poole noted, as student? 
repeatedlv expressed concerns over what was for many the frighten- 
ing prospect of writing a story, 1 would respond with a conviction that 
students grew to accept, "You have a story that must be told" — and 1 
was available for further discussion. Over time, many students came 
to realize that they had stories worth telling and, most significantly, felt 
safe enough to share these personal worlds and make them public. As 



178 



"All the Things That Mattered 0 



one student described this safety: "We had what we needed, a setting 
where we felt safe and supported as we tap into deeply personal 
themes in our own lives." 

Uniting the Personal and Professional: 
Three Teachers and Their Stories 

Although students were not asked to write autobiographically, most 
chose to do so, drawing from a full range of lived experience. The 
autobiographical stories were windows into family and cultural differ- 
ences, subtle differences in ways of being, yet were surprisingly simi- 
lar in theme and situation. Students wrote of loved ones, family, 
friends, and pets. They told of "little" adventures, stories of the child's 
world when the adults are not around; stories of struggles, loss, and 
separation; stories of growing up and coming of age, initiation stories, 
stories of one's struggle to achieve identity. A few students also wrote 
stories from experiences in their own classrooms. Because the form of 
the telling was left open, many skillfully drew from the many models 
they had experienced throughout the course, most frequently using 
evocative, tight text with a definite rhythm and in some cases verso. 
Most stories were conceived as picture books, with a dynamic inter- 
play between text and visual image. Some students sketched the illus- 
trations or verbally described them. For some, the illustrations were as 
evocative as the text. 

Although some of the stories were not precisely autobiographi- 
cal, much of the writer's self took form in the story. Students told these 
stories in the manner of tales taken from their own cultural back- 
grounds. Some chose to rewrite stories passed down through their 
families, stories they had grown up with and were to them as real as 
their lived experience. Others wrote works of fantasy, such as animal 
stories, grounded in their own life passions, while others created con- 
cept books, such as alphabet books, filled with humor and ingenuity. 

From among the many evolved and powerful stories, the texts 
of the following three were selected to present here: Sometime* in the 
Bethtuhrby Heather Smith-Willis; One Plus One, by Monique Marshall; 
and When Night Comes, by Veronica Najjar. These were selected be- 
cause of their obviously different style, age focus, and situation, but 
surprisingly similar themes. In diverse ways the authors address ques- 
tions of human difference, of safety and security, and of vulnerability 
as children move bevond the home. Each was shared in classrooms 
with children, as well as in the graduate class. Because the illustrations 



:RLC 



IS."; 



VasccHaw ami Ccnishi 



179 



are inherent to the experience of these stories, their full power can only 
be hinted at here. 

Sometimes in the Bathtub 

Written and Illustrated by Heather Smith-Willis 
DEDICATED TO: 
My husband Stephen 
Mv parents and 
My sisters Kathleen 
and Krista 



Fverv evening at 7 o'clock we get ready for our bath. Sometimes 
we all take our bath together. 



Sometimes in the bathtub, Daddy runs our bath water. He gives 
us plastic cups and scoopers to play with and puts red food 
coloring in the water. 



Sometimes in the bathtub, as a special treat Mommy gives us 
special soaps shaped like Mother Goose characters. Sometimes 
she reads us the stories that go with our soaps while we're in 
the tub. 



Sometimes in the bathtub, Mommy puts in scented bath oil that 
makes the water silkv and the whole bathroom seems to smell 
like flowers. 

Sometimes in the bathtub, we get to have bubble bath from a 
box. That was before the doctor said we were allergic to it. 



Sometimes in the bathtub, 1 pretend to swim instead of washing 
with the soap that doesn't sink. 

Sometimes in the bathtub, we take turns sliding down the back 
of the tub to see who can make the biggc.t splash. 



Sometimes in the bathtub, Kathy makes a really big splash and 
our hair gets wet all over. Krista doesn't like this game and she 
alwavs gets out. 

Sometimes in the bathtub, we get mi noisy that our dog Bear 
comes in to see what's happening. Then Mommy comes and 
makes him get out. 



180 



"All the Things That Mattered 



Sometimes in the bathtub, Mommy says we have to wear a 
shower cap if we're going to play the sliding game. Mine is 
yellow with white lace. 



Sometimes in the bathtub, we make such big waves that the 
water goes over the top and gets on the floor. 



Sometimes in the bathtub, 1 drop the big towel in by accident 
and we laugh so loud that mommy says it's time to get out. 



Sometimes in the bathtub, I watch all the water and bubbles go 
down the drain until the last bubble is gone. 



Sometimes in the bathtub, my hair gets wet even with the 
shower cap on and Mommy has to blow it dry before 1 go to 
bed. 



Next time in the bathtub, I'll try to make the biggest splash of 
all without getting my hair wet. 



The End 



"All the Things That Mattered" 

Smith-Willis evokes the universal childhood ritual of taking a bath. It 
is a story of three sisters and a great moment they share together, told 
through the eyes of the middle child, Heather. It is also a story of their 
parents, how they set the stage, offer the props, then leave as the children 
invent this world together. The adults are never intrusive or overlv 
controlling. Yet the security and comfort of their presence are never far 
awav. The world they offer their children is safe and predictable. 

The storv moves from one special moment of fun to another as 
each evening the bathtub seems to grow to Olympic size, as Figure 1 
shows. Though the sisters are of different ages, the bath offers a mo- 
ment of fun among equals. The greatest fun is seeing who can make 
the biggest splash. With irreducible simplicity, the storv captures the 
young child's intense pleasure and awe in little things. "Sometimes in 
the bathtub, 1 watch all the water and bubbles go down the drain until 
the last bubble is gone." It is as though the regularity, safety, and fun 
of these days would last forever. The ending evokes the consummate 
bedtime story, Goodnight Moon, in that it too "is a ritual preparation fox 
a journev bevond the world" (Marcus, 187). 



Vasccllaro and Goiishi 



181 




Figure 1. From Sometimes in the Bathtub, by Heather Smith-Willis. The 
story is formatted horizontally and is 20 x 15 inches. On each double-page 
opening, text is presented on the left page and a full-page illustration on 
the right. (Photo courtesy Joyce Culver.) 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 1 % ° 



182 



"All the Things Thai Mattered 



As in A Chair for My Mother, this story too grew from memory 
and desire. It was sparked for Smith-Willis by seeing a photograph of 
herself and her two sisters as children in a bath together, and she 
realized how their adult lives had led them in different directions and 
just how much she missed the closeness. "That was a time when we 
were very close. It was a special time when I was allowed to be Kathy's 
buddy — without her friends around. It was a time we always had so 
much fun. 1 wanted to re-create that fun and preserve it." 

In re-creating this time through the eyes of a six-year-old, Smith- 
Willis also preserved how she saw and felt as a child. This story is told 
in what Lewis (1981) calls "the language of sensory perception" (18), 
a language children know and use themselves, a language as physi- 
cally alive as they are, "close to the living source." In showing "all the 
things that mattered," Smith-Willis also shows how they mattered — 
felt through the child's senses and imagination. The sense of place is 
described as the child experiences it, powerful and rich in evocative 
detail. 

The story is at once universal and specific, with the illustrations 
especially showing the specific. It was important for Smith-Willis to 
show the family as African American. "1 think all children should be 
able to pick up a book and see faces that look like their own. It's 
unfortunate that my sisters and 1 didn't have a book like mine to 
enjoy." 

The illustrations are bold, brightly colored cut paper collage, 
without extraneous elements. Yet they are filled with critical details, 
such as the bath caps, "each a different color," the slippers, "those big 
round fluffs," and of course the bathtub. At times filled with red or 
blue coloring, at times filled with pink and white bubbles, at times 
actually filled with flowers from the scented bath oil, the bathtub 
seems to grow as we move from one little adventure to the next, subtly 
merging fantasy with reality in ways that children do all the time. 

In writing this story, Smith-Willis also wanted to create a mate- 
rial for the second graders she teaches. "1 wanted it to be easy to read: 
simple, repetitive, and also fun. I wanted the language to be accessible, 
even for the kids I teach who struggle with reading." Perhaps she 
wants for her students the competence and independence her parents 
allowed her to experience in the bath, while also structuring their 
environment for "safety." When she read the book to her class, she was 
surprised how evervone liked it and, just as important to her, how thev 
were able to read it later. The students obviously experienced the fun 
she wanted to capture and preserve. 



187 



Vasccllaro and Genishi 



183 



They were filled with questions revealing surprise and a new 
perception of their teacher, such as "How could you do this when 
you're here all the time?" "How did you learn to draw?" "How long 
did it take you to illustrate one page?" "When can we buy it in the 
store?" They were very interested in how she put together her Matisse- 
like cut paper illustrations. To give them insight into the mechanics of 
the illustrations, she had them experiment with the stencils she created 
for each of her characters. 

In reflecting on the meanings of this process of writing her story 
for children, Smith-Willis concludes: 

This was hard, really hard, a lot harder than it looks, that is, to 
capture something that has so much meaning for you. I look at 
this book and I remember all the fun and it makes me feel close 
to my sisters again. Perhaps that's why people describe the 
book as warm. I guess, because my book means so much to me 
personally, 1 look at books differently 1 try to focus on books 
that will have meaning for the kids in my class and hope they 
too will know this meaning. I also think more about where my 
children are coming from, their perspective. Doing this has 
made me see a lot more from their eyes. 1 am now better able to 
do this because in writing this book I remembered how a child 
sees — and it has been fun. 

One Plus One 

Written and Illustrated by Monique Marshall 

For my mother, 
who taught me 
the peace sign 
and in loving 
memory of Bill. 



Tl I I: SONG TH E BE AO 1 

Mommy sings me lullabies My dad swings me easily 

in German. up uP UP to his broad, black, deep 

Stroking the top of my brown 

chestnut brown head, ever so high shoulders 

braiding the thick, 

down my back "O.K. Baby," he breathes and 

mass of hair, rumbles 

She purrs softness down inside his lovely sell. 

"Anne, schwa r/o Kate/' . . . and 1 hang tight beneath his chin, 

she hums. 



1SJ 



All the Things That Mattered 



And I curl up inside 

and smile. 

Her sweet black cat. 



HI 



neck. 



squeeze my legs 'round the strong 



My cheek rests on his shiny brown suntanned 

head, 

Knowing, 

He'd never let His Baby 
Fall 



T HE SWIN G 

We are flying 
Together 
to the tops 
of the trees — 

My legs wrapped around her 
strong waist. 

I can only swing this high 
with Her — 

Laughing aloud, the Butterflies 
inside us Both 
help steer our swing 
through the Autumn air — 
Onlv the leaves 



down. 



[31 



THE MAGIC 



Once 1 woke up 
alone 

and my mother 
was not there — 



[2] 



THE TRUCK 



His sunburnt Blackbrown 
Hand 

gently grips the Big Rig's 
Wheel. Just one 
Hand 

Drives the Truck across 

the country — 

(ME, snug in the passenger 

seat) 

HE, keeping time, 
Full-finger snapping 
with his other. 
Deep baritone, 
Humming soul song's 
with the radio. 
His Body 
keeps the Truck 
D N 
A C N 
1 

G 

across the road 

towards some far away 

destination . . . 

I hope we 

NEVER 

get there. 

141 

THE ROAD 

Driving the truck 
with his high knees — 
Both hands are 
HREF. 

tapping softly, 




IS 



Vasccllaro and Genishi 



Not anywhere in the apartment, 
i threw my smallness 
against the old, worn, 
embracing couch, 
and cried 

from emptiness. 
I tore myself to smaller 

pieces, until . . . 

She Magically appeared 
and dried my tears 
with her love li ness. 
Making 
me 

whole 
again. 

T HF.S UNTAN? 

Walking down German streets — 

Even mother's voice 

sounds unfamiliar. 

Mv Oma speaks only 

her own language — 

Strangers stare, 

but do they 

reallv see 

me?' 

"Yes, 

it's 

a 

suntan." 
when they ask? 

171 

THE COLOR 

1 am coloring 
with a brown crayon. 
But the face that I 
color 

is lonely . . . 

For, looking around 
I am surprised to see, 



keeping rhvthm on 
ME 

as we race through the night. 
The rich, soft Blackness 
slides by my window. 
I sleep 

always Knowing . . . 
He would NEVER 
let His Baby Fall. 



161 

THEK1SS 

"Gimme some sugar," 

he begs in his husky deep 

low, familiar growl. 

and when we kiss our lips go 

SMACK! 
in onlv the wav thev do with 

DADDY. 
Mommy's Kiss is different. 
The quiet kind 
are 
Hers. 

181 

THE QUESTION 

Although 1 live with He 
and not with 1 lim, 
I am part of Both 
of Them. 

and sometimes 1 wonder 
if 

I'm 
Black 



186 



"All the Things That Mattered 



or 

White 
or 

When 

Thcv are gone 1 

Whoa- I'll fit 
in. 

[in] 

"The Pieces of a Puzzle" 

Otic Plu> One is a story of a child growing up and eventually imagining 
her world apart from her parents (see Figure 2). Marshall tells this 
story through a series of ten poems, the first six of the child's experi- 
ence of her white German mother and her African American father, 
who are separated. Each of these is told as "one plus one," the child 
and parent alone, and is connected by the child's sense of security 
through being a part of one, then the other. 

In very different ways each parent is a powerful presence, at 
times larger than life. They are strong, protective, and steady and also 
playful, warm, and gentle. The young child exists as though physically 
a part of each of them. Even when her father takes her across country 
in his truck, she lives in the pleasure and safety of their world together. 
In "The Magic," the fifth poem, foreshadowing the end of the story, her 
world of security is dramatically disrupted when she wakes up from 
a nap on the couch and finds herself alone. With a child's intense fear 
of abandonment, she is shattered until her mother "magically" ap- 
peared, making her feel "whole again." 

In the last four poems, she moves out into worlds, such as the 
street or school, not encircled by him or her and becomes aware of 
being different, alone, estranged from the people around her, even her 
mother, grandmother, and classmates. As she walks down a German 
street with her mother and grandmother, to the strangers' question she 
answers, "Yes, / it's / a / suntan." In her school she realizes, "1 am 
coloring / with a brown crayon. / . . . / no one / has done / this / but 
/ me." Marshall ends her story with the child alone asking a question 
that did not have to be asked earlier, wondering, "When / Thev are 
gone / Where I'll fit / in." 

In ending with this question instead of happy resolution, Mar- 
shall forces the reader to move beyond the present, beyond immediate 
impressions, and to share the child's insecurity. This child can never 
go back to the younger self, comfortably rooted in mother and father. 



ERJC 



no one 
has done 
this 
but 
me. 



Vasccllaro and Gcnishi 



187 




Figure 2. From One Plus One, by Monique Marshall. The story is format- 
ted horizontally and is 11 x 7 inches. One poem is placed on each page 
and is framed in illustration or visual design. The poems placed to the left 
and right of each other convey the story's tension. (Photo courtesy Joyce 
Culver.) 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



188 

"All the Things That Mattered' 



It is a story for young adolescents-or children and adults of any 
age-queshoning their place in the world. She has also written a story 
■ for ch, dren hko herself, neither black nor white, not knowing wS 
world they bebng in-so different from the clear, predictable wor 
conveyed by Sm.th-Willis. Yet her story also speaks to children 
immigrants, children of new family structures^!! children who e 
worlds are unclear. 

The book grows from the totality of her lived experience but 
most especially from recent experiences. Before writing he story' she 
attended a wedding on her father's side of her family. At one poh, in 
the wedding party everybody danced together as a group, from the 
youngest child to the oldest relative, and because she did not know the 
dance she could not join them. "I didn't grow up with that dance, and 

ike ti,, M ; a,S °, eU thiS b ° nd WitH l ^ fami 'y- Th ™ ™« things 
like tha that were really powerful that were happening to me " 

When Marshall read All the Colors of the Race (Adoff 1982)' a book 
of poetry about a little girl who is also biracial, she knew she wanted 
to do something similar. Like Smith-Willis, who wished she had expe- 
rienced books that reflected her own life situation as an African Ameri- 
can chi d, Marshall says, "If i had read a book like it when I was a 
child, it would have changed my life. I never really knew another 
person who was in my position and I felt that little girl in the book 

ZT l H i 4 re Were Strikinff dilferenoes - little girl, unlike 

Marshal , had grown up white and black and was completely comfort- 
able with bo h aspects of herself. Marshall had a different story to tell- 
1 felt that I had a lot of really complex feelings that 1 wanted to deal 
with m writing and share with people." 

She began her process of conceiving the story on the very first 
night ot the course, when the assignment was given. She developed 

cMcltr a n n WO [ k WUh the Children f ° r Wh ° m sh0 was assistant 
cacher During certain writing times, students and teachers alike 

wrote ideas for possible stoiies, and she used these times to focus on 
herself WaS ^ ^ hor a ,ife a « cnda ' the black-white side of 

Marshall chose poetry to convey the intensity of her inner strug- 
gle and- the "one plus one" format to graphically represent the ever- 

SSS w-n-" ,0n ; H ° r iU T rati0nS <** Fi * uro »• s « diff ^ent from 
Sm.th-VV. lis s clear, simple, evocative statement, are like the "pieces of 

a pilule and reflect the child's experience of her different worlds 

tach illustration frames and extends the text in technically and stvlis- 



Vasccllaro and Genishi 



189 



tically different ways, incorporating close-up photographs of mother, 
of father, and herself. At times she uses soft watercolors to evoke "her 
loveliness" and "the magic" and blocks of color to reinforce the dra- 
matic contrasts of her story. 

As the story evolved, in the experimental style of Lucy Sprague 
Mitchell and in the more recent process writing approaches, Marshall 
read' it to her class of third and fourth graders and asked for their 
input. In certain instances they found the wording awkward, which 
helped her "find the right words." Mostly, they were struck with the 
power of her story. One child commented, "It was like the pieces of a 
puzzle, yet they all fit together." Even though she had openly spoken 
to the children of her interracial background, it was through this story 
of herself as a child that it became real. They found it unbelievable that, 
as a child, she was the only one in her class who was brown. 

After her sharing the story, children spoke of aspects of their 
own lives in their families. One child told for the first time in school 
that he was adopted. Another spoke of how his extended family was 
biracial. Through the reading of her own story for children, Marshall 
created a setting in which it was safe for the children's stories to 
surface, where children could feel less alone. In the actual reading to 
her children, she says, "I felt like 1 was baring myself. I was giving 
something of myself to these kids, and even though it was a little scary, 
1 liked the feeling." She felt closer to the children— as she did to her 
peers in the course when she read it aloud. 

In reflecting on the process of writing her story and its connec- 
tion to what she wants to offer children, Marshall describes how shar- 
ing was so significant: "Sharing with peers and the children makes a 
difference — we usually don't do this. Theoretically, I knew sharing 
was important, but it was eye opening sharing myself and seeing how 
much 1 and the children got out of it. When I have a class of my own, 
I'll have them share." She also saw this kind of writing as significant 
and powerful, "coming from a personal place, not like the writing 
that's usually done"— which may certainly account for the closeness 
she describes. By helping her "see what a person has to go through to 
come up with a piece of writing," Marshall views the entire process of 
writing differently. Perhaps she will do many of the things she would 
have done anyway, like sharing, but will now do them with subtle 
differences, with greater insight and sensitivity. She knows she wants 
to continue writing with the children, even with the many demands 
on a teacher's lime. 



"All the Things That Mattered" 



Marshall feels that modeling is the critical aspect. Throughout 
her own process she has modeled what she most values. In allowing 
herself to be vulnerable, in trusting freely, she has made it safe for 
others too to be vulnerable. She has shown that there are many kinds 
of families and that being different is a part of the human story. She 
has made it acceptable to express loss and fear as well as pleasure. She 
has let the children know that their questions, their important ques- 
tions, have a place in their school life. Throughout her process she has 
given the powerful message that through writing one can express 
what is deeply significant, with style and beauty. On the day she read 
her story to her children, she received a letter from five of them telling 
her that they thought the story was so good it should be published, 
and if she should take it to a publisher to tell him they say so. Each 
child signed the letter. 

When Night Comes 
Written and Illustrated by Veronica Najjar 

When Night Comes it Happens . . . 
When all is still and 
they're alone. 

They've been waiting. 
Waiting for a chance to come 
alive. 

Waiting patiently to leave 
their high perch 
their safe nest 
their quilted world. 



It begins slowly . . . 

the twitch of a small head 
the ruffle of red feathers 
the beating of delicate wings 



Songs fill the air. 
A Rat A Tat A Tat 
Jay, Jay 
Kee, Kee 
Whoo, Whoo 



Vascellaro and Genishi 



191 



They lift themselves up. 
They flutter 
They flap 
They glide 
They swoop 



They enter a world where a 
cardinal can feel safe flying with 
an eagle. 

A hawk can swoop down and meet 
a fluttering hummingbird. 
Where a woodpecker can leave its 
lofty perch and share a worm with 
a sandpiper. 



When day breaks 
the night's adventures are over. 
They slowly return to their quilted 
world and wait. 
Wait silently and still 
through the noise and activity 
surrounded by people who will 
never know 

what really happens When Night 
Comes. 



But if you look closely 

you may just find 

a forgotten berry 

a half-eaten nut 

a stray feather 

or hear the echo of a song 

left behind in the night. 



a rat a tat a tat 
jay, jay 
kee, kee 
whoo, whoo 



The Quilted Harmony 

Unlike Smith- Willis and Marshall who tell stories of lived experience, 
stories about people, Najjar brings to life her children's own creation, 



192 



All the Things That Mattered 




Figure 3. From When Night Comes, by Veronica Najjar. The story is 
formatted vertically and is 5^x8^. On each double page, text is placed on 
the left page and illustrations on the right; both are framed in quiltlike pat- 
terned borders. (Photo courtesy Joyce Culver.) 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE ] Q 7 



Vascellaro and Genishi 



193 



a quilt of birds which they had made together. In doing so she conveys 
a magic moment when a child's reality and fantasy merge, as in the 
many stories in which children's toys come to life. Out of the artistic 
harmonv of the many patterns and fabrics of the quilt emerges a 
generous, ^nfe, and nonviolent world. And like The Wizard of Oz, the 
story ends with a hint of reality. The world has changed in small ways 
and has become a better place. 

Najjar has created a work at once alive with movement and 
sound and serene in ways reminiscent of literature to lull the child to 
sleep. In nine short pages she has done what Margaret Wise Brown has 
said books should accomplish for a child, "to jog him with the unex- 
pected and comfort him with the familiar" (Marcus 1992, 250). The 
pages themselves seem to come alive through the quiltlike patterned 
borders and patterned silhouettes of the children's birds, with each 
figure emerging in flight from a stark black background (see Figure 3). 

For Najjar, the book was one way to keep alive what the uass of 
second and third graders she taught the year before meant to her and 
also what their study of birds meant to them. The study spanned most 
of that school year, and the quilt itself took five months to complete. 
Each child fashioned a square for the bird he or she had researched. 
Tremendous time and energy went into depicting the reality of each 
bird in the context of its environment. Najjar saw how deeply each 
child connected with his or her own square and how the children came 
together as a group through this shared effort — symbolized in the 
quilt. 

The actual idea for the story was sparked by the memory of the 
dav they culminated their study with a celebration. As the assistant 
principal left their class party, she looked up at the quilt hanging on 
the wall and said, "You know, it's really amazing how they always go 
back to the right square when daylight comes." Najjar was surprised 
at her children's reaction. They seemed suspended in time, silently 
living in the imagined possibilities of the statement. She saw how the 
idea excited them and wanted to create for them what she had not had 
as a child: "I was not touched much by literature as a child. I wanted 
it to be different for the children I teach. I wanted their excitement to 
live in my story. I wanted the ending to give them a lasting feeling." 
The story she went on to write, then, is an attempt to offer to children 
the possibility and pleasure of literature that she had experienced as 
an adult by bringing to life magically through language what they had 



l Q 3 



194 



"All the Things That Mattered" 



created through their hard work — thereby moving their work to a new 
level of experience. 

Although the story is not autobiographical in the sense of telling 
a lived story from her childhood, it too grows from the wellsprings of 
Najjar's experience and embodies her life as a teacher. The safe, har- 
monious world so perfectly captured in the quilt is something she 
works on each day with her children: 

I spend an enormous amount of time as a teacher working on 
tone, working with the children on community. If they learn 
nothing else, they learn how to live in harmony how to hear 
each other, how to work out conflicts. This is an endless strug- 
gle. Like the birds in the quilt, all my children are very different. 
When we studied predators and prey we learned how so many 
are prey. Like in the very different kind of world that comes 
alive at night, in this classroom it's all right to be next to a hawk. 
I try to create a safe environment where each child is listened to 
and accepted, where differences are accepted. 

Like Marshall's, her story is also about being different, perhaps differ- 
ent in family structure, different racially, ethnically, different in lan- 
guage, in temperament, different as individuals. Yet there is greater 
possibility of resolution for Najjar's theme, achieved through a 
teacher's dream and her children's work. Perhaps her story is also a 
metaphor of her hopes for the children. 

When she shared the story with her current class (because the 
school has mixed-age groupings, half of the children who had made 
the quilt were still in her class), she lowered the shades "to create the 
appropriate mood." The children seemed to glow, especially when a 
child heard his or her "own bird" mentioned. In Najjar's class the bird 
did indeed evoke the child. The children applauded, and giving the 
true testament to a child's pleasure, asked her to read it again. Since 
they had seen their teacher creating the quiltlike cut paper illustrations 
during free times in the class, they were especially excited to see the 
result. 

In reflecting on the process of writing the book, like Marshall, 
Najjar felt close to what children must feel when they create stories. 
She would think, "Mere I am stuck for an idea, dry. Now I know what 
the kids experience." Like Smith-Willis, she felt that in thinking hard 
about what they would enjoy, what would have an impact, she con- 
nected more intimately with who her children are and with herself as 
a child. Najjar concludes her thoughts on the book by saving, "I felt 
good that I had done something that maybe is lasting." 



193 



Vascellaw and Genishi 



195 



A Path One Would Like to Take 

The process of writing a story for children seemed inextricably bound 
to the teachers' evolving professional selves. Thus the paths they took 
as teachers were transformed in a number of important ways as a 
result of taking the course. Like Marshall and Najjar, many spoke of 
how their views of writing changed: they would teach in the future 
with a greater understanding and appreciation of the child's writing 
process. Writing in their programs was now seen as more than learning 
to read and write; it became a powerful means of self-expression for 
children as it was for the teachers, who had struggled to express 
themselves through their own stories. Not surprisingly many teachers 
said that for the first time in their lives they saw themselves as writers. 
This confidence grew from their writing "coming from a personal 
place," as Marshall said. The creator's understanding of the source of 
the story led her and her colleagues to see new meaning in their 
children's life stories. They could see why the stories and books their 
children write mean so much to them, why it is so important to see 
one's self in a book. 

In addition, the teachers' views of literature changed. For exam- 
ple, most of the teachers said they select and use children's literature 
very differently now. Like Smith-Willis and Najjar, many wrote their 
story with specific children in mind and, in doing so, felt they were 
teaching these children in particular rather than children in general— 
an approach they carry over to their book selection decisions. One 
student says, "I balance my own interests and inclinations with the 
abilities, scope, and inclinations of my children." Another student 
comments, 

It is one thing to examine the writings and illustrations of oth- 
ers, it is quite another to attempt it yourself It made me 

question and scrutinize my choices. As I wrote my book, I asked 
myself questions like: How can I phrase this so the population 
I write for understands it? Why am I writing this? What under- 
standings do I want for the children (and adults) who read this? 
Those are the same questions I now ask myself as I select books 
each week for my children. 

Like Najjar, many students, in woiking to create a story within the 
conventions of children's picture books, found they understood the 
literature differently. 

And this greater understanding of literature seemed to lead to a 
deeper understanding of children. Many, through growing close to the 




196 



"All the Things That Mattered' 



power of their own story, felt closer to their children in ways that 
changed their role as teacher. Some became aware of how the chil- 
dren's written stories were windows to worlds a teacher might other- 
wise never know or understand, how these worlds contained complex 
layers of experience, and how teachers only know part of a larger story 
Because as adults they had felt safe to share their stories, to be vulner- 
able, many wanted to offer in their classrooms the support, sensitivity, 
and acceptance of a community where children felt safe to express 
what was important to them. 

To construct their stories, the teacher-authors had reconstituted 
within themselves "a semblance of the actual framework of child- 
hood" (Marcus 1992, 60). They relived the child's heightened sense of 
experience by reading and discussing many books in open and per- 
sonal ways. Paley (1991) writes that "we cannot speak of the child's 
self without looking at our own" (156), and without considering their 
experience from a child's-eye view. To tell a "good story" from that 
viewpoint, the teachers evoked the people, places, and times of their 
childhoods. Yet gradually the authors shifted and altered one or more 
of these elements so that within their stories, like Williams (1982), they 
created fictions and often took "the path one wished one could have 
taken." They needed their stories not just to understand and come to 
terms with the past, but also to help them transform the piesent and 
construct the future. In crafting a literary and visual work at once 
satisfying to themselves, their peers, and their children, many saw 
themselves enabled to create what is important for the children they 
teach. The teachers' stories reflected a passion to create living spaces 
that are more accommodating than many they had known. 

In this desire for transformation, the teachers were like other 
writers. In her autobiography, One Writer'* tte$innin$$ (1983), Weltv 
(see also Paterson 1991) described aspects of her process of transfor- 
mation from memory of lived event to story: 

The events in our lives happen in a sequence of time, in their 
significance to ourselves they find their own order, a timetable 
not necessarily — perhaps not possibly — chronological. The time 
as we know it subjectively is often the chronology that stories 
and novels follow: it is the continuous thread of revelation. (68) 

What the teachers' stories revealed and continue to reveal was striking 
portraits of lived experience— relived, reinterpreted, distilled, and 
often transformed. Some stories revealed the cultural histories that 
made each writer's path unique, as the characters in two stories high- 
lighted here showed: Smith-Willis depicted an African American fam- 



2\r: 



Vasccllaro and Genishi 



ily; Marshall focused on being biracial. And Najjar depicted birds that 
reflected the diversity of her children, who had studied these birds in 
depth. Whether or not they identified with these three writers' specific 
experiences, teachers in the course gained the sense that their own 
individual uniqueness — their memories of struggle, loneliness, com- 
munion, difference, and joy — linked them to others. Through the sto- 
ries they created and shared, they became part of a human "quilted 
harmony." Their stories touched something universal, speaking so 
directly to their children and their peers about all the things that 
mattered. 

Through the processes of speaking, remembering, and writing, 
many teachers found the stories to be healing. Like the sun-warmed 
stories of Lionni's Frederick, these stories sustain us. Through imagi- 
nation, memory, and desire, they affirm who we are; they heal wounds 
not yet closed by time; they allow us to dream and to realize who we 
can be as people and teachers of children — one and the same. These 
stories offer a path one would like to take, filled with possibility. 

Notes 

1 . The comments of Claudia Lewis, as well as those of Heather Smith- 
Willis, Monique Marshall, and Veronica Najjar about their stories, come from 
open-ended interviews with the first author. Comments from other teachers 
are excerpts from written responses to a questionnaire about the children's 
literature course. 

2. Vera Williams was the featured speaker at the "Literature in the 
Classroom" conference, held in May 1989 at Teachers College, Columbia 
University. 

References 

Adoff, A. (1982). All the color* of the nice. New York: Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. 

Lewis, C. (1981). Writing for young children. Garden City, NY: Anchor 

Press/ Doubleday. 
Lionni, L. (1967). Frederick. New York: Pantheon Books. 

Marcus, L. S. (1992). Margaret Wise Hroton: Awakened by the moon. Boston: 
Beacon Press. 

Paley, V G. (1991). The heart and soul of the matter: Teaching as a moral 
act. The Educational Forum, 55(2), 155-166. 

Paterson, K. (1991). The spying heart: More thoughts on reading and writing 
hooks for children. New York: Dutton. 



198 



"All the Things That Mattered 



Rosenblatt, L M. (1978). The reader, the text, the poem. Carbondale and Ed- 
wardsville: Southern Illinois University Press. 

Wells, R. (1990). The well-tempered children's book. In W. Zinsser (Ed.), 
Worlds of childhood: The art ami craft of writing for children (121-143). 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 

Welty, E. (1983). One writer's beginnings. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer- 
sity Press. 

Williams, V. (1982). A chair for my mother. New York: Greenwillow. 



199 



1 3 The Contribution of 
the Preschool to a 
Native American 
Community 

Susan J. Britsch 

Purdue University 

In Iter chapter, Susan Br i tech reveal* hoxv stories may serve as the life- 
blood of a community, sustaining it through difficult periods of change. 
The community of interest is a small Native American tribe, and stories 
provide a major tool for bringing together the learning and living of 
community elders and preschoolers. 

During the nineteenth century, the Tachi Yokuts people lived on 
the north and west shores of Tulare Lake, in south central 
California. Their territory extended over the Kettleinan Hills and 
across the plains to the western foothills of the Mount Diablo 
chain of the Coast Range of mountains (Latta 1977). 
In winter, the people lived near the place where the western hills 
approached the lake. In summer, they crossed to the east and 
gathered seeds closer to the eight-hundred-square-mile lake that 
provided fish for eating and tule reeds for building homes, 
baskets, and boats. The swampy shores of the lake nourished 
berries and g -asses, clover, fiddleneck, and watercress. 
During the spring and summer, groups of grandmothers and 
children would spend their days fishing beside the slough that 
served as the inlet to the lake. Children would listen to the ladies 
chat and gossip in Tachi as they fished or washed the clothes, or 
gathered blackberries from nearby bushes. The land was green; 
the sun was warm and constant, the earth and sky. Grandmother 
and Grandfather, fed both the body and spirit. It was, as many 
sav today, "like paradise." 

The Yokuts linguistic family once comprised as many as sixty 
language-dialects spoken by thousands of people throughout 
California's Central Valley. At one time, the Tachi Yokuts lan- 
guage was probably spoken by as many as 1 ,500 people (Kroeber 1925) 



2'K 



200 The Contribution of the Preschool to a Native American Community 



living in five villages close beside Tulare Lake. Tachi is now known and 
recurrently used by approximately thirty people who live in a small 
Native American community located on the nineteenth-century site of 
one of the old Tachi villages. 

Most speakers of Tachi are no longer of child-bearing age, so the 
language is not learned in the homes of contemporary Tachi families. 
Small children have a sociolinguistic acquaintance with the language; 
that is, they may know several speakers (usually grandparents or 
great-grandparents), and they understand that certain kinds of social 
situations motivate the use of Tachi among adults. In general, however, 
the children's linguistic knowledge of Tachi extends to only a few 
words or phrases — isolated tokens from a linguistic game that is 
strangely foreign to them and for which they do not know the broader 
set of rules. 

Parents in the community are now becoming increasingly con- 
cerned that their children have not had sufficient opportunity to hear 
about the times when their grandparents were young and lived in 
traditional homes, to learn stories that teach traditional values and 
beliefs, and to become acquainted with their ancestral language as a 
way of communicating among a people. To address this situation, a 
pilot language renewal program — Tachi as a Second Language (TSL) — 
was inaugurated in the community in the fall of 1987. 

The TSL Program operated throughout most of the 1987-88 
school year within the framework of the community's Head Start 
Program. The goal of the program was language exposure, not lan- 
guage mastery: its primary task was to make the Tachi language a 
more familiar and hospitable presence within the lives of the children, 
while acquainting them with basic vocabulary, sentence structure, and 
the use of simple conversational routines. The language sessions were 
conducted exclusively in Tachi. As an educator and linguist, I acted as 
curriculum designer and language specialist for the program. This 
gave me the chance to become involved in the very life of a language 
I had endeavored to learn for several years from elders in the commu- 
nity. 

The Elders and the School 

Within the context of the community's linguistic situation, the real 
"knowers" of Tachi — the elders who learned Tachi as a first lan- 
guage — represent a tremendous resource within the community. They 



Susan j. Britsch 



are regarded as the true teachers of the language by parents who are 
not speakers or who may possess a comprehension-centered knowl- 
edge of Tachi. On the other hand, children are regarded as the commu- 
nity's most important learners, so it was felt that any ancestral 
language-learning effort should first concern both the oldest and the 
youngest people in the community It is upon just this interaction that 
the Tachi as a Second Language Program was built and carried out 
within the preschool. 

Two elder women worked with small groups of children in the 
classroom four times each week for approximately an hour per day 
(within a four-hour program). The elders were aided by the pre- 
school's head teacher, a young woman whose command of Tachi is 
primarily receptive. Within the structure of community roles, the 
teacher did not view herself as one who should be responsible for the 
teaching of the language. Instead, she saw herself as a "coordinator," 
to use her word. 

At the beginning of the school year, the teacher actually directed 
the classroom activity herself — initiating interactions, suggesting vari- 
ations in practice, and modeling dialogues with the elders. But this 
would become awkward when, for example, the elders would sponta- 
neouslv interject language with which she was unfamiliar. As the 
school year progressed, the elders became more and more comfortable 
with conducting the language sessions cooperatively on their own. 
This gave them the opportunity to use Tachi with each other when 
discussing clarifications or offering suggestions. 

This approach, in turn, helped the children to feel more comfort- 
able as they saw Tachi being used as a primary means of interaction. 
This was reflected in the children's social response to the language 
sessions: by the end of the school year, some children began to appro- 
priate the teaching role themselves. They, in fact, initiated the language 
sessions by pointing to familiar objects to request identifications, for 
example, from other children. In the community, children began to 
greet one of the elders in Tachi, and they would proceed to verbally 
demonstrate their knowledge of various language items learned in 
school. The children had thus begun to appropriate the role of 
"knower" in the community's sense of the word, as well as in the 
school-oriented sense of the term. 

Acting in the capacity of coordinator, the teacher also organized 
regular planning sessions during which she and the elders would 
discuss the language and activities to be used throughout the coming 



202 The Contribution of the Preschool to a Native American Community 



week. Originally planned as brief technical meetings, the planning 
sessions soon expanded to afternoon-long conversations during which 
the elders' recollections of elements of the Tachi language rang with 
images of their own life experiences. This infused the planning ses- 
sions with another, less overt, purpose; the elders began to create a 
"community of memory" (Bellah et al. 1985) as they began to retell the 
history of the community through the vehicles of the ancestral lan- 
guage and their own personal histories. Bellah describes the process as 
follows: 

In order not to forget that past, a community is involved in 
retelling its story its constitutive narrative, and in so doing, it 
offers examples of the men and women who have embodied 
and exemplified the meaning of the community. These stones of 
collective history and exemplary individuals are an important 
part of the tradition that is so central to a community of mem- 
ory (153) 

Thus, in one of the planning sessions, the elders recalled the seasonal 
experience of gathering plants, including fiddleneck, with their moth- 
ers and grandmothers. These memories incorporated long-forgotten 
language and life experience, prompted by the whole of the elders' 
more immediate experience of the language with the children. 

As curriculum designer, I responded to this particular element 
of the retelling by preparing a unit that involved the elders and the 
children in picking fiddleneck and preparing it for eating. The design 
of the unit focused on a cooperative exploration between the elders 
and myself of the teaching process they had experienced when their 
grandmothers had taught them to gather and prepare fiddleneck. In 
this way, the retelling extended into the classroom, enlarging the pres- 
ence of the elders beyond the role of "knowers of language," as they 
transmitted knowledge of self constituted by connections to others. 
This is the full sense of the word "community," as Bellah sees it — the 
sense that must underlie the use of the language in teaching if that 
teaching is to address the processes of learning that the traditional way 
of life has to offer children in the contemporary society. As Tafova 
(n.d.) points out, it is through the interpersonal processes of learning — 
not through exposure to particular curriculum products — that chil- 
dren can begin to accept what they have been given from the 
traditional language. Thus, although the Tachi used by the children 
was not at all elaborate, it represented the renewed presence of the 
language in the preschool — itself a community of lives within the 
whole of the evolving history of the community. 



Susan J. Briisch 



203 



The School and the Community 

Throughout the school year, the teacher's aim was to enhance the 
voluntary participation of both children and adults in the very open 
and flexible conceptual entity of the language program. She wanted to 
make it clear that the program was not a closed, school-bound block 
of activity, but a resource from which anyone in the community could 
draw or to which anyone could contribute. 

The teacher encouraged the children to participate in the lan- 
guage sessions, but she did not make it mandatory. This approach is 
consistent with the community learning style, which emphasizes the 
learner's independence throughout a self-determined period of obser- 
vation followed by learner-initiated attempts at practice. In this way, 
the experience of the program was offered to the children so that they 
could both accept and contribute at their own discretion. As it hap- 
pened, at the beginning of the school year, the language sessions 
occupied a small corner of the classroom that the teacher had blocked 
off with portable bulletin boards and had furnished attractively. By the 
end of the year, more than a third of the total -classroom space was 
devoted to T achi, as both large and small group activities were con- 
ducted to accommodate the participation of all the children. 

In a simiiar way, the program was offered to the community 
itself through various presentations in Tachi by the preschool children. 
One presentation was held at the community center during the week 
in March when the Tachi people traditionally celebrate the new year. 
Coinciding as it did with the new year's ritual, the presentation en- 
hanced the theme of renewal in the community and helped to further 
renew the Ta-ehi language as a communal possession, now being ac- 
quired by the most important learners: the children. 

In a community where the traditional language, as repre- 
sentative of a traditional way of life, is obsolescing, it is easy for tribal 
members to lose hope for the future of that language. It is easy to feel 
that the children do not listen because they do not care to, or that they 
do not listen because they truly cannot learn the old language. Further, 
it is a belief in the Tachi community that language is not something 
that can be taught: language is something that is "picked up" from the 
context of lived experience. Thus "knowing" a language means under- 
standing it because one has understood the experience from which it 
came. When the home experience of the language is missing, people 
find it difficult to believe that the school can provide anything compa- 
rable—and, in fact, it cannot. But in the preschool, the Tachi language 
program provided an nprning within which a retelling of the commu- 



9 -1 r? 



204 The Contribution of the Preschool to a Native American Community 



nity's story could begin. And throughout the retelling, the elders have 
represented much more than just the presence of the language in the 
school: they have embodied the presence of the traditional culture in 
the school through the acting out of their roles as "knowers," and 
through the ways in which they scold, praise, prompt, and demon- 
strate life and language to the children. 

At the end of the school year, the Tachi tribe's eldest male mem- 
ber (now in his nineties) paid a visit to the preschool to observe the 
children and to find out not what they were learning, but how they 
were learning. After conversing with the teacher, whose talk was inter- 
laced with the Tachi ^he had learned from the elders, he concluded that 
the teaching was being done "the right way." He had not believed it, 
he said, until he saw it happen. This was the feeling of many commu- 
nity members, but as each person now encounters the children and 
their use of the language, Tachi becomes less removed from lived 
experience and more accessible to rediscovery within one's own life as 
a part of the lives of others. The language curriculum, then, becomes 
a vehicle of the retelling as the elders make it more and more an 
expression of their own interactions with the children. As these two 
processes — the curriculum and the retelling — begin to merge, the lan- 
guage program in the school will continue to draw upon the intimacy 
and wisdom of the home, echoing the beliefs of the community, nour- 
ishing the strength of all its members. 



Acknowledgments 

Some of the ideas presented in this chapter are discussed more fully in a 
paper entitled "The Collaborative Development of a Language Renewal Pro- 
gram for Preschoolers/' published in the winter 1988 issue of Human Organi- 
zation. 

I wish to acknowledge the invaluable help of the tribal chairman and 
of the tribal members who have contributed to and supported the language 
program discussed in this chapter. In order to protect their privacy, 1 will not 
name these people here; however, I wish to extend to them my deepest 
appreciation. 



References 

Bellah, R. N., Madscn, R., Sullivan, W. M., Swidler, A., and Tipton, S. M. 
(1985). Habits of the heart: Individualism and commitment in American 
life. Berkeley: University of California Press. 



20 



ERIC 



Susan }. Britsch ^1 

Kroeber, A. L. (1<*76). Handbook of the Indiana of California. New York: Dover 

Publications. (Original work published 1925) 
Latta, F. F. (N77). Handbook of the Yakuts Indiana. Santa Cruz, CA: Bear State 
' Books. 

Tifova T (n d ) The direction* of Indian and Native education: Culture, content. 
' 'and container. Unpublished manuscript, Seattle, VVA. Photocopy. 



21.) 



206 



14 Stories as Ways 
of Acting Together 

Shirley Brice Heath 

Stanford University 

Shirley Brice Heath takes us into still another site for community and 
for story— it youth organization in an inner-city neighborhood. The 
storytellers here are adolescents who use stories as av;y> of testing 
theories about themselves and their relationships to each other and to 
the 'world around them. 



I will toll you something about stories, 

They aren't just entertainment. 

Don't be fooled. 

They are all we have, vou see, 

all we have to fight off 

illness and death. 

Leslie Silko, Ceremony (3) 



Much has been written on the socializing or even the humaniz- 
ing aspects of storytelling, on this oi that story's lasting effects. 
Yet educators generally relv for their extolling of stories on 
those written or told for and by young children. In the years since the 
publication of Britton's Language and Learning (1 970),' many move- 
ments and trends in education have celebrated children's stories. 
Books and articles far too numerous to list have described, explained, 
and praised how children respond to the same "call of stories" that 
Coles (1989), a psychiatrist, has illustrated for adults. 

It is curious, therefore, that relatively little glorv has come to the 
stories of young people— defined here as adolescents, teenagers or 
young adults. Admittedly, it is and has always been far more romantic 
to talk of children than of those in the awkward transition between 
childhood and adulthood. But what of the stories told by young peo- 
ple? How do they use narratives, and are there particular ways in 
which they view and construct their stories? In particular, how do 
young people who see their life experiences as marginal to those of the 
mainstream use stories? If their wavs of creating and using stories 



21, 



Shirley Bricc Heath 



207 



differ from patterns we have come to expect for younger children, then 
how have they learned to create such stories? One psychologist has 
told us that "a life is created or constructed by the act of autobiogra- 
phy" (Bruner 1993). What then does it mean for young people to 
construct themselves by the telling of their experiences, beliefs, and 
feelings? Do their tales create some sort of cultural stability when 
society offers little such steadiness for them? 

The data on which this chapter is based come from transcripts 
of audiorecordings made during the activities of young people from 
ages fourteen to eighteen in inner-city youth organizations over five 
years of participant-observer research. 1 These recordings were made 
during the everyday activities — practices, planning sessions, games, 
and performances — at community centers and gathering places for 
members of youth organizations in a study designed to learn how the 
lives of inner-city youth are spent outside their home and school 
hours. These young walk daily on the edge of what mainstream 
Americans would consider disaster and life threats; most have very 
little, if any, stable family support, and most have found school a place 
that offers them little in the way of positive identity. The young of this 
study, however, have found their ways to neighborhood youth organi- 
zations — national organizations such as the YMCA, Boys and Girls 
Clubs, and scouts, or local church-affiliated or grass-roots groups such 
as dance or drama troupes, sports teams, or social clubs. There they 
have found places to belong and to count on as sources of support and 
optimism for their futures. 

Teen Drama 

In an inner-city Boys and Girls Club each day of the summer, teens 
who auditioned early in June for the coveted twenty or so spots on the 
teen drama team prepare for their grueling performance schedule of 
the year. They choose themes which they will want to use for the 
dramas they script. Later they hear experts on these topics (such as 
AIDS, teenage drunk driving, runaways, date rape, and drug usage) 
and use information from these talks and films to develop perform- 
ances for schools, juvenile detention centers, and youth groups 
throughout their city. Their performances consist of three parts. The 
first is a brief play on one of the themes they have chosen; the second 
is a dialogue between the audience and the actors, with each actor 
remaining in the character he or she has just played in the perform- 
ance. The third part is a follow-up session in which each performer 



208 



Stories as Ways of Acting Together 



speaks in his or her own voice about matters treated in the play and 
what it felt like to take the particular role of this performance. During 
the academic year, and often during the summer, the group performs 
three or four times a week. 

During the late summer, while hard at work perfecting their 
lines and practicing in character to be able to answer the questions 
their future audiences may put to them, the youth tell many stories. 
They do so to lighten their workload, cut the tension of the "heavy" 
scenes they often play, and, most often, to support their arguments for 
particular points they want to make about how the lines should go, 
where and how actors should move, and what audience responses 
may be. 

The story below emerges out of a teasing session between a boy 
and girl about to perform. 2 Each is "highsiding" (belittling or cutting 
down) the other, and the adult leader, who has been part of the jesting 
spirit, reminds David (African American) that he had gotten a ride to 
the Boys and Girls Center from Amy (European American), the girl he 
is now giving such a hard time. 

1 . Lanier: She gave you a ride. 

2. Amy: Yes, 1 think 1 did. 

3. David: It was a uh, it was uh, il was uh ride of my life. 

4. hirst, we almost 

5- Amy: David, you know/ 

David: /First, first, we almost had a 

wreck coming off my street. "Get ready to die!"/ 

~ ^'".V: /I'm a good driver, i knew 

8. she was gonna wait- 

y - David: -This car was comin |3-second pause] down 

10. the street and was turnin on my street. She had to pull 

11. out— and stop three or four times before vou could, and 

12. laughing the whole time. And then, the window |4-second 

13. pause] on the passenger side |2-second pause] goes down by 

14. itself you know. Now, it did this three or lour times. 

15. And then, you know, you cannot take off in her car when 

lf>. the air conditioning is on. Once you, vou come to a stop sign, 

17. have to turn the air conditioning off, take off, and then 

IS. turn it back on. So, I'm sittin/ 

Amxt: /It had llaunhii 



2\ 



ERIC 



Shirley Brier Heath 



209 



20. Lanier: It's possessed. 

21. Ann/: cause I'll have il all the way down to the floor like— 

22. (imitates a struggling ear against background of group laughter! 

23. David: So, I'm sittin at this stop light, burnin up, 

24. sweatin. I see the devil sittin next to me, it was so hot 

25. (stands up and uses wide-sweeping hand gestures]. She's 

26. sittin up there (imitating Amy's laugh] he, he, hee. And 

27. then, we're enmin on our way to Teen Drama, by Eddy's 

28. Chicken, she almost runs the light right into this other 

29. car. 1 ler, her friend tells her "STOP!" She wouldn't have 

30. stopped - 

31. Amy: -I was about to stop= 

32. David: -Then- 

33. Amy: -she always just tells me— 

34. David: We got to i iemphill |street|. 1 don't know where she 

35. was at, she was gonna get in the turn lane and try to go 

36. like that (acts like he is in a car and makes a super wide 
V. turn using all the lanesl 

38. Amy: | laughter] 

3 l >. David: She's lving and says she wasn't, but she had her 

40. signal on - 

41. Amy: -I was not, I was changing lanes to the middle 

42. lane, thank you. 

43. David: When you drive, Amy, you do not lake a big turn 

44. like this (again imitating her turn] to gel to the ne\t lane, 

45. ()K? Il was the ride of my life. We got to the, we got to the 

46. stop sign up here al Lipscombe, little kid walk out, and 

47. she about run over him. 

48. Amy: ] laughing] I was not. Man, you lying. 

4^. David: I'm lying? Did vou i»rdid vou not | pause I almost 

50. hit those little kids? 

51. Amy: I did not (with careful articulation on the final M 

52. David: Il was a ride of a lifetime (shaking his head in 

53. disbelief). Believe me. 

54. Amy: We'll see it I ever give you a ride again. 



210 



Stories r?s Wm/s of Acting Together 



This story carries many features that mark the stories of teens. 
They usually tell such narratives in the presence of friends who shared 
the experience and also before one or more third parties not present at 
the actual shared event. Individuals announce their own stories, usu- 
ally with the goal of "doggin" or teasing other co-participants in the 
event. These listeners provide backup — the laughter and other sound 
effects that reinforce the drama of the telling. They often add their own 
dialogue, details, or rebuttals. The storyteller who initiates the story 
remains, however, in control of the group and summarizes the tale, 
often with a reminder to the audience that they should believe the 
teller and not those who were simply there at the event but did not 
initiate this telling. 

Such tellings often create a siring of stories, with individual 
participants adding their own version of the event, with the opener, 
"Now, let me tell you what REALLY happened!" The stories embody 
description, persuasion, exposition, with argument implicit; but they 
must also include humor — achieved through character development, 
word play, and satire. Punctuating the stories are gestures, often highly 
animated, and looks at members of the audience to see if they acknow- 
ledge understanding slang or references to local places, and register 
appropriate amusement or horror at the events recounted. 

Stories that achieve any status among teen associates such as 
those described here must have some actual basis, but they must also 
achieve humor through exaggeration and hyperbole in abundance. 
Tellers include much internal dialogue thought, though not expressed, 
at the time of the actual event. In addition, during the story's telling, 
they create on-the-spot dialogues between teller and other participants 
to increase the liveliness and participatory nature of the story. 

Unspoken in any direct way in such stories are the tensions, 
fears, competitions, and marginalized areas of knowledge from which 
they draw. These stories' background themes, like those of any inter- 
personal verbal teasing, stand as serious matters within the commu- 
nity, matters so serious they can only rarely be directly articulated. 

In the case of Amy and David, their early jesting in the initial 
portions of practice had led Amy to call David "a monkey." He re- 
sponded, "So was that a racial, a racial remark, uh?" Amy replies: "1 
didn't say you were a black monkey. 1 just said you were a monkey." 
Later in the conversation, the two tease about the fact that David lives 
in a less desirable part of town than Amy does, and her taking him 
home after practice might not be a g od idea. Throughout the story, 
listeners are left to believe that only Amy and David were in the car; 



Shirley Bricc Heath 



211 



thus the tension between the two of them is highlighted. However, at 
line 29, David mentions "her" friend and clearly separates himself 
from Amy ami her friend, as well as from any part of the causes of the 
entire event. He leaves, therefore, the strong suggestion that Amy was 
"out of control" on this early morning ride for reasons that are left for 
listeners to guess. 

This story and others of the youth carry subtle messages about 
these voung people's sense of the extent to which any one of them can 
take on the outsider's authoritative voice. In the excerpt above (lines 
49 and 50), David assumes the role of prosecuting attorney, and Amy 
responds as witness secure in her self-denial. In this exchange, the 
laughter of both dries up; they take on serious facial expressions and 
upright postures and speak in their assumed dramatic roles for this 
brief on-the-spot dialogue. Stories of young people often include some 
public authority, who is played with appropriate dramatic gestures 
and shifts of voice quality, along with rhetorical questions and expres- 
sions of emotional evaluation. Many of their stories carry a curious 
combination of didacticism and daredeviltry; at the same time that 
celebrations of foolhardiness or ventures into danger events are heard, 
so are internal lessons (for example, lines 43 and 44 regarding the way 
to turn a corner). 

From Gangbanging to Youth Service 

Although most of the stories told by the inner-city youth are of their 
own experiences, they also often use these familiar experiences to 
reshape stories that tell of events and people quite distant from them. 
A common way of doing this occurs when youngsters in a group hear 
of something that has taken place outside their environment. They 

begin to reshape that event, often with the lead-in "It's like " They 

construct the world "out there" into their own by reshaping the narra- 
tives of others to fit their own worlds. But a clear xve-theif undertone 
pervades these stories to indicate that, though we know what they are 
like, xvc cannot be tiny. 

During the events in the former Soviet Union in August of 1991, 
young men in a gang intervention group connected with a YMCA in 
an inner-city area told of the attempted coup by reshaping it as gang 
battle. They similarly reshaped the conflict in the Middle East that led 
to Desert Storm: "It was like their gang [that of the forces of the United 
Statesl was against the Iraqi gang ... it was like a big old war, big old 
war. hike a gang fight." 



2'- 



212 



Stories f?s Wn\fs of Acting Together 



Summary statements regarding these mctaphoric reshaping* 
link what is "out there" with what the young people know; unstated 
explanation is assumed to follow. In other words, "If you know the 
way it is here, and you can pick out points of comparison between here 
and there, then you can handle both/' Young people from inner-city 
gangs described the U.S. involvement in the Kuwait-Iraq conflict as 
"that's their thing to take care of." The distance between them and their 
filing and u> and our thing rarely escapes underlining in their stories. 

Their retellings in response to something outside their direct 
experience usually then take a direct comparative frame, in which the 
base ol what is known is taken as something to move from to knowl- 
edge that is not verifiable by direct experience. In a conversation in 
which a new kind of drug just coming to the West Coast was men- 
tioned by an outsider, one of the local young men (Latino) responded: 

55. hmior: I think nowadays everybody just has their own/ 

Roberto: /yeah/ 
ktuiai: /their 
own way of experience, you know, hike 1 experienced— I 
experienced a lot of drugs before in mv life, but I mean, 
I've never been [inaudible] to, you know, any kind of 
other phase or nothing like that. But I think pretty much 
nowadays kids these days are, in these davs and age, are 
going to drugs so fast and experiencing so many drugs, 
that 1 mean, they're liable to do anything, you know. Not so 
long ago there was this lady w ho was smoking wickets, and 
1 don't know if vou know what that is, but it's like 
embalming fluid, it's VCV. They smoke reefer and they dip it 
into embalming fluid and thev smoke it, and like il gets them 
some kind of high that they really don't know what they're 
doing. 

Roberto: I hallucination. 

Istitlor: Yeah, hallucination. So she was taking her habv a 
hath, and I don't know, she forgot about it, and when she 
realized it, oh, the bathtub is running over, and when sin 
went to the bathtub, her baby was in the bathtub drowned. 
I ler husband came in, he was on the same thing, wicket 
linandiblel, and he savs "What'd vou do to mv son?" And, 



57 
SH 

h() 
61 
02 
fc.l 

(vt 

Ml 
o7 
6cS 
(+) 
70 
71 
72 
73 
74 
7S 
7h 



ERJC 



21 



Shirley Br ice Heath 



213 



78. and, boom, killed her. So his baby and his wife is dead, and 

79. he's in jail now today. 

This story estaolishes a comparative frame between the speaker 
and the young group of "these days.' 7 The story is punctuated with 
evaluative comments (lines 61 and 64), explanations (lines 66 to 70), 
details of dialogue, and uses of the present tense (lines 74 and 77) to 
highlight the impending critical action that will give the turning point 
of the tale. The effect of the actions of the tale stands unmistakenly in 
the present (lines 78 and 79). 

How Tales Are Structured 

Among youth familiar with street life, direct contact with violence is 
an everyday event. They need not spend their time simply chronicling 
events. Instead, they leave an unspoken sense of meditation or think- 
ing about action and knowledge. Grammatical structuring plays an 
important role in developing this theme: shifts between past and pre- 
sent tense, uses of modals or conditionals, and expressions of the 
speaker's own comparative experiences (lines 58 and 59), and mental 
state (of disbelief, horror, sadness, puzzlement, and so forth — lines 61 
to 64). 

In both the stories illustrated here, as well as in any sample of 
story that exceeded ten lines in our corpus, tellers shifted between 
present and past tense to foreground certain events so as to move the 
story forward. David shifts back and forth between present and past, 
using the present to highlight the central focus of each of the critical 
incidents of "bad driving" on Amy's part. He offers his commentary 
to listeners through the use of a conditional perfect (for example, 
"wouldn't") as well as present tense (lines 23 to 29), and when he uses 
the present tense to involve the audience, he shifts to past tense to 
describe Amy's actions. Isador similarly shifts to present tense to de- 
scribe the turning event of his story, as well 'as to lay out his own 
evaluation of background causes and resulting consequences. He uses 
the past tense to offer background information on events that sup- 
ported or led to the critical actions. 

Young people begin their stories by suggesting a narrative 
through their use of prototypical openings: "It was," "There was," and 
so forth. With their shift of time focus, especially in narratives of 
comparison such as that of Isador, they hold the present and them- 
selves in opposition with the past and others— either in action or in 




214 



Stories as Ways of Acting Together 



emotional response to the event. David moves back and forth between 
his story and its dialogue, and the here and now of a staging of 
dialogue with the present audience. In addition (in line 14), he uses 
"now" to bring the listener back to the scene of events and to narrow 
the framing of the story. Isador, in his several repetitions that establish 
the "then and now" aspect of his story, establishes its basic two-part 
comparative frame. The final "he's in jail now today" once again 
repeats the presentness of repercussions of the events and suggests the 
ongoing nature of events carried out under the influence of drugs. The 
narrative sets up a tension with many of its non-narrative features, 
especially the generalizations (for example, line 64) of Isador's story 
and the dialogue exchange (lines 43 and 44, 48, 49 to 51) of David's. 

Through these stories and those of other teens, the listener 
watches the teller go through thought processes and emotional re- 
sponses almost as though in real time while within the frame of a past 
narrative. Listeners, including Amy in David's story, are invoked, 
sometimes literally, to think about events, to take them out of the 
story's frame of just being something that did happen. Instead, the 
telling brings them to the action of the events and to interactions in 
the moment to persuade them to reflect and to incorporate ideas re- 
lated to the story into their own perceptions (for example, the way to 
turn a corner or the repercussions of "weird" or of mixing drugs). 
Young people tell stories not then so much to invoke common memo- 
ries as to project perceptions or reflections they want listeners to store. 
But such ^..didactic purpose cannot go unveiled. Hence, stories must 
be on the surface clear entertainment, joking around, or just comparing 
what is going on out there with what the youth themselves do. When 
Isador talks to adult outsiders about his storytelling with younger 
street kids, he says: 

I think I — I think I'll be good for kids because of the simple fact 
is I've been through it, and I can sit down with a kid and tell 
him "I've been through what you've been through, or maybe 
even more," you know, "and 1 could tell you things that you 
would never believe but I bet you one dav will come true in 
your life, and you're going to say 'Oh no, I shoulda listened to 
Isador.'" 

Common expressions such as "I don't know" or "I'm not sure" suggest 
possibilities beyond events of the telling and establish a distance be- 
tween the teller and any apparent authoritative position as knowcr. 
When the young step into such positions, they do so by assuming the 



21D 



Shirley Bricc Heath 



215 



voice of the outsider and not that of their own personal character. 
Being serious, thoughtful, or prescriptive within the inner city or about 
topics such as racial tensions, drug use, or family violence marks one 
as vulnerable and sensitive— qualities that do not make for survival in 
the transition between childhood and adult life in urban areas. 

Stories as Theories 

The tellers of these stories are young people whose narratives in both 
content and form find little place within classrooms or other main- 
stream institutional settings. These stories do, however, coincide in 
numerous ways with those that are described in many highly accept- 
able and mainstream settings for adults. Scholars in several disciplines 
have repeatedly noted that, for adults, stories are theories; they need 
not be replaced by abstractions or explanations. Coles (1989) wrote of 
his own revelation of his need to learn in his early days of medical 
practice to set aside the abstractions he had learned "in one school 
setting after another." His mentor told him: 

The people who come to see us bring us their stories. They hope 
they tell them well enough so that we understand the truth of 
their lives. They hope we know how to interpret their stories 
correctly. We have to remember that what we hear is their story. 
(1989, 7; italics in the original) 

Coles reflected on how he was to use these stories in his own thinking 
and perception that would lead presumedly to informed and re- 
formed actions: "[N]cw a difference obtained: I was learning new 
abstractions [the stories of his patients] and using them ... to help 
understand the palpable pain and suffering of another human being" 
(8). Mink, a philosopher and literary critic, echoes this view of sto- 
nes—especially those created by fiction writers— as theory: "[Nlarra- 
tive form as it is exhibited in both history and fiction is particularly 
important as a rival to theoretical explanation or understanding" 
(1987, 185). This role of story as a way of explaining and of prompting 
others to new perceptions makes special sense for those who see their 
experiences as somehow marginal, as lying outside the mainstream of 
their associates. 

If we can risk giving a generalization to the stories of youth, then 
it is possible to say that the message of their stories is not "Here is the 
world; take it or leave it," but instead, "Here is something to think 
about/' Einstein and other scientists have similarly noted the power of 



2. J 



216 



Stories as Ways of Acting Together 



stories and the observations that both spawn them and are spurred on 
by them: "The theory determines what we can observe." 

As one literary critic (Hanson 1989) has noted, the story in the 
United States may well have been dominated by "losers and' loners, 
exiles, women, blacks — writers who for one reason or another have 
not been part of the ruling 'narrative' or epistemological/experiential 
framework of their society" (2). Stories align themselves with hidden 
or mysterious dimensions of subjective experience — particularly ap- 
propriate for those who see their vision as alienated and set apart. 

Ironically, as gangs have turned more and more to the use of 
weapons that bring such brutal harm, and as the streets of inner cities 
have become more like war zones, it is no longer the case as it was in 
earlier years that the words of stories are the dangerous or provocative 
weapons in youth encounters and confrontations. Simply being in the 
wrong place, wearing the wrong sign, or making an inappropriate 
gesture provokes violence and harm now. Direct communication be- 
tween the warring parties rarely takes place. 

The same is true, more often than not, for confrontations within 
the homes of these young people. They report that when trouble 
begins they do not enter the fray, but find ways to retreat — outside, to 
the street, to a friend's house, or to their youth organization. The 
stories the young tell each other have become the least lethal weapons 
they have; indeed, in Leslie Silko's words, they have become the only 
thing they have to fight against "illness and death." They use their 
stories to bond with each other, coating their stories often in humor, 
testing their relationships within the storytelling and listening group, 
and comparing themselves and their situations with those of others. 
Stories, when they can be told in safe places, are their theories, ways 
of testing what others feel and think and how they and their friends 
stand in contrast with others. These uses of story are, ironically just 
those that psychiatrists, literary critics, attorneys, and others have 
extolled for adult stories. 

Connections to Classrooms 

But adults rarely get to hear stories of the type described here. The 
occasions and relationships of intimacy and common knowledge and 
trust rarely present themselves for youth and adults to come together 
through story, as adults and younger children do. But what if the 
marginalized youth of these stories were to want to find ways to bring 
their stories to link with those of literature and theory in academic 



ZZ k 

ERJC 



Shirley Brice Heath 



217 



settings? What difference might it make to know more about how 
inner-city young people tell and receive stories and attribute meanings 
to them in their everyday lives? 

First and foremost, classrooms must be safe places. Adults must 
not offer their summative comments or elaborate on the moral impli- 
cations of the stories of young people. In addition, it almost goes 
without saving that adults must realize that if they ask for stones to be 
told directly to them, rather than to young peers, the stories will not 
be those of the daily interactions of youth. With care, sensitivity, and 
flexibility, however, teachers who want to integrate the range of com- 
petencies of students' everyday stories into the classroom can do so 
with comparative and analytical perspectives on classroom textual 
materials. The following types of situations created in the classroom 
can help in these efforts: 

1. Learners work in small groups to record, transcribe, and study 
stories collected from family members and friends. They use these 
stories in class to develop questions to ask storytellers and listeners 
about the functions and evaluations of stories and to compare the 
kinds of background knowledge expected for each story to be compre- 
hensible. 

2. Following such small-group work, the class creates a composite 
picture of the regions, cultures, and languages reflected in the stories 
of the class. Some whole-class discussion enables students to prepare 
for more small-group work in which they consider themes, structural 
features, and uses of particular techniques of style of the stories they 
have collected. 

3. Further small-group work centers on talking about differences and 
similarities of themes, uses of particular structural characteristics 
(such as setting and character descriptions, dialogue, and references to 
folklore, myths, and proverbs), and occasions and purposes of telling 
stories. Each group works out a comparative chart of such features, 
identifying stories also by their region, language, and culture of origin. 

4. Beyond and within these group exchanges around stories, learners 
can write their own stories to contradict, expand, or parallel those they 
have collected. For example, elders interviewed may tell stories of 
family reunions and occasions of celebration of cultural membership; 
the voung may write counter-stories that reflect their views (perhaps 
unfavorable, ambivalent, or openly resistant) of such occasions. 



218 



Stories as Wax/s of Acting Together 



This interplay of class discussion, small-group work, and indi- 
vidual writing and reading of stories prepares learners to move to the 
study of different types and uses of printed stories: news stories, 
fictional tales, traditional stories, or accounts of daily events. Ways in 
which these differ in structure, background knowledge assumed, and 
expectations of uses can provide the frame for preparing a composite 
picture for comparison with the stories collected in the class. For 
example, the individual stories from Amy Tan's Joy Luck Club may 
parallel some of those written by students in class who question or 
challenge traditional cultural celebrations or myths pertaining to 
women, men, children, outsiders, or animals. From their comparative 
analyses of their own collected and written stories, learners can begin 
to approach published stories with a sense of expertise and familiarity. 
But they must do so in a safe place and from a solid grounding of 
appreciation of the intricate features of style and substance of their 
own stories. 

This type of work with stories — collecting, comparing, analyz- 
ing, and cataloguing — as well as reading and interpreting builds from 
two central themes: stories occur in every society, but cultures shape 
their forms and uses in multiple ways that vary across ages and situ- 
ations of listeners, as well as the sociohistorical circumstances of the 
group. Some stories, such as those told by agricultural and nomadic 
groups, appear to depend on inside knowledge regarding seasons and 
metaphors of development. Other stories, such as those of groups that 
see themselves as marginalized and exploited within their own society, 
appear to move from description to dialogue without precise steps 
that lead to a clear plot as customarily defined in classroom instruc- 
tion. Still other stories rest on expectations of shared background 
knowledge regarding animals, places, or root literary works (such as 
the Bible or the Quran) or oral sayings or myths (especially those 
regarding taboos or societal "secrets"). 

Learning to expect the unexpected in stories told by the young 
becomes necessary across cultures, times, and regions and thus en- 
ables students to consider the important narratives that frame their 
own lives. These narratives fit no plot structure studied in classrooms, 
but they may often mesh with stories of older members of the out-of- 
school group. 

Such framing and reframing do not simply refer to group histo- 
ries or distant figures, but perhaps even more importantly to young 
people, their everyday planning, personal relations, and veiled theo- 
ries, perceptions, and reflections on themselves, others around them, 



2-'.; 



Shirley Bricc Heath 



219 



and the conditions of their lives. These latter stories rarely receive 
attention in classrooms, and yet these do more of the work to shape 
everyday learning than do tales of faraway events, ancestors, and 
places. Through the stories they tell, young people persuade, argue, 
describe, and entertain. The two stories analyzed here illustrate also 
the ways in which they use shifts of dialect, perspectives, and roles to 
indicate both their sense of relationship with each other and their 
theories about actions and possibilities within their cultural worlds. 
Moreover, they use stories to suggest what taking risks might mean, 
their strong interdependence with their peers, and the restraints that 
outside authorities and the inevitable outcomes of some actions can 
hold over them. When David takes on the voice of the law and when 
Isador tells of loss and death from drugs, their stories give them ways 
of influencing peers without risking loss of face. Through their 
tellings, they are both within and outside events and conditions re- 
counted, and their own reflections and considerations of causes and 
consequences create one of several subtexts their stories hold. 



Notes 

1 . This research project, "Language, Socialization, and Neighborhood- 
based Organizations: Moving Youth beyond Dependency on School and Fam- 
ily/' was funded bv the Spencer Foundation. Senior associates who worked 
with the project's co-principal investigators, Heath and Milbrey W. McLaugh- 
lin, were Merita A. Irby and Juliet Langman, who collected data and worked 
closely with teams of twenty junior ethnographers in the youth organizations 
studied. Language data are drawn from a million-word corpus of language 
transcripts made from audiotape recordings within the youth organizations. 
This chapter is an abbreviated version of a chapter in Suitable Company (forth- 
coming). Findings from the project are further detailed in Heath and 
McLaughlin (1993). 

2. The slash marks [ / 1 indicate interruption of one speaker by another. 
The equal sign [=] indicates a latching of talk where the second speaker picks 
up from the first speaker and continues talking. 



References 

Britton, J. (1970). Language ami teaming. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin 
Books. 

Brunei; J. (1993). The autobiographical process. In R. Folkenflik (Fd.), The 
culture of autobiography: Construction* of self- representation (38-56). 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 



220 



Stories as Ways of Acting Together 



Coles, R. (1989). The call of atones: Teaching and the moral imagination. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin. 

Hanson, C. (Ed.). (1989). Re-reading the short story. New York: St. Martin's 
Press. 

Heath, S. B., and McLaughlin, M. W. (1993). Identity and inner-city youth: Be- 
yond ethnicity and gender. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Mink, L. (1987). Narrative form as a cognitive instrument. In B. Fay, E. 

Golob, and R. Vann (Eds.), Historical understanding (182-203). Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press. 

Silko, L. (1977). Ceremony. New York: Viking Press. 



1 5 Writing as a 
Foundation for 
Transformative 
Community in the 
Tenderloin 

Carol E. Heller 

University of Illinois at Chicago 

Carol Heller allows us access to the inner workings of a loomen's 
writing group in "the Tenderloin" a San Francisco neighborhood. She 
shows us how r amidst the urban problems that surrounded them, the 
women formed a supportive community. Witliin this community, they 
transformed their daily lives into powerful stories and imagined for 
themselves and their neighbors alternative possibilities. 

Every big city in America has a neighborhood, often many, where 
people from the "better parts of town" would just as soon not 
find themselves after dark — neighborhoods where, through 
quirks of history or geography, poverty and despair have become 
unmistakable, as has the restlessness and violence to which these 
conditions are so closely related. In San Francisco, this neighborhood, 
called the Tenderloin, is forty square blocks located just south of the 
opulent downtown shopping area. Within its tightly packed popula- 
tion of 25,000 exists the largest concentration of intravenous drug 
users, welfare recipients, mental health patients, and homeless people 
in San Francisco. For many years, the Tenderloin's crime rate has been 
the highest in the city. 

While other cities have used the name "Tenderloin" to signify 
the city's "underbelly," San Francisco's Tenderloin received its name, 
as the story goes, by special circumstances many years ago when a 
not-too-ethical city policeman who "earned" a side income via drug 
traffic declared, "No more hamburger for mo. From now on, it's ten- 
derloin." In the lore of this city, the name has come to be a symbol of 



2?G 



222 



Writing as a Foundation for Transformative Community 



drugs, crime, food lines, homelessness, and in the eyes of many out- 
siders an inarticulate hopelessness. But little by little the worlds within 
this neighborhood have been rearranging themselves, shifting. This 
shifting has occurred less as a visible change to outsiders, more as a 
transformation within the consciousness of the community itself. As 
Rob Waters, former editor of the twelve-year-old Tenderloin Times, 
states of this San Francisco neighborhood: 

Today's Tenderloin is redeveloping itself from the inside out. . . . 
It is a change that fails some statistics tests. The Tenderloin's 
real transformation is one that you would have to have been 
hero a good while to fully sense. A change in direction, in 
momentum, felt at ground level A transformation best un- 
derstood by meeting some of the people who are making it 
happen without making headlines. (Waters 1987) 

In the coming pages, I will introduce some of the people who 1 
believe are contributing to this transformation. They are poets and 
writers living or working in the Tenderloin. With the support of 
community-based writing groups and public readings, these writers 
are not only telling their stories, but in so doing they are bringing their 
community together in gatherings which foster critical reflection of the 
writers' varied histories and imaginations, as well as the social condi- 
tions which surround daily life in their neighborhood and in the wider 
world. 

Writing in the Tenderloin 

Writing is a profoundly difficult undertaking under the best of condi- 
tions. In the last twenty years, literacy researchers like Emig (1971) and 
Dyson (1989), among many others, have explored the circumstances 
which support the growth of written expression. Leo Tolstoy, Charles 
Dickens, Tillie Olsen, Alice Walker, and George Orwell are among 
many novelists who have addressed the particular struggles that poor 
people face in order to write — in order to maintain, in Olsen's words, 
"creation's needs for full functioning" (1978, 6). As Orwell says of his 
hero Gordon Comstock, in Keep the Aspidistra Flying, "He couldn't cope 
with rhymes and adjectives. You can't, with only two pence and a 
halfpenny in your pocket" (1936, (n). Through his hero, Orwell reminds 
us that writing is an activity that is nourished by security, by quiet, by 
a sense of safety and order in one's daily rhythms. The creative spirit 
is offered little of this in the Tenderloin. Yet here, creative spirits are 
providing each other nourishment in groups and gatherings. 



2 i i 



Carol E. Heller 



223 



Women Writers Workshop 

The Tenderloin Reflection and Education Center, an independent 
learning and resource center, sponsors a storytelling and culture 
group, an artists' and activists' group, and a workshop particularly for 
women writers, all of which meet regularly in the Tenderloin. In the 
writing workshops, those just beginning to express their thoughts on 
paper to those more experienced convene with facilitators from the 
Reflection Center to find an audience of peers, to express content, 
experiment with language, and hone form. In the writing workshops, 
too, participants discuss social issues and plan ways for their creativity 
to intersect with grass-roots politics as enabling forces for the wider 
community. 

Ben Clarke, director of the Tenderloin Reflection and Education 
Center, was one of the driving forces behind the establishment of the 
adult writing program. He explains the philosophy: 

Wo focus on content, on issues. We base the writing groups on 
a liberation model in which the experience of participants acts 
as the core of the learning process. We want to involve members 
in articulating and reflecting back on their own experience. . . . 
We want to create a record of this world. Many people here have 
fallen through the cracks . . . and in spite of that, through that, 
have so much to say. They're only beginning to recognize that 
thev do. It happens through being heard. 

Seventy-six-year-old Leona Walker, a member of the Tenderloin 
Women Writers Workshop, is one participant who became involved 
with community action projects partly as a result of support from her 
writing workshop cohorts. Encouraged by the group's members, 
Leona, a widow who long ago in her native Oklahoma wrote poems 
of daily life, began to write poems about her new neighborhood. The 
group encouraged her to send these as well as letters about housing 
and street conditions to local papers or to San Francisco's mayor. For 
the last several years she has headed a nationwide group of elderly 
citizens in protest against the sale of subsidized housing and, function- 
ing as a writer-advocate for her elderly neighbors, has successfully 
blocked a federal sale of several buildings in the Tenderloin. 

Like Leona, thirty-four-year-old Cleo Meeks, also a member of 
the workshop, began to use her new belief in the power of the written 
word on her community's behalf. Once homeless, she began the 
"Homeless Link/' a newsletter of poems, stories, and articles by home- 
less people. Like Leona's efforts, Cleo's are being met with some 
success, winning her meetings with the mayor's commission on home- 



2?3 



Writing as a Foundation for Transformative Community 



lessness. Leona Walker and Cleo Meeks are but two of dozens of 
Tenderloin residents of varying ages, ethnicities, and backgrounds 
who have participated in the Reflection Center workshops. Not all of 
them have become activists. Indeed, participants use the writing 
groups to fulfill varying functions in their lives. While each participant 
has unique characteristics, living as poor people in a rough urban 
neighborhood unites them. So does the intense desire to connect with 
each other and tell their stories. 

In October of 1987 1 began to visit the Tenderloin Women Writers 
Workshop, then the newest writing workshop in the Tenderloin. As a 
graduate student in education, I had become increasingly interested in 
the growing body of literacy research which explores the roles that 
reading and writing assume in different groups and communities 
(Heath 1983; Dyson 1989, among many others). By exploring and 
documenting the growth of the Tenderloin Women Writers Workshop 
and its individual members, 1 hoped to contribute to a fuller under- 
standing of the varied social contexts that support writers and the craft 
of writing. What became increasingly clear during my three years of 
participating in the workshop was that, through reading their own and 
examining each other's stories, poems, novels, and plays and through 
participating in discussions that emerged both from these texts and 
from less text-bound interactions, workshop members were in fact 
participating in a multilayered educational undertaking. In the groups 
and in the public readings and pamphlets which emerged from them, 
the members' histories and experiences became vehicles for social 
analysis and often, as for Cleo and Leona, for personal and social 
action. 

Tenderloin writers, often in the company of writers from other 
neighborhoods — who ironically seemed to seek in this marginal set- 
ting a certain hope and moral guidance — listened to and analyzed 
poems and stories that encouraged renewed meaning and vitality in 
their own lives and in their own stories. The experience, knowledge, 
and insight stemming from members' widely different histories and 
reference points and offered so generously in these gatherings consti- 
tuted the emerging strength of this workshop. At the same time, this 
endeavor revealed how many levels of support and education can 
occur simultaneously in settings that one might initially view as ac- 
complishing a more narrowly defined literacy function. 

It also became clear that to look at the workshop through a lens 
narrowly focused on the obvious literacy activity occurring would 



Carol £. Heller 



225 



leave out far too much. The functions the workshop served, functions 
I came to think of as levels of support for participants, were highly 
interwoven and built upon the workshop's philosophical foundation 
that writing is not looked upon as separate from real life, but is used 
to form meaningful connections to that life. The levels of support 
included (1) building skills as writers through the writing critique 
itself, including forming definitions of oneself as a writer and engag- 
ing in complex examinations of language; (2) sharing life histories and 
experiences; (3) telling "mirror stories" (similar stories inspired by 
others), which often leads to the breaking of silences; (4) boosting 
identity and self-esteem, as people, as writers, and as public presences; 
(5) raising consciousness and political awareness; (6) sharing informa- 
tion and resources; (7) bonding and building an internal community; 
(8) pure and simple teaching and learning; (9) supporting each other 
to take action in the world. 

Community Writing as Cultural Forum 

Communities like the Tenderloin are rarely included in the academic 
discussions surrounding the meaning of literacy. People who live in 
such settings are seldom seen as strong spokespeople for literacy's 
capacities. Historically, the trajectory of educational research has typi- 
cally extended from mainstream settings to marginal settings, the lat- 
ter all too often being viewed as the "deficit-like" terminus for 
mainstream research. Yet, as Holzman suggests, there may be "truth at 
the periphery that might not be as evident in the center" (1986, 157). 
For indeed it is in such settings that relationships among people living 
in community, struggling in community, and writing in community 
may likely reveal the foundations of such humane, civil — yes, trans- 
formative—sites of learning as those for which we all search. 

Bruner (1986) might call such settings "cultural forums" where 
storytelling is encouraged and granted validity as a mode of knowing. 
Greene (1990) has described such settings as "social harbors" where 
people come together "to enact a process of moving persons into the 
kind of relationship that may enable each of them to become, to desire, 
to reach beyond themselves" (332). 

The following section introduces the Tenderloin Women Writers 
Workshop during one of its first meetings in 1987. Already in those 
early weeks, and then growing with almost synergistic power as the 
participants became closer through time, these powerful functions 
were being enacted. 



2.-, ) 



226 



Writing as a Foundation for Transformative Community 



The Stories Unfold 

Beatrice, an Anglo in her forties, has just finished reading a journal 
entry describing an evening of life in the hotel where she lives. It's a 
streams-consciousness piece, an entry that both describes some of 
the characters living in her building and suggests the chronic noise 
and disruptions that form the background of her life there. Her writing 
contrasts with the more focused poems that Mickey, an African Ameri- 
can in her fifties, and Jan, an Anglo in her forties, had read just before 
her. "It's not a finished product," Beatrice says somewhat apologeti- 
cally as she finishes. Mary TallMountain, a sixty-nine-year-old 
Athabaskan Native American and the only published writer in the 
group, reassures her that her wilting is at a very early stage and that 
she might pick one part of her journal and try to turn it into a story, 
even a made-up one. "1 see a story in there. It's all there. It has time 
and action and conflict." Martha Nichols, an Anglo in her thirties and 
the group's facilitator, and Maria Rand, a sixty-three-year-old Angio, 
agree. After telling the group that she has almost no quiet time to 
attend to the writing she wants to do, Beatrice offers that she'll give it 
a try. 

Maria's Ruby Brooklyn Arrives 

It's Maria Rand's turn to read. Wearing an oversized denim coat and 
clutching a manila folder thick with typing paper, Maria, who's been 
chomping at the bit to read ever since she arrived today, lets out a 
jubilant chuckle, "This is my story of life as a young chick, life on the 
road!" She chuckles again, seeming to delight in the secrets she's about 
to disclose. Maria had read the beginning of her novel last week, but 
offers background now for the women who weren't there. 

This is from my novel, my life history. It's going to be called The 
Life ami Time* of Ruby Brooklyn. I must explain that when I was 
eighteen years old I went on the road by myself. I was curious 
and wanted to see the world, so this is me at eighteen in Chi- 
cago . . . I'm real tough! 

Another delighted laugh and she launches into a saga whose chapters 
will take her much of the first three years of her time in the workshop 
to complete. 

Have you ever been to Chicago when the wind is whistling 
down Wabash? Well, let me tell you, one winter some forty 
years ago, I landed there, tired and dirty and very hungry. Oil 
just to be alive and young and free. To hear people's voices," look 



231 



Carol E. Heller 



227 



at their faces. Just to be where the action was. That's what I 
wanted. And the neon lights didn't disappoint me. The band 
was playing "Night Train" and the stripper was giving it all she 
had. I stumbled around in the dark trying to find a seat. The 
place was full of servicemen in tight fitting pants 

Maria reads on, looking up above her bifocals to check on the 
responses of the group; she laughs, apparently delighted to discover 
her rapt audience. As her story continues, she describes the beginning 
of young Ruby Brooklyn's life on the road. In this passage, she had 
wandered into a strip joint where soon a group of young marines, 
mistaking her for a prostitute, would eagerly solicit her services. Ruby, 
at once shocked, angered, and terrified, slams one of the soldiers over 
the head with a bottle and runs out of the nightclub in tears. 

I walked the streets alone until I found a serene little bar called 
the College of Complexes, what is known to squares as a way 
out beat hangout. 

"This was the beat era," she explains to workshop members, many of 
them younger than she. "And I'm an old beatnik!" Another huge, 
Maria Rand laugh springs forth as she reads of her heroine, Ruby 
Brooklyn, dancing the night away at the College of Complexes, only 
to return to her hotel room in the wee hours of the morning to find 
she'd been locked out, her suitcase deposited in another room, the 
money she had saved and carefully hidden in its secret pocket stolen. 
Salima, a fifty-year-old African American, utterly attentive to Maria's 
reading, nods and laughs at the images the scene evokes; it's almost as 
though the picture might be a familiar one to her. Before she concedes 
the floor, Maria, who's gone a bit over time, asks to finish just this 
passage, which ends with Ruby's attempt the next day, with no money 
to her name, to find a much needed meal. As she finishes reading, 
voices of Tenderloin kids playing on Leavenworth Street are heard in 
the background. 

After wiping my mouth with a red Irish linen napkin, 1 tipped 
the waitress my last quarter, and asked to see the manager . . . 
he was wringing his hands, his face wrapped in the phony 
practiced smile of head waiters. As soon as I mentioned 1 had 
no monev, he turned into an old man with colorless eyes and 
saliva spewing from his mouth. He was flinging his arms and 
poking his finger into the air. "What do you mean coming into 
a respectable place and not having money?!" Poor man. 1 was 
starting to feel sorry for him. Evidently life hadn't prepared him 
for this kind of emergency. He demanded lo know why oh why 
had I picked on his place. "Cause 1 was hungry" 1 said. This 




228 



Writing as a Foundation for Transformative Community 



seemed to throw him into another frenzy. . . . "OUT! OUT! 
OUT!" He threw me out. "And if you come back, I'll kill you!" 

Maria ends her reading with another bellowing laugh. "OK I'll give 
somebody else a chance to read. But this is my childhood!" 

Salima, her gray fisherman's cap angled over her forehead, is the 
first to respond. "Yea I can relate to that too. I can relate to those streets 
too." 

Maria: Really? 
Salima: Yea! 

Maria: The mean streets! Of course this is when I was eight- 
een, when covered wagons were circling the Indians! 

Mary TallMountain, Salima, and Maria let out a great laugh. 

Salima: [still laughing] Yea, I can relate to that too. That's all 
right! 

Maria: Oh, I got a good education, baby. 

A discussion begins, prompted by Martha's question of whether the 
marines in the nightclub might have said a few too many "fuck you's" 
to Ruby to be believable. 

Maria: That's the way they talk! 
Salima: You don't know servicemen! 

Beatrice: I'm from Minnesota, but I know that's the way they 
talk! 

Maria: I'm not using those words to shock anyone. That's just 
the way they talk. 

Others enter the conversation. Several agree that she should 
keep the "fuck you's" in, but remove some of the qualifiers. Martha 
talks up the power of simple language. She cautions Maria on her 
wordiness, but praises her story too. "It's ten times better than a lot of 
stuff that's out th?re." Maria brings up her past efforts to publish other 
stories she's written. 

Maria: I keep sending it out and they send me back rejection 
slips. One agent told me I wrote like Charles Bukowski. . . . 
So I said, "well, if I write like Charles Bukowski and you 
like Charles Bukowski, why don't vou publish me?" 

Salima: Good question! 

Maria: But she didn't answer my question. 

Martha: Your stuff, it's got more of a narrative. It's the same 
kind of material. 



Carol E. Heller 



229 



Maria: I thought, "Oh to Hell with it/' but I'll get back to it 
now. 

Others offer Maria tips. Beatrice would like to see her send it to a 
friend of hers in Minnesota. "It's so midwest; the character of the west 
coast is different." Taking up the suggestion, Martha offers to bring 
Maria names of smaller publishing houses in Chicago and encourages 
others to keep thinking of good advice for her. She reminds people of 
Saturday's Tenderloin reading, hopes that Maria will read Ruby Brook- 
lyn for that event, and asks Salima, who had volunteered earlier, if 
she's ready to take the floor. 

Salima's Message to the Tenderloin 

Salima takes off her cap and moves to a spot near the door where she 
can stand. Reading from a piece of notebook paper, she laughs with a 
hint of stage fright as she imitates the ring of a phone and mimes the 
action of picking up the receiver to answer a call: 

Hello? Who? No, you not back again. Every time I try to get my 
life straight, you pop your tail up. Yes, I was lonely and we were 
friends. That was then. What? Don't make me puke. Listen, 
Satan, having you for a friend almost caused my life to end. 
Each morning I woke up you kept poking me with your devil's 
stick. You what? Sorry? That's a lie. The devil ain't never sorry. 
There you go, trying to trick me again, but it won't work this 
time. No, you listen! You caused me nothin' but shame and 
pain. Shame because I lost my self-respect, pride and dignity, 
[pause] Shut the fuck up! Let me tell you about fear and pain. 
The sickness of being your friend. Fear of going to sleep. Afraid 
to wake up. Not knowing what I had to do to stop my nose and 
ears from running. My nerves from crawling. My head from 
hurting. Hot and cold chilis. Fever. Throwing my insides up. 
Diarrhea. Stomach's in knots. And every joint in my body was 
aching. I couldn't sleep, eat, nor think without your poison. Oh, 
no, Satan, I will not fall for your trap this time, [pause] What? 
You gotta go? No, you keep your tail right there and listen. You 
tricked me once. You tricked me twice. Now I kick you out and 
I'm in charge of my life! [pause] Say what? You'll take care of 
me? Don't make me sick! You took care of me all right, [pause] 
No, no, you listen! I was powerless and possessed by you. Yes, 
you took care of me all right. You sent me to prison. Time and 
many times I went to jail. But never again will I go through Hell. 
Oh, I almost forgot, you even put me in the hospital. Go to Hell, 
Satan, and get out of my life. Don't call me. Don't come around. 
And stay out of my fuckin' dreams. I don't have to live in fear 
and darkness no more. Our friendship is dead. I don't need that 
garbage. I have God in my life now. He told me to trust and 



2^ 4 

<v J t 



230 



Writing as a Foundation for Transformative Community 



have faith, and He will save me from eternal Hell, [pause] You 
gonna . . . you gonna cry? [cracks up with laughter] Everybody 

know the Devil can't cry. [more laughter] Hello? Hello? 

He's gone. 

As Salima looks up, the workshop members have broken into 
applause. Maria, Mary TallMountain, and Martha add loud theater 
whistles. The acknowledgment seems as much for Salima's fight for 
life as for the effectiveness of the dramatic performance itself. 

Martha: [still applauding] Well, I think you're ready to go! [re- 
ferring to Saturday's reading] 

Leona: I'd say so! 

Martha: One thing, did you hang up the phone in the end? 

Salitna: [laughing] Oh no, 1 forgot to hang up the phone! 

Martha: [laughing] That's the one thing. You gotta remember 
to hang up that phone! 

Salima: [laughing] OK! OK! I will! One thing . . . one thing, 
though [her voice getting serious], did I seem nervous? 

Not one to let her guard down easily, Salima often gives the impression 
of a woman with an "attitude," a word she herself uses to describe the 
"don't mess with me" stance from which she characteristically meets 
the world. Now, three weeks into the workshop, that "attitude," which 
often seems invulnerable, makes way for something else. A number of 
workshop members assure her that in fact she didn't seem nervous. 
Martha, however, taking note of the seriousness of Salima's concern 
and the courage she may have summoned to ask, has a somewhat 
different take: "There's nothing wrong with being nervous, Salima! It 
gives you a lot of energy. It makes people take notice." 

"It gives us an edge!" winks Maria. With a public bravado not 
unlike Salima's, Maria would discuss her own stage fright several 
sessions later and take pleasure in Martha's further confirmation that 
anxiety is often a necessary and positive ingredient that goes with 
reading one's work to others. 

A Vision of Elegance from Mary TallMountain 

Mary TallMountain moves to the spot near the front door that Salima 
has now inaugurated as the rehearsal stage for Saturday's reading. In 
an interview, Mary once described herself as "unbelievably various 
and interesting even to myself." Her face alone capture^ this. It is at 
once round and robust, frail and weary, her eyes filled with a quick, 
challenging intensity and a vast kindness toward and interest in 



233 



Carol E. Heller 



231 



whomever she's addressing. Favoring colorful gym shoes and whim- 
sical, handpainted jewelry— striped goldfish earrings and a spider 
watch today — Mary does not look sixty-nine, though it's clear she 
takes great pleasure in the role of an "elder" in the tradition of her 
Koyukon Athabaskan Indian tribe. 

"This is a story about one of our street brothers and it's called 
'Them Kinda Dogs/" Mary begins. "Butt's blue headband . . . uh, 
Butt's . . . uh, Butte's blue headband ... oh my my my. Let me start 
again!" To the group's great amusement, Mary has opened with a 
sterling mispronunciation of her story hero's first name, and she's not 
about to live it down. No one, least of all Mary, can stop laughing. 
"Well you can only do that once!" says Leona. "You did it here for us 
so you won't call him 'Butt' on Saturday!" Several more minutes of 
laughter and Mary begins again. Her story is about an Indian man 
named Butte and his black Labrador, Thomas Mann, who live together 
in a vacated garage in San Francisco. It is one of several stories that 
Mary writes about transplanted Native Americans living in San Fran- 
cisco, often in the Tenderloin. 

Butte's blue headband was the faded cotton of the City's regular 
street Indian. His hair, rippling heavily down off his bulwark- 
like shoulders, was the black that is unfathomable, hair which, 
when it fell forward of its own weight, he sometimes tossed 
back out of his way in a motion of indefinable grace. Faded 
Levi's further enunciated the symbol and statement of his city 
uniform. The jacket which served as armor against the chill 
morning smother of fog around Embarcadero Four was long 
since exfoliated of its fringes; the pristine red suede had been 
denuded of nap to its roots. Close inspection of his attire would 
have found it, though clean, worn nearly to its demise. His 
muscled legs pistoned along, followed by the clicking nails of 
the paws of Thomas Mann, who was the embodiment of ele- 
gance. Mann was a hunting Labrador, wearing a pelt and tail 
which surpassed Butte's Indian mane by several degrees of 
gloss. Mann's frank crystal eyes and his smooth head so 
roundly correct had won points from the American Kennel 
Association in his early years. His muzzle now sported a grizzle 
of silver, neat as any executive's above his morning moustache 
cup, and he emanated an aura of warm gentility. The union of 
man and dog was one of complete understanding; it often ap- 
peared that they spoke in an eccentric language not understood 
by any but themselves. 

"Them Kinda Dogs," like a good number of Mary's other works 
that she would read in the workshop and for community perform- 
ances, captures her sense of the elegance of poor people. To Mary, 



2??> 



232 



Writing as a Foundation for Transformative Community 



Butte, a homeless man whose stature many would readily overlook, is 
a picture to behold. He is a man of "indefinable grace." His bond to 
Thomas Mann, "the embodiment of elegance," evokes Mary's regard 
for the deep and ancient affinity that exists between Native American 
people and animals. One doesn't know from her story what brought 
Butte and Mann to their present life. One does know that the two go 
forth with a great sense of honor and commitment to each other. Theirs 
is a life, too, that begins each day with a search for edible food in the 
city's dumpsters. 

On the cracked cement they slept in a well-matured twin 
mummy bag, warming each other through frosty nights when 

cold snaps brought icicles Frisco weather scarcely fazed 

either because they had lived most of their life in Blackfeet 
country. Mann's dense mat of winter undercoat was enough for 
any outdoors working dog. In Montana, his work had consisted 
of hunting deer, birds, and small game. Here the hunting was 
different. He possessed an exquisite nose. It was of great value, 
informing himself and then Butte of the presence of tasty dis- 
cards, their sort and quantity, reposing in any receptacle, open 
or closed. This talent narrowed the need for Butte to investigate. 
.'. . Looking around, their manners almost identical, the proud 
lifted heads spoke of character and a certain finely honed style. 
"At Embark Four it ain't garbage, Mann," Butte was saying. 
"It's elegant gar-bazzhe." He accented the slow syllables in his 
best quasi-French manner. Mann nodded. His eyes glinted. 

Not realizing that two watchful janitors have them under sur- 
veillance, Butte and Mann begin their search for food in a trash barrel 
outside a lavish downtown hotel. 

Casually, from his six-four, Butte looked down into it and thrust 
in a hand. Mann watched. With no haste, with utmost care, he 
received between his teeth the partly bitten hamburger Butte 
offered. He gave no sign of distaste. He did not allow his nose 
to quiver; each wet black pore was disciplined to stillness, lest 
he embarrass Butte. 

"Hey, Chief, you can't dig in our disposal. . . . No bums allowed here." 
Their faces, as Mary describes them, delighting in the thought of an 
easy conquest, the janitors start to chase Butte when Mann, "like the 
first eruption of a far-off volcano," bares his teeth in protection of his 
companion and their food. The two escape, their breakfast intact, "I 
never did like them kinda dogs," scowls one of the janitors, his final 
assessment of the morning's incident evincing the toss-off attitude 
toward the poor that much of Mary's writing challenges. 



237 



Carol E. Heller 



233 



Community Building in Education 

In Yearning: Race, Gender, and Cultural Politics (1990), hooks writes a 
chapter called "Choosing the Margin/' Her sense of "margin" and 
what can occur there is a powerful one. She is not, she states emphati- 
cally, "speaking of a marginality one wishes to lose" (149). "Not a sign 
marking . . . despair . . . [wherel one's creativity, one's imagination is 
at risk" (150-151), but rather "a space that can tell stories and unfold 
histories" (152). 

In the Tenderloin Women Writers Workshop, texts and dialogue 
grounded in authentic experience constituted not only a multifunc- 
tional form of community education, but also a powerful foundation 
of renewed community itself. Within their writing groups, members 
claimed new capacities to define and discover themselves both as 
knowers and as community members. Maxine Greene (Chapter 2 of 
this volume) reminds us that Dewey once said of democracy that it "is 
a name for a life of free and enriching communion." The functions 
which emerged in the life of the workshop touch, I believe, on the 
foundations of democratic sympathy that Dewey referred to, as group 
members and their facilitator tried to accommodate the needs of all 
participants, to understand the experiences of each other, and finally 
to support each other's need to publicly matter. 

Perhaps the workshop's strength was its unwillingness to create 
false oppositions between the emotions and the intellect, the spirit and 
mind, the person and community. This kind of integration, what Brit- 
ton calls "synthesis" (1989), is precisely what many in the forefront of 
educational thinking (Cazden 1979; Bruner 1986; Greene 1989; Dyson 
1989) suggest we begin to see as a goal— even a requirement— for 
children's classrooms. Yet we rarely witness the enactment of such 
powerful "synthesis." Historically, as Britton reminds us, much of 
formal education has been guided by the assumption that learning in 
fact necessitates "screening out the affective" (1989). But he is con- 
vinced, as are Greene (1989), Dyson (1989), and others, that the exact 
opposite may likely be true. The affective, a fundamental ingredient of 
what Dyson describes as the deeply layered "embeddedness" of pow- 
erful learning settings, might be seen, as it so naturally was in the 
Tenderloin Women Writers Workshop, as a vital, welcomed part of the 
complex life of education. 

Additionally, we are only beginning to understand the powerful 
role that community building has in effective learning and literacy 
settings. Cazden (1979), who returned to classroom teaching after 
years as a university researcher, discovered that, in spite of her rich 



p Q 



234 



Writing as a Foundation for Transformative Community 



store of knowledge about children's language and learning, teaching 
in fact became a futile enterprise in a classroom dominated by human 
distances, a classroom where a sense of community was missing. After 
months of struggling to infuse her students with a feeling of solidarity 
with one another and with her, Cazden tried to describe a model for 
her own growing classroom successes that might be useful to others 
seeking to bridge similar distances in their classrooms. She divided her 
approach into several categories: attempting to decrease psychological 
distances when social distances were facts of life (most of Cazden's 
students came from class backgrounds different from hers); finding 
ways for the lives she and her students led to connect outside the 
classroom; building a shared life through important events within the 
classroom; avoiding activities that increased, rather than diminished, 
distances. These strategies, worked out in various ways, were to serve 
her quest toward the classroom intimacy — the sense of solidarity — 
that she began to realize w T as vital for her students' emotional and 
intellectual well-being. And these same ingredients were among the 
qualities of group life that emerged so strongly in the Tenderloin 
Women Writers Workshop. 

One of the cardinal features of the workshop was the signifi- 
cance its facilitators, ongoing members, and funding organizations 
placed on establishing a strong association between the workshop and 
the neighborhood of which it was part. The Tenderloin Reflection and 
Education Center planned an assortment of public events, focused on 
some feature of art, politics, and culture, to reinforce this link. Writing 
was not looked upon as separate from real life, but, through the work- 
shops and public readings, as well as through a variety of community 
publications that featured Tenderloin writers' work, was used to form 
meaningful connections to that life. Increasingly, mainstream educa- 
tors, too, are understanding the significance such vital connection can 
have for students to experience excitement and an authentic sense of 
accomplishment in classroom learning. 

The facilitators of the Tenderloin Women Writers Workshop had 
a great deal to do, too, with the kind of community-in-the-making that 
the workshop became. Holzman (198^) once interviewed a group who 
had successfully worked in adult literacy and education projects in 
economically poor communities abroad. He wrote about his conversa- 
tion with them: 

A nun who had gone out lo the Philippines in l c )47 told mo 
stories that began as stories about literacy, but gradually be- 
came stories about community organizing They wish to 



233 



Carol E. Heller 



235 



"accompany" members of local communities who are engaged 
in attempting to improve their own lives. (187) 

Holzman's words might well describe how the group's facilita- 
tors, some of whom lived in fairly comfortable circumstances outside 
the Tenderloin, assumed their roles. With a light touch, commitment, 
humor, and friendship, they "accompanied" the members of the Ten- 
derloin Women Writers Workshop. They became involved in the com- 
munity; they gave support, information, writing tips, and criticism 
when needed; they held back and let the group do a lot of its own work 
together. Workshop participants felt that each facilitator had a genu- 
ineness, a trustworthiness, an abiding regard for and interest in them 
as people— traits Erickson (1984) might describe as "civility." Once 
again, more and more educators are recognizing the need for teachers 
to cultivate such traits— to talk less and listen more, to reconnect 
learners with their own communities, to guide and "accompany" them 
as students contribute more and more to the construction of their own 
learning based on their own lives and aspirations. 

A Story of "Warriors" 

Mary TallMountain owns a red tee shirt inscribed with the words, "A 
Warrior Is Geared to Struggle So Her People Will Continue." She 
enjoyed wearing it to the workshop, where it was greatly admired. In 
just the way that her tee shirt describes, Mary TallMountain and many 
members of the Tenderloin Women Writers Workshop were, in fact, 
warriors. Indeed many of the members of the workshop wrote so that 
their people would continue. Through a novel she focused on in her 
later workshop work, Mary saw to it that her Athabaskan ancestors 
would continue. She also saw to it that her "street brothers and sisters" 
like Butte would be offered stature and places of distinction in her 
stories. They, too, would continue. Maria's writing was driven by her 
desire to have Ruby Brooklyn continue, as well as her parents, grand- 
parents, and those who represented her cultural past. And through her 
vibrant plays about her family in the pre-civil-rights South and 
through her stories about the Tenderloin, Salima saw to it that her 
mother and the many people she became committed to in the Tender- 
loin would continue as well. 

While the Tenderloin Women Writers Workshop provided mul- 
tiple levels of support— served multiple functions— for those who par- 
ticipated, perhaps the driving function that wove all the other levels 
of support together was that the workshop supported participants' 
right to be those kinds of warriors Mary's tee shirt describes. Here, 



2\) 



236 



Writing as a Foundation for Transformative Community 



participants were offered the requisite audience to have their own 
stories and those of the people they came from and cared about matter, 
were granted the right to have them continue. The workshop bore 
witness to all these powerful stories and, through time, became its 
own. 



References 

Britton, J. (1989). Writing-and-reading in the classroom. In A. H. Dyson 

(Ed.), Collaboration through writing and reading: Exploring possibilities 
(217-246). Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of 'English. 

Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Ca/.den, C. (1979). How knowledge about language helps the classroom 
teacher — or does it?: A personal account. Urban Review, 9, 74-91 . 

Dyson, A. H. (1989). The multiple worlds of child writers: Friends learning to 
write. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Emig, J. (1971). The composing processes of twelfth graders. NCTE Research Re- 
port No. 13. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 

Erickson, F. (1984). ^chool literacy reasoning, and civility: An anthropolo- 
gist's perspective. Review of Educational Research, 54(4), 525-546. 

Greene, M. (1989). The literacy debate: Going beyond the functional Address to 
the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco. 

. (1990). Relationalitv in the humanities: A perspective on leadership. 

language Arts, 67(A)] 370-378. 

Heath, S. B. (1983). Wir?i/s with words, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Holzman, M. (1986). The social context of literacy education. College 
li$h,48{\), 27-33. 

. (1989). Teaching is remembering. In M Holzman and M. Cooper 

(Eds.), Writing as social action (221-232). Portsmouth, NH: Heine- 
ma nn. 

hooks, b. (1990). Yearning: Race, gender, and cultural politics. Boston: South 
End Press. 

Olsen, T. (1978). Silences. New York: Delacorte Press. 

Orwell, G. (1936). Keep the aspidistra flying. London: Harcourt, Brace, 
Jovanovich. 

Waters, R. (1987, November 1). The Tenderloin transformed. Image Maga- 
zine, San Francisco Chronicle, 10-14, 31, 34. 



ERJC 



24, 



237 



16 Conclusion: Fulfilling 
the Need for Story 

Celia Genishi 

Teachers College, Columbia University 

Anne Haas Dyson 

University of California, Berkeley 

In the end, why do zve need our stories? 

To produce food for the mind, for the senses, for the heart. To 

keep language alive What do we have from the past? Art and 

thought. That's what lasts. That's what continues to feed people 
and give them an idea of something better. 

Susan Sontag (quoted in Garis 1992, 43) 

We all need stories to nourish our selves, to feed mind and 
heart. In the three sections of this collection, the contributors 
have fulfilled the need in a range of ways through their art 
and thought, enriching our themes of "Connections between Story, 
Self, and Others," "Ways with Stories," and "Weaving Communities 
through Story." In this chapter we synthesize from our perspective— 
we hope without diminishing the richness of each teller's story— some 
ways in which authors have elaborated upon the original themes. 

Connections between Story, Self, 
and Others: Why Do We Tell Stories? 

A theme that links all sections of the book together is the role of story 
in fulfilling our need for a community in which each self both stands 
out and fits in. The challenge of increasing the number and quality of 
connections among our selves, within and across communities, is 
given a literary framework in Maxine Greene's chapter. Her own 
search for self took her first to the pages of a literary canon and the 
faces and figures created by long-dead painters. She later sought and 
found alternative selves, in the art of both men and women and those 
presenting nontraditional, often non-Western voices and images. She 
suggests that, as teachers, we seek the most spacious landscapes, the 



240 



238 



Conclusion: Fulfilling the Need for Story 



most accepting communities, in which our stories reside next to con- 
trasting ones and next to vacant places that wait for unexpected and 
new storytellers. 

Spacious landscapes provide sites for reconciliation of the tradi- 
tional with the revolutionary, for the classical with the popular. Thus 
next to Greene's chapter are two others that look less to published 
stories and more to accounts of "ordinary" lives, the stories of selves 
in families and varied sociocultural circumstances. The Goodhertz 
family members structure their individual autobiographies, revealing 
the tensions between family members who chafe to be independent, 
while making sense of their lives only as they fit into the context of 
their family history. Their individual ways of recounting experience 
both shape and are shaped by the stories they remember. Jerome 
Bruner points out that autobiography functions to uncover the tellers' 
"recipes for experience," as they narrate and create their own defini- 
tions of the "examined life." 

The origin of our storied selves, our ways of recounting personal 
experience, is Peggy Miller and Robert Mehler's focus. Young chil- 
dren, as Anthony and his classmates demonstrated in Chapter 1, are 
capable of telling their own stories, of expressing themselves in rela- 
tion to particular social situations and people. Even in the preschool 
years, children of all backgrounds are active participants in telling, 
hearing, and being the topics of narratives of personal experience. 
Thus stories serve to socialize, to construct selves in the frequent and 
ordinary interactions through which children become members of 
their communities. Embedded in these interactions are evaluative 
statements and judgments formed by adults and children as they 
decide how individual selves do or don't fit in. 

Ways with Stories in the Classroom: 

Whose Stories Are Told? Whose Stories Are Heard? 

Story as a means to constructing and seeing one's self in relation to 
others, appreciating difference, and evaluating ourselves, others, and 
experience are continued themes in the varied chapters of the second 
section. "Difference" is reflected in a number of overlapping factors: 
gender, age, class, race, and ethnic, linguistic, or sociocultural back- 
ground. In contrast to many contributors who focus on small numbers 
of classrooms or children, Geneva Smitherman considers some of these 
factors on a large scale in the context of a well-known evaluation 
project, the National Assessment of Educational Progress. Focusing on 
African American high school students' writing, she and her collabo- 



9 i ~ 



Genishi and Dyson 



239 



rators go beyond the usual measures of conventional writing and look 
for African American discourse features in the students' samples, such 
as rhythmic or evocative language, reference to race or color, or the 
rhetorical style of traditional black churches. When writers use these 
features, their scores tend to be better. So in this study, raters view as 
a strength the ability to incorporate the voices of students' own com- 
munities into imaginative or narrative essays. As noted in Chapter 1, 
musical and image-making features of language convey a distinctive 
sense of self that less culturally rich prose cannot capture. 

Reflecting another difference, Ageliki Nicolopoulou, Barbara 
Scales, and Jeff Weintraub locate in preschool classrooms the missing 
female voices that Greene referred to in her chapter. These researchers 
seek to hear four-year-old middle-class children's imagined stories, 
which in this setting show strikingly clear gender differences. Despite 
their teachers' efforts to create a nonsexist environment, most of the 
time in their numerous tellings the girls' stories are "orderly," with 
conventional and peaceful endings, whereas the boys' stories are "dis- 
orderly," with violent events and endings. Where these differences in 
narrative style come from and whether they will endure are humbling 
questions that Nicolopoulou and her collaborators raise. 

In her own consideration of gendered voices, Pam Gilbert sug- 
gests that a feminine style does endure, and its persistence may work 
against the construction of diverse selves. The elementary school girls 
in her study continue to tell orderly stories, similar in their orderliness 
to those in the data of Nicolopoulou, Scales, and Weintraub. These 
often have stock endings in which men save women so that all can live 
happily ever after. Romantic "fictions" (Walkerdine 1990), Gilbert and 
Nicolopoulou and her colleagues argue, are social constructions, fed 
in part by the cultural stories of the mass media. Gilbert suggests that, 
as we try to understand the origin and contexts of students' desires, 
we raise questions of the students themselves so that they encounter a 
multiplicity of voices and perspectives and the idea that less conven- 
tional, more divergent stories are possible— to write and to live. 

Focusing on another type of sociolinguistic difference, Courtney 
Cazden raises the question of what adults are to do when children's 
voices are unfamiliar to the teacher's ear. During the common routine 
called Sharing Time, children's narratives may vary widely. And since 
adults' own social and linguistic background may differ from their 
children's, much of the teacher's work entails careful listening. In fact, 
whether children's narratives are heard and truly shared depends on 
allowing each child "equal access" to stand out as she or he takes a 



240 



Conclusion: Fulfilling the Need for Story 



turn and then to fit into the classroom community as teacher and 
children work out mutual understandings of each story. As in Gilbert's 
study making room for divergent ways of storying creates the poten- 
tial for learner-responsive and changed curricula. 

The themes of difference and transformation are developed fur- 
ther within the context of children's literature by Mingshui Cai and 
Rudine Sims Bishop. These authors build an argument for clear defi- 
nitions of the varied types of multicultural literature. For them the mere 
inclusion in literature of characters of varied races and ethnicities is 
not sufficient because the goal of multicultural literature needs to 
coincide with that of multicultural education: to transform society so 
that it is more just and equitable. That transformation will depend on 
an understanding of experiences of parallel cultures, of people. of color 
who tell stories of the heart about the cultures and communities from 
which they come. 

Weaving Communities through Story: Who Are We? 

Community as a contributor to the creation of self and story is main- 
tained and highlighted as a unifying theme in the third section of this 
collection. Too, there are the repeated motifs of valuing difference and 
the common task of transforming the usually accepted — the canon. 
The authors all demonstrate that stories, like communities, are social 
constructions rooted in language (Berger and Luckmann 1967; Britton 
1971; Vygotsky 1978). And as Anne Haas Dyson proposes in her chap- 
ter, stories are also a crossroads where these constructions take form, 
where people gather with theii own interests and agendas and, like 
Bruner's Goodhertz family, with their unique histories. Those histories 
are replete with experiences both ordinary (Heather Smith-Willis's 
evening bath in Sal Vascellaro and Celia Genishi's chapter) and ex- 
traordinary (the homelessness of some participants of the writing 
group that Carol Heller describes). At the crossroads where the ex- 
traordinary and the everyday meet, stories " transmute the common- 
place into an alternative reality," as Greene discusses in her chapter; 
they create the hope of better futures in which the tensions of the 
present might be eased or resolved. 

The tension between differei ' races, for example, has no simple 
resolution, but classrooms can become communities in which stories 
help diminish tensions. Vivian Palcy, for example, addresses the ques- 
tion of whether one's skin color is of beauty and value in a particular 
societv — and whether "who we are" is valued — as she weaves the 




Genishi avi Dyson 



241 



memory of her own childhood disappointments into the experiences 
of fictitious princesses and the children in her classroom. Along with 
their classmates, three African American girls are carried into the 
world of Paley's story, where the heroes' skin color resembles the three 
girls'. The boundary between the story world and the classroom blurs 
as the girls' own imagined stories begin to feature heroes of color. Who 
the girls are begins to merge with who their heroes are. 

This same blurring of boundaries appears in different ways in 
Dyson's chapter about a third-grade classroom and Susan Britsch's, 
about a Head Start program The third graders of Dyson's chapter 
respond in complex ways to societal tensions, such as racism and war, 
which children talk about explicitly. The boundary they cross most 
often in their efforts to figure out how they fit in, though, is the one 
between the official and unofficial worlds, between the society of the 
classroom, with its expectations and school guidelines, and the world 
outside it. Children like William bring elements of the outside world 
into their stories; the pages on which they write become a forum for 
the handling of the personal tensions of complicated selves. 

In an effort to preserve a "group self," the staff of a Head Start 
program create a unique curriculum, described in Britsch's chapter. 
The Tachi Yokuts people, of whom only about thirty speak Tachi, 
participate in a program that weaves Tachi as a second language to- 
gether with activities typical of the Tachi Yokuts culture. It is the stories 
of the elders, though, that form the strongest threads, uniting the past 
with the present, through a dying language. The elders, families, and 
children at the Head Start Center construct a "community of memory" 
(Bellah et al... cited in Britsch's chapter), transforming their curriculum 
so that the traditional is preserved through a program for the very 
young, thus melding community treasures with school life. 

The adults in Vascellaro's classroom experienced similar bound- 
ary crossings as they created stories for children. Although the college 
classroom is not traditionally a stage for narratives of personal experi- 
ence, Vascellaro's course relies upon groups of student storytellers 
transforming themselves into communities of story writers and trans- 
forming their experiences into stories for children. Like storytellers in 
other chapters, these students use talk as a bridge between everyday 
life and story (see also Gc'S, 992). Who they are— their lives as 
children, siblings, teachers, parents— all coalesce as their lived experi- 
ence crosses over into the world of "literature." 

The communities in which stories emerge, then., have much in 
common. And thev often thrive in unofficial— non-school— settings 



242 



Conclusion: Fulfilling the Need for Story 



such as Shirley Briee Heath and Carol Heller describe. Their respective 
chapters portray groups whose activities are typically seen not just as 
unofficial, but marginal. The lives of some of the young people in 
Heath's study and the writers in Heller's have involved such things as 
drug use, violence, and prison terms; many are poor, and some, home- 
less. Yet their capacity for telling stories makes them members of 
literary groups: Heath's young people are part of a teen drama team, 
whereas Heller's participants are members of a neighborhood writing 
group. Like the storytellers of other chapters, though, they attempt to 
cross boundaries, to bring their pasts into the imaginative worlds of 
literature. There, unconventional experiences are no longer "devia- 
tions," but the core of plots in which writers have room to enact their 
own stories. Thus stories help them shape a present where they no 
longer encounter the painful scene that Adrienne Rich (quoted in 
Rosaldo 1989, ix) has described: 

When someone with the authority of a teacher, say, describes 
the world and you are not in it, there is a moment of psychic 
disequilibrium, as if you looked into a mirror and saw nothing. 

The stories in this volume help to widen the boundaries of life's 
curriculum to include the unexpected and ordinary experiences of 
diverse selves that developed in and out of classrooms. Thus stories 
represent ways of taking action to create the spacious landscapes 
where the "different" have audible voices and visible faces. 

Conclusion 

This book has been filled with crossroads, places where people meet, 
bringing their pasts, their differences, their hopes, their distinctive 
disciplines. What they bring has been woven into stories, grand and 
small ones: representatives of the traditional canon, next to stories of 
personal experience. At such a crossroads in such a community, the 
hero of a classic novel stands next to a child like kindergartner Mary 
who is learning her numbers. Her short story of personal experience 
notes that in the past, "I used to make my threes like that. Or like that. 
Mow I make it like that" (in Miller and Mehler's chapter). 

In short, th#*n. why do we need our stories? Stories help us 
construct our scl:^ K \ who used to be one way and are now another; 
stories help to make sense of, evaluate, and integrate the tensions 
inherent in experience, the past with the present, the fictional with the 
"real," the official with the unofficial, the personal with the profes- 
sional, the canonical with the different or unexpected. Stories help us 



2r: 



Genishi mid Dyson 



243 



transform the present and shape the future for our students and our- 
selves so that it will be richer or better than the past. 

There is a fable by James Thurber (1957) called The Wonderful O, 
which offers another way to view our need for story. The tale's villain, 
who runs the town, had the misfortune of losing his mother when she 
disappeared out of a porthole. So he has banned all words, objects, and 
people whose names contain the letter O. Life in the town becomes 
almost unbearable as people, things, ideas, feelings all vanish. But in 
the end, a horde of literary heroes, from Romeo to Goldilocks, comes 
riding into town. Following the return of the heroes, the people save 
themselves from the villain as they discover in stories words long 
banished— love, valor, memory, freedom. . . . The lives of the townspeo- 
ple return to normal as those words again sustain them. But their 
return was enabled by a more important word: story a community 
where words live, where, as they assemble in stories, they help us live 
freely and humanely. 

Finally, stories are valuable because they give us a most impor- 
tant O-word: hope. Perhaps in the end, we need our stories to give us 
hope. They help us see possibilities, they give us what we need to 
envision a transformed future in which learners have satisfying social 
relationships, make sense of print, all see themselves in the world 
around them— in the dolls they favor, the books they choose, and the 
stories they tell, hear, read, write, perform. 

References 

Berger, P., and Luckmann, T. (1967). The social construction of reality: A trea- 
tise in the sociology of knowledge. New York: Anchor. 

Britton, J. (1971). language and learning. Hammondsworth, England: Pen- 
guin. 

Garis, L. (1992, August 2). Susan Sontag finds romance. New York Times 

Magazine, 20-23,31,43. 
Genishi, C. (Ed.). (1992). Wans of assessing children and curriculum: Stories of 

~ early childhood practice. New York: Teachers College Press. 
Rosaldo, R. (1989). Culture and truth: The remaking of social analysis. Boston: 
Beacon. 

Thurber, J. (1957). The wonderful O. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 

VValkerdine, V. (1990). Schoolgirl fiction*. New York: Verso. 



24 



Index 



Adoff, A., 188 
Adolescents, stories by 
authority in, 211,214-215,219 
in Boys and Girls Club drama, 

207-208 
in classrooms, 216-219 
and gender, 135-137 
Heath's research methods on, 207 
lack of research on, 206 
listener response to, 210, 214 
social purposes of, 208-211, 214, 

215-216,218-219 
structure of, 213-215,219 
for teasing, 208-211 
as theories, 215-216 
treatment of unfamiliar in, 211-213, 
214 

Adults in stories by children, 3, 4 
Aesthetic response, 175-177 
African American discourse style 
and Black English Vernacular (BEV), 

81,83,88,91-95,96 
criteria for identifying, 86-87 
effect on NAEP scores, 81, 91-94, 95, 
239 

and field dependence/independence, 

83-85, 91 
previous research on, 82-85 
Smitherman's research on 
conclusions from, 94-95 
methodology for, 85-91 
results of, 91-94, 96, 239 
sample essays from, 96-98 
African American Verbal Tradition, 81, 
85, 94. See also African American 
discourse style 
African Americans. See also Racial 
identity 

in adult literature and art, 17-19 
in children's literature, 64, 65-66, 67 
examples of essays by, 96-98 
in stories bv teachers, 145-154, 182, 

186.188,196-197 
written literacy level of, 80-81 

All the Colors of the Raee (Adoff), 188 

Ana Veil Rudolfo, 61 

Angel Chilli. Dragon Child (Surat), 64 

Anger in personal narratives, 42-43 



Art as Experience (Dewey), 107 
Arts, visual, 16, 58 

Assertiveness, in personal narratives, 
42-43 

Authority, in stories by adolescents, 211, 
214-215, 219. Sec also Resistance 
of authority, stories for 

Autobiography. See Personal narratives 



Baer, E., 63 

Bakhtin, M., 3, 156, 163 
Bank Street College, 172-174 
Banks, J. A., 58, 65, 69n.2 
Bauman, R., 43 
Bayliss, V, 126 
Bell, M., 126 
Bellah, R. N., 202 
Bereiter, C, 84 
Berger, J., 16 

BEV Sec Black English Vernacular (BEV) 
Biracial children, in stories, 186, 188, 197 
Bishop, Rudine Sims, 57-71, 240 
Black Americans. See African American 
discourse style; African 
American Verbal Tradition; 
African Americans 
Black English Vernacular (BEV). See also 
African American discourse style 
effect on writing, 81, 83, 88, 91-95, 96 
grammatical patterns of, 90-91 
Bluest Eye, The (Morrison), 17 
Booth, W.C., 21,22 

Boundaries, social, stories for crossing, 

168-170, 241-242 
Boy of the Three-Year Nap, The (Snyder), 

62 

Britsch, Susan]., 199-205, 241 
BrittonJ., 206, 233 
Brown, Margaret Wise, 174, 180, 193 
Bruner, Jerome S., 28-37, 102, 105, 225, 

238, 240 
Burke, K., 31,33 



Cai, Mingshui, 57-71,240 
Cannibal Galaxy, The (Ozick), 20 
Carlson, N. S.,64, 65-66 



213 



246 



Index 



Carlson, R. K., 60 

Causation, in personal narrative, 36 
Cazden, Courtney B., 72-79, 233-234, 
239-240 

Ceremony of the Panther (Wailin), 66 
Chair for My Mother, A (Williams), 175 
Changing Stories (Inner London 

Education Authority English 

Centre), 129 
Chaplin, M, 82-85 

Characters, effect of gender on choice 

of, 107, 110, 111 
Childbirth, in personal narratives, 42 
Children. See Adolescents, stories by; 

Children's literature; Gender] 

effect on stories by children; 

Kindergarten; Preschool children; 

Primary grades 
Children of Crisis (Coles), 18 
Children's literature, multiculturalism 

in, 59-69. See also Picture books; 

Teachers, stories by 
China Men (Kingston), 19-20 
Chinese 

in children's literature, 64-65 
personal narratives by, 44 
Chinese Exclusion Acts, 19 
Chronology, in personal narratives, 35 

36,213 
Clark, Kenneth, 18 
Clarke, Ben, 223 

Classrooms. See also Kindergarten; 
Primary grades 
stones by adolescents in, 216-219 
strategies for community making in, 
234 

"Cleaving, The" (Lee), 25-26 
Cleverness, in personal narratives, 42-43 
Cognitive development, stories by 

children for, 103, 120 
Cohan, S., 135 
Coles, R., 18, 206, 215 
Community making. See also Social 
purposes of stories 
community preservation, 200, 202 

203-204, 241 
and multiculturalism, 11-12, 22, 23, 25 
overview of stories' role in, 5-6, 237 
teaching strategies for, 234 
through personal narrative, 238 
writers' groups in, 222, 223-22^, 233 
234-235 
Conformity, 23 



Constructivism, 28-29, 36 
Contingency, 12-13 
Cooper, G., 84 

Cross-cultural competency, 65 
Cross-cultural literature, 63-66, 69 
Cultural identity, 168. See also Racial 
identity 

Culture. See also Multiculturalism; 
Social meaning of stories; 
Socialization 
definition of, 3 

and gender differences in storyine 

112,119,239 
overview of effect on stories, 3-5, 129 
and personal narratives, 44-45, 47 
and teachers' responses to stories by 

children, 77 



Dahl, R., 129-130 
Dalley, L, 132, 135 
Dasenbrock, R. W., 60-61, 63 
Da vies, B., 131 

Desire, and gender, 131-132, 138, 239 
Dewey, John, 11, 12, 17, 107, 233 
Dialect interference hypothesis, 82. See 
also Black English Vernacular 
(BEV), effect on writing 
Dialeetie of Freedom, The (Greene), 4 
Differences, human. See Diversity, 
themes of 

Discourse model of socialization, 40-41 
Disorder vs. order, in stories, 103, 107, 

110, 111, 113, 114-115, 117, 239 
Diversity, themes of (human 

differences), 178, 194, 197. Sir 

also Multiculturalism; Racial 

identity 
Dixon, B., 129 

Do the Right Thing (film, Lee), 17 
Doctorow, E. L, 18-19 
Dorsey, D., 58-59, 68 
Douglas, M., 107 
Drama, by adolescents, 207-208 
Dwyer, B., 139 

Dyson, Anne Haas, 1-7, 155-171, 222, 
233, 237-243 



Edited American English, 94 
Education, through writers' groups, 

225, 233-234. See also C lassrooms: 

Teaching strategies 



25 ) 



Index 



Education Commission of the States, 81 
Educational reform, multiculturalism 
in, 58 

Educational Testing Service, 81 
Einstein, Albert, 215 
Emig,J., 222 
Empowerment, 4 

Empty Schoolhousc. The (Carlson), 64, 

65-66 
Engleman, S., 84 
Erickson, F., 235 

Ethnic group, definition of, o9-70n.2. 

See also Diversity, themes of 

(human differences); 

Multiculturalism; Racial identity; 

specific ethnic groups 
Ethnic literature, vs. multicultural 

literature, 60. Sec also 

Multicultural literature 
Ethnicity, personal reinvention of, 

21-22. See also Cultural identity; 

Racial identity 
Ethnocentrism, 65 
Evaluative purpose of stories, 2 
Experience. See also Personal 

narratives 
as metaphor for the unfamiliar, 

211-212 
narratives in structuring, 36 



Fairv tales, and gender construction, 
129-130, 138-139 

Family 

gender differences in storying about, 

108, 113-114, 115 
in stones by teachers, 186, 188, 190 
stories told' in, effect on children, 
41-47 
Feelings in stories, 4 
Field dependence/ independence, 

83-85, 91 
Fischer, M. M. ]., 21-22 
Folklore 
of American families, 39 
and gender construction, 138-139 
in multicultural children's literature, 
63, 69 
Frederick (Lionni), 172 
Freire, R, 24 
Freud, Sigmund, 36 
Friedman, I. R., 63 
Friendship, in stories, 112 



Garcia Marquez, Gabriel, 23 
Geertz, Clifford, 3, 31, 106 
Gender, and moral development, 
118 

Gender, effect on stories by children 
in adolescents' stories, 135-137 
in boys' stories, 110-113, 117 
causes of, 119, 120, 121 
and characters, 107, 110, 111, 126 
and competence, 126-127 
effect of culture on, 112, 119, 239 
and family themes, 108, 113-114, 115, 
116 

and friendship themes, 112 
in girls' stories, 107-110, 113, 117, 126, 
239 

and imagery, 110 

implications for education, 118-121 
and marriage themes, 109-110 
methods for evaluating, 113-116 
and order/disorder content, 103, 107, 

110, 111, 113, 114-115, 117, 239 
overview of, 106-107, 113, 116-117 
and plot, 107, 110, 111 
and power themes, 110 
and romanticism, 109, 126, 133-134, 

135-137 
and setting, 108-109, 111 
social effects of, 126-127, 130-137 
and social relationship themes, 106, 

108, 109, 112, 113, 115 
and stabilitv/instabilitv, 109, 110, 112, 

114 

and style, 107, 110, 113, 116, 118, 

119-120 
and themes, 103, 106-116, 239 
and topics, 126 

and violent themes, 110-111, 113-115, 

134, 239 
Gender construction 

hearing/reading of stories in, 

130-132, 135, 137-140 
and language, 125 
nonstereotvpical alternatives for, 

137-140 

telling/ writing of stories in, 127-128, 
130-137 

Genishi, Celia, 1-7, 172-198, 237-243 

Gilbert, Ram, 124-142, 239 

Good hertz family narratives, 29-36, 

238,240 
Goodman, Nelson, 28-29 
Goodnight Moon (Brown), 180 



248 



Index 



Grammar 

in Black English Vernacular, 81, 90-91 " 
in stories by adolescents, 213 
Greene, Maxine, 4, 11-27, 225, 233, 

237-238, 239, 240 
Grimm, Jacob Ludwig Carl & Wilhclm 

Carl, 130 
Gusdorf, G., 36 



Haley, E., 131 
Hamilton, Virginia, 70 n. 3 
Handful of Start, A (Schami), 62 
Hanrahan, B., 131 
Hanson, C, 216 
Head Start program, 200, 241 
Heath, Shirley Brice, 120, 206-220, 
242 

Heller, Carol E., 221-236, 240, 242 

Heterosexuality, 132, 137 

Kijuelos, Oscar, The Ma mho King* Sing 

Songs of Love, 22-23 
Holocaust, 20 
Holzman, M., 225, 234-235 
Home, in stories, 31-32, 33, 108, 117 
"Homeless Link," 223 
Homclessness, 223-224, 231-232, 235 
hooks, b., 233 
I lope, 243 

How Mi/ Parent* Learned to Eat 

(Friedman), 63 
Huckleberry Finn (Twain), 61 
Hughes, M., 49 
Humboldt, W. V, 84 
Humor, in stories bv adolescents, 210, 

216 

Hymcs, D„ 43, 84 



Imaginative essavs, for NAEP, 92, 94, 

96-97 
Individualism, 23 

Inner London Education Authority 

English Centre, 129 
Instability vs. stability, gender 

difference in use of, 109, 110, 112, 

114 

Integration, in multicultural literature, 
67 

Interpretation 
and multiculturalism, 22 
of stories bv children, methods for, 
105-106 



James, Henry, 28 

Japanese, in children's literature, 62, 63 
Jensen, A. R., 84 
Jones, R., 64 
Joy Luck Club (Tan), 218 
Joyce, James, 13, 31, 34 
Juvenile literature. Sir Children'^ 
literature 



Kamler, B., 126 

Keep the Aspidistra Flying (Orwell), 222 
Keicpie Doll (Hanrahan), 131 
Kincaid, Jamaica, 13, 16 
Kindergarten 

effects of stories bv teachers of, 
145-154, 240-241 

personal storytelling in, 39, 47-52 
Kingston, Maxine Hong, 19-20, 22, 61 
Knot* on a Counting Rope (Martin), 64, 
65 



/ Hate English (Levine), 64-65 

"I Stand Here Ironing" (Olson), 17 

Identity See Cultural identity; Racial 

identity; Self-image 
Ihimaera, Witi, 61 

Illustrations, in stories bv teachers, 181, 
182, 183, 187, 188-189, 192, 193. 
See also Picture books 
Imagery 
and community-making, 5-6 
and culture, 4 

gender differences in use of, 110 
in personal narrative, 35-36 
Imagination, symbolic, 103, 113, 120 



Language 

for presenting social self, 155-157 
for preserving Native American 
community, 199-204, 241 
Language and Learning (Britton), 206 
Language socialization, 40-41 
Learning. See Classrooms; Education, 
through writers' groups; 
Teaching strategies 
Lee, Li -Young, 25-26 
Lee, Spike, 17 
Levine, E., 64-65 
Lewis, Claudia, 174, 182 
Lionni, Leo, 172 



252 



Index 



Literacy, written 
level of, among A Mean Americans, 
80-81 

writers' groups for developing, 225 
Literature. See also Children's literature; 
Multicultural literature 
for achieving multiculturalism, 19-26, 

58-59, 68-69, 240 
for encouraging adolescents' 

storying, 218 
lack of multiculturalism in, 14-16 
personal narratives in, 39-40 
sexism in, and gender construction, 
130-132, 135, 137-140 
Logic, 28, 129, 135 
Love in the Time of Cholera (Garcia 

Marque/), 23 
Lucy (Kincaid), 13, 16 



Maclean, Norman, 39-40 

Mambo Kings Si tig Songs of Love, The 

(Hijuelos), 22-23 
Maniac Magec (Spinelli), 64 
Marcus, L. S., 174 
Marriage, themes of, 109-110 
Marshall, Monique, 178, 183-190, 195, 

197 

Martin, B., Jr., 64, 65 
Matthew and Tilly (Jones), 64 
Meeks, Cleo, 223-224 
Mehler, Robert A., 38-53, 238 
Merchant of Venice (Shakespeare), 61 
Metaphor 
spatial, 32-33 

in stories by adolescents, 211-212 
Michaels, Sarah, 73, 120 
Miller, Peggy J., 38-53, 238 
Mink, L. f 215 

Minority, definition of, 69-70nn.l, 2, 3. 

See aho Diversity, themes of 

(human differences); 

Multiculturalism; Racial identity; 

specific minority groups 
Minority literature, 60, 69n.l. Sec aho 

Multicultural literature 
Mitchell, Lucy Sprague, 174 
Moffett, J., 78 

Moral development, and gender, 
118 

Morgan, Kathryn L., 40 
Morrison, Toni, 17 
Motherhood, themes of, 42 



Multicultural literature 

for achieving multiculturalism, 19-26, 

58-59, 68-69, 240 
and cross-cultural literature, 63-66, 69 
definition of, 57-62 
effect of lack of, 14-16 
and parallel culture literature, 66-68 
perspective of, 67-68 
purpose of, 58 
racism in, 61-62, 67 
vs. world literature, 60, 62-63 
Multiculturalism. See also Multicultural 

literature 
and community making, 11-12, 22, 

23,25 

and contingency, 12-13 
in educational reform, 58 
effect of lack of, 14-16 
history of thought on, 11-13 
and personal narratives, 14 
and racism, 17-19 
and self-image, 15, 16-17, 21-22, 23 
strategies for achieving 
overview of, 13-14 
through adolescents' storying, 218 
through literature and arts, 19-26, 
58-59, 68-69, 240 
Multiethnnic literature, 60, 69-70n.2. See 
also Multicultural literature 



NAEP (National Assessment of 
Educational Progress) 
African Americans' scores on, 80-81, 

91-94, 95, 239 
Chaplin's research on, 82-85 
description of, 81-82 
Smitherman's research on, 82-83, 

85-98, 238-239 
techniques for scoring of, 87-88, 89 
Najjar, Veronica, 178, 190-194, 197 
Narayan, R. K., 61 
Narratives, personal. See Personal 

narratives 
National Assessment of Educational 
Progress. See NAEP (National 
Assessment of Educational 
Progress) 
Native Americans 
in children's literature, 64, 65, 66 
Tachi Yokuts, 199-204 
in Tenderloin Women Writers 

Workshop, 226, 228. 230-232, 235 



250 



Index 



Need for stones, basis of, 2, 4-5, 237, 

242-243 
Neisser, U., 30 

Nichols, Martha, 226, 228, 230 
Nicolopoulou, Ageliki, 102-123, 239 
Nieto, S., 58, 6%.l 
Norton, D. E., 60 



Olson, Tillic, 16, 17, 222 
One Plus One (Marshall), 178, 183-190, 
197 

One Writer'* Beginnings (Welty), 196 
Order vs. disorder, in stories, 103, 107, 

110, 111, 113, 114-115, 117, 239 
Orwell, George, 222 
Otherness, 12, 57-58. See also 

Multiculturalism 
Ozick, Cvnthia, 20, 24 



Painting, and multiculturalism, 16 
Palev, Vivian Gussin, 102, 104, 145-154, 

196,240-241 
Parallel culture literature, 66-68, 240 
Parallel cultures, definition of, 70n.3 
Paternalism, 67 
Peer influence, 139, 156, 158 
Performance, stories for, 164-168 
Perrault, Charles, 130 
Personal experience. See Experience; 

Personal narratives 
Personal narratives. See also Experience 

by adolescents, 208-211, 213, 
218-219 

anger in, 42-43 

assertiveness in, 42-43 

causation in, 36 

in Chair for My Mother, A (Williams), 

175' 
by children 
analvsis of specific examples, 

4l'-44, 46, 49-51 
function of, 78, 238 
in kindergarten classrooms, 47-52 
listener response to, 73 
in primarv classroom sharing time, 

72-79, 239-240 
in response to stories bv teachers, 

189 

and teacher-pupil ratio, 48, 78 
teachers' response to, 73-78, 
23^-240 



chronology in, 35, 36, 213 
cleverness in, 42-43 
community making through, 238 
cultural differences in, 44—45, 47 
and discourse model of socialization, 
40-41 

effect of adults' narratives or 

children, 41-47 
function of, overview of, 39-40, 238 
Goodhertz family narratives, 29-36. 

238, 240 

home vs. real world in, 31-32, 33 

imagery in, 35-36 

life as, 28-37 

in literature, 39-40 

motherhood in, 42 

and multiculturalism, 14 

overview of, 38-40, 238 

place in, 31-33 

pregnancy and childbirth in, 42 
rule violations in, 44-45, 50 
and self, 32, 33-36, 40, 41, 45-47, 

^0-52, 161 
socializing function of, 41-44, 47 
spatial metaphor in, 32-33 
in stories by teachers, 177-178, 182, 

183, 188, 194, 196-197, 240 
for structuring experience, 36 
style of, 33, 35-36, 43 
toughness in, 4-5, 42-43 
bv writers' group members, 225, 

226-228 
Perspective, 67-68 
Persuasion 
in NAEP essays, 92, 94, 97-98 
as social purpose of stories, 214 
Picture books 
Chair for My Mother, A (Williams), 175 
Frederick (LionnO, 172 
One Plus One (Marshall), 178, 

183-190, 197 
Sometimes in the Bathtub 

(Smith-Wiilis), 178, 179-183, 

196-197, 240 
teacher-written, in general, 172, 176, 

178 

When Night Comes (Najjar), 178, 
190-194, 197 
Place (scene, setting), 31-33, 108-109, 
111 

Plot, gender differences in use of, 107, 
110, 111 

Pluralism. See Multiculturalism 



ERLC 



251 



Index 



251 



Poetry 

rhyming,. 169 

in stories by teachers, 183-186, 188 
Politics of story. See Social purposes of 

stories 
Poole, Carla.. 177 

Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man 

(Joyce), 31, 33 
Power, themes of, 4, 110 
Poynton, C, 126, 127 
Pregnancy, themes of, 42 
Preschool children. See also 

Kindergarten; Preschool 
children, stories by 
effect of adults' personal narratives 

on, 41-47, 204 
effect of teacjv*rs' stories on racial 
idefifityof, 145-154, 240-241 
Tachi Yokut Native American, 200-204 
Preschool children, stories by 
function of, 103, 120 
gender differences in 

in bovs' stories, 110-113, 117 
cause's of, 119, 120, 121 
in characters, 107, 110, 111 
effects of culture on, 112, 119, 239 
in girls' stones, 107-110, 113, 117, 
239 

in imagery, 110 

implications for education, 118-121 
methods for evaluating, 113-116 
in order /disorder content, 103, 107, 

110,111, 113,114-115,117, 239 
overview of, 106-107, 113, 116-117 
in plot, 107, 110, 111 
and romanticism, 109, 126 
insetting, 108-109, 111 
in social relationship themes, 106, 

108, 109, 112, 113, 115 
in stabilitv/inslabilitv, 109, 110, 112, 

114 

instvle, 107, 110, 113, 116, 118, 

119-120 
in themes, 103, 106-116, 239 
previous research on, 105 
research by Nicolopoulou, Scales, & 
Weinlraub on 
conclusions from, 103, 115, 116-117, 
118-121 

methodology of, 103-106, 114, 

115-116 
results of, 106-117 
symbolism in, 103, 105, 114, 116 



Primary grades 

personal narrative in, 72-79 
social purposes for stories in 
crossing social boundaries, 

168-170, 241 
performance, 164-168 
presenting self, 155-157, 161 
resistance of authority, 158-159, 

162-164 
teasing, 161-162 
Prolepsis, 35 

Pupil-teacher ratio, 48, 78 

Questioning, by teachers, 73-75 

Racial identity, 145-154, 182, 186, 188, 

240-241 
Racism 

of multicultural literature, 61-62, 67 
and multiculturalism, 17-19, 25 
in stories by adolescents, 210, 215 

Ragtime (Doctorow), 18-19 

Rand, Maria, 226-229, 230, 235 

Relational self, 46^7 

Resistance of authority, stories for, 
158-159, 162-164 

Revolting Rhymes (Dahl), 129-130 

Rhyming, 169. See also Poetry 

Rhythms, 4, 5-6 

Rich, Adrienne, 242 

Romanticism 
and gender construction, 132-134, 
135-137 

gender differences in use of, 109, 
126 

Romatowski, J., 126 

Room of One's Own (Woolf), 15 

Rorty, A. O., 33 

Rosen, H., 77 

Rosenblatt, L M., 175-176 
Rule violations, themes of, 44-45, 50, 
111, 115 

"Sacrifices" (Haley), 131 

Safety and security, themes of, 178, 182 

San Francisco Tenderloin district, 
described, 221-222. See also 
Tenderloin Women Writers 
Workshop 

Sapir, R., 84 

Scales, Barbara, 102-123, 239 



255 



Scene (place, setting), 31-33, 108-109, 
111 

Schami, R., 62 
Scott, J., 82, 83 

Sculpture, and multiculturaiism, 16 

Seale, D., 65, 66 

Self. Sec also Self-image 

and personal narratives, 32, 33-36, 40, 
41, 45-47, 50-52, 161 

relational, 46-47 

stories for presenting, 155-157, 161 
Self-image. See aho Racial identity 
and multiculturaiism, 15, 16-17, 

21-22, 23, 65-66, 67, 68 
in stories, overview of, 3, 237, 238-239 
writers' groups for boosting, 225 
Sensory perception, 182 
Setting (place, scene), 31-33, 108-109, 
111 

Sexist literature, 130-132, 135, 137-140 
Sexuality, 132, 137. See aho Gender 

construction 
Shakespeare, William, 61 
Sharing time, 49, 72-79, 239-240 
Shawl, The (Ozick), 20 
Shires, L., 135 
Show-and-tell, 48 
Silencing of voices, 12, 15-16 
Silko, Leslie, 206, 216 
Sims [Bishop], Rudine, 57-71, 240 
Slapin, B., 65, 66 

Smith-Willis, Heather, 178, 179-183, 

196-197, 240 
Smitherman, Geneva, 80-101, 238-239 
Snyder, D., 62 

Social meaning of stories, 128-130. See 
aho Culture; Social purposes of 
stories; Socialization 
Social purposes of stories. See aho 
Community making 
community making in general, 11-12, 

22, 23,' 25 
community preservation, 200, 202, 
203-204 

crossing social boundaries, lb8-170, 

241-242 
overview of, 2-3, 156 
performance, 164-168 
persuasion, 214 
presenting self, 155-157, 161 
presenting theories, 215-216 
resistance of authority 158-159, 

162-164 



socialization, 39, 40, 41-44, 47 
of stories by adolescents, 208-211, 

214,215-216, 218-219 
and style, 156 
teasing, 161-162, 208-21! 
telling about self, 161 
Social relationships, gender differences 
in presentation of, 106, 108, 109, 
112, 113-114, 115 
Socialization. See also Gender 
construction 
discourse model of, 40-41 
through story, 39, 40, 41-44, 47 
Sometimes in tlie Bathtub (Smith-Willis), 

178, 179-183, 196-197, 240 
"Song of Myself" (Whitman), 12 
Sontag, Susan, 237 

Spatial metaphor, 32-33. Sec aho Place 

(scene, setting) 
Spinelli, J., 64 

Stability vs. instability, gender 

difference in use of, 109, 110, 112, 
114 

Stas/.ewski, Carol, 29 
Stereotyping, 62. Sec aho Racism 
Storyteller. The (Vargas Llosa), 23 
Student-teacher ratio, 48, 78 
Style 

gender differences in children's, 107, 
111, 113, 116, 118, 119-120 

of personal narratives, 33, 35-36, 
43 

and social purpose of stories, 156 
Surat, M., 64 

Symbolic imagination, 103, 113, 120 
Svmbolism, in stories bv children, 103, 

105,114,116 
Syrians, in children's literature, 62 



Tachi as a Second Langage program 

(TSL), 200, 201 
Tachi Yokuts, 199-204, 241 
Tafoya, T., 202 

Talk That Talk (Goss & Barnes), 40 
TallMountain, Mary, 226, 228, 230-232, 
235 

Tan, Amy, 218 
Teacher-pupil ratio, 48, 78 
Teachers 

responses to stories bv children, 
73-78, 239-240 

stories bv 



Index 



253 



autobiographical aspects of, 
177-178, 182, 183, 188, 194, 
196-197, 240 

children's response to, in general, 

182- 183, 189, 190 
description of Banks Street College 

coursework on, 172-178 
effect on racial identity, 145-154, 
240-241 

effects of writing, 173, 177-178, 183, 
189, 194, 195-196, 197, 241 

illustrations in, 181, 182, 183, 187, 
188-189, 192, 193 

One Plus One (Marshall), 178, 

183- 190, 197 
Sometime* in the Bathtub 

(Smith-Willis), 178, 179-183, 
196-197, 240 
themes of, 178, 182, 186 
VVJ/tvi Night Come* (Najjar), 178, 
190-194, 197 
Teaching strategies 

for achieving multiculturalism, 13-14, 

19-26, 58-59, 68-69, 218 
for community making, 234 
for encouraging adolescents' 

story ing, 216-219 
and gender differences in story ing, 
118-121 

Teasing, stories for, 161-162, 208-211 
Tenderloin district (San Francisco), 

described, 221-222 
Tenderloin Reflection and Education 

Center, 223, 234 
Tenderloin Times, 222 
Tenderloin Women Writers Workshop 
community making through, 

223-225, 233. 234-235 
description of, 223 
examples of members' stories, 
226-232 

listener response in, 227, 228, 230 
Tense, in stories by adolescents, 213 
Textbooks, 4 

Themes. See also specific themes 
gender differences in use of, 103, 

106-116, 239 
of stories bv teachers, 178. 182, 186, 
194 

Theories, stories as, 215-216 

This ly> the Way We Co to School: A Hook 

about Children around the World 

(Baer), 63 



Thompson, J., 65 

Thought, function of, 28 

Threadgold, T., 127 

Through the Eyes of a Child (Norton), 60 

Thurber, James, 243 

Tizard, B., 49 

Tocqueville, Alexis de, 23 

Toughness in stories, 4-5, 42^3 

Trepanier-Street, M., 126 

TSL Program (Tachi as a Second 

Language), 200, 201 
Tuck, D., 126 
Twain, Mark, 61 



University of California, Berkeley Child 
Study Center, 104 



Vargas Llosa, Mario, 23 
Vascellaro, Sal, 172-198, 240, 241 
Vietnamese, in children's literature, 64 
Violence 

gender differences in use of themes 
of, 110-111,113-115, 134, 239 

in stories by adolescents, 213, 215 
Visual arts, 16, 58 
Volosinov, V. N., 84 
Vulnerability, themes of, 178 
Vygotsky, LS.,40, 84 



Wagner, B. J., 78 

Walker, Lcona, 223 

Walkerdine, V, 128,131 

Wallin, L., 66 

Waters, Rob, 222 

Ways of Seeing (Berger), 16 

Weedon, C, 138 

Weintraub, Jeff, 102-123, 239 

Weisser, Susan, 29 

Weltv, Eudora, 39, 196 

West,C 18 

When Night Comes (Najjar), 178, 

190-194, 197 
White, J., 126^127 
Whiteman, M., 82 
Whitman, Walt, 12,23 
Whole language movement, 22 
Whorf, B., 84 
Williams, Vera, 175, 196 
Woman Warrior, The (Kingston), 22 
Wonderful O, The (Thurber), 243 



n rr **\ 



254 



Index 



Woodard, G., 65 

Woolf, Virginia, 15 

World literature vs. multicultural 

literature, 60, 62-63 
Wright, S., 82 

Writers' groups, 222, 223-225. See ah 
Tenderloin Women Writers 
Workshop 



Yearning, Race. Gender, ami Cultural 

Politic* (hooks), 233 
Yeats, William Butler, 37 
Yokuts. See Tachi Yokuts 



Zipes, J., 129 



Editors 




Anne Haas Dyson is a professor in the School of 
Education at the University of California, 
Berkeley. She is the author of Multiple Worlds of 
Child Writers: Friend* Learning to Write and Soeial 
Worlds of Children Learning to Write in an Urban 
Primary School. Her research concentrates on 
children's oral and written language use in offi- 
cial and unofficial classroom worlds. 




Celia Genishi is a professor of curriculum and 
teaching at Teachers College, Columbia Univer- 
sity. She is the editor of Ways of Assessing Children 
and Curriculum: Stories of Early Childhood Practice 
and co-author, with Anne Haas Dyson, of Lan- 
guage Assessmoit in the Fjirly Years. Her interests 
inciude children's language in the classroom and 
the role of stories in research and practice. 



Contributors 



Rudine Sims Bishop is a professor in the Department of Educational Theory 
and Practice at The Ohio State University. She is the author of the 
NCTE publication Shadow and Substance: Afro-American Experience in 
Contemporary Children's Fiction and has a particular interest in multicul- 
tural literature. 

Susan J. Britsch is an assistant professor of literacy and language education 
in the Department of Curriculum and Instruction at Purdue Univer- 
sity. Among her interests are child language socialization in families 
and communities, the interface between teaching style and issues of 
developmentally appropriate practice for children in specific commu- 
nities, and children's stories, both told and written. 

Jerome Bruner is a research professor of psychology and senior research 
fellow in law at New York University. He is the author of Actual Minds, 
Possible Worlds and Acts of Meaning. His research has included work in 
curriculum theory, cognitive development, child language acquisition, 
and literary theory. 

Mingshui Cai is an assistant professor of education at the University of 
Northern Iowa. His major areas of research interest are reader re- 
sponse, multicultural literature, and children's literature. He is the 
recipient of the 1993 Virginia Hamilton Essay Award. 

Courtney B. Cazden is a professor in the Harvard Graduate School of Educa- 
tion. She is the author of Classroom Discourse: The Language of Teaching 
and Learning and Whole Language Plus: Essays on Literacy in the United 
States and Nexv Zealand. Her research has included work in child lan- 
guage development, educational anthropology, and applied linguis- 
tics. 

Pam Gilbert is a senior lecturer in education at James Cook University of 
North Queensland, Australia. She is the author of Writing, Schooling, 
and Deconstruction: From Voice to Text in the Classroom and Gender, Liter- 
acy, and the Classroom. Her research has focused on the teaching of 
literature and on gender issues in English education. 

Maxine Greene is William F. Russell Professor Emeritus in the Foundations 
of Education at Teachers College, Columbia University. She is the 
author of Landscapes of Learning and The Dialectic of Freedom and is 
particularly interested in connections among philosophy, education, 
and the arts. 

Shirley Brice Heath is a professor of English and linguistics at Stanford 
University. She is the author of Ways with Woni>: Language, Life, and 
Wink in Communities and Classrooms. Her research includes work in the 



258 



Contributors 



ethnography of communication, child language socialization, the his- 
tory and politics of language policies and attitudes, and educational 
practices for culturally diverse populations in school and community. 

Carol E. Heller is an assistant professor of education at the University of 
Illinois at Chicago. She was formerly a research fellow with the Teach- 
ing Tolerance project of the Southern Poverty Law Center in Mont- 
gomery, Alabama. 

Robert A. Mehler, after receiving a B.A. degree in tutorial studies at the 
University of Chicago, was research assistant to Dr. Peggy Miller from 
1%8 to He is currently in premedieal training at the University 

of Illinois at Chicago. 

Peggy J. Miller is an associate professor in the departments of Speech Com- 
munication and Psychology at the University of Illinois at Urbana- 
Champaign. The author of Ann/, Wendy, and Beth: Learning Language in 
South Baltimore, she has a longstanding interest in language socializa- 
tion in children from diverse cultures. 

Ageliki Nicolopoulou is an assistant professor of education and child devel- 
opment at Smith College. She is co-editor, along with Barbara Scales, 
of Play and the Social Context of Development in Early Care and Education. 
Her interests include the role of play and fantasy in education and 
development. 

Vivian Gussin Paley is a teacher at the University of Chicago Laboratory 
Schools. Among her books are White Teacher, Wally's Stories, Bo\/s and 
Girls, The Boy Who Would Be a Helicopter, and You Can't Say You Can't 
Play. A classroom teacher for more than thirty-five years, she has 
created a continuing autobiographical study of young children in 
school. 

Barbara Scales is the head teacher at the Harold E. Jones Child Study Center, 
University of California, Berkeley. Co-author of Looking at Children's 
Play: A Bridge between Theory and Practice and more recently Play at the 
Center of the Curriculum, she has a particular interest in the social 
ecology of the preschool and in children's storytelling and dramatic 
play. 

Geneva Smitherman is University Distinguished Professor and director of 
the African American Language and Literacy Program in the Depart- 
ment of English at Michigan State University- She is the author of Black 
Language and Culture: Sounds of Soul, Talkin'and Testifyin: The Language 
of Black America, and Rap, Forty Acres, and the N-Word: A Dictionary of 
Black Talk. Her interests include the oral and written language of Afri- 
can Americans in classroom and community settings and the politics 
of language in and out of school. 

Sal Vascellaro is a member of the graduate faculty at the Bank Street College 
of Education, where he teaches courses in early childhood curriculum 



26; 



Contributors 



and children's literature. He is a doctoral student in the Department 
of Philosophy and the Social Sciences at Teachers College, Colum- 
bia University, and is especially interested in the "storywriting" of 
teachers. 

Jeff Weintraub is a visiting associate professor of political science at Williams 
College. He is a social theorist and cultural sociologist who has also 
taught at Harvard and the University of California, San Diego. His 
publications include the forthcoming Freedom and Community: The Re- 
publican Virtue Tradition and the Sociology of Liberty. His central interests 
include the role of culture in formation of the self. 










We all have a basic need for story, for 
organizing our experiences into tales of 
important happenings. In this volume, nineteen, 
contributors explore, the nature of story - the 
basic functions it serves, its connections to th§ 
diverse sociocultural landscape of our society, 
"and it9 power in the classroom. Emphasizing 

the Simplex relationships among story, 
ethnicity, and gfender, the book includes within 
its scope stories both told and written, those . 
authored by children and by teachers, stories 
professionally produced. and those created in 
the classroom. In addressing concerns about 

how to most effectively serve increasingly 
diverse student populations, the contributors 
. among them, Maxme Greene, Rudihe Sims 
Bishop. Geneva Smitherman, Vivian Paieyj 
Pam Gilbert, Shirley Bnce Heath, and Jerome 
Bruner - demonstrate through vivid example- 
the need for and the power of story. 



National Council of Teachers of English 
1111 W. Kenyon Road* 
Urbana, Illinois 61801-1096 

ISBN 0-8141-3300-2 







ISBN D-fiim-33DD-2 
90000 



9 78081 4 U 1 3300? 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



263 



9 

ERIC 



