DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 362 345 



RC 019 301 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



ABSTRACT 



Torson, Dianna 

Communication and the Power of Native American 

Women, 

90 

lOOp.; Master's Thesis, South Dakota State 
Universi ty. 

Dissertations/Theses - Masters Theses (042) 
MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Culture; American Indian History; 
'''American Indian Literature; American Indians; 
Cultural Images; ''^Ethnic Stereotypes; 'Teraales; 
'''Feminism; ''Individual Power; Non Formal Education; 
Oral Tradition; '"'Sexism in Language; Sex Role; Sex 
Stereotypes ; Values 
'"'Native Americans 



This thesis focuses on the effects of the language of 
patriarchy on the power of Native American women, how these women 
have retained power in their own societies, and how an understanding 
of Native women's values can aid feminists. An examination of Native 
American women's literature provides a connecting bridge back to a 
time before patriarchy and shows how Native languages and oral 
tradition have nurtured Native culture and values. This literature 
frequently draws on Native mythology and legends to express female 
awareness of the loss of traditional power and the importance of 
regaining its strength. It is a spiritual knowledge focusing on 
harmony and balance between the male and female aspects of life, and 
its language differs from the standard feminist rhetoric of proving 
equality with men. The efforts of patriarchal White society to negate 
the power and p-sition of Native women are examined, highlighting the 
destructive influence of the "Indian princess" or Pocahontas image. 
The growing activism of Native American female poets, authors, and 
educators as they reestablish women's leadership and confront the 
problems of their communities is illustrated through their statements 
and fragments of their works. Contains 107 references. (SV) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

from the original document , >'f 



COMMUNICATION AND THE POWER OF 
NATIVE AMERICAN WOMEN 



BY 

DIANNA TORSON 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC). ' 



U.S. PEPAHTMENTOF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Impiovement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
y CENTERiERIC) 

This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organiration 
originating it 

O Minor changes have been made \q <mprove 
reproduction quality 



• Pomis n) view or opinions stated <n this docu- 
ment 00 •'^01 necessarily represent official 
OEBI position or policy 




A thesis submitted in partial fulfillment 
of the requirements for the degree 
Master of Arts 
Major in Speech 
South Dakota State University 



COMMUNICATION AND THE POWER OF 



NATIVE AMERICAN WOMEN 



This thesis is approved as a creditable and 



independent investigation by a candidate for the degree, 
Master of Arts, and is acceptable for meeting the thesis 
requirements for this degree. Acceptance of this thesis 
does not imply that the conclusions reached by the 
candidate are necessarily the conclusions of the major 
department. 



Harold Widvey Q 
Thesis Adviser 



Date 




Michael R. Schliessmann 
Acting Head 
Department of Speech 



Date 



ERLC 



To 

the ones I love 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



I wish to thank all those who have inspired, 
encouraged and assisted me during the writing process. 
The list is long and no one is of less importance. 

Velva Lu Spencer, a special friend who has 
laughed, cried and "whined" with me for the past two 
years. 

Jo Lillis, whose enthusiastic intellectualism 
helped fan the fire. 

Linda Gene and Kristy Ann, sisters whose courage 
and fortitude and love keep me going. 

Scott, Kim and Pat, kids who are willing to let 
their mother be who she is. 

Jeremy and Joshua, grandsons who sing to 
f ishworms . 

Dolores Kamp my mother, and Gene Tor son my Dad. 
Their willingness to create their lives have inspired 
mine . 

Hugh, Helena, and Selmay, part of my life I 

cherish. 



ERLC 



5 



Dr. Chuck Woodard^ without whom this project 

i 

would not have proceeded and whose example of "ways of 

t 

being" and of "seeing" are extremely rare. 

Dr. Jerry Ferguson, whose insight and knowing 
have helped create mine. 

Dr. Harold Widvey, major professor whose trust 
allowed a thesis of unparalleled paradigm in the 
Department of Speech. 

Dr. Michael Schliessmann and the entire 
Department of Speech, whose friendly, honest and open 
attit-'ies encourage all as equals. 

Janos Shoemyen, Big Elk, Doris Giago, Terry 
Branson, Ruth Branson, and J.R., friends; and Hota and 
Honey Bear, howlers of significant significance. 

DTR 



ERLC 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Chapter Page 

I. INTRODUCTION 1 

Origin of Study 1 

Statement of Purpose 1 

Procedures 5 

Perspective 8 

II. THE RICHNESS OF WOMEN'S POWER IN NATIVE 

AI4ERICAN MYTH 18 

Native Language Reflected Native Women • . . 18 

Creation Legends 19 

Value of Women Legends 22 

Women Power of Perpetuation 25 

Women as Heroes 27 

Harmony and Balance 29 

III. THE DESTRUCTIVENESS OF PATRIARCHAL LANGUAGE 

ON NATIVE AMERICAN WOMEN 39 

The Pocahantas Perplex 39 

Patriarchy 41 

Other Ways of Being 43 

IV. THE RICHNESS OF WOMEN'S POWER IN THE RECENT 

RHETORIC OF NATIVE AMERICAN WOMEN 57 

Rhetoric 57 

Literature 65 

Action 71 

V. SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND SUGGESTIONS FOR 

FURTHER STUDY 77 

Sximmary 77 

Conclusions 81 

Suggestions for Further Study . 83 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 85 



ERLC 



CHAPTER I 



INTRODUCTION 

Origin of the Study 

The origin of this study is my innate interest in 
Native American cultures and their basic value systems. 

The Native American Studies minor I completed for 
my B.A. degree enhanced this interest, as has my 
involvement with South Dakota State University's Native 
American Club and the Native American Advisory Committee. 

My participation in a 1988 Speech/English/Drama 
Workshop, which emphasized Native American Literature, 
also contributed to this interest. From there I began to 
explore, analyze and connect a historical, descriptive 
study utilizing the literature of and about Native 
American women. 

Statement of Purpose 
I believe in a multi-cultural world. I believe 
that we should learn from other cultures. It seems, 
however, that because of patriarchy and its resultant 
ethnocentrism, many Americans have shut themselves off 
from other cultures. They have become victims of what 



2 



the renowned scholar Kenneth Burke says is a way of 
seeing that "is always a way of not seeing" (Jaeger 1988^ 
22) . Or as the Sioux medicine man John (Fire) Lame Deer 
puts it, of '•seeing with only one eye" (Lame Deer 1972, 
190) • The linguist Benjamin Lee Whorf believes "language 
has direct impact on behavior." In fact Whorf 
hypothesizes in his principle of linguistic relativity 
that "the structure of a human being's language 
influences the manner in which he understands reality and 
behaves with respect to it" (Whorf 1956, 23). 

Intellectual thinking for centuries held that 
words from one lai-guage could be translated into any 
other language without loss of meaning. Whorf believed, 
however, that "A change in language can transform our 
appreciation of the Cosmos" (Whorf 1956, vii) . Whorf 
reached these conclusions as a result of studying the 
Aztec, Maya, and Shawnee languages with major in-depth 
emphasis on the Hopi language. Whorf was concerned with 
basic mental operations. He was uncomfortable with the 
"strait jacket" represented by language (Whorf 1956, 23) . 
He explored the field of language-psychology by the use 
of comparative linguistics and hoped to contribute to an 
eventual universal, international language. He developed 
the oligosynthetic principle which theorizes that Native 
American language structure is built from a few elements 

ERLC 



that stand for certain general ideas* He utilized field 
research methods to develop a linguistic analysis of 
Hopi. He worked with a native speaker of Hopi who lived 
in New York City before he spent time on the Hopi 
reservation in Arizona, He prepared a grammar and 
dictionary of Hopi. From this he developed the idea that 
the native speaker of Hopi might hold a different mode of 
perceiving and conceiving things. He stated in a paper 
he read at a meeting of the Linguistic Society of America 
that "the Hopi actually have a language better equipped 
to deal with . . . vibratile phenomena than is our latest 
scientific technology" (Whorf 1956, 17). 

In a paper titled "An American Indian Model of 
the Universe," he explained the Hopi verb system with 
regard to space and time. From his studies he understood 
that within Native American languages were "bread ideas 
or complexes of related ideas" which provided different 
"segmentations of experience" (Whorf 1956, 25-26). His 
research centered around what was being thought about. 

Benjamin Lee Whorf *s achievements came at a time 
when very little writing was being done by Native 
American women. His work revolved around the effect of 
language on thinking and knowing. One aspect of that is 
the effect of an enforced language on Native people. 



His ideas fit well within the scope of this 

thesis. Native American women seem to have a different 

world view. Their ideas on regaining power seem 

different from the ideas of feminists achieving power. 

According to John B. Carroll, editor of Whorf's essays: 

One wonders, indeed, what makes the notion of 
linguistic relativity so fascinating even to the 
nonspecialist. Perhaps it is the suggestion that 
all one's life one has been tricked, all unaware, 
by the structure of language into a certain way of 
perceiving reality, with the implication that 
awareness of this trickery will enable one to see 
the world with fresh insight (Whorf 1956, 27). 

Attention in this study will be drawn to the 

effects of the language of patriarchy on the power of 

Native American women. Their picture of the universe is 

very different from the two-valued, either-or thinking of 

the conquering patriarchal colonizing culture. Their 

ability to express themselves creatively in English, 

through the use of poetry and parables, may teach us 

something of their life, their language, and their world 

previously unexpressible . The study will suggest how 

understanding the Native American woman's value system 

could aid feminists. It will exemplify Whorf's cardinal 

hypothesis that the "structure of the language one 

habitually uses influences the manner in which one 

understands his environment" (Whorf, 1956, vi) , 



Procedures 

In determining a way to approach this study, 

several people were consulted. The way obviously was not 

clear. Finally , advice from Aristotle became evident. 

Our discussion will be adequate if it has as much 
clearness as the subject matter admits of, for 
precision is not to be sought for alike in all 
discussion, any more than in all the products of 
crafts . . . For it is the mark of an educated man 
to look for precision in each class of things just 
as far as the nature of the subject admits; it is 
evidently equally foolish to accept probable 
reasoning from a mathematician and to demand from 
a rhetorician scientific proofs (Jaeger 1988, 15). 

As the topic is broad, several suggestions were made that 

a narrowing to one or two tribal groups might aid in 

focusing and narrowing the study. However, I decided it 

would not include the range of Native American women 

writers needed to demonstrate any sort of trend. 

Therefore, material was chosen from available sources 

reflecting diverse tribal backgrounds, the criteria being 

that it was by or about Native American women. 

My earlier reading suggested that Native American 

women, especially those motivated by traditional value 

systems, are regaining power. They have, however, not 

been involved in the feminist movement in America. Their 

position has been that within their own culture they are 

already free. 



6 

To determine the availability of scholarly 
material in this area a review of The Index to Journals 
in Communication Studies ^ edited by Matlon and Facciola, 
was conducted. On July 19, 1989, an extensive computer 
search was conducted at the Briggs library on the campus 
of South Dakota State University. The databases searched 
were Ageline, Drug Info & Alcohol Use & Abuse, 
Publications in Sociology, Psyc Info, Rehab Data, Soc 
Planning/Pol & Dev, Social Work Abstracts, Books in 
Print, Child abuse & Neglect, Dissertation Abstracts, 
Family Resources, Linguistics & Language Behavior, 
Magazine Index, PAIS International, Popu3ation 
Bibliography, PsycALERT, Social Sci Search, Sociological 
Abstracts, and MLA Bibliography. From these only 
Dissertation Abstracts and Sociological Abstracts yielded 
any results. These were (1) Rayna Green, "Native 
American Women;" (2) Rayna Green, "The Pocahontas 
Perplex: The Image of Indian Women in American Culture;" 
and (3) Clara Sue Kidwell, "The Power of Women in Three 
American Indian Societies." It was determined that very 
little has been done in the area of Native American women 
and patriarchal power structures, particularly in the 
area of language, feminists, and communication. 

A journal article by Rayna Green entitled "Native 
American Women" was published in Signs in 1980. In it 



7 

the author reviews the types of scholarly work achieved 

in the past. She believes most of it has been 

"selective, stereotyped, and damaging" (Green 1980, 

249). ^" •:^ites the literature as being anthropological, 

psychological, sociological, and historical. She 

believes the concerns have been about biological 

functions, social functions, and economic functions, with 

very little about real Native American women or real 

Native American categories of significance. 

Women as defective beings, psychologically and 
physically, or as inferior beings, socially, 
intellectually, and politically, are yet the 
interpretive frameworks within which Native 
American women are cast along with their non- 
Native American counterparts (Green 1980, 265). 

She states, "Unless the scholarly agenda changes, we will 

learn less and less about Native American women" (Green 

1980, 265-267). 

Green's earlier article, "The Pocahontas 
Perplex: The Image of Indian Women in American Culture," 
provided historical background and insight into the 
building of the stereotypes (Green 1975) . 

Clara Sue Kidwell says in her article, "The Power 

of Women in Three American Indian Societies," published 

The Journal of Ethnic Studies , that these stereotypes 

were created by a society dominated by males but that the 

persistency of values from traditional societies 
to contemporary times provides a source of power 



8 



for American Indian women within their own 
societies , despite the relative powerlessness of 
Indian people in American society today (Kidwell 
1978, 114) . 

In addition to material gleaned in the journal 
articles, letters were received from Dr. Beatrice 
Medicine and Anne Cameron, who provided ideas. Advice 
was solicited from Dr. Jack Marken, professor emeritus, 
South Dakota State University, who provided materials. 
And an interview was conducted with the Sioux artist 
Arthur Amiotte, who provided insight - 

Reading was begun and notes were taken, in order 
to compile a historical, descriptive thesis which 
attempts to demonstrate that through female power and 
female remembering, there is a connecting bridge found in 
Native American women's literature back to a time before 
patriarchy, back to a connection with nature and an 
acceptance of women as women, back to a time of 
realization of inner strength and power and an acceptance 
of knowledge that is more than rational, and to a 
language and oral tradition which nurtured Native 
American values and culture. 

Perspective 
According to John Upton Terrell and Donna M. 
Terrell, authors of I ndian Women of the Western Morning; 
Their Life in Early America ; 

ERLC 



9 



The concept that woman was made from man is not 
found in Indian religion. Indians accept and 
adhere to the doctrine that the female of their 
kind was crecited simultaneously with the male. 
For apparent reasons, each was endowed with 
peculiar qualities and sensibilities, neither was 
accorded supremacy, and each was made dependent 
upon the other for existence (Terrell and Terrell 
1974, 1). 

The Terrells contend that there is "nothing in 
any Indian mythology to suggest the principle that man 
preceded woman" (Terrell and Terrell 1974, 13). 

Native American spiritual hierarchies included 
goddesses as well as gods, according to the Terrells* 
The tribal structure was often matrilineal, with women's 
rights the foundation of tribal society and government. 

The Terrells add that among the tribes there were 
medicine women as well as medicine men, and that female 
healers "were believed to be possessed of supernatural 
powers that enabled them to diagnose and cure 
afflictions." There were also medicine women who "made 
no claim to possession of supernatural powers." These 
women were knowledgeable herbalists and midwives and were 
highly regarded by tribal members (Terrell and Terrell, 
1974, 167) . 

Bea Medicine, in The Native American Woman; A 
Perspective , discusses many aspects of the life of Native 
American women from past to present. She does not 
portray the role of Native American women in any 



glamorous way, but rather attempts to describe the 
"variety of Indian women" (Medicine 1978, 1). Dr. 
Medicine states that in 1974 she taught a course at 
Dartmouth College entitled^ "The Role of Women in Native 
American Societies," and at that time there were very few 
Native American women involved in the Women's Liberation 
Movement. The response of the Native American woman to 
the question of why this was, according to Dr. Medicine, 
was often: "Why should I belong? I'm already liberated" 
(Medicine 1978, 3). In her course, she explored whether 
this statement was really true in modern society. She 
states : 

From that time during which Native cultures 
operated in a state of distinctive equilibria 
before the onslaught of the dominant culture, 
tribal cultures have constantly undergone and 
reacted to forces of cultural change . . . 
(Medicine 1978, 4) . 

That time "during which Native cultures operated 

in a state of distinctive equilibria" is the time of 

remembering to which modern Native American women writers 

refer; a time before tribal societies were forced to 

change. These writers are looking back to a time before 

the European conquerors and the "change agents," of 

"trappers, traders, missionaries. Army personnel, and 

other assorted immigrants," who forced acculturation upon 

the Native people (Medicine 1978, 79). 



11 



r 

This forced acculturation, viewed from present 

day perspectives, also provides an opportunity to analyze 

results aided by new understandings in the studies of 

interpersonal communication. The use of language to 

attempt to destroy Native American women's self-concepts 

and self-esteem, are obvious in many areas. For exeanple, 

the development of negative stereotypes as a consequence 

of the Pocahontas Perplex will be examined. The power of 

communication to cause one to cheerfully accept the fact 

that one's culture is dying will be described. And 

especially, the way Native American women are regaining 

their positive self -concepts and their power through 

language will also be examined. According to Howard 

Giles and John M. Wiemann in the The Handbook of 

Communication Science (edited by Charles R. Berger and 

Steven H. Chaffee) , "Language and power are central to 

understanding human social life" (Giles and Wiemann 1987, 

372) . A model is provided that shows the 

interrelatedness of: 

self-concept/social identity - social comparison - 
self-esteem - social influence needs - language 
behaviors - social cognitions - self-presentation 
(Giles and Wiemann 1987, 368). 



ERIC 



Understanding interrelatedness and discovering 
connections is the key component found in the rhetoric^ 
writing, and actions of Native American women. And as 
they regain their lost power they provide a model for 
feminists as they continue to struggle for equality. 

Certain Native American women writers are taking 
a first step toward recovering a feminine value system; 
toward defining the feminine system and its power. Paula 
Gunn Allen, author of The Sacred Hoop: Recovering the 
Feminine in American Indian Traditions , believes we need 
to learn about self-directing women whose major concern 
is the welfare of the young and about reestablishing 
societies where powerful women are central to social well^ 
being (Allen 1986, 3) . 

Allen's book contains a chapter entitled "Who is 
Your Mother? Red Roots of White Feminism," in which she. 
talks of remembering, rather than forgetting the past. 
She talks of this remembering causing an Indianization of 
society: 

But regardless of official versions of relations 
between Indians and whites or other segments of 
the American population, the fact remains that 
great numbers of apparently "white" or "Black" 
Americans carry notable degrees of Indian blood. 
With that blood has come the culture of the Indian 
. . . (Allen 1986, 216) . 



According to Allen, this is the root of our 

society's remembering and the basis for a possible 

Indianization of modem culture (Allen 1986, 216), She 

sees Indianization as a strong influence in American 

society today, stating that: 

Third-- and fourth-generation Americans indulge in 
growing nudity, informality in social relations, 
egalitarianism, and the rearing of women who value 
autonomy, strength, freedom, and personal dignity 
. . . (Allen 1986, 217) . 

Coinciding with that idea, she also notes that 
"permissive" childrearing practices are becoming more 
popular in America and a movement away from the physical 
and psychological abuse of children is gaining strength. 
She states that Native Americans "did not believe that 
children are born in sin, are congenitally predisposed \.o 
evil ..." (Allen 1986, 216-17). These are beliefs that 
she suggests are passing into white culture from Native 
American culture. 

Anne Cameron's Daughters of Copper Women , 
published in 19 81, celebrates feminine power and 
remembering. Cameron calls for women to become strong as 
women once again. 

Cameron states that she was "given permission to 
tell the stories in her book by women who are members of 
a secret society whose roots go back beyond recorded 
history to the dawn of Time itself." She says, "There is 



14 



a better way of doing things. Some of us remember that 

better way" (Cameron 1981, preface) . 

Her stories are myti. ^logical tracings of women 

from the beginning of time until the present day. They 

speak of change and enduring and female power. The final 

story, "The Face of Old Woman/' is about "Granny." 

Granny believes: 

Women are bringing the pieces of the truth 
together. Women are believing again that we have 
a right to be whole. Scattered pieces from the 
black sisters, from the yellow sisters, from the 
white sisters ; are coming together, trying to form 
a whole, and it can't form without the pieces we 
have saved and cherished (Cameron 1931, 145). 

Granny is referring to the remembering. The 
threads of connection to the before-patriarchy-past that 
remain in Native cultures. 

This idea is supported by Sandra Lee Bartkey, a 

philosopher at the University of Illinois. In her essay, 

"Women are Not Free," in Classic Philosophical Questions , 

edited by James A. Gould, she states: 

A culture has a global character; the limits of my 
culture are the limits of my world. The 
subordination of women, then, because it is so 
pervasive a feature of my culture, will (if 
uncontested) appear to be natural — and because it 
is natural, unalterable. Unlike a colonized 
people, women have no memory of a "time before;" a 
time before the masters came, a time before we 
were subjugated and ruled. Further, since one 
function of cultural identity is to allow me to 
distinguish those who are like me from those who 
are not, I may feel more kinship with those who 
share my culture, even though they oppress me. 



ERIC 



than with the women of another culture, whose 
whole experience of life may well be closer to my 
own than to any man's (Bartkey 1985, 562) • 

In the same book, William T. Blackstone says. 

The women's liberation movement is a complex 
phenomenon. Within it there are widely different 
views of the causes of the oppression of women, 
and consequently, widely different views of what 
is required to overcome that oppression • Put in a 
different way, the movement includes widely 
different views of what constitutes a free person 
in the social and political sense and , hence , 
different views of the sort of society required to 
assure freedom (Blackstone 1985, 574) • 

This American male philosopher admits that 
oppression exists. He then discusses several positions 
within the feminist movement, including traditionalism, 
liberalism, radicalism, and one he calls "radical 
feminists" (Blackstone 1985, 576). 

According to Blackstone, the traditionalist 
stance says that everything is all right the way it is. 
The traditionalist believes that women are and should be • 
passive, submissive, with sex-differentiated labor and 
sex stereotyping where the restriction of females is not 
oppression but the fulfillment of women's nature. The 
liberal argues that sex-role stereotyping causes great 
social injustice, and thinks freedom can be had by 
reforming the system. The radical believes freedom can 
only be had by overthrowing the political system. The 
other type of radical feminist believes liberation for 
females is possible only by overcoming biological 



16 

differences through technology, and believes, according 
to Blackstone, that artificial reproduction "will free 
women from their biological inequalities, and 
subsequently, from social inequalities" (Blackstone 1985, 
576) . 

Interestingly, none of these feminist positions 
are Native American fem: nine positions of regaining lost 
power; except for the traditionalist viewpoint, these 
feminist ideas speak of achieving power. 

Jane DeHart-Mathews , writing about the Woman's 
Movement, sums up a discussion by saying: "The tension 
between past position and future possibility, however, 
demands of all women — not merely feminists — a definition 
of self that extends tieyond the definitions of the past" 
(DeHart-Mathews 1987, 462). 

Beyond the limited definitions of the patriarchal 
past is where the Native American contemporary woman 
writer may be. Therefore, this thesis will explore the 
feminine value system of traditional Native American 
women. It will show, in Chapter II, that Native American 
women had power. How the power was diminished by the 
conquering patriarchal culture will be discussed in 
Chapter III. It will also show in Chapter IV, that there 
is a current, ongoing attempt to regain that power 



ERLC 



9 " 



expressed in the rhetoric, the writing <r and the actions 
of Native American women. 



CHAPTER II 
THE RICHNESS OF WOMEN'S POWER IN 
NATIVE AMERICAN MYTH 



Native Language Reflected Native Women 

I am the sea 

I am the mountains 

I am the light 

I am eternal 

Anne Cameron 

Daughters of Copper Woman 
There have been many books written by and about 
Native American women. Whether they are novels^ poetry, 
autobiographies, or anthologies, these books express 
awareness of the loss of traditional power, and the 
importance of regaining its strength. It is a spiritual 
knowledge, and its language differs from the standard 
feminist rhetoric focused on proving equality with men. 
As Heartwarrior Chosa, the Sundancer and Pipecarrier, 
stated to me this summer, "Feminists have always thought 
the power is in the pants, not knowing that it is really 
in the skirt" (Conversation at Green Grass, South Dakota, 
June 1989) . Native American women have always known this 
and are now expressing it. 



Gertrude Buckanaga, an Ojibwe woman, says: 
"Indian women have always been strong. They've kept 
families together" (Buckanaga 1977, 122) . And Joseph 
Bruchac, in conversation with Paula Gunn Allen, states 
that some of the strongest people he knows are "Indian 
women over the age of forty" (Bruchac 1987, 12). Yet in 
the white culture, the opposite seems obvious. Elders 
are often discarded, thrown into nursing homes. 
According to Allen, women in the dominant culture between 
the ages of thirty-five and seventy-five "think of ways 
to placate people so they won't punish you and they won't 
ignore you and they won't abandon you." Even in the age 
of feminists, women dye their hair and have face lifts to 
hide the fact they are older, revealing the fact that 
they cannot truly accept themselves. In Native American 
culture, according to Allen, "Old women are powerful" and 
they become "singular with vibrancy," and, according to 
her, they are "the most beautiful of all," just as 
"leaves get before they fall" (Allen 1987, 12-13). 

Creation Legends 
Equality can be found in the creation legends of 
many of the tribes. In the Navajo legend, "Creation of 
First Man and First Woman," four mysterious gods tell the 
Navajo people that they have "bodies like ours, but you 
have the teeth, the feet, and the claws of beasts and 



f 

I 

i 



20 



insects. The new humans will have hands and feet like 
ours. Also, you are unclean; you smell bad." Twelve 
days later the gods return, and with two ears of corn and 
the help of sacred buckskin, and two eagle feathers, they 
create man and woman. "The white ear of corn had become 
the man, the yellow ear the woman. First Man and First 
Woman" (Erdoes and Ortiz 1984, 40). 

I A popular Sioux creation story is centered around 

a woman. A beautiful girl is the only human survivor of 
a great flood. She is saved by a big spotted eagle, 
Wanblee Galeshka, who takes her to his home in the Black 
Hills where she conceives and gives birth to twins, a boy 
and a girl. It is from this union of the woman and the 
spotted eagle that the Great Sioux Nation descended 
(Erdoes and Ortiz 1984, 93-95). 

In an Iroquois traditional story, a certain young 
woman follows her dead father's advice to marry a 
sorcerer. It is noted that she should have taken her 
mother's advice, which was not to marry the sorcerer. 
But she proposes to the man and he says she will have to 

^ meet his tests before he will take her as his wife. 

Consequently she grinds corn for him. She 
endures burns from cooking and torments from wild beasts, 
meeting tests, and they are finally married. He gives 

r 

I gifts to her people in the village. 

ERIC 



This woman loves a certain tree that grows 
outside her husband's lodge, and while sleeping under it 
she conceives from a blossom of the tree. This causes 
her husband to become weak, and fearing her power to be 
greater than his, he devises a plan to uproot the tree, 
convince her to jump into rhe hole, then replace the 
tree. His advisors believe he will then recover his 
health. He talks her into jumping into the hole from 
which can be seen a beautiful place, "a shining blue 
world." She jumps and consequently creates earth, the 
sun, and the moon (Allen 1989, 56-58). 

This story demonstrates the regard held for women 
and the power they hold, since the Sacred Woman in the 
story is actually the creator of the world. The 
mainstream culture has regarded stories like these as 
folklore and myth in the most negative senses of those 
words. Yet as times change and new ways of thinking 
based on research and experience using different criteria 
emerge, myth is now being considered to be as much truth 
as the most elaborately and carefully conducted 
scientific experiment. As Allen states in an essay in 
the American Indian Culture and Research Journal , 
Americans have a "myth about myth ♦ ♦ ♦ and this metamyth 
is the belief that there is such a thing as determinable 
fact, natural (right) explanations, reality that can be 



determined outside the hiiman agency of discovery, fact- 
finding, and determination" (Allen 1974, 3) • 

The psychologist M. Scott Peck, in The Different 
Driam: Community Making and Peace , also addresses this 
idea, saying: 

To most people a myth is a tall tale, a story that 
is not true or real. Increasingly, however, 
psychologists are coming to realize that myths are 
myths precisely because they are true. Myths are 
found in one form or another in culture after 
culture, age after age. The reason for their 
permanence and universality is precisely that they 
are embodiments of great truths (Peck 1987, 171- 
72) . 

Peck explains that myths are required '^o contain 
and embrace the richness of human nature, because human 
nature is multifaceted and complex. He believes that to 
define human nature in simplistic ways is not to do its 
richness justice, and in fact is extremely dangerous 
(Peck 1987, 172-73) . 

Value of Women Legends 
"Corn Mother," a legend of the Penobscot tribe, 
explains the importance of women. The legend describes 
the time when there were no people, and only Kloskurbeh 
the All-maker and his nephew lived on eart.K They had 
created many things when a beautiful girl came to them^ 
"born of the wonderful earth plant, and of the dew, and 
of warmth." The nephew married her, and she conceived, 
and from this was the beginning of human beings • She was 



23 



known as First Mother, and when the people were starving 

she instructed her husband to kill her; 

So it was done. The husband slew his wife and her 
sons, praying, d. ctggc^ her body to and fro as she 
had commanded, until her flesh covered all the 
earth. They took up her bones and buried them in 
the middle of it (Erdoes and Ortiz 1984, 11). 

As instructed, seven "moons" later they returned 
and found that First Mother's flesh was corn and First 
Mother's bones were sacred tobacco. 

First Mother's husband told the people: 

. . . take good care of First Mother's flesh, 
because it is her goodness become substance. Take 
good care of her breath, because it is her love 
turned into smoke. Remember her and think of her 
whenever you eat, whenever you smoke this sacred 
plant, because she has given her life so that you 
might live. Yet she is not dead, she lives: in 
undying love she renews herself again and again 
(Erdoes and Ortiz 1984, 13). 

The Creek poet Joy Harjo says women "reach an 

androgynous kind of spirit where they are very strong 

people . . . and yet to be strong does not mean to be 

male, to be strong does not mean to lose femininity, 

which is what the dominant culture has taught" (Harjo 

1987, 97). 

Native Americans traditionally value age and the 
wisdom that comes with it. In fact, the goal in life is 
to achieve wisdom through age. In her article, "Native 
American Women," Rayna Green says: "They look forward to 



24 



being old — an elder — when their words, actions, and 
leadership come to be respected" (Green 1980, 263). 

In "The Old Woman of the Spring," a Cheyenne 
legend, two young men go to an old woman who sits near 
the entrance of a large cave cooking buffalo meat in one 
pot and corn in another. When they tell her that they 
and their people are hungry, she gives them "corn from 
one pot and meat from the other" but even after they have 
had enough the pots are "still full." Then she tells 
them to "look toward the south," and they see that the 
land in that direction is "covered with buffalo," She 
tells them to "look to the west," and they see "all kinds 
of animals, large and small, including ponies, though 
they knew nothing of ponies in those days." She tells 
them to "look toward the north," and they see "corn 
growing everywhere." Because of her, the Cheyenne still 
believe that this brought corn and buffalo (Erdoes and 
Ortiz 1984, 26-28) . 

In a Cochiti story, "Salt Woman is Refused Food," 
Old Salt Woman and her grandson are begging for food, and 
when no one will feed them, she uses her magic crystal to 
turn the children into birds. Then she and her grandson 
travel on and find a place where they are "well treated 
and fed." She leaves them some of her flesh. It is 
salt, and until this time people cooked without salt. 

ERLC 



25 



Old Salt Woman tells them to "remember that if I am in 
your food, it will always taste better," Then she goes 
to Salt Lake to stay (Erdoes and Ortiz 1984, 61). 
According to the authors, the procuring of salt is still 
associated with solemn ceremonies in the Southwest. "The 
mythic figure associated with salt is almost alv/ays an 
old woman . * (Erdoes and Ortiz 1984, 62). 

Traditionally, children looked forward to 
learning "spiritual insights" and "lessons of the human 
spirit" from their elders so that they might become wise 
themselves (Woodard 1989, 10). But today's majority 
culture tends to devalue the old, especially women, 
thinking technology has advanced beyond the knowledge of 
the eldeily. 

Woman Power of Perpetuation 
"The Great Medicine Dance" of the Cheyenne 
explains the beginning of the Sundance, and the "woman- 
power of perpetuation" is acknowledged. In the legend, 
the Cheyenne people are starving. Because of a drought, 
"the earth itself was starving." Then a young medicine 
man approaches a beautiful woman and begs her to give him 
something to eat. She feeds him a bowl of dog soup. 
Then he sayss "I have chosen you from among all women to 
help me save our people." Together they travel north, as 
medicine spirits have commanded. Every evening the woman 



ERLC 



puts up the tipi and makes separate, soft sage beds for 
them. When she inquires as to why they never sleep 
together as man and woman, he explains: "We must abstain 
from embracing until we enter the great mountain of the 
north and receive the sacred medicine dance. After we 
emerge from the mountain, I shall embrace you in a 
renewal-of-all-life ceremony by which people will 
continue to be born, generation after generation, through 
the woman-power of perpetuation" (Erdoes and Ortiz 1984, 
33-35) • 

At last they come to a mountain, and behind a 
large rock they find an entrance. Inside they find 
themselves "in the mountain's great medicine lodge." 
Then they hear the voices of the Creator and his helper, 
"Great Roaring Thunder." The voices instruct them how to 
perform the sacred ceremony, the Sundance. If performed 
in the right way, they will be "favored for generations 
to come." The young medicine man is given a sacred hat 
to wear when he performs the Sundance. With this hat he 
will be able to control the animals so his people will 
never again starve. As soon as the couple leave the 
mountain, "buffalo without numbers streamed out of the 
mountain behind them, and the earth brought forth green 
shoots . . . the earth was like new, glistening in 
freshness." At some time during the journey back to 



27 



their village, the man and woman do "lovingly what was 
necessary to ensure renewal and continuation of life 
through woman-power" (Erdoes and Ortiz 1984, 33-37). 

Women as Heroes 

In a story by Zitkala Sa in Spider Woman' s 

Granddaughters; Traditional Tales and Contemporary 

Writing by Native American Women , by Paula Gunn Allen, 

Tusee, a beautiful young woman, rides with the elderly 

women accompanying the men on a raid. They ride for a 

day and then camp in separate tipis at night. The men 

stay in one tipi. The women including Tusee stay in a 

separate tipi, because it was known that to be together 

would weaken the group. In the morning the men attack 

while the women hide out nearby. Later they discover 

that Tusee' s lover has been captured. The description of 

Tusee waiting for night so that she can free her lover is 

one of feminine strength: "Her hand rests on a long 

knife in her belt," and "With a panther's tread and pace 

she climbs the high ridge beyond the low ravine . . . 

rooted to the barren bluff the slender woman's figure 

stands on the pinnacle of night, outlined against a 

starry sky" (Zitkala Sa 1989, 33-34), she prays. 

Great Spirit, speed me to my lover's rescue! Give 
me swift cunning for a weapon this night! All- 
powerful Spirit, grant me my warrior-father's 
heart, strong to slay a foe and mighty to save a 
friend (Zitkala Sa 1989, 34). 



ERLC 



She lures the man who captured her lover away 
from the area, then springs on him, hissing between her 
teeth, "I am a Dakota woman," and kills him with "her 
unerring long knife." Then, disguised as an old woman, 
she goes into the cainp and cuts the ropes that hold her 
lover to a center pole. When she sees his weakness, a 
"mighty power thrills her body" and she "lifts him upon 
her broad shoulders . . . and carries him away into the 
open night" (Zitkala Sa 1989, 36). 

Typically Native American women do not like to 
talk about themselves. Culturally, it is not the thing 
to do. Yet, in Spider Woman's Granddaughters; 
Traditional Tales and Contemporary Writing by Native 
American Women , Pretty Shield, a Crow wise woman, tells 
how a 60-year-old woman won a fight against Sioux 
warriors by singing her Medicine song and riding straight 
out at them. She had the support of the rest of the camp 
who were also singing. The Sioux were afraid of her and 
ran away (Pretty Shield 1989, 27-29). 

Allen recounts an Oneida traditional story, "The 
Warrior Maiden," which she says, is still handed down 
through generations of Oneidas. Aliqiupso's people are 
in hiding after attack by the Mingos and they are 
starving. She allows herself to be captured by the enemy 
and then under torture says she will reveal where her 



people are hiding. However, this is exactly what she had 
planned. She leads the enemy into a trap where she dies, 
sacrificing herself for her people. The Mingo survivors 
leave and never attack her people again (Allen 1989, 53- 
55) . 

Harmony and Balance 

Traditionally Native women were able to function 
as the essential strength in tribal life. The men often 
were gone and the women were relied on to "maintain 
stability in community life" (Katz 1977, xvii) . The 
ideal life was one of harmony and balance where men and 
women relied on each other. 

In a wonderful Blood-Piegan story of "How Men and 
Women Got Together," the men live in one camp and the 
women in another. Looking at each other secretly, they 
admire each other's capabilities. The men see that the 
women have "fine tipis and fine clothes." The women see 
that the men have sharp shooting sticks and' are never 
hungry (Erdoes and Ortiz 1984, 42). 

At this time they are unaware of sexual pleasure, 
so after many unsuccessful attempts to come together, 
both the men and women dress properly and accept each 
other and discover sexual pleasure. old Man mates with 
the woman Chief and says, "This is surely the most 
wonderful thing that ever happened to me. I couldn't 



ever imagine such a wonderful thing" (Erdoes and Ortiz 
1984, 45). 

The woman Chief says, "And I never dreamed I 

could feel so good." They decide to go and tell the 

others, but discover that they have already paired off 

and have disappeared. When they return, "Their eyes were 

smiling. Their mouths were smiling, their whole bodies 

were smiling" (Erdoes and Ortiz 1984, 45). 

Then the women moved in with the men. They brought 
all their things, all their skills to the men's 
village. Then the women quilled and tanned for the 
men. Then the men hunted for the women. Then there 
was love. Then there was happiness. Then there was 
marriage. Then there were children (Erdoes and 
Ortiz, 1984, 45) . 

This story demonstrates the egalitarian approach 
to life found in Native American culture. The Chief 
remarks, "This is surely the most wonderful thing that 
ever happened to me," which is a clear contrast to 
majority culture view where the man is the initiator. 
The woman Chief expresses her delight, in an equal 
emphasis of pleasure, also demonstrating the difference 
in societal values. Then together, equally, they produce 
children and happiness. 

In white culture on this continent, women have 
had to prove that they are even human beings. This has 
been difficult, since women have been taught to think of 
themselves as "uncertain, anxious, nervous, hasty, 



careless, fearful, dull, childish, helpless, sorry, 

timid, clumsy, stupid, silly, and domestic" (Ccunpbell 

1973, 78) . 

Contrastingly, where white males have 

historically devalued the role of women, the Native 

American male has given it great respect. For instance, 

Sarah Winnemucca Hopkins, a Paiute woman born in 1844, 

says that after the birth of the first child: 

Both father and mother fast from all flesh, and the 
father goes through the labor of piling the wood for 
twenty-five days, and assumes all his wife's 
household work during that time. If he does not do 
his part in the care of the child, he is considered 
an outcast (Hopkins 1977, 11). 

According to legend, the Sioux people did not 
know how to live before the White Buffalo Calf Woman came 
to them. She instructed them in many things and gave 
them the buffalo and their sacred pipe. One of the 
things she said to the women was, "You are from the 
mother earth. V7hat you are doing is as great as what the 
warriors do" (Erdoes and Ortiz 1984, 47-52). 

There was an egalitarian sociopolitical system 
embedded in the culture through myth and legend, and it 
is quite different from the European habit of ranking of 
duties into hierarchical layers of status which make 
women's domestic duties inferior to men's. According to 
Rebecca Tsosie, "American Indians generally perceived 



32 

women and men as individuals with specific talents, 
abilities and clan-sanctioned roles" (Tsosie 1984, 5-6) • 

Waterlily , by Ella Deloria, a novel which 
recreates the Teton Sioux lifestyle before the white 
settlement of the western plains, was written from the 
perspective of a Native American woman and focuses on the 
Native American woman. The roles of the men, women, and 
children are well-delineated and high societal regard for 
women is evident. For example, when the warrior. Bear 
Heart, takes certain young boys into training he is 
"honoring the women of his generation, whom he had been 
taught to respect, protect, and aid" (Deloria 1988, 63), 

Although it is a novel, the background material 
for it comes from Deloria 's anthropological studies and 
years spent with Franz Boas, and her experiences with her 
own Sioux culture. 

This novel, which was never published in the 
author's lifetime, recreates traditional Sioux ways. 
These were the ways Deloria, a writer and ethnologist, 
had been close to. And writing from a woman's 
perspective, she gives us an insight into camp life that 
has not been normally noticed. 

In Deloria' s own words about the novel: "We 
shall go back to a time prior to white settlement of the 
western plains, when native custom and thought were all 



33 



there was, and we shall examine certain of the most 
significant elements in the old life" (Deloria 1988, x) . 
The novel demonstrates an egalitarian sense to living, 
where the value of each person was important, whether 
male or female. It /as a time in which, if a woman found 
her marriage disagreeable, she could leave it without 
explanation because she had security in her extended 
family. It was a time when marriage did not seem to be 
the distinguishing factor in a woman's life, because 
"almost any woman could marry somebody ..." (Deloria 
1988 , 180) • It was a time in which elderly Native 
American women were held in high regard and given the 
right to scold their own sons if they were treating their 
wives badly, demonstrating the closeness of women and the 
regard for them from other women. There was a 
traditional recognition of a respect for one another, 
where each gender had its role and was highly regarded. 

In Speaking of Indians , Deloria says, "No Dakota 
lived unto himself alone," and therefore was careful not 
to risk his life, "thereby bringing tears to the eyes of 
his relatives — especially his sisters and women cousins, 
to whom he owed the very highest respect and 
consideration" (Deloria 1979, 22). 

In The New Indians , Steiner says: "When women 
led by being women, they held together the tribe and 



•i 



34 



family by their act of being. Unobtrusive^ soft spoken^ 
quiet women did not have to act -like men" (Steiner 1968, 
215) • 

Women were important in tribal life. In the 
stories about creation, the sacredness of Mother Earth is 
always central. She was where human beings came from. 
"She was an earthy goddess, indeed, for she was the 
biological, as well as the agricultural, as well as the 
spiritual giver of life" (Steiner 1968, 219). 

Historically, white culture has acknowledged that 

the Iroquois were democratic and matrilineal . And it is 

known that the men of that nation conceded the power to 

decide when to go to war to the women when the women 

"proclaimed a boycott on love-making and childbearing" 

(Steiner 1968, 219-20). Their constitution states that 

the Great Spirit 

. . . caused the body of our mother, the woman, to 
be of a great worth and honor. . He proposed that 
she shall be endowed and entrusted with the birth 
and the upbringing of men, . . . and moreover that 
the warriors shall be her assistants (Steiner 
1968 , 220) . 

As a result of the conquering culture forcing 
partriarchy on the Native culture, "Women were 
conspicuously absent from the hundreds of tribal 
delegations brought to Washington by the government in 
the late 1800s" (Steiner 1968, 221). 

i 

ERLC 



35 



Elizabeth Cook-Lynn, a South Dakota writer, poet, 
and editor of Wicazo Sa Review , explains that "Most of 
the time Christians thought that only men were people of 
importance^ that the father and the brother were the 
important people" (Cook-Lynn 1987, 63). Consequently 
Native American women were ignored by the government, and 
the Native American male elevated to an unaccustomed 
position. 

Although we have few recorded speeches by any 

Native women, Thomas Louis v^ones has reprinted the entire 

speech of Warcaziwin (Sunflower) , a Sioux woman, which 

she gave in 1930. She admonished historians for 

inaccurate accounts and inadequate histories of Native 

Americans who were 

. . . making history thousands of years before the 
advent of the white men to these shores . . . for 
centuries in Europe both children and women 
occupied a low social position. On the other 
hand, they, the white men, found the Indian woman 
and child occupying a very high social position 
(Warcaziwin 1965, 116) . 

Native American women had power, and that power 

came from being women. There was a sexual division 

manifested in all aspects of lif e , including labor , 

behavior, and even speech patterns — but no lessening of 

regard, according to Raymond DeMallie's essay on Lakota 

culture in The Hidden Half; Studies of Plains Indian 

Women (DeMallie 1983, 240). 



DeMallie continues: "Women's power, on the 
whole, was associated with domestic matters, while men's 
power dealt with the dangers of life outside the camp 
circle" (DeMallie 1983, 241). 

According to DeMallie, women were considered 
extremely powerful during their menstrual periods, and 
were isolated from men only because their power was at 
odds with the power of men. He states: "Various taboos 
surrounded women's behavior, particularly while 
menstruating, to prevent the clash between the women's 
power and men's power" (DeMallie 1983, 259). 

According to Clara Sue Kidwell, "The puberty rite 

for girls almost universal in Indian communities . . . 

served as an indication of the connection between women's 

biological and social functions." She continues: 

The beginning of the female menstrual cycle has 
been, in its ceremonial significance, the 
validation of the woman's role in society. Her 
isolation from the rest of society during this 
time has been a recognition of the power that 
descended on her. In traditional communities her 
glance would deprive hunters of their power; her 
presence at certain ceremonies would anger the 
spirits and cause them to withdraw their favors 
from the people. In very drastic fashion the 
physical manifestation of her femininity both 
prepared her to bring forth new life and yet 
bestowed on her the power to destroy the life 
forces and powers of others (Kidwell 1978, 115). 

According to the authors of American Indian 

Women: Telling Their Lives , Gretchen M. Bataille and 

Kathleen Mullen Sands: 



The belief that Native American women do not need 
the feminist movement is consistent with the role 
Indian women have played within their societies 
through the years • Recent autobiographies 
reaffirm this belief. The roles described fay 
Indian women in traditional societies reveal the 
power that is alluded to by contemporary Indian 
women in their autobiographies (Bataille and Sands 
1984, 119). 

In her autobiography, compiled by Nancy 0. Lurie, 
Mountain Wolf Woman, a Winnebago from Wisconsin, 
described her unhappiness with her first husband, and how 
she dissolved the marriage. She was unhappy because her 
husband was a very jealous man and had accused her of 
having affairs with other men. She simply told him to go 
back to his own people — which he did, reluctantly, and 
she went to stay with her family, and it was over. She 
remained single for a time before re-marrying. That was 
her decision (Wolf Woman 1961, 45-46). 

Mountain Wolf Woman demonstrated this strength 
and power again, after she had moved to Martin, South 
Dakota, with her second husband, who was a mailman. 
Lonely and homesick for her relatives, she told him "Stay 
here and be the mailman. ... As for myself, I am going 
to go home." He went with her (Mountain Wolf Woman 1961, 
45-46) . 

The Sioux Medicine Man Lame Deer says: "A woman 
could divorce her husband too, simply by throwing all his 
things out of her tipi. He'd know what that meant; Get 



38 



out and don't come back" (Lame Deer and Erdoes 1972, 
136) . 

Laiue Deer talks of the traditional regard for 
women and mentions the days when men never talked to 
their mothers-in-law. There was a Native American man 
who had an old woman for a friend, but he fell in love 
with the old woman's daughter and they lived together and 
had children. He would not marry her, however, because 
then he would not be able to be the old woman's friend 
(Lame Deer and Erdoes 1972, 138). 

In Charles Woodard's Ancestral Voices; 
Conversations with Scott Momaday , the power of woman 
is discussed. In Momaday 's work women are often central 
to the story. Momaday says women were at the center 
because they were indispensable. "They are life bringers 
. . . they are sacred" (Momaday 1989, 89). 

He goes on to say that because of stereotypes, 
people "think of the plains cultures as patriarchal," and 
says "That's a false view" (Woodard 1989, 66). Women 
were not always visible but "the most powerful things are 
usually less visible than the visible things." Momaday 
believes it is the "women who . . . hold the knowledge" 
(Momaday 1989, 91) . 



4Z 



CHAPTER III 



THE DESTRUCTIVENESS OF PATRIARCHAL 
LANGUAGE ON NATIVE AMERICAN 
WOMEN 

The Pocahantas Perplex 

You can see me , I am sick and I hurt every 
day. The soldiers nearly kill me. I never done 
them any harm or any other white man. That 
Massacre was very wrong to the Indians and Big 
Foot didn't want to fight the soldiers. He always 
had a white flag so that they would know he was 
for peace and for the treaty. 

The soldiers did not fire in our camp till the 
guns were put down at Big Foot's teepee. Before 
they shot us some of them came to our tents and 
wagons and the women. They took our knives and 
axes. After this they killed us and our 
children. We tried to run but they shot us like 
we were buffalo. I know there are some good white 
people, but the soldiers must be mean to shoot 
children and women. Indian soldiers would not do 
that to white children. 

Louise Weasel Bear 
"Statements of the Survivors" 
The Wounded Knee Massacre 

The idea that Native American women of North 
America had power is amply supported by legend and 
literature. Why Native American women lost their power 
can also be understood from that literature. 

The "Pocahontas Perplex," according to Rayna 
Green, "emerged as a controlling metaphor in the American 



40 

experience." It was a major reason why Native American 
women lost power. This metaphor portrayed Native 
American women saving white men from Native Americans. 
The Native American woman became a princess, "the 
Christian, English lady . . . for her English husband and 
her faithful audience for all time." This helped to 
create the misleading mental image that "the only good 
Indian — male or female, . . . rescues and helps white 
men." Consequently, the idea was implanted in the Native 
American woman's mind as well that "to be 'good,' she 
must defy her own people, exile herself from them, become 
white ..." (Green 1975, 700-704). 

Patriarchy, the male dominated, hierarchical 
social system brought from Europe, produced the 
"Pocahontas Perplex" by developing "a model for the 
national understanding of Indian women ..." The self- 
concept of Native American women was damaged when they 
accepted the "Princess" idea that they must abandon their 
culture in order to be accepted by the white society 
(Green 1975, 701) . 

Ironically, the Native American woman who 
accepted this stereotype found that in the eyes of 
America, she could not be a real woman. If she was not 
the "princess" she was not acceptable, she was nothing. 
In America's eyes, the real woman, anything less than the 



ERLC 



47 



41 



"Princess," was the "Squaw." According to the stereotype 
of the "Pocahontas Perplex," squaws shared "in the same 
vices attributed to Indian men — drunkenness, stupidity, 
thievery, venality of every kind ..." Green states 
that "As the squaw, a depersonalized object of scornful 
convenience, she is powerless . . . easily destroyed 
without reference to her humanity" (Green 1975, 711-713). 

Women in the majority culture allowed this 
destruction to occur because, as Bartkey believes, they 
did not identify with the women from another culture, but 
with the hierarchical, patriarchal men of their own. 
They were victims as much as the Native American women 
were victims, for they were not allowed to see with "more 
than one eye'^ (Lame Deer 1972, 190). Their minds were 
closed to other ways of being. 

Patriarchy 

Patriarchy pardons evils in the guise of 
protection. According to Webster's Ninth New Collegiate 
Dictionary , patriarchy is the "social organization marked 
by the supremacy of the father in the clan or family, the 
legal dependence of wives and children, and the reckoning 
of descent and inheritance in the male line" (Webster 
1985, 863). The patriarchal philosophy conflicts with 
the traditional Native American ideas. The father was 
not supreme, the wives and children were not legally 



ERLC 



4 



dependent on him and the descent and inheritance was not 
through the father* 

In The Sacred Hoop: Recovering the Feminine In 
American Indian Traditions , Paula Gunn Allen sees beyond 
the benign description and states that "Patriarchy 
requires that powerful women be discredited so that its 
own system will seem to be the only one that reasonable 
or intelligent people can subscribe to" (Allen 1986, 
203). Lame Deer believed "We must learn to be different, 
to feel and taste the manifold things that are us" (Lame 
Deer 1972, 146). Sadly, personhood is what patriarchy 
denies, and because women in the majority culture were 
not allowed to view life beyond patriarchy, their world 
view became closed. 

According to Charlene Spretnak, editor of a 

compilation of essays entitled The Politics of Women's 

Spirituality , 

The objective of patriarchy was and is to prevent 
women from achieving, or even supposing . . . 
[their] potential: that . . . [they] are powerful 
in both mind and body and that the totality of 
those powers is a potent force (Spretnak 1982, 
xii) . 

The European culture was a victim of itself and 
could not understand the Native American culture because 
it could not listen. It was incapable of "seeing" 
another way of being. It could not discard preconceived 
intellectual images and words, and therefore could feel 



no empathy with a people suffering cultural genocide. As 

Scot Peck states: 

Unless we empty ourselves of . . . preconceived 
cultural or intellectual images and expectations, 
we not only cannot understand the Other, we cannot 
even listen. Indeed^ we cannot even feel empathy 
(Peck 1987, 214) . 



Other Ways of Being 
Paula Gunn Allen says in Studies in American 
Indian Literature: Critical Essays and Course Designs 
that Native American thought is "mystical and psychic 
with an enduring sense of the fluidity and malleability, 
c creative flux, of things" (Allen 1983, 15) . She 
contends the Westerner's bias with respect to non- 
ordinary states of consciousness is 

as unthinking as the Indian's belief in them is 
said to be . . .it is the result of an 
intellectual climate . . . that has reached its 
culmination in Freudian and Darwinian theories . . 
. has had many unfortunate side effects . . . one 
of which is the deep misunderstanding of tribal 
literatures . . . (Allen 1983, 15). 

According to Allen, the tribal person perceives 

things as alive and able to grow and change and thus able 

to be manipulated under certain conditions and according 

to certain laws. These laws are called "walking in a 

sacred manner" (Sioux) , "standing in the center of the 

world" (Navajo) , "having a tradition" (Porno) ; each tribe 

refers to it differently (Allen 1983, 15) . 



The stories she has collected in Spider Woman's 
Granddaughters: Traditional Tales and Contemporary 
Writing by Native American Women are about "being 
conquered^ about losing the right and authority to 
control personal and community life." She says: "No 
holocaust in this millennium has been more destructive^ 
and no survivors more helplessly victimized long after 
the shooting ended" (Allen 1983, 21). 

In The Sacred Hoop: Recovering the Feminine in 

American Indian Traditions she states: 

Western studies of American Indian tribal systems 
are erroneous at base because they view tribalism 
from the cultural bias of patriarchy and thus 
either discount, degrade, or conceal gynocratic 
features or recontextualize those features so that 
they will appear patriarchal (Allen 1983, 4). 

Allen says the idea that Native Americans must 
"assimilate or perish" is a result of what she terms the 
"Progressive Fallacy," which "... allows American 
Indians victim status only," and is a result of the 
American belief in progress and evolution. She states 
that it "is a root cause of the genocide practiced 
against American Indians since the colonial period" 
(Allen 1983, 5) . 

In The Hidden Half: Studies of Plains Indian 
Women , the issue of stereotyping is addressed by Patricia 
Albers and Beatrice Medicine. Published in 1983, it is a 
study of tribal groups of the Northern plains which 



45 



focuses on the female. It deals with women in modern 
reservation settings , while providing insight into a time 
before European contact. 

One contributing author, Katherine M. Weist, 
explains the myth of the "Beast of Burden," which began 
with initial encounters and continues to modern times. 
It has only recently been revealed as a 

misinterpretation. Native American women were described 
through the blinders of cultural bias. They were seen 
through the eyes of patriarchal men. With no attempt 
made to change view points, they were categorized and 
stereotyped. Explorers and traders and missionaries came 
to the same conclusions, calling them "infuriated 
brutes," "beasts of burden," "slaves," "menials," 
"courtesans," "obscenely vulgar," and "sexually lax." 
"The overriding emphasis was an explicitly negative 
estimation of the position of Indian women ..." (Weist 
1983, 23-26). Only if Native American women married 
white men could they escape this stereotype. 

Weist believes that because the male observer had 
to cross a cultural barrier as well as a gender barrier, 
"The assessments of the position of Indian women by Euro- 
American men should be viewed with skepticism ..." 
(Weist 1983, 39) . 



Crossing these barriers would require "seeing 

with more than one eye" (Lame Deer 1972, 190). The 

European male was not conditioned to do this kind of 

seeing. Some were quite cynical: 

• • . an Indian woman loves her white husband only 
for what he possesses — because she works less 
hard, eats better food, is allowed to dress and 
adorn herself in a better way (Weist 1983, 32). 

Interestingly however, had they overcome cultural 

barriers, and attempted to understand Native culture, 

there would no longer have been the need to "civilize" 

the Native American, which became a prime motive of the 

colonizers . 

Ironically, contributing to the confines of the 
stereotype, Bataille and Sands point out, was the 
honorable notion of "subordination of the individual to 
the collective need of the tribe" (Bataille and Sands 
1984, 4) . 

Native American women are individuals, but have 
characteristics in common, according to Vine Deloria, 
Sr. In an interview in 1981 with Bataille and Sands, he 
said Native American women are skilled at creating a 
community of women. Modesty and responsibility for the 
steadfastness of tribal ideals and values are main 
attributes. He said "Indian men did not hold office 
without approval of the mature women of a tribe" (Deloria 
1984, 18). He also stated that Native American women 



have traditionally had this power. Native American women 
are willing to sacrifice iitimediate goals for the well- 
being of the family members, and are willing to defer but 
not forego personal goals, thus creating a pattern of 
attainment of personal satisfaction in maturity. 
According to Deloria, they are willing to endure 
considerable hardship, but achieve an inner strength that 
leads to serenity and wisdom in later years because of it 
(Deloria 1984, 18-19) . 

Therefore, as the authors of I Tell You Now; 
Autobiographical Essays by Native American Writers state, 
it has been culturally very difficult for Native women to 
write autobiographically because they traditionally felt 
the individual was not important (Swann and Krupat 1987, 
xii) . 

The act of writing about themselves, not of their 
tradition, became an uncomfortable, if not painful 
procedure and was utilized only as a survival technique. 
As Elizabeth Cook-Lynn, a contemporary South Dakota 
writer, says in I Tell You Now; Autobiographical Essays 
by Native American Writers , "Writing, for me, then, is an 
act of defiance born of the need to survive** (Swann and 
Krupat 1987, 57) . 

There was egalitarianism operating among many 
Native American societies during early colonization, but 



48 



it was ignored by the incoming Europeans « In the words 

of Grace Black Elk: 

The Lakota have no word for "sexist." 
The White man does. 

The Lakota does not put his name to his child. 
White men do. 

For the Lakota, property is the possession of 
the woman. The generations are the responsibility 
of the woman. Power is thus in the hands of 
women . . . 

Lakota women are the strength of the people (Black 
Elk 1988, 8) . 

The colonists believed the Native American 

society was a dying society and they strove to record it 

as such. For example, Swann and Krupat state in I Tell 

You Now: Autobiographical Essays by Native American 

Writers , 

Early in the twentieth century, Native American 
autobiography was pursued by those interested not 
in the historical record but rather in the 
cultural or ethnographic record- It was, for the 
most part, the university-trained professional 
anthropologists, students of Franz Boas, who 
sought to record Indian lives in print as part of 
the great and urgent project of "ethnographic 
salvage" (Swann and Krupat 1987, x-xi) . 

It was believed that the race would vanish. They 

sought only to preserve, in the museum or the library, 

traces of lives and cultures that could not have a 

continuing existence anywhere else (Swann and Krupat 

1987, x-xi) . Supporting Paula Gunn Allen's "Progressive 

Fallacy," these collections were done only as a way to 

study a vanishing people. Franz Boas is quoted as saying 

in 1911 that the proportion of people with Native 



•ERLC 



49 



American blood "is so insignificant that it may well be 
disregarded," and that they had "vanished comparatively 
rapidly" (Boas 1968, xi) . 

There were some early attempts by Native American 
women to present their side of the story in fictional 
works. These writings did not receive readership, 
however and thus their stories did not become known, 

Zitkala Sa's image of Tusee, explained earlier, 
is a different image of Native American women than the 
Pocahontas model, since the powerful feminine figure 
represented by Tusee rescues and saves a Native American 
male, not a white male. Zitkala Sa effectively refutes 
the dysfunctional image of Native American women created 
by white men. This image of Tusee is not the one of the 
Pocahontas myth, because Tusee supported rather than 
betrayed her people. 

While Ella Deloria's Waterlil y is a superb 
recreation of traditional woman's role, written to 
demonstrate the power of Native American women, the 
influence of Boas becomes apparent in her other book. 
Speaking of Indians , In it she becomes a proponent of 
the dominant culture's philosophy. This can be 
understood by considering her years of work with Boas. 
She had been his student at Columbia and later worked 
with him on the Sioux language (Deloria 1979, xiv) . 



In her essay "Toward a New Community" in Speaking 
of Indians , she seems to be promoting assimilation. She 
believes that Native Americans with involved descriptive 
names should simplify them in order to avoid 
embarrassment {Deloria 1979, 100). She advocates name 
changing to avoid ridicule. She encourages her people to 
join the progressive world. 

Deloria became a victim of patriarchal thinking. 
She had been raised at a time of devaluing of Native 
Americans, and because of her work, she inadvertently 
adopted the progressive fallacy and the thinking that was 
changing the power of Native American women and 
contributing to the killing of her culture. 

Deloria conveys the traditional image of women as 
powerful, but says that era is over. She says the Church 
and the government should sit down together in their 
common concern for Native American people, that "they 
would know better what they were all working for and be 
able to direct the people to a responsive goal" (Deloria 
1979, 105). Deloria loves her people, but regards them 
as children who need to mature. 

Deloria talks of the enlightenment of her 
people. She says churches and schools and the government 
will produce good Americans who will 



. . . want to participate in the larger thought 
and life of the land and not be given special work 
scaled down to their abilities, as if those 
abilities were static, or to their needs, as if 
those needs must always be limited to tribal 
life. Tribal life is only a phase in human 
development anyway (Deloria 1979, 97). 

Deloria claims that "Indians need the government 
to help them materially and the schools to help them 
mentally" but most of all the Native Americans need the 
church "to help them spiritually" (Deloria 1979, 97). 

She claims it is "to the Church they must look 
for strength to withstand temptation, wisdom to make 
right choices, steadfastness to see things through, and 
hope and faith in the eventual victory of right" (Deloria 
1979, 97). She continues: "No other institution is so 
well equipped to offer friendship, sympathy, wise 
counsel, and unselfish assistance to all who need it" 
(Deloria 1979, 98) . Ironically, this was a death 
sentence for Native people, since the Christian Church, 
as introduced by the Europeans, was the main preserver of 
the patriarchal model. 

Ella Deloria obviously had the best interest of 
her people at heart. She saw the suffering and 
humiliation they were enduring and knew of their 
strength. Unfortunately, she became a victim of the 
patriarchal, hierarchical thinking prevalent at the time. 



52 



In 1929, Zitkala Sa was asked to speak at a 
conference on Native American concerns at Lake Mohonk 
Mountain House in New York State • In part she said: 
"Home is home, wherever it may be, and the children's 
love for their parents and the parents' love for the 
children brings a heart tie superior to anything the 
missionary can do for us . . . (Zitkala Sa 1965, 119). 
This Native American woman had the insight to see through 
the hypocrisy of the church and government in a way that 
Ella Deloria did not. 

The insight we might have had has been denied. 
Green points out in "Native American Women." In American 
histories traditionally, we learned only of "distant 
princesses and saints" who served white men, but never of 
"matriarchal, matrifocal and matrilineal societies" 
(Green 1980, 250) . 

In my youth I was always unsettled over the 
absence of Native Americans. Their absence worried me. 
What happened to them? I felt a connection to them, but 
what was I connected to? I have come to believe the 
connection is a feminine value system. In my involvement 
with Native American culture, I have come to realize the 
power of feminine force. The lessons of the Sacred Tree 
provide insight into that force; 



53 



The second meaning of the Sacred Tree is 
nourishment. This nourishment is represented by 
the fruit of the tree. On one level the fruit of 
the Sacred Tree represents the nourishment a 
mother* gives to her children and all the care 
children need in growing up ... a deeper meaning 
of the fruit is the nurturing human beings receive 
through interactions with the human . . . physical 
and spiritual environments • . . these 
environments are represented by the mother . . . 
and eating the fruit of the tree represents our 
interaction with all the aspects of life that 
nourish and sustain our growth and development . . 
• (Personal letter from a traditional Native 
American^ January 9, 1989) . 

The regard for feminine force is evident from 
these words. This passage is bursting with feminine 
metaphors and provides insight into a full natural life, 
not a denial of personhood. These metaphors are missing 
in the religious teachings of the conquering culture. In 
fact, the metaphor of "eating fruit from the sacred tree" 
is used to portray the descent of humankind into sin and 
is directly attributable to a woman. 

According to Allen in The Scared Hoop; Recovering 
the Feminine in American Indian Traditions / "There is 
reason to believe that many Native American tribes 
thought the primary potency in the Universe was female, 
and that understanding authorizes all tribal activities" 
(Allen 1986, 26) . 

According to Judalon, a Canadian Indian woman who 
was interviewed for a West German feminist monthly. 



ERLC 



In my mother's tribe, the Mohawks, the women made 
all the decisions. In the Longhouse (meeting 
place) the clan mothers would gather and sit on 
one side. The chiefs would sit on the other 
side. On the other two sides, the rest of the 
people would sit and the current problems would be 
discussed. The clan mothers would decide what 
should happen, but the men would speak for them. 
The men never made decisions. It was the way in 
the tribe and also in a clan's household. The 
women were responsible and made the decisions 
(Judalon 1983, 6) . 

Judalon continues: 

Everything has changed since we've had contact 
with the Europeans. First our leaders were 
brainwashed. They became vain and thought that 
they alone could decide things, like the European 
men. Over the years everything has turned 
around. Today many Indian men behave like 
European men (Judalon 1983, 5). 

In the same article, another Canadian Indian 
woman, Dinah says; 

They've turned our men around the way they want 
them, so that they have lost their direction and 
no longer know which way they should be going 
( Connexions , 5) . 

Native American women did not deny their 

femininity. They were honored because of it. They 

assumed the responsibility of feminine power and valued 

the "importance of the puberty rite . . . which has 

served as an indication of the connection between women' 

biological and social functions." Traditionally a 

woman's "moontime" was a time of isolation, not because 

it was unclean or evil but because of the "power that 



descended on her." This power was respected by Native 



American males, while white society, male and female, has 

seen it as a curse (Kidwell 1978, 115). 

According to Kidwell, at least in Woodland 

societies, "The division of labor along sex lines . . . 

was a function of the physical demands of hunting in 

harsh climatic conditions for the men and the physical 

requirements of motherhood for the women" (Kidwell 197 8, 

116) . But because of European male stereotypes and a 

value system totally revolving around the male, the words 

of Marie Chona were lost: 

You see, we have power. Men have to dream to get 
power from the spirits and they thiny. of 
everything they can — song and speeches and 
marching around, hoping that the spirits will 
notice them and give them some power. But we have 
power . . . Children. Can any warrior make a 
child, no matter how brave and wonderful he is? 
(Chona 1984, 48) 

Maria Campbell, a Canadian Metis woman, writes in 
her autobiography, "Halfbreed," that according to her 
grandmother, "The white man saw ... a more powerful 
weapon than anything else with which to beat the 
Halfbreeds, and he used it and still does today. Already 
they are using it on you. They try to make you hate your 
people" (Campbell 1984, 119). 

Victims of patriarchal-influenced stereotypes. 
Native American women were subjected to degradation. The 
degradation that devalued them as people and kills spirit 
and hope . These negative stereotypes also prompted their 



inhtimane treatment by the soldiers of the United States 
Array, who could not "see with more than one eye" (Lame 
Deer 1972, 190). 



CHAPTER IV 
THE RICHNESS OF WOMEN'S POWER IN THE 
RECENT RHETORIC OF NATIVE 
AMERICAN WOMEN 

Rhetoric 

I have been searching 

lost 

alone 

I have been searching 
for so many years 

I have been searching 
Old Woman 

and I find her 
in 

mySelf 

Anne Cameron 

Daughters of Copper Woman 
Threads of memory from a pre-patriarchy-past 
support the Native American valuing of the feminine, a 
way not found in the dominant United States society. 
Because of the knowledge and wisdom learned in legend and 
myth, indigenous people respected the feminine because it 
represented life in its every meaning « There was an 
egalitarian sense of being that honored all forms of life 
as well, with no dominance evident. 



They thought and lived in metaphor, seeking to be 
the eagle, the bear, the wolf, the river, the rock. 
Integrated intimately with nature, they honored the 
earth. With this respect, it was against their nature to 
devalue the feminine, the source from which it all Ccime. 
With this ideology, they lived in North America for at 
least twenty thousand years, with populations of about 
two million, without significantly damaging their 
environment, and in harmony with it. 

The horror that descended upon them, discussed in 
Chapter III, is only now being addressed by Native 
American women. These women are slowly delineating the 
cultural genocide that destroyed a people and has nearly 
destroyed the earth. 

With awareness growing, they speak of regaining 

their lost power by remembering a past in a way that most 

feminists are unable to, a past before patriarchy. 

There are women everywhere with fragments 

when we learn to come together we are whole 

when we learn to recognize the enemy 

we will come to recognize what we need to know 

to learn how to come together . . . (Cameron 1981, 

147) . 

These words express what is happening in the 
world of Native American women as they "know the many 
smiling faces of . . . [the] enemy . . . know the 
pretense that is the weapon used" (Cameron 1981, 147). 



59 



As they come to know the power that was theirs, they are 
regaining that power. This knowledge is being expressed 
in their rhetoric, in their writing, and in their 
actions. 

Paula Gunn Allen says a poem is a "recording of 
an event in the mind." According to Allen, spirituality 
is always evident in Native American poetry (Allen 1987, 
18) . 

This spirituality may be manifest in memory, a 
living entity. According to Joy Harjo, the Creek writer, 
people forget that "everything they say, everything they 
do, think, feel, dream, has effect, which to me is being 
Indian ..." She believes this is a "tribal 
consciousness" or, in other words, living memory (Harjo, 
1987, 93) . 

The consciousness in Harjo 's poetry comes from 
what she says is a "way of believing or sensing things" 
and from an idea that the "world is not disconnected or 
separate." She sees remembering as "occurring, not just 
going back, but occurring right now, and also future 
occurrence so that you can remember things in a way that: 
makes what occurs now beautiful" (Harjo 1987, 93) . 

She believes that writing poetry is one way to 
communicate ideas that are nearly impossible to speak 
of. She explains, "... the center of tribal languages 

ERLC 



often has notning to do with things, objects, but 
contains a more spiritual sense • • Harjo believes 

North America to be "an Indian continenf and she thinks 
the bitter experiencer of Native Americans "can be used 
to move the world. " This can be a powerful force of 
good, built from conserved anger. She says; "I'm aware 
of the power of language which isn't meaningless words 
. . . Sound is an extension of all, and sound is spirit, 
motion" (Harjo 1987,94^100). 

This power of language, being utilized at last by 
Native American women, is growing. They express a 
knowledge, a wisdom, and a spirituality needed to 
strengthen the faltering feminist force and to encourage 
the environmentalist movement of the last decade of the 
twentieth century. 

Rebecca Tsosie, in her article "Changing Women: 
The Cross-Currents of American Indian Feminine Identity" 
in the American Indian Culture and Research Journal , 
states : 

. . . contemporary Indian women writers have 
chosen to express both the diversity of Indian 
people, and the centrality of an Indian "ethos" 
which emphasizes "life," "motion" and "balance" 
against the polarized madness of Western 
technology (Tsosie 1988, 2-3). 



Tsosie believes Native American women are using a natural 
power to "refute the victimization and oppression which 
characterized Western patriarchal power structures" 
(Tsosie 1988, 2«3) . 

This force of good built from conserved anger is 
manifesting itself through memory and remembering and 
rhetoric. Rebecca Tsosie states: "It is essential to 
realize that maintaining one's ties to the traditional 
past, to the ritual and symbolic structures of one's 
culture, imparts a significant sense of 'power'" (Tsosie 
1988, 17). 

Native American women are actively reestablishing 
that power through new words and are expressing a 
knowledge that has previously been ignored. They are 
finding and using English words for ancient tribal 
knowledge. They are maintaining and building their 
culture after years of personal and tribal destruction. 
A destruction that created catastrophic dissonance. 

In Bruchac's interview with the Chickasaw poet 
Linda Hogan, she expresses her view on dissonance. She 
says the 

U.S. is organized socially and politically and 
economically in ways to keep people without 
vibrance or energy. To keep them working hard, 
thinking they will "make it" if they work harder, 
all at the expense of their real lives (Hogan 
1987, 123-124). 



Native American culture has continued to be the 

antithesis of the modern political technocracy. It 

functions as a thorn in the side of the majority culture, 

but at the expense of the Native American. 

Hogan says there has been dissonance in her life 

but "creative work is a way to order it" (Hogan 1987, 123- 

24). She believes that to be silent is not to be 

honest. Consequently, she has spoken of her strong 

feelings about preserving life, rather than destroying 

it. She says: 

I have never really thought that hunting was a 
particularly appropriate thing because most people 
who hunt do not need to. It becomes a death 
sport, a very different thing than it once was 
(Hogan 1987, 133) . 

It is a destruction of life. It is not for survivals 

All cruelty, she believes, is needless, all fighting. "I 

did not want to be silent about the things that were very 

important . . . survival is very important." In this way 

she indicates the unity humans have with all of life. 

She clearly differentiates between the hunting and 

gathering styles of early traditional cultures, who 

I'onored and respected animals, and the death sport 

hunting has become (Hogan 1987, 133). 

Many Native American women are working in 

courageous and creative ways against the dissonance and 

the destruction. They are becoming teachers of ancient 



63 



knowledge that may be applicable and useful not only in 

restoring their power, but in restoring the world. 

Wendy Rose, the Hopi poet, anthropologist, and 

teacher, says her poems were written as a survival kit. 

Her sense of knowing and being seems exceptional. She 

sees humans as a conscious part of the earth that 

emerges, lives for a time, and then returns to be part of 

the earth. She explains: 

Well, you know, the rocks are alive and all the 
components of a tree, for instance, live. A pine 
cone falls down from the tree and it's alive. It 
carries the life of the tree in the seeds that are 
in the pine cone. And I think the parts of the 
body must be the same way. The brain isn't all 
there is to human life. The consciousness that's 
inside the skull is not all there is (Rose 1987, 
262) . 

Perhaps Native American women lost their power 
through silence. This silence, attributable in part to a 
cultural tradition and in part to a language gap is being 
overcome. Now talking and writing are truly tactics for 
survival, of not only themselves, but the entire 
culture. They realize the importance. According to 
Linda Hogan: "The poetry writing was very important to 
me. Ir was a way of trying to define who I was . . . 
writing had everything to do with my survival" (Rose 
1987, 121). 

Louise Erdrich, Turtle Mountain Chippewa, 
states: "We are taught to present a demure face to the 

ERIC ^ 'J 



64 



world and yet there is a kind of wild energy behind it 
• . . that is transformational energy ..." (Erdich 
1987, 82). The use of this transformational energy could 
build the future. 

Luci Tapahonso, of the Navajo Nation, says many 
of her poems are "memory poems . . . the past determines 
what our present is or what our future will be* I don't 
think there is really a separation of the three" 
(Tapahonso 1987, 275). 

She believes part of human strength lies in 

storytelling, which gives us the ability to go on. It 

also gives us the ability to ,see ourselves in unity and 

in community with others. She says: 

What we are ties in with stories and the future 
. . . people are no different than spiritual 
beings ... we can see on those different levels 
... we are the Earth ... we are no different 
from the animals . . . (Tapahonso 1987, 282). 

Diane Burns, of Anishinabe and Chemehuevi 

ancestry, lives in New York City, but she still gets 

stories from home from her grandfather in North Dakota. 

He can tell her "what happened ... by this tree . . . 

that rock ..." She finds, especially in New York City, 

that coimnunity is important, including relatives and 

extended family (Burns 1987, 52). 

Roberta Hill Whiteman, a member of the Oneida 

! tribe of Wisconsin, wanted to learn her cultural language 

iERLC ^ 



65 



as a child. But her father, apparently as a result of 

the "change agents," and in an understandable attempt to 

protect her from ridicule, told her that there was 

nothing positive to be gained from learning the 

language. He told her that people would make fun of 

her. In spite of that handicap, she has learned, 

however, that: 

Indian people have an awareness of ... a 
different sort of time and a different sort of 
space ... a connection of a moving, living, and 
alive time, an alive space, a sense of everything 
being alive . . . this connection to the earth is 
found in myth . . . things are instantaneous . . . 
space between stars is not just empty space . . . 
this idea will become more focused over the next 
hundred years . . . the conception of reality is 
changing . . . things can't be pigeonholed and 
classified and separated and analyzed (Whiteman 
1987, 334-35) . 

She feels that the mythic world is very much 

alive, 

. . . we are close to the earth . . . when you 
dance you're close to the earth . . . you massage 
the earth . . . and I like to think of that 
connection, that the earth is telling us things 
(Whiteman 1987, 334-35). 



Literature 

The well-known Native American women poets, like 
the ones just discussed, are creatively expressing their 
cultural death, their rebirth, and the regaining of their 
cultural spirit. 



ERIC 



other Native American women are also expressing 
the same knowledge. A Gathering of Spirit; Writing and 
Art by N orth American Indian Women , pviblished by Beth 
Brant in 1984, contains works of mostly unknown Native 
American women. Their words also express those threads 
of memory from the pre-patriarchy past, and reveal what 
Rayna Green believes, that it is in non-scholarly 
literature such as poetry that we find the "real 
experience of Indian women's lives" (Green 1980, 263). 

Amber Coverdale Sumrall defines the knowledge and 
power found in the silence that many people seem to fear 
in "Owl Women: " 

Fire wings soar into forest depths 
glazed with moonspill 
there are no illusions here 
fogwebs hide the source of magic. 
Listen to the silence 
as it echos around you, 
ancient spirits dance in it. 
Take heed 

guard your secrets 

bury your treasures well, 

your knives, your crystals, 

your feathers and shells... 

All your sacred things. 

Like ancestors bones 

they will be stolen, 

pulverized into 

instant powder to feed 

white men" s souls (Sximrall 1984, 18). 



67 



Diane Glancy write? of remembering the ancient 

times in terms of the present in "I Am Not the Woman I 

Am." Glancy concisely time-binds past to present. In a 

few short lines she tells the history of Native 

Americans, A. A. (after arrival), and the horror that 

descended upon them. She is able to connect and 

remember. 

You are looking at my ghost, 
not the woman I am, nor even was 

when prairie buckled under black wagons, clammed 
shut the grip of plains. 

The yellow flowers, the curd of watery faces; 

wagons like fish on banks, flopping, 

gulping for last breath. Our men, watched them 

from the hill; we hear the talk of their silvery 

breath. 

Our broken tribes weep on spirit trails where the man 
with a sword in his gizzard and outspread arms 
calls us to the prairie's rusted gate (Glancy 1984, 
41) . 

In "Trading Post — Winslow, Arizona, " Terri 

Meyette picturesquely portrays an image of cultural 

genocide with vivid scenes of understanding: 

Momma said I had eyes like a hawk. 
Dust, red earthen clay clings 
to emerald green velveteen skirts, 
flashing opposites 

as they quietly sway past a tiny face. 

Silver and turquoise slides from a wrinkled wrist. 

crosses the counter to meet its fate 

a pawn ticket. 

Voices grunt and haggle price, 

two bags of flour appear in exchange, 
j Faces wrinkled and worn 

like ancient ruins, 

browned like fry bread 
I parade into the trading post. 

[ Tourists with knobby knees white socks 

\ 

I 

ERIC 



68 



and black leather shoes parade out. 
Cameras around smog-soaked necks 
dead pawn in their white clutches; 
they buy history in a blanket, 

family traditions in a squash-blossom necklace 
the old lady walks home 

with two bags of flour (Meyette 1984, 42), 

In the next poem, "Celebration," also by Meyette, 

she empathetically expresses her feelings for small 

things unnoticed by the bomb testers. She reclaims lost 

power by challenging the policies of the "button 

pushers . " 

They say no one died. 

tiny desert flower 

micro beetle bug 

are they not life? 

Their bag of bones 

blown into the wind 

captured in white dust storms 

washed down polluted rivers 

are they not dead? 

They say no one died. 

Scientist, unconscious 

mushroom button pushers. 

Secretary of Defense what's his name. 

President what's his name 

when will they be tried 

for imposing fantasies and celebrations 
on all life forms? 

It wasn't enough 
in "45" 

Hiroshima and Nagasaki. 

They say no one died. 
Nevada desert 
1000 miles into her bowels 
earth melted. 

radiation, radiation, radiation, 
radiation. 



69 



oozed into blood 

of Shoshone and Paiute. 

The bomb lasted minutes 

the intent lasts generations 

in the womb of Creation, herself. 

They say no one died. 
Closing their eye. 
They dismissed death 
dismissed life 
became blinded 
by white flash 
their God. 

They say no one died. 
As thousands of beetles 
fell through the sky 
and rabbit hair turned into 
fur coats protecting atoms 
as they floated into water. 
They won't look 
they will just say 

no one died (Meyette 1984, 60-61). 

In "Circumstance," Alice Bowen expresses the 

devastating results of the knowledge expressed in the 

previous poems. 

sweet, sweet wine 

make me forget 

the decay of heart 

that raped the land 

killed our intimate friends 

sweet, red wine 

cherished warmth ^ 
making existence bearable 
on this once 
beautiful land 

cheap, sour wine 

comfort 

console me 

I stand stripped 

of dignity, 

and wise, old ways (Bowen 1984, 76). 




70 



Finally in "Tremolo," Joan Shaddox Isom expresses 
triumph in finding herself: 

A woman is making the tremolo into the wind 
No longer is it the song she once made 
For her husband and sons in battle 
Now 

She sings it for herself 
This woman is a strong woman 
Her face is etched in lines 
That have not yet made an ending 

In another time she would be called "man-hearted" 

But now she has turned her back to the wind 

and the four winds take her cry and carry 

it to the four directions, to all-women 

And her tremolo is a new song 

She sings in a voice of rolling thunder 

Saying, 

Listen, women! The new word for strong 
is "Woman-hearted" (Isom 1984, 226). 

These poems demonstrate Anne Cameron's ideas of 

the "fragments," "recognizing the enemy," and of learning 

"to come together" to be "whole." They know "the 

pretense that is the weapon used. " These poems represent 

the centrality of Native American ethics, emphasizing 

"life," "motion," and "balance" against the madness of 

patriarchy and Western technology. A natural power is 

being used to refute the victimization of patriarchy. 

These writers are finding "power" by knowing themselves 

and maintaining ties to the past. In this way they 

connect to the traditional strength and power of the 

feminine. 



ERIC 



71 

Action 

In April of 1981, the Ohoyo Resource Center of 
Wichita Falls, Texas, sponsored an American Indian 
Women's Educational Equity Awareness Conference at 
Northeastern State University in Tahlequah, Oklahoma. 
Drawing from the many diverse tribal representatives 
speaking and participating, a book was published. Qhoyo 
Makachi; Words of Today's American Indian Women , is a 
"first collection of Oratory by American Indian/Alaska 
Native Women." Ohoyo Makachi is Choctaw for "Women 
Speak," Native American women are speaking, and 
demonstrating that action is now appropriate. This is 
consistently obvious in the speeches printed in the book. 

Owanah Anderson, a Choctaw woman and Founder and 

Director of the Ohoyo Resource Center, speaks of no 

longer lamenting the past. Rather, she speaks of 

charting new courses and exploring alternatives. She 

states in her keynote address, "Charting New Directions": 

We survived manifest destiny; we survived White 
men's diseases; we survived the Trail of Tears 
which was trod by the foremothers of many of us 
here today. We survived corrupt Indian agents and 
insensitive White school teachers. We've survived 
poverty and pestilence and federal bureaucracy 
. . . We shall prevail as Indian women ... we 
will be a force to be reckoned with (Anderson 
1981, 10). 



ERIC 



72 



Shirley Hill Witt, of Akwesasne Mohawk heritage, 
believes it is important for Native people to be able to 
move between the "Indian" world and the "White man's" 
world, and qualifies this by stating: 

not%o^S'/?^ '^^''^ "'^^'^ world," by the way, is 
not to be taken as a quaint archaic phrase- the 
world of the White woman is, for the moSt ^art 
invisible to Indians. Even if it wJren't ' 

iS^id^^'^^;>.^'' irrelevant, since the White man's 
world is the one making an impact upon Indian^Tff 

Wh?te"Fa?Li"f ^^^^^ the G^eat'''" 

White Father (sic), who determines the quality of 
life for Native people as well as all o?her 
Americans, male and female (Witt 1981, n!^) . 

She points out that while "traditional cultures 

viewed women's roles as primarily being involved in 

family and household needs," there were many tribal 

groups that expected "women to play key roles in the 

political and religious areas of Native life." m the 

modern world it is expected the women will move into the 

"Anglo world of work and education," and that this 

movement is not "npopccar--! i,, 

necessarily seen as a major threat to 

traditional concepts of women's behavior" (Witt 1981, 13- 



14) . 



This idea explains the key differences between 
the values of traditionally-thinking Native American 
women and the inherent concepts in feminist thought. 
When feminists moved into the white man's world of work 



73 



and education, changes in the concepts of women's 

behavior were implied. 

The ongoing problem of alcoholism was addressed 

by Leah Harjo, a Creek/Euchee woman, who as Director of 

the Indian Women's Alcoholism Program, says: 

. . . we were and still are, faced with the stigma 
of the "drunken woman." In the dominant society, 
drinking is socially acceptable for men and is 
becoming more acceptable for women. But it's 
still mostly a man's world (Harjo 1981, 97). 

Harjo believes the Native American woman alcoholic is a 

"woman that everybody dumps on." Consequently, the 

Native American woman substance abuser has a 

"terrifically low sense of self-esteem, a low sense of 

self-worth and almost no self-love" (Harjo 1981, 97). 

Therefore, in an attempt to deal with the special needs 

of Native American women alcoholics, her organization has 

begun innovative out-patient counseling to help Native 

American women rebuild self-respect and self-love. 

These examples illustrate the scope of thought, 

actions, and oratory taking place across the United 

States. 

Action in South Dakota is also occurring. "Women 
take on tribal alcoholism," as reported by Doris Giago in 
the Sioux Falls Argus Leader dated 21 August 1988, 
informs us that certain Sioux women are "attacking the 
source of their social, physical and psychological 



problems." They are directing their energies toward 
eliminating alcohol abuse on the Pine Ridge Reservation 
in South Dakota. They are looking back to their 
traditions and combining them with "modern techniques." 
Their traditional values of "respect, wisdom, generosity 
and fortitude" are combined with education and law to 
produce a workable strategy against the silent weapon 
introduced by the Europeans. A silent weapon which is 
continuing the practice of cultural genocide begun 
centuries ago, the cruelty of which, according to Dr. 
Charles Woodard of South Dakota State University, "was 
even greater than we supposed" (Woodard 1988). 

With their actions they are reestablishing the 
powerful woman's role. They are denying the Pocahontas 
stereotype and proving the real woman is not the "squaw" 
caricatxire. They are challenging patriarchy by proving 
they are women of power, not to be discredited by the 
system: 

The Indian woman is and has been strong within her 
culture . . . the trappers who desired Indian 
women, the missionaries whose religion dictated 
that women be defined as inferior, the painters 
who saw only romantic figures — all were viewing 
women from a decidedly ethnocentric position . . . 
(Bataille and Sands 1984, 134). 

The Lakota women of Pine Ridge are demonstrating 

their "growing assertiveness ..." (Bataille and Sands, 



75 



1984, 135). As their knowledge of their own history 

becomes known and accessible to them, through writings of 

contemporary Native American women, they are 

demonstrating the power they once had, 

Indian women insist on taking their traditional 
places as healers , legal specialists , and tribal 
governors. Their call is for a return to Native 
American forms which they insist, invoke men and 
women in complementary, mutual roles (Green 1980, 
264) . 

The scholar and teacher, as well as a speaker, 

writer and poet , Dr . Beatrice Medicine has taken action 

by speaking out about the discrimination she experienced 

in her hometown where she has retired. In a letter to 

the editor of the Mobridge (South Dakota) Tribune , which 

was subsequently reprinted in the Lakota Times dated 2 

January 1990, she expresses her anger at being refused 

participation in a Christmas dinner: 

I heard, over the local radio station, that 
the Senior Citizen's Center was having a Christmas 
dinner and "Everybody was welcome!" — and to call 
for rides. 

I called, and jokingly asked, "Do you pick up 
Indians?" A woman, also laughingly, said, "Yes," 
and took my address. 

I did not give my name. Within five minutes, 
a male called, and said that the event "was for 
members only. " 

I told him that in the autumn ... I had gone 
to the center building. While there, I asked 
about participation. A younger female employee 
said the center was open to all. There was no 
mention of membership. 

Beatrice Medicine 



76 



Dr. Medicine expresses her amazement and alarm at 
this discrimination. From her position as a strong 
Lakota elder, she fights by illuminating the racism and 
speaking out against the prejudice. 

Dr. Medicine's action exemplifies what Rayna 
Green says in "Native American Women," "Indian women do 
not, on- the whole, document change, they make change 
. . ." (Green 1980, 263). These changes are now 
necessary for the survival of Native American culture, 
for the feminist survival as a force, and ultimately, for 
the survival of the earth. 

Endurance is greater than politics and 
econor.ics. True knowledge is remembering what you 
already know. Native American womeu have endured and are 
remembering what they knew in the pre-patriarchy past. 
As an act of survival, they now communicate their 
knowledge and understandings through speaking and 
writing. Their call is not for more data gathering, 
classifying, segmenting, and evaluating as if they were a 
plant species. Their call is for acceptance, 
understanding and communication of the knowledge that is 
already known . 



ERIC 



CHAPTER V 
SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS 
FOR FURTHER STUDY 



Summary 

As J. Samuel Bois has said, "We seldom question 
the common sense of our own language" (Bois 1978, 224). 
Because of this phenomenon. Native American women were 
stereotyped, and became the objects of a cultural 
genocide from which they still suffer. My study 
indicates that Native American women enjoyed 
egalitarianism and power within their culture. This 
original power was generated and supported by cultural 
values of honor for the feminine powers of the universe. 
The traditional oral histories of Native Americans 
contain significant recognition of female power. 

The passing of knowledge through the generations 
has been effected through oral histories. Their myths 
and legends contained profound truths and established 
guidelines for proper behavior. This method of 
communication is very personal. It represented a form of 
knowledge that was honored among tribal members. This 
was their rhetoric. This was their value system. It 



78 



established the interrelatedness and connectedness of 
living things • It established Native American women's 
social power. It exemplifies Benjamin Whorf's idea that 
'•each language is not merely a reproducing instrument for 
voicing ideas, but rather is a shaper of ideas" (Whorf 
1956, 212). The literature explored in the preceding 
chapters strongly supports the idea that a state of 
distinctive equilibria existed before contact by the 
European culture. 

Dissonance began occurring for Native American 
women when colonization and language loss began. The 
Europeans initiated a system of destruction by causing 
loss of group prestige, economic loss, loss of personal 
prestige, and loss of security in life styles, along with 
a sense of guilt. According to Charles Larson in the 
text Persuasion Reception and Responsibility , these are 
all ways to cause dissonance (Larson 1986, 135-37). For 
Native American women, it was an unbalancing. Everything 
the "knew" no longer worked for them. Their system was 
shattered. 

According to Paula Gunn Allen in The Sacred Hoop: 
Recovering the Feminine in American Indian Traditions , 
these destructive objectives were met by the Europeans by 
"effecting the social transformation from egalitarian, 
gynecentric systems to hierarchical, patriarchal systems" 



(Allen 1986, 41). The steps taken were: displacing the 



primacy of female as creator and replacing them with mal( 
gendered creators, destroying tribal governing 
institutions and the philosophies that are their 
foundation, pushing the people off their land thereby 
depriving them of their economic livelihood, and 
replacing the clan structure by the nuclear family. She 
states : 

. . . each of these parts of the overall program 
of degynocraticization is subject to image control 
and information control. Recasting archaic tribal 
versions of tribal history, customs, institutions, 
and the oral tradition increases the likelihood 
that the patriarchal revisionist versions of 
tribal life, skewed or simply made up by 
patriarchal non-Indians and patriarchalized 
Indians, will be incorporated into the spiritual 
and popular traditions of the tribes. This is 
reinforced, by the loss of rituals, medicine 
societies, and entire clans through assimilation 
and dying off of tribal members familiar with the 
elder rituals and practices (Allen 1986, 42) . 

Allen claims that "the oral tradition has 

prevented the complete destruction ... of tribal ways 

. . (Allen 1986, 45). The oral tradition has 

continued the connection to the past, and has given 

Native American women writers the strength to survive. 

It has sustained their value system. Through their 

writing and their creativity, they are able to "order" 

the dissonance. The oral tradition, continued and 

contained now in writing, adapts to the "flow of the 



present while never relinquishing its connection to the 
past" (Allen 1986, .45) • 

Because the women belonging to European males 
were victims of the patriarchal belief system to which 
their men adhered, they could not "see" that Native 
American women were their sisters. That both groups were 
victims of patriarchy was not immediately obvious to 
them. Consequently, the feminist irovement, instead of 
attempting to regain lost power, attempted to prove 
equality with men. Coming from the low position in a 
hierarchical structured society, this has proven 
difficult, if not impossible. 

Native women, given the same blindfolders , have 
nevertheless remembered a time before patriarchy, and 
have drawn on that remembering to reestablish their 
rraditional worth. With anger and bitterness they 
comprehend their victimization, and they speak to it, 
"Scream the bloody truth of how we've been raped in every 
possible way, and then rise up and dig the beauty of our 
people," exclaims Cree singer and songwriter Buffy Sainte- 
Marie {Sainte Marie 1977, 171-72), Native American women 
writers are voicing these threads of memory, these 
connections to the pre-patri^rchy past, which cannot be 
forgotten. The attempts of the conquering culture to 
destroy Native Americans' connections have failed. As 



Tsewaa^ a Tewa woman from New Mexico states: "But 
remember; there will always be someone who will remember 
the way, the instruction, the beginning" (Tsewaa 1977, 
174) . 

With language we know our universe and share that 
knowledge with our community. That process of sharing 
knowledge, or communication, was broken for Native 
American people. It is a testimony to Native American 
women that they have remembered, since their normal means 
of communication has had to change and reemerge in the 
form of writing. Now, writing is a way to share the 
knowledge. With rebirth of their power, comm.unication 
returns. With the return of communication, rebirth will 
continue and with it the power of self-knowledge. 

Conclusions 

Part of Benjamin Lee Whorf's hypothesis is that 
the "picture of the universe shifts from tongue to 
tongue" and is exemplified in the preceding material. A 
refusal on the part of most American's to learn Native 
American languages (or any foreign language for that 
matter), makes Whorf's work all the more amazing. 
Through his studies, he realized that Native American 
languages led to a "different mode of perceiving and 
conceiving things" (Whorf 1956, 17). Muc^ of his work 
deals with basic differences in perceiving time and 



82 



space. In fact, as a result of his work he discovered 
that the "Hopi language contains no reference to 'time,' 
either explicit or implicit" (Whorf 1956, 58) . 

In The Sacred Hoop , Paula Gunn Allen says that 
. . basic assumptions about the universe and, 
therefore, the basic reality experienced by tribal 
peoples and by Western peoples are not the same ..." 
(Allen 1986 , 55) • 

Research in this area is weak. In fact in the 
area of Speech Communication only one rhetorical paper 
was discovered. This paper, which was presented at the 
annual meeting of the Speech Communication Association in 
New Orleans in November of 1988 by Kathleen M. German is 
titled "Mythic Functions of Time in Seattle's 1855 
Address." The author analyzes and investigates myth 
through an exploration of its rhetorical functions in 
Chief Seattle's speech, "The Indian's Night Promises to 
be Dark . " She concludes : "The nature of time in this 
speech is multidimensional . . . time cannot be viewed 
just chronologically but must be understood cyclically as 
well" (German 1988, 13). 



83 



r 



Suggestions for Further Study 
Rhetorical analysis of Native American women's 



r 



values as expressed in their contributions to literature 
need to be explored* Rhetorical analysis of their 
oratory is lacking. Studies in interpersonal relations 
via communication styles of Native American women is non- 
existent. The difficulties they have encountered 
learning to express thoughts in English could be 
explored. 



newspaper. The Lakota Times , originated and resides in 
South Dakota and provides an excellent source for 
collection of materials. The South Dakota Indian 
Education Association meets yearly in South Dakota and 
would provide opportunity to gather data. A return to 
traditional ways is an on-going move among many Native 



Americans, with a more open willingness to share these 
teachings since the Native Arierican Freedom of Religion 
Act was passed in 1978. However, since there is an 
inherent reluctance to express this knowledge due to 
historical persecution, care must be taken to demonstrate 
sensitivity if interviewing procedures are used. The 
penal system of South Dakota contains an extremely high 
number of Native American women and would provide a 



The only independently owned Native American 



possible source for collection of data. 



ERIC 




84 



Studies in the area of Native American women and 
Speech Communication could contribute to better 
understanding and ultimately to the breaking down of 
racial barriers. These studies could provide 
enlightenment for feminists as well as 

environmentalists. Ultimately our educational system, 
which has traditionally omitted study of some of the most 
eloquent orators, could also benefit and perhaps at last 
we could "learn to see with more than one eye" (Lame Deer 
1972, 190) . 



ERLC 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Albers, Patricia, and Beatraice Medicine 

1983 The hidden half; Studies of plains Indian 

women. Lanham, Maryland: University Press 

of America, Inc. 

Allen, Paul Gunn 

1974 The mythopoeic vision in Native American 

Literature: The problem of myth. American 
Indian Culture and Reesearch Journal 9: 
3-12. 

1981 A cannon between my knees . New York: 

Strawberry Press . 

1983 ed. Studies in American Indian 

literature : Critical essays and course 
designs . New York: The Modern Language 
Association of America. 

1986 The sacred hoops Recovering the feminine 
in American Indian traditions . Boston: 
Beacon Press . 

1987 See Bruchac 1987. 

1989 ed. Spider Woman's granddaughters: 

Traditional tales and contemporary writing 
by Native American women . Boston: Beacon 
Press . 

Alexander, Ruth Ann 

1988 Elaine Goodale Eastman and the failure of 
the feminist Protestant ethic. Great 
Plains Quarterly 8 Spring): 89-101. 

Anderson, Owanah 

1981 See Verble 1981. 



Bartkey, Sandra Lee 

1985 Women are not free. See Gould 19 85. 



86 



Bataille, Gretchen M, , and Kathleen Mullen Sands 

1984 American Indian women; Telling their 
lives > Lincoln: University of Nebraska 
Press. 

Berger, Charles , and Steven H. Chaffee 

1987 Handbook of communication science * 
Newbury Park, California: Sage 
Publications , Inc . 

Black Elk, Grace 

1988 See Tsosie 1988, 

Blackstone, William T. 

1985 See Gould 1985. 

Boas, Franz 

1911 See Steiner 1968. 

Bois, Samuel J. 

1978 The art of awareness . Dubuque, Iowa: Wm. 

C. Brown, Co. 

Brant, Beth, 

1984 ed. A gathering of spirit: Writing and 

art by North American Indian women . 
Montpelier, Veirmont: Sinister Wisdom 
Books • 

Bruchac, Joseph 

1987 Survival this way: Interviews with 

American Indian Poets . Tucson: The 
University of Arizona Press, 1987. 

Buckanaga , Gertrude 

1977 See Katz 1977. 

Burns , Diane 

1987 See Bruchac 1987. 

Cameron, Anne 

1981 Daughters of copper woman . Vancouver: 

Press Gang Publishers. 

Campbell, Karlyn Kohrs 

1973 The rhetoric of women's liberation: an 

oxymoron. Quarterly Journal of Speech 59 
(1973) : 74-86. 



ERLC 



87 



Campbell, Maria 

1984 See Bataille and Sands 1983. 

Chona, Marie 

1984 See Bataille and Sands 1984. 

Connexions; An International Women's Quarterly 

1983 Passi"ng^ on culture. 8 (Spring): 6-8. 

Cook-Lynn, Elizabeth 

1977 Then Badger said this . New York: Vantage 

Press* 

1987 See Bruchac 1987. 
Deloria, Ella Cara 

1979 Speaking of Indians . VerTxiillion: Dakota 

Press . 

1988 Waterlily . Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press. 

Deloria, Vine, Sr. 

1984 See Bataille and Sands 1984. 
DeMallie, Raymond 

1983 See Albers and Meicine 1983. 
Eastman, Charles Alexander 

1911 The soul of the Indian . Boston and New 

York: Hougton Mifflin Company. 

Erdrich, Louise 

1984a Jacklight . New York: Holt, Rinehart and 

Winston. 

1984b Love medicine . New York: Holt, Rinehart 

and Winston. 

1986 The beet queen . New York: Bantam Books. 

1988 Tracks. New York: Henry Holt and Company. 

Erdoes and Ortiz 

1984 American Indian myths and legends . New 
York: Pantheon Books. 



ERLC 



Etienne, Mona, and Eleanor Leacock 

1980 eds* Women and colonization: 

Anthropological perspectives . New York: 

Praeger . 

Fisher, Dexter 

1980 ed. The third woman: Minority women 

writers of the United States . Boston: 
Houghton Miflin Company. 

Forema:; , Carolyn Thomas 

1976 Indian women chiefs . Washington, D.C.: 

Zenger Publishing. 

German, Kathleen M. 

1988 Mythic functions of time in Seattle's 1955 

Address. Paper presented at the annual 
meeting of the Speech Communication 
Association, New Orleans ,* Lousiana, 
November 6 . 

Giles, Howard and John M. Wiemann 

1987 See Berger and Chaffee 1987 

Glancy, Diane 

1984 See Brant 1984. 
Gould, James A. 

1985 ed. Classic philosophical questions . 
ColTimbus, Ohio: Charles E. Merrill 
Publishing Company. 

Green, Rayna 

1975 The Pocahontas perplex: the image of 

Indian worien in American culture. 
Massachusetts Review 16:4 (Fall): 698-714. 

1980 Native American women. Signs: Journal of 

Women in Culture and Society 6:2 (Winter): 
248-267. 

Harjo, Joy 

1987 See Bruchac 1987. 



Harjo, Leah 
1981 



See Verble 1981. 



89 



Heartwarrior , Chosa. 

1982 Heart of Turtle Island; Seven chalk 

hills * Ely, Minnesota: Bearhand 
Publishing. 

1989 Interview by author, June, Green Grass, 

South Dakota. 

Hester, Karen 

1989 Why the nonviolent movement needs feminist 

spirituality. Women's Studies Int, Forum 
12:1: 87-89. 

Hogan, Linda 

1987 See Bruchac 1987. 

Hopkins, Sarah Winnemucca 
1977 See Katz 1977. 

Isom, Joan Shaddox 

1984 See Brant 1984. 

Jaeger, Richard M. 

1988 ed. Complementary methods for research in 
education. Washington, D.C.: American 
Educational Research Association. 

Johansen, Bruce and Roberto Maestas 

1979 Wasi'chu: The continuing Indian wars ^ New 

York: Monthly Review Press. 

Johnson , Sonia 

1981 From housewife to heretic . Garden City, 

New York: Doubleday and Company, Inc. 

Jones, Thomas Louis 

1965 Aboriginal American oratory . Los Angeles, 

California: Southwest Museum. 

Judalon 

1983 See Passing on Culture, 1983. 

Katz , Jane B. 

1977 ed. I am the fire of time: The voices of 

Native American women . New York: E. P. 
Dutton. 

Kerber, Linda K. , and Jane DeHart-Mathews 
1987 Women's America refocusing the past . New 

York: Oxford University Press. 




Centimeter 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 mm 




90 



Kidwell, Clara Sue 

1978 The power of women in three American 

Indian societies. The Journal of Ethnic 
Studies 6:3 (Fall): 113-21. 

Lame Deer, John (Fire) , and Richard Erdoes 
1972 Lame Deer seeker of visions . New York: 

Washington Square Press. 

Larson , Charles U. 

1986 Persuasion reception and responsibility , 

Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing 
Company. 

Lurie, Nancy Oestreich 

i961 ed. Mountain Wolf Woman; Sister of 

Crashing Thunder , An Arbor: The 
University of Michigan Press. 

Matlon, Ronald J. and Peter C, Facciola 

1987 eds. Index to Journals in Communication 
Studies ♦ Annandale , Virginia : Speech 
Communication Association. 

McGregor, James H, 

1969 The Wounded Knee Massacre: From the 

viewpoint of the Sioux . Rapid City, South 
Dakota: Fenske Printing, Inc. 

Medicine, Bea 

1978 The Native American woman; A perspective . ■ 

Las Cruces, New Mexico: ERIC/CRESS. 

Meyette , Terri 

1984 See Brant 1984. 

Momaday, N, Scott 

1989a The Ancient Child , New York: Doubleday. 

1989b See Woodard 1989a. 

Mountain Wolf Woman 

1961 See Lurie 1961, 

Niethammer, Carolyn 

1977 Daughters of the Earth; The lives and 

legends of American Indian women . New 
York; Macmillan Publishing Company, 



ERIC 



Niehardt, John G. 

1932 Black Elk speaks . New York: Washington 

Square Press. 

Peck, M. Scott 

X987 The different drxom; Community making and 

peace . New York: Simon and Schuster. 

Pretty Shield 

1989 See Allen 1989. 

Rose, Wendy 

1987 See Bruchac 1987. 

Sante-Marie, Huffy 

1977 See Katz 1977. 

Shenandoah, Audrey 

1988 Everything has to be in balance. 
Northeast" Indian Quarterly IV (Winter) and 
V (Spring) : 4-7. 

Silko, Leslie Marmon 

1977 Ceremony > New York: Viking. 

Sobol, Rose 

1976 Woman Chief . New York: Dell Publishing 

Co. , Inc. 

Spretnak , Charlene 

1982 The politics of women^s spirituality . 

Garden City, New York: Anchor Books. 

Steiner, Stan. 

19 68 The new Indians . New York: Harper and 

Row. 

Sumrall, Amber Coverdale 

1984 See Brant 1984. 

Swann, Brian and Arnold Krupat 

1987 eds. I tell you now: Autobiographical 

essays by Native American writers . 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 

Tapahonso, Luci 

1987 See Bruchac 1987. 



Terrell, John Upton and Donna M, Terrell 

1974 Indian women of the Western morning; Their 

life in early America « Garden City, New 
York: Anchor Press* 

Tsosie, Rebecca 

1988 Changing women: The cross-currents of 

American Indian feminine identity, 
American Indian Culture and Research 
Journal 12:1: 1-37, 

Turtle Quarerly 

1989 Niagara Falls, New York: Native American 

Center for the Living Arts, Inc,, vol 3, 
no. 2 « 

Tsewaa 

1977 See Katz 1977. 

Velie, Alan R. 

1982 Four American Indian literary masters . 

Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Verble, Sedelta 

1981 ed. Ohoyo makachi; Words of today's 
American Indian women . Wichita Falls, 
Texas: OHOYO, Inc. 

Vittachi , Anuradha 

1989 Earth conference one; Sharing a vision of 

our planet . Boston: Shambhala 
Publications. 

Walker, James R. 

1982 Lakota Society . Edited by Raymond 

DeMallie. Lincoln: University of Nebraska 
Press. 

Warcaziwin (Sunflower) 

1930 See Jones 1965. 

Whiteman, Roberta Hill 

1987 See Bruchac 1987. 

Whorf, Benjamin Lee 

1956 Language, thoug h-^ ,, and reality . Edited by 

John B. Carroll. Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology. 



93 



Weist, Katherine M. 

1983 See Albers and Medicine 1983. 

Williams, 'Walter 

1986 Review of The saacred hoop; recovering the 

feminine in American Indian traditions ^ by 
Paula Gunn Allen, in American Indian 
Culture and Research Journ.^ I xC • 3 : 127- 
130. 

Wilson, Norma 

1980 Outlook for survival, Denver Quarterly 14 

(Winter) : 22-30. 

Witt, Shirley Hill 

1981 See Verble 1981. 

Woodard, Charles L. 

1988 Speech/English/ Drama Workshop. Summer . 

1989a Ancestral voice: Conversations with N. 



Scott Momaday . Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press. 



1989b Native and other Americans. Speech 

delivered for the Sewrey Colloquim, South 
Dakota State University. 

Zitkala Sa (Gertrude Bonin) 
1965 See Jones 1965. 

1976 American Indian stories 1921 . Glorietta,- 

New Mexico: Rio Grande Press. 

1989 See Allen 1989. 



ERLC 



1 u ^ 



