DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 413 926 



IR 056 758 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Mosely, Joyce J. 

Multicultural Diversity of Children’s Picture Books: Robert 
Fulton Elementary School Library. 

1997-07-00 

3 7p . ; Master's Research Paper, Kent State University. 
Dissertations/Theses (040) -- Reports - Evaluative (142) 

MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

American Indians; Asian Americans; Blacks; Childrens 
Literature; Content Analysis; Cultural Awareness; Cultural 
Education; Cultural Enrichment; *Cultural Pluralism; 
♦Cultural Relevance; Elementary Education; Ethnic Groups; 
Family (Sociological Unit) ; Hispanic Americans; Library 
Collection Development; Library Material Selection; 
♦Multicultural Education; *Picture Books; Racial 
Distribution; *School Libraries; Sex Role; User Needs 
( Information) 

♦Multicultural Literature; Multicultural Materials 



ABSTRACT 



The United States has a culturally diverse society. Since 
children are influenced by what they see and hear at a young age, the aim of 
this study was to determine if the picture book collection of the Robert 
Fulton Elementary School Library (Cleveland, Ohio) reflects the cultural 
diversity of its students. The secondary objective was to ensure that 
students have materials to learn about a diversity of cultures, and the 
ability to develop a sense of themselves in the books they read. A content 
analysis was conducted of 143 books in a sample of 201 picture books. Each 
book was analyzed for: ethnic representation of characters, central and 
incidental; ethnicity in terms of roles and gender; the importance of the 
family to the characters and the story; the authenticity and realism of the 
races portrayed; and whether children would be positively or negatively 
affected by the content of the book. The characters in the majority of the 
titles were realistic and little stereotyping was found. There is a need for 
more books on the cultures of African Americans, Hispanics, Asians, and 
Native Americans in the collection of this library. If a school is 
predominantly African American, then the collection of the library should 
reflect that fact. Publishers need to make a greater effort to find 
multicultural authors and publish more multicultural books. (Contains 42 
references . ) (Author/SWC) 



******************************************************************************** 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document . 



******************************************************************************** 



O 

ERIC 



MULTICULTURAL DIVERSITY OF CHILDREN’S PICTURE BOOKS 
ROBERT FULTON ELEMENTARY SCHOOL LIBRARY 



K 



VO 

CN 

ON 

CO 

l—H 

Q 

w 



A Master’s Research Paper submitted to the 
Kent State University School of Library Science 
in partial fulfillment of the requirements 
for the degree Master of Library Science 

by 

Joyce J. Mosely 
July, 1997 



DO 

in 



C 

in 



&EKIC 

I « 



DNAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

^cument has been reproduced as 
3d from the person or organization 

iting it. 

changes have been made to 
/e reproduction quality. 

. of view or opinions stated in this 
IienJdo not necessarily represent 
d OER1 position or policy. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

2 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 

material has been granted by 
K- T in Mont 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



ABSTRACT 



The United States has a culturally diverse society. The uniqueness, the differences and the 
similarities of the people of the world are what make them so special. Therefore, it is the 
responsibility of all libraries and librarians to make special literature available to special 
people. 

Since children are influenced by what they see and hear at a young age, the aim of this 
research was to determine if the picture book collection of the Robert Fulton Elementary 
School Library met the cultural diversity of its students. 

This research determined that there is a need for more books on the cultures of African 
Americans, Hispanics, Asians and Native Americans in the collection of this library. An 
additional finding shows that there is a need for publishers to make a greater effort to find 
multicultural authors and publish more multicultural books. 




3 



Adviser 



ERIC 



Master’s Research Paper by 
Joyce J. Mosely 

B.L.S., Clarion State Teacher’s College, 1961 
M.L.S., Kent State University, 1997 



Approved by 
Date 



ii 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



LIST OF TABLES 



CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION 1 

Purpose of the Study 3 

Definition of Terms 4 

Limitations of the Study 5 

CHAPTER II REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 6 

What is Multiculturalism? 6 

Types of Multicultural Literature 7 

General Criteria 8 

Specific Criteria 9 

The Role of Libraries and Librarians 10 

Values 10 

Authenticity and Conformity 11 

Insider versus Outsider 12 

CHAPTER III METHODOLOGY 14 

CHAPTER IV. ANALYSIS OF THE DATA 16 

Main Characters 17 

Incidental Characters 18 

Families 19 

Settings 20 

Major Contributors to Young Readers 21 

CHAPTER V . CONCLUSIONS 22 

Further Research 25 

APPENDIX A: CODING FORM 26 

REFERENCES 27 




iii 



5 



LIST OF TABLES 



Table 


Page 


I. Main Characters 


17 


II. Incidental Characters 


18 


III. Families 


19 


IV. Settings 


20 




iv 



Acknowledgements 



to 

Dr. Lois Buttlar for all her patience during this entire process. 
Malcolm Mosely, my son, for all his help and loss of sleep. 



CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION 



The uniqueness, the differences, and the similarities of the people of the world are 
what make them so special. The need for survival and self-expression make up the culture 
of a people and the customs— personal, creative, family, spiritual, language and speaking, 
music and dance, holiday, folklore, and others— are what make them the same and 
different. In order to live in peace together, they must know something about each other. 
One way to do this is to read and understand something of the culture and customs which 
make up these similarities and differences (Pilger 1992). 

The diversity of the population is becoming an ever increasing concern among the 
people of the United States. Most communities have a diverse culture and libraries need 
to reflect this diversity. Librarians are responsible for selecting books and therefore they 
can do a lot to increase the use of multicultural literature. By selecting books that enhance 
cultural diversity, children are exposed to other cultures at the age when they begin to 
form attitudes and prejudices. Librarians can promote positive images by fair and effective 
selection of picture books. Self-identification increases self-esteem and a sense of self 
worth, but negative or disparaging images can create negative responses to another 
culture or race. Avoiding negative images and responses is certainly the responsibility of 
librarians as well as the entire community. Therefore, librarians must be very sensitive to 



ERIC 



8 



the needs and feelings of the public-at-large, and especially to those of impressionable 
children. Librarians must be perceptive enough to recognize stereotyping, realistic 
interpretations and experiences, and quality and authenticity in books about other cultures. 
They can offer multicultural books to children at any time. Books about Native 
Americans are not just read at Thanksgiving, African American books are not just for the 
month of February, etc. Children will read all types of books if they are well-written and 
illustrated, not just books about their own culture. However, when they do read about 
their own or other cultures, the books should reflect the realism of that culture and not 
have unintended but real lies. It is important for minority children to see themselves as 
important enough to be in books and for white children to see minorities as important 
enough to be in books. And so, with the minority about to become the majority in many 
areas of the country (according to the 1990 census), it will be up to the librarians to see 
that their collections reflect this new majority. 

Robert Fulton Elementary School is located in a predominently African American 
community. The cultural diversity of the school is 99.3% African American and 7% 
Hispanic American. Young children who use the school library are developing their 
awareness of different cultures and ethnic groups, as well as their own self images. These 
perceptions are strongly influenced by the literature which is available to them. 

Picture books are how children learn about the world outside of their own 
environment. Through picture books, they learn social values, see role models, and are 
influenced about other cultures. 




2 



9 



Purpose of the Study 



The objective of this research is to determine if the diversity of the picture book 
collection of Robert Fulton Elementary School library reflects the diversity of its students. 
What if any stereotyping will be found? How realistic are the characters being portrayed, 
the settings of the stories and the roles of the characters? What cultures are represented 
by the primary and secondary characters? What role does the family play in the stories? 
And, are the books written and illustrated by a person or persons of the same culture as 
the characters in the stories? 

A secondary objective was to insure that the students are getting a diversity of 
cultures to learn about and a sense of themselves in the books that they read. The children 
need to understand at an early age that their own culture is important and so are the 
cultures of others. In the mixing and sharing of cultures, comes respect for all cultures. 
Multiculturalism means everyone, not just minorities. The rewards of learning about the 
culture of one’s own heritage as well as that of others can only result in a world family of 
peace, love and true understanding. Pilger( 1 992) 



ERIC 



3 



Definition of Terms 



Criteria : guidelines by which books may be evaluated. 



Cultural authenticity: realistic or factual interpretation of a culture. 



Cultural conformity : positive and realistic views of all aspects of a culture. 



Cultural diversity , includes all cultures in collections or books. 



Cultural theft : taking of another’s culture to write about when you do not understand that 
culture. 



Insider : an author or illustrator who is of the same culture as the characters in a book. 



Multiculturalism : relating to diverse cultures. 



Outsider : an author or illustrator who is of another culture than that of the characters in a 
book. 



Stereotype : an image which is false or presents an isolated phenomenon as true of an 
entire people. 



Limitations of the Study 



The findings of this study will be limited to the Robert Fulton Elementary School 
picture book collection. Robert Fulton is a part of the Cleveland Public School system. 
The reason that the limitation of this study is to picture books for young children, is that 
many psychologists believe that children perceive racial differences and form racial 
attitudes at an early age (Edmonds 1986). So, it is important to examine the literature 
written for young children and determine whether or not the books will have a positive 
effect on the young readers of the school. 



CHAPTER II REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 



The initial research for the study was done by searching the databases of ERIC, 
LISA and INFOTRAC. Other sources were found through the bibliographies of the first 
sources, and in the collections of the CLEVENET libraries. The majority of the sources 
gave information on: multiculturalism and its definitions; the types of multicultural 
literature available; general and specific criteria for the evaluation of the literature; the 
role of libraries and librarians in providing the literature; the value of multicultural books 
to children; the need for authenticity and conformity; and insider versus outsider 
authorship. 



What is Multiculturalism 

Decter (1991) describes multiculturalism as the diversity within and across 
groups. In an article by Michael Ford (1994), it is described in three ways: marketing 
definition— anything that works; status group definition— a new way to define minorities; 
working group(those who are pushing the publication of minority books)definition— a 
culture and its multifactions. Ford also describes multiculturalism as the realistic and 
contemporary representation of a culture, so others can learn and understand. Other 



ERIC 



6 



sources define multiculturalism as a synonym for minorities or people of color 
(Smithl993). It means all people to Native Americans (Bruchac 1995), the crossing, 
mixing and sharing of cultures (Aronson 1995); an organization of cultural groups that 
value their diversity (DuMont, Buttlar, and Caynon 1994); the loss of one nation by a 
common culture (Lee 1995); multiculturalism is a way of life (Salvadore 1995), and it 
does not only mean people of color (Rochman 1993). 



“No Single Season: Multicultural Literature for All Children” (1992) lists types of 
multicultural literature. They are: inclusive, this portrays ordinary people of all races, 
ages and genders doing everyday things in racial harmony; multiculture only in content, 
these are usually written by authors outside the culture and may or may not be sympathetic 
to the culture portrayed, or, multicultural in content written by authors of the same 
culture and usually reflect true images of the author’s heritage. In the “ Multicolored 
Mirror,” Bishop (1991) lists three more types: social conscience, where the author or 
illustrator throws in a black face, the melting pot, an integration of cultures; and the 
culturally conscious, whose major characteristics are of one culture, told from that 
culture’s point-of-view and set in appropriate neighborhoods, but not necessarily 
authentic. Real multicultural literature expands awareness and understanding of other 
cultures. 



Types of Multicultural Literature 



ERIC 



7 



General Criteria 



Kruse (1992), Smith (1993), and Willet (1995) give criteria which not only 
applies to multicultural literature, but to all literature written for children. A partial list of 
those criteria follows. 

1 . Organization and format. 

2. Well- written. 

3 . Accuracy and quality. 

4. No stereotypes. 

5. Fulfills the purpose. 

6. Authentic representation of life and history. 

7. Fosters respect and empathy for other cultures. 

8. Encourages positive values. 

9. Includes positive images. 

10. Fosters growth and self-respect. 

1 1 . Encourages racial pride. 

12. Realistic and contemporary. 



ERIC 



15 



Specific Criteria 



MacCann and Woodard (1977) say there are four major minority cultures that are 
usually included in the literature for children. They discuss the stereotypes of each group 
that are typical of poorly-written multicultural literature. They also list criteria to insure 
accuracy and authenticity. Later articles by MacMann and Woodard (1989, 1991) give 
additional criteria for authors to follow in order to write the best books for minority 
children. In a section of “T he Multicolored Mirror .” Bishop (1991) states that other 
criteria, although specifically for African American literature, could be applied to the 
literature of other cultures as well. One of the main things Bishop emphasizes is the use of 
variety— variety in language, settings and occupations. Bishop also values the family, it’s 
heritage, history, race, pride and identity. Realistic illustrations showing recognizable, 
culturally correct characters are very important. Kurtz (1996) says that it is important to 
get visual details right. In this source, as well as others, accuracy and authenticity were 
deemed to be the most important criteria, regardless of the culture. Regardless that one 
source (Ford 1994) says that the most important thing is to get the literature to the 
children, no matter who writes it, inaccurate information is more harmful than no 
information (McMahon 1996). 




9 



The Role of Libraries and Librarians 



Fish (1992) feels that libraries need to respond to the needs of the community and 
diverse communities should be reflected in the collections of those libraries. Since funding 
is decreasing, libraries have to decide between increasing collections or weakening basic 
services. Also, Fish sees a need for libraries to rewrite mission statements, replan 
objectives and create multicultural services. Another source by MacCann and Woodard 
(1977) takes the position that since librarians select books, it is up to them to increase 
multicultural titles that enhance cultural diversity. These books should then be given to 
children at an early age, because attitudes and prejudices are formed at this time in a 
child’s life. MacCann and Woodard also feel that there should be fair and effective 
selection of books and that librarians should promote books that have positive images 
because negative images promote negative attitudes toward a race or culture. DuMont, 
Buttlar and Caynon (1994) emphasize the need for minority librarians to provide services 
to the ever-increasing diverse population that will be using the libraries. Librarians can 
and should play a major role in serving this diversity. 

Values 

Several sources cited values as an important part of multicultural literature. 

Johnson (1990) feels that values imply a whole way of behaving and thinking within any 



culture. Self-esteem was first among many of the values listed as well as the avoidance of 
bias in books for young children. Norton (1987) listed the afore-mentioned values and 
included: having roots in the past; making a contribution; pride in your heritage; 
understanding of and respect for other cultures; and eliminating stereotypes. Good 
literature for children validates these values when they let them see themselves in a 
positive manner (Creany 1993). 

Authenticity and Conformity 

An article in School Library Journal by Seto (1993) discusses why multicultural 
literature should be realistic and authentic. It should contain real lives, real issues, names 
and values. It should tell it like it is and eliminate stereotypes. African Americans can do 
other things besides play sports; Native Americans do not only wear feathers and beads; 
Hispanic Americans are not all migrant workers; and all Asian Americans do not wear 
pajama-like clothing. It is important that illustrations be as free of stereotypes as the text. 
Several sources (Kruse 1993; Salvadore 1995) cite some of these stereotypes and 
more,but most sources agree that authenticity and conformity in literature for all cultures 



are essential. 



Insider versus Outsider 



The insider versus outsider controversy could be a future research project if it has 
not already been done. In reading the literature, it appeared to be a major concern of 
many of the sources used in this research. Most were of the opinion that insiders write 
more authentically than outsiders because they are part of the culture about which they are 
writing. Michael Thomas Ford (1994) feels that outsiders must write books for other 
cultures because there are not enough minority writers. However, the outsiders must 
carefully research the culture they propose to write about. He believes that good books 
for all children are more important than defining the culture. Others, like McElmeel 
(1993) and Campbell (1994) feel that it is more important to find more minority writers 
and publishers or have publishers increase the number of multilcultural books published 
each year. Since one-third of the population is minority, one-third of the books published 
should be about minorities. Smith (1993) advocates insiders over outsiders and more 
availability of culturally diverse materials, authors, illustrators and publishers. Outsiders 
can unintentionally portray characters in a negative manner, give distorted views of a 
culture, and perpetuate myths or stereotypes. Why should outsiders write about another 
culture, especially when insiders are being overlooked or ignored (Campbell 1994). In 
“Telling Tales,” Diane Johnson (1990) discusses how the racial identity of authors is 
important to African American consumers because they tend to trust authors who are of 



the same racial background as themselves. Insiders usually do better research and present 
positive images because they are part of the culture. They have usually lived through the 
pain and experience of prejudice and can tell their stories more accurately and 
authentically. 




1 3 



20 



CHAPTER III. METHODOLOGY 



Content analysis was used to evaluate the picture book collection of the Robert 
Fulton Elementary School library. The population from which the sample of 201 books 
was chosen, is the 417 picture books which make up the collection. This sample was 
determined by consulting the Table for Determining Sample Size from a given population 
(Krejcie and Morgan 1970). 

This distinct method of research is commonly used to study trends, values and 
quantitative materials. It is useful in the investigation of collection development and other 
media services, and for the examination and evaluation of materials that may be biased or 
stereotyped. 

The research was conducted through the use of a coding form (Appendix A). The 
information searched for in the sample is: the ethnic representation of characters, central 
and incidental; ethnicity in terms of roles and gender; the importance of the family to the 
characters and the story; the authenticity and realism of the races portrayed; and whether 
children would be positively or negatively affected by the content of the books analyzed. 




1 4 



21 



The objectives of the research were to determine: the cultural diversity of the 
picture book collection, whether or not it is appropriate for the cultural differences of the 
students, and if further collection development is necessary to achieve cultural 
conformity. Basically, the researcher analyzed, through application of the coding form, 
how the collection of picture books meets the requirements for multicultural diversity in 
Robert Fulton Elementary School. 




15 22 



CHAPTER IV ANALYSIS OF DATA 



The following tables and summaries show the results of the content analysis 
research gathered from the picture book collection of the Robert Fulton Elementary 
School Library. In the Purpose of the Study , this researcher was looking for data that 
would show the diversity of the main characters, the diversity of the incidental characters, 
what kind of families were portrayed in the stories and in what kind of settings the stories 
took place. Two Hundred One books were selected randomly and of the 201, 58 books 
did not meet the criteria because they were books about animals, fantasies, alphabets, or 
counting. The other 143 books were analyzed by using a coding form (Appendix A), and 
the data entered into the tables below. 

The ethnic group of the main characters is important to the study in order to 
determine if the diversity of the picture book collection reflects the diversity of the 
students of the school. The ethnic group of the incidental characters is important in order 
to look at whether people from parallel cultures are interacting with each other in these 
stories and to determine the multiculturalism of the literature. How families impact on the 
characters in the stories and family relationships are a vital part of the cultures involved in 
the study. Hemphill (1993) in her research, found that the settings of stories which 



depict African Americans, Hispanics and Native Americans are often stereotyped, i.e. 
inner city ghettos, migrant worker farmlands, and reservations. It is also significant to 
determine if these stories will have a positive effect on the students. 



Main Characters 



TABLE I 

Distribution of Main Characters by Ethnic Groups 


Group 


Frequency 


Percentage 


African American 


69 


43% 


Hispanic American 


7 


4.4% 


Native American 


10 


6.3% 


Asian American 


16 


10% 


White 


58 


36.3% 



Note: Some of the titles had more than one main character. 



Summary 

In comparing the results of the table above to the cultural diversity of the students 
of Robert Fulton School it was found that while the African American population of the 
school is 99,9%, only 43% of the picture book collection depicts African Americans as 
the main character. With 36.3%, it was found that white characters represent the next 
highest group with Asians at 10%, Native Americans at 6.3% and Hispanics the lowest at 
4.4%. The figures show that there is enough of a representation to give the students a 
positive insight into their own culture and almost none into other ethnic groups. 



Incidental Characters 



TABLE II 

Distribution of Incidental Characters by Ethnic Group 


Group 


Frequency 


Percentage 


African American 


69 


40% 


Hispanic American 


13 


7.5% 


Native American 


9 


5.2% 


Asian American 


17 


9.8% 


White 


65 


37.6% 



Note: Some titles had more than one incidental character. 



Summary 

The percentage of African Americans as incidental characters in the picture books 
analyzed in the study was 40% making them the highest percentage in study with white 
characters second at 37.6%. The frequency of incidental African American characters 
was the same as that of the African American main characters, but not necessarily in the 
same titles. After African Americans and whites, Asian Americans appeared the most, 
with 9.8%, Hispanics, 7.5%, and Native Americans, 5.2% 




18 



25 



Families 



TABLE III 

Distribution of Families by Type in the Stories 


Group 


Frequency 


Percentage 


Traditional 


43 


28.1% 


One-Parent Female 


25 


16,3% 


One-Parent Male 


4 


2.6% 


Extended 


51 


33.3% 


None 


26 


17% 



Note: Many of the titles had more than one family portrayed. 



Summary 

Families are important to all groups, but especially to the four major ethnic groups 
researched in the study (Flemphill 1993). It was therefore surprising to discover that 
although the family played a major role in many of the books, there were 26 ( 1 7%) 
instances where the family was never mentioned or shown, although it was evident that the 
characters lived with some type of family The extended family is shown to be the 
influence in the majority of the picture books at 33.3%, with the traditional family a close 
second at 28 . 1%. It was not surprising to find that 18,9% of the families were one-parent, 
especially with a female as the one parent. However, it was refreshing to find that 2.6% of 
that 18.9% were male parents. 




1 9 



26 



Settings 



TABLE IV 

Distribution of Settings by Type in the Stories 


Group 


Frequency 


Percentage 


Urban 


54 


18.2% 


Suburan 


29 


9.8% 


Rural 


70 


23.6% 


Integrated 


36 


12.2% 


Non-integrated 


107 


36% 



Note: All of the titles were analyzed for physical as well as environmental settings. 



Summary 

It was surprising to find many rural settings in the titles that were analyzed. 
Twenty-three and six tenths percent of the settings were rural as compared to 18.2% 
urban settings and 9.8% suburban. The analysis also shows that although 12.2% of the 
titles had an integrated setting, 36% took place in a non-integrated environment. 

An additional finding of the study was that there were certain authors who wrote 
primarily for specific cultures. 




20 



27 



Some of the Major Contributors to Literature for Very Young Readers in the Library of 

the Robert Fulton Elementary School 



African American 

Arnold Adoff, Lucille Clifton, Floyd Cooper, Donald Crews, Pat Cummings, 
Jan Spivey Gilchrist, Eloise Greenfield, Rachel Isadora, Angela Johnson, 
Dolores Johnson, Patricia McKissack, Jerry Pinkney, Faith Ringgold, Mildred 
Pitts Walker. 



Hispanic American 

Arthur Dorros, Leo Politi, Harriet Rohmer. 

Native American 

B. J. Ebenson, Paul Goble, R. Martin, A. S. Medaris, Miska Miles. 

Asian American 

Kimiko Saiko, Allen Say, Yoshiko Uchido, Taro Yashima, Ed Young. 
Multicultural 

Ann Grifalconi, Ezra Jack Keats, Patricia Polacco, Robert San Souci, Ann 
Herbert Scott. 




21 



28 



CHAPTER V: CONCLUSIONS 



In conclusion, of the 201 books in the random sample, only 143 were actually 
analyzed as to content. The remaining 58 picture books did not meet the criteria of the 
study. Of these 143 titles, only 43% had African Americans as main characters, while 
37.6% had African Americans as incidental characters. In the stories where African 
Americans were the main character, the African American incidental character played a 
vital role in the story, whereas when the main character was of another culture, the role of 
the incidental African American character was significantly reduced. Many of the titles 
which had African Americans as the main character usually had incidental characters of 
other cultures who were either white, Hispanic or Native American. In the stories where 
whites were the main character, whites were also the incidental character, but if other 
cultures were included, they were mainly African American, Hispanic, and Asian. Few if 
any of these stories included Native Americans. On the other hand, in most of the Native 
American and Asian stories there were no other cultures included at all. The stories about 
Hispanics were mainly one culture, and in the few that included others, the incidental 
characters were either white or African American. 




22 



29 



(23.6%) were rural, but many of the rural settings were integrated. Most of the 29 
(9.8%)stories set in the suburbs were integrated. Fifty-four( 1 8 . 2%) of the settings were 
urban, and the majority of these settings were non-integrated. The conclusion in this 
instance is that while many of the stories took place in an urban setting, which would lend 
itself to an integrated environment, these stories had no other cultures included in the 
content. 

As stated above, there were five titles where the researcher had a question as to 
whether or not the effect on the reader would be positive or negative. In all but one 
instance, these titles were written or illustrated by outsiders. In one title, the problem of 
the story is solved by white intervention. In an otherwise perfectly delightful story that 
has won several awards, the illustrator shows one of the African characters falling into a 
cart of watermelons. In another story, there is a party scene where the characters come 
dressed in costumes, the only African American pictured in the entire book is dressed as a 
basketball player. In one title, the Asian characters are depicted with the stereotypical 
round faces and slanted slits for eyes. This illustrator is an insider to the Asian culture, 
and this book is on several multicultural lists and recommended by one of the outstanding 
authorities on insiders versus outsiders. Can this researcher disagree with the experts? 
Maybe not, but she will. The last book will be removed from the collection because the 
entire book depicts the Asian culture in such a way as to perpetuate negativism towards 
that culture by young readers. 




23 

30 



The question of whether insiders or outsiders should write or illustrate for other 
cultures did not pose a problem in this study, with the exception of five titles. In the 
majority of the titles analyzed, if you did not know the ethnic background of the writer or 
illustrator, it would have no effect on how the children would react to the books. There is 
a great debate going on as to whether authors should write about cultures other than their 
own, but in this study it did not seem to make a difference in the quality and realism of the 
stories. 

The family was important to the story in the majority of the stories where the 
family was included, and the trend seems to be that all cultures have all kinds of families. 
All of the cultures depicted had traditional, one-parent, and extended families. It was 
surprising to find so many titles (26 or 1 7%) without a family in evidence, although the 
text of the stories would allude to the fact that the family was there, just not seen. 

With the exception of the five instances mentioned above, the roles of the 
characters were handled in a positive way. There were several instances where the 
occupation of the parent in the family, especially the female one-parent family, was still 
stereotyped. The mother took in washing or cleaned houses. Although some of these 
stories were set in the past, some were modern. However, this was usually only 
mentioned in passing, and did not take away from the positive influence of the stories. 

In analyzing the settings of the stories, it was found that the majority of the stories 
took place in a rural setting in a non-integrated environment. Seventy of the settings 



24 




ERIC 



The final conclusion of the researcher is that the objectives of the study were met. 
The characters in the majority of the titles were realistic and little stereotyping was found. 
The question of insider versus outsider was not the great dilemma that the research led 
one to believe. The diversity of the picture book collection of the Robert Fulton 
Elementary library is not what it should be in order to meet the needs of the student body. 
If the school is predominently African American, than the collection of the library should 
reflect that fact. 



Further Research 

The diversity of the United States continues to change and if the libraries and 
librarians want to have a collection that reflects that diversity, they will have to carefully 
make selections that are not only about a culture, but are the best possible literature for 
that culture. 

Therefore, more research needs to be done in the area of insider versus outsider 
authors of all literature for young children and young adults and data needs to be 
researched on the number of multicultural books published each year. If one- third of the 
population is minority, than one-third of the books published should be about minorities. 




25 

32 



APPENDIX A: CODING FORM 



CHARACTERISTIC WORKSHEET FOR CONTENT ANALYSIS OF THE 
CULTURAL DIVERSITY OF ROBERT FULTON’S PICTURE BOOK COLLECTION 



1. TITLE 

2. AUTHOR 

INSIDER? OUTSIDER? 

3. ILLUSTRATOR 

INSIDER? OUTSIDER? 



4. CHARACTERS MAIN 





AF.-AM. . 


HISP. 


N. AM. 


ASIAN AM. 


WHITE 


5. 


CHARACTERS — 


INCIDENTAL 










AF.-AM. . 


HISP. 


N. AM. 


ASIAN AM. 


WHITE 


6. 


IS THE FAMILY IMPORTANT TO THE STORY 9 _ 


YES 


NO 



7. WHAT TYPE OF FAMILY IS PORTRAYED 9 

TRADITIONAL ONE PARENT( FEMALE MALE) EXTENDED 

8. HOW ARE ROLES AND OCCUPATIONS HANDLED? 

POSITIVELY STEROTYPICAL 

9. WHAT IS THE SETTING OF THE STORY 9 

—URBAN —SUBURBAN RURAL INTEGRATED NON-INTEGRATED 

10. ARE THE ILLUSTRATIONS REALISTIC AND BELIEVABLE 9 

YES NO SOMEWHAT 

11. IN WHAT MANNER IS THE HERITAGE OF THE RACIAL GROUP PORTRAYED 9 

POSITIVELY NEGATIVELY NOT AT ALL 

12 WHAT EFFECT WILL THE BOOK HAVE ON THE SELF-IMAGE OF THE READER 9 
POSITIVE NEGATIVE 



26 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



33 



WORKS CITED 



Aronson, Marc. 1995. A mess of stories. (Multiculturalism and children’s literature). 
The Horn Book Magazine 71 (March- April): 163-168. 

Bekkedal, Takla K.. 1973. Content analysis of children’s books. Library Trends 11 
(October): 109-126. 

Bishop, Rudine Sims. 1991. Evaluating books by and about African Americans. IN: 

The Multicolored mirror . Fort Atkinson, Wisconsin: Highsmith Press. 

. 1994. Books from parallel cultures: “Let our rejoicing rise.” 

The Horn Book Magazine 70 (September-October): 562-568. 

. 1994. Books from paralleled cultures. “What’s happening.” The 

Horn Book Magazine 70 (January-February): 105-09. 

1994. Kaleidoscope . Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers 

of English. 

Bruchac, Joseph. 1995. All our relations. (Multiculturalism and children’s books). The 
Horn Book Magazine 71 (March- April): 158-162. 

Campbell, Patty. 1994. The sand in the oyster. (White children’s book authors on 
multiculture topics). The Horn Book Magazine 70 (July- August): 491-496. 

Cooper, Ilene. 1992. The African American Experience in picture books. Booklist 88 
(February 1): 1036-7. 

. 1994. African American families in picture books. Booklist 90 

(February 15): 1095. 

Creany, Anne Drolett, and Others. 1993. Representation of culture in children’s picture 
books. (Speech/conference paper). Rochester, NY: International Visual Literacy 
Association. 



BEST COPY AVAIt.AF” F 



27 



Dale, Doris Cruger. 1989. Content analysis: A research methodology for school library 
media specialists. School Library Media Quarterly 18 (Fall). 45-6. 

Decter, Midge. 1991. Epluribus nihil: Multiculturalism and Black children (New York 
state). Commentary 92 (September): 25-9. 

DuMont, Rosemary Ruhig, Buttlar, Lois, and Caynon, William. 1994. Multiculturalism 
in libraries . Wesport, CT: Greenwood Press. 

Edmonds, Leslie. 1986. The treatment of race in picture books for young children. 

Book Research Quarterly (Fall): 30-41. 

Fish, James. 1992. Responding to cultural diversity: A library in transition. Wilson 
Library Bulletin 66 (February): 34-7. 

Ford, Michael Thomas. 1994. The cult of multiculturalism: (Children’s books). 
Publisher’s Weekly 241 (July 18): 30-3. 

Hemphill, Carol T. “Multicultural representation in children’s picture books: 

Comparing two generations.” Masters Research Paper at Kent State University. 
(July 1993). 

Hirschfelder, Arlene B.. 1993. Native American literature for children and young 
adults. Library Trends 41 (Winter): 414-433. 

Howard, Elizabeth Fitzgerald. 1991. Authentic multicultural literature for children: An 
author’s perspective. IN: The Multicolored mirror . Fort Atkinson, Wisconsin: 
Highsmith Press. 

Johnson, Diane. 1990. Telling tales . New York, NY. Greenwood Press. 

Jones, Malcolm. 1991. It’s a not so small world. (Multiculturalism in children’s 
literature). Newsweek 118 (September 9): 64-5. 

Kalisa, Beryl Graham. 1990. Africa in picture books: Portrait or preconception. School 
Library Journal 36 (February): 36-7. 

Kruse, Ginny Moore. 1992. No single season: Multicultural literature for all children. 
Wilson Library Bulletin 66 (February): 30-3. 

Kurtz, Jane. 1996. Multicultural children’s books: The subtle tug of war. School 
Library Journal (February): 40-1. 




28 



35 



MacCann, Donnarae and Richard, Olga. 1987. Picture books for children. Wilson 
Library Bulletin 61 (February): 46-7. 

. 1989. Picture books for children: (Picture 

books featuring Black American and Caribbean characters, interview with 
Frederick Woodard). Wilson Library Bulletin 63 (April): 92-3. 

. 1991. Picture books about Blacks: (An 

interview with Opal Moore). Wilson Library Bulletin 65 (April): 92-3. 

. 1993. Picture books and Native Americans 

(An interview with Naomi Caldwell-Wood). Wilson Library Bulletin 67 
(February): 30-4+ . 

MacCann, Donnarae and Woodard, Gloria, eds. 1977. Cultural conformity in books 
for children: Further readings in racism . Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press. 

McElmeel, Sharon L.. Toward a real multiculturalism: Why aren’t there more good 
books showing the faces of the real America? School Library Journal 39 
(November): 50. 

McMahon, Rebecca, Saunders, DeLaura, and Bardwell, Tracey. 1996. Increasing 
young children’s cultural awareness with American Indian literature. Childhood 
Education 73 (Winter): 105-09. 

Norton, Donna E.. 1983. Through the eves of a child: An introduction to children’s 
literature . Columbus, OH: Merrill. 

Pilger, Mary Anne. 1992. Multicultural projects index: Things to make and do to 
celebrate festivals, cultures, and holidays around the world . Englewood, 
Colorado: Libraries Unlimited, Inc.. 

Rochman, Hazel. 1993. Against borders: Promoting books for a multicultural world . 
Chicago, IL: American Library Association. 

. 1995. Against borders. (Multiculturalism and children’s literature). 

The Horn Book Magazine 71 (March-April): 144-157. 

Salvadore, Maria. 1995. Making sense of our world. (Multiculturalism and children’s 
literature). The Horn Book Magazine 71 (March-April): 229-232. 

Seto, Thelma. 1995. Multiculturalism is not Halloween. (Multiculturalism and 

children’s literature). The Horn Book Magazine 71 (March-April): 169-174. 




29 



Smith, Karen Patricia. 1993. Introduction to multicultural children’s literature. Library 
Trends 41 (Winter): 335-39. 

. 1993. The multicultural ethnic and connections to literature for 

children and young adults. Library Trends 41 (Winter): 340-353. 

Willett, Gail Pettiford. 1995. Strong, resilient, capable, and confident. 

(Multiculturalism and children’s literature). The Horn Book Magazine 71 
(March- April): 175-79. 



Yolen, Jane. 1994. An empress of thieves. The Horn Book Magazine 70 (November- 
December): 702-05. 



* 




U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Otllce of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 

RE PRODUCTION BASIS 




This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)” form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 



This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release 
form (either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). . 



O 

ERIC 



