DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 388 467 



RC 020 284 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

REPORT NO 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



Erdrich, Heidi Ellen 

Maria Tallchief. Raintree/Rivi lo ^^merican Indian 

Stories Series . 

ISBN-0-8114-6577-2 

93 

35p,; Written by scholars and designed to provide 
young students/readers with accurate accounts of the 
lives of American Indian men and women important in 
the history of their tribes. Colored illustrations 
may not reproduce adequately. 
Books (010) — Historical Materials (060) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Culture; American Indian History; 
American Indians; Biographies; Childrens Literature; 
^'^Dance; ''Temales; Theater Arts 

'^Ballet Dancers; Native Americans; Osage (Tribe); 
'^Tallchief (Maria) 



ABSTRACT 

The great American ballerina, Maria Tallchief, was 
born in 1925 in Fairfax, Oklahoma. Her mother was White and her 
father was a full-blood Osage. Her younger sister, Marjorie, also 
became a famous dancer. The Osage originally lived in western 
Missouri. They lived in lodges or tepees and were farmers and 
hunters. The U.S. Government moved them to Oklahoma in 1808. The new 
land was not good for farming, but oil was found there and the Osage 
managed the wealth from oil wisely, sharing with one another. Maria's 
grandmother introduced her to Osage dance, and later Maria took piano 
and ballet lessons. She studied under one of the greatest ballet 
te^^chers, Bronislava Nijinska, and toured with the Ballet Russe. She 
became the prima ballerina for the New York City Ballet Company and 
the American Ballet Theater, and cofounded the Chicago City Ballet 
with her sister. Maria was given an honor name by the Osage tribe, 
was awarded the Indian Achievement Award by the Council of Fire, 
became a member of the Council of Fire, spoke to American Indian 
groups about Indians and the arts, and took part in programs at 
various universities to educate students about Native Americans. 
Contains many illustrations and a timeline of Maria's life. (TD) 



Vf Vf Vf Vf Vr Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vr Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vc Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vf Vr Vf Vf Vf 

Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
Vf from the original document. 

VtVtVfVt^V:VfVfVtVtVfVcVfVfVfVfVfVfVcVcVfVfVfVfVfVfVfVfV'VfVfVfVfVfVfVfVfVfVfVfVfVfVfVfVfVfVfVfVfVf,WfVfVfVfVfVfVfV^ 



CO 
CO 



■ PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THiS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER {ERiCl. ' 




U.S. OCPARTUENT OF EDUCATION 
OttiC* Ot EduCStionat ReMSrd and impiovemem 

EDuCATiONAL RESOURCES iNrO«MATrON 

/CENTER (EPrCj 
This document has Dee" feo'OduceO »s 
f«ceiv«d trom the oefion o' o»g»n<iai on 
originating it 
C7 Minof Changes have oeen "^ade lo -rr^o'ovp 
-eoroduction Qua>i|y 

• Points ot view 0« Otxmons Staled inihiSdOCu 

Tient 00 not oecesMfiiv 'eo'«s«'^t o"": a" 
OERt POSiliOn o» poticv 



1 



ERIC 



CM 

o ' 
CM 

o 



zm BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



To the Reader. 



Our purpose in creating this series is lo provide young readers with 
accurate accounts of the lives of Native American men and v^omen 
important in the history of their tribes. The stories are written by 
scholars, including American Indians. 

Native Americans are as much a part of North American life today 
as they were one hundred years ago. Even in times past, hidians were 
not all the same. Not all of them lived in teepees or wore feather 
warbonnets. They were not all warriors. Some did fight against the 
white man, but many befriended him. 

Whether patriot or politician, athlete or artist, Arapaho or Zuni, 
the story of each person in this series deserves to be told. Whether 
the individuals gained distinction on the battlefield or the playing field, 
in the courtroom or the classroom, they have enriched the heritage and 
historv' of all Americans. It is hoped that those who read their stories 
will realize that many different peoples, regardless of culture or colon 
have played a part in shaping the United States and Canada, in making 
both countries what they are today. 

Herman J. Viola 
General Editor 
Author o\' E.xplorinti the Wcsi 
and other volumes on the W est 
and N;Ui\e Americans 



3 



(;enkral kditor 

Herman J. Viola 

Author of E.xpioriny, ihc Wcsi and other volumes on the Wesi 
and Native Americans 

MANA(;iN(; EDITOR 

Robert M. Kvasnicka 

Coeditor of ffw Commissioners oChuitan Affairs. IS24-f^77 
Coedilor oi' fnJian-Whiic Rciaiions. A Pcrsisicni Paradox 

MANLSCRin KDITOR 

Eric Newman 

PROJECT mana(;er 

Joyce Spicer 

PRODUCTION 

Jack Re ic hard 
Scott Melcer 



Published by Steck- Vaughn 1993 

Copyright © 1993 Pinnacle Press, Inc., doing business as Rivilo Books 

All rights reserved. No pan of this book may be reproduced or utili/xd 
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval 
system, without permission in writing from the Publisher, hiquiries 
should be addressed to Steck-Vaughn Company, P.O. Box 26015. 
Austin. TX 78755. 

Printed and bound in the United Slates. 

12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 WO 98 97 96 95 94 93 

Library of Congress Catalo^in^-in-Publication Data 

Erdrich. Heidi FUen. 

Maria Tallchief / text by Heidi Ellen Erdrich; illustrations by 
Rick Whipple. 

p. cm. — (American Indian stories) 
''A Rivilo book." 

Summary: Describes the life of the American ballerina and 
descendant of the Osage tribe. 

ISBN 0-81 14-6577-2 — ISBN 0-81 14-4()99>0 (soft cover) 
1. Tallchief. Maria - Juvenile literature. 2. Dancers 
United Slates Biography — Juvenile literature. 3. Osage 
Indians - Biography — Juvenile literature. 1 1. Tallchief. Maria. 
2. Dancers. 3. Osi'^.,e Indians — Biogiaphy. 4. Indians of North 
America — Biography.] I. Whipple. Rick. ill. II. Title. 
III. Series. 

GVI785.T32E73 1993 
792.8^()28*092 — dc20 

I HI 4 92-12256 

(^IP AC 



MARIA 

TALLCHIEF 

Text by Heidi Ellen Erdrich 
Illustrations by Rick Whipple 

A RIVILO BOOK 




RAINTREE 

o 'BEST COPY AVAILABLE W^^Wm 



1' { H I . 1 H V K *^ 



The great American ballerina Maria Tallchief came from 
the American Indian tribe called the Osage. An old Osage 
story says that the people of the stars in the sky came down 
and met the people of the earth. The two kinds of people 
became one. They were called 'The People of the Middle 
Waters/' another name for the Osage. 

Maria also came from two kinds of people. Her mother, 
Ruth Mary Porter, was white. Her father, Alexander Tall 
Chief, was a full-blood Osage. 





Maria was born in 1925 in Fairfax, Oklahoma. Her birth 
name was Elizabeth Marie Tall Chief. Her family called her 
Betty Marie. She had a younger sister, Marjoric, who also 
grew up to be a famous dancer. They were members of two 
important Osage families, the Big Hearts and the Tall 
Chiefs. Many tribal leaders had come from those families. 



D 



When the white people came, the Osage were living in 
villages located along the Little Osage River in what is now 
western Missouri. Several families shared one long house, 
or lod ic. These lodges were made from a hickory-tree 
framework covered with tree bark and mats. The women 
made the mats from the stems of cattail plants that they 
collected from marshy areas. Some families lived in tepees, 
which were cone-shaped tents. Tepees had a frame of 
wooden poles. The frame was covered with animal hides. 



The Osage were tarmers and hunters. They planted com, 
- ' beans, and squash for food. They also grew gourds that they 
used for containers and musical instruments. The forest 
provided wild berries and nuts to eat. It also provided plants 
for medicines to cure the sick. When meat was needed, the 
Osage men hunted with bows and arrows. They started 
using guns to hunt after the white people came. When an 
Indian killed a bison, no part of the animal was wasted. 
The meat fed many people. The bison hides were used 
to make blankets, robes, and other clothing. Bison ribs 
were even used to make sleds for Osage children to use 
in the snow. 



In 1808 the United States govemn^^nt began buying land 
from the Osage. The government moved them to an area 
that is now the state of Oklahoma. 

Their new home was called the Osage Reservation. The 
land was not good for farming, but oil was found there in 
1896. Suddenly, the Osage were very rich. The tribal leaders 
were wise in the way they managed the oil money. The 
Osage shared the money with one another so that no one in 
the tribe had to be poor. 

Over the years, the Osage came to live like the white 
people. When they became wealthy, some Osage bought 
fancy cars and moved into big houses. Their lives were 
much like those of rich white people. Sometimes, however, 
an old tepee or a long house stood in the backyard of a 
fine house. 



Maria's family lived in a brick house. Only English was 
spoken in Maria's home. Their Indian grandmother, Eliza 
Big Heart Tall Chief, lived in the house, too. She made 
certain that Maria and Marjorie learned about the Osage 
and the way they lived before the whites came. She told 
them old tribal stories of magical spirit birds who spoke 
to the Osage. 



Grandma Eliza took the little girls to Osage dances. The 
Osage loved to dance. Before they learned about the white 
people's religion, they danced to honor their great spirit 
Vvah'Kon-Tah, the giver of life. They also danced to 
celebrate important events in their lives. Because the dances 
reminded the Osage of the lime before the whites came, the 
government thought dancing made the Indians difficult to 
control. The dances were outlawed for a time, but now they 
are performed on special occasions. 



Al the dances, Maria saw men and women dressed in 
colorlul costumes made from beads, feathers, and animal 
skins. She heard the high "falsetto" singing and t!ie beat of 
the drum. The drumbeats and the dance steps sounded Hke 
heartbeats. After she got home from the dances. Maria tried 
to make Osage music on the family piano. 

Maria had a great talent for all musical things. Mer mother 
wanted her to be a concert pianist, so Maria took piano 
lessons. Maria liked playing the piano, but she also was 
interested in dancing. A dance teacher came to the Tall 
Chiefs' home to give the girls ballet lessons. Maria and 
Marjorie dressed up in black lights and pink ballet slippers 
for their lessons. They looked like twins with their black 
hair, dark eyes, and oval faces. Their teacher taught them 
how to dance ''on points" — that is. on their toes. Soon they 
were whirling around the room, dancing on the tips 
of their toes. 

Grandma Eliza was glad that the girls liked to dance. 
Even though they were not learning Osage dances, she knew 
that any kind of dancing would make their bodies strong. 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



When Maria was about eight years old. her family moved 
to Los Angeles, California. Her parents thought that the 
music and dance teachers would be better there. At first, 
the children at Maria's new school made fake "Indian war 
whoops" and teased her about her American Indian last 
name. Maria didn't let the teasing bother her. She was happy 
because she had a new dance teacher. 

Maria and Marjorie went to Ernest Belcher's dance 
studio. There they learned acrobatics, tap, and Spanish and 
ballet dancing. On the first day, Maria and Marjorie jumped 
about and twirled on tiptoe. The teacher was very upset. He 
said that the girls' feet were too small for dancing on their 
toes. They could have been injured for life. He made the 
girls promise not to dance on their toes until they were 
older. They worked very hard practicing other dance steps 
every day. Maria also spent a great deal of time practicing 
piano. With school, piano, and dance, Maria was a very 
busy little girl. ^ 



Finally, the girls got the chance to dance for an audience. 
Because they were Osage, the teacher had them do what 
was supposed to be an "Indian" dance. It was nothing like 
the real Osage dances Maria had seen. There were no gourd 
rattles or eagle-bone whistles to make the music. The girls 
did not sway slowly with pride like the Osage women. 
Instead, they jumped around like wild things. Still, it was 
better than not dancing on stage at all. 

17 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Maria was twelve before she got to wear a tutu, a ballet 
dancer's short dress. She wore it to pejform in a recital. 
The tutu was made of yellow net and was very soft. Maria 
floated across the stage in her lovely dress as free as a 
butterfly. This recital was special for another reason. In it, 
Maria was able to reveal both her talents. She danced for 
half of the program and played the piano for the other half. 

Although she continued to study piano, Maria thought 
more and more about ballet. When she was about fifteen, 
she had a chance to study with one of the greatest ballet 
teachers. Bronislava Nijinska. Maria called her Madame. 
Madame was the sister of the great Russian ballet dancer 
Vaslav Nijinsky. 

Maria worked harder than ever for the teacher she liked 
so well. Her dancing became so good that she was asked to 
perform in a special show of Madame 's. 

Under a star-filled sky, many people watched Maria dance 
at the Hollywood Bowl, a large outdoor theater. She was 
performing in the Chopin Concerto, a ballet created by 
Madame. 

As the music flowed, Maria moved gracefully across the 
stage. Then, suddenly, she slipped! It was the worst thing a 
dancer could do. Maria kept on dancing and tried not to cry. 
As soon as she finished, Madame comforted her. Madame 
reminded Maria that her slip was not the end of the world. 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Maria continued lo dance. Playing the piano was 
important. Dancing, however, was something she absolutely 
needed. Maria decided thai she really wanted to be a 
professional dancer and not a pianist. 

After Maria graduated from Beverly Hills High School, 
she went to New York City. She quickly got a lucky break. 
A man who had seen her perform in Los Angeles was 
looking for dancers to join the ballet company known as the 
Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo, for a tour of Canada. He hired 
Maria for the "corps de ballet." a large group of dancers. In 
this group, young girls can gain the experience necessary to 
become outstanding dancers. 

In Canada, Maria's life was very exciting. She studied 
many small parts, dancing them over and over to make them 
perfect. Maria learned the dances so that she would be able 
to perform them in case something happened to the star 
ballerina. Maria knew that she was ready to perform the 
leading role. It seemed to her. however, that she would 
never get a chance to do it. 

Finally, the time came when she was needed for the lead. 
Maria danced so well that everyone said she was going lo 
be a great ballerina. She began to get better pails to dance. 
The Ballet Russe then asked her lo stay with the group 
permanently. 



All her life Maria had been called Betty Marie Tall Chief. 
The people who ran the Ballet Russe wanted her name to 
sound more like those of the great European ballet dancers. 
She agreed to change her. first name to Maria. She was 
proud of her Osage last name, and she would not change it. 
Instead, she made it one word: Tallchief. 

It was thrilling for an American Indian to dance ballet as 
well as the Europeans did. Newspaper writers called Maria 
"The Beautiful Dancing Osage Princess." Maria thought this 
was strange because the Osage did not have princesses. 




In May 1943, Maria danced the Chopin Concerto again. 
This was the dance that Maria had slipped in years before. 
This time, however, she danced it perfectly. At last, she had 
shown everyone her best. After the performance, the 
audience cheered loudly. The other young dancers gave 
Maria an armful of red roses. 



Then George Balanchine came to work \\ ith the Ballet 
Russe. Balanchine was famous as a teacher and as a 
choreographer, the person who arranges the dances. He 
made Maria work harder than e\'er. She enjoyed working 
for Balanchine. She danced with more grace and feeling 
whenever he was nearb\'. 

Balanchine trained Maria to dance the part of a fairy in a 
ballet called The Fairy\s Kiss. Maria danced the role so well 
that people cheered enthusiastically. Maria had prov en that 
she was as good as the European dancers. 





Opera Company. Maria's fans threw Oowers on stage at the 
end of her dances and sent her gifts. People said that Maria 
made magic when she danced. Balanchine helped her dance 
even better by creating dances for her that showed off her 
special abilities. 

When Maria and Balanchine returned to the United States, 
they worked with the Ballet Society. This oruani/.ation 
eventually became the New Yoik City Ballcn Company. 
Maria was the company's prima, or first, ballerina. 



In 1949 Balanchine asked Maria to dance the starring role 
in The FirehircL the story of a magical creature, half bird 
and half woman. It was a difficult part to dance, but Maria 
remembered the stories her grandmother had told her about 
a time when spirit birds spoke to the Osage. Maria tried to 
capture the feeling of this magic in her performance. 

Dressed in the colors of a flame, Maria leapt across the 
stage. Her red and orange feathered dress glowed as she 
soared and spun. Gold dust on her arms and shoulders 
shimmered like fire. To those who watched hen it was as if 
she really were a firebird. They knew they were seeing one 
of the greatest dancers of all time. 




the Swans. In The Nutcracker, Maria had one of the most 
difficult parts a ballerina can dance — the Sugar Plum Fairy. 
In these roles and many others, she proved to be worthy of 
being known all over the woHd as the first Native American 
prima ballerina. 






ERIC 



QEST COPY AVAILABLE 



I.-. 



Another great honor was given to Maria by her own tribe. 
The Osage staged a great celebration for her in Fairfax in 
1953. The tribe danced, made speeches, and sang Osage 
songs. They had a feast of Indian foods such as com soup 
and fry bread. Maria dressed in Osage clothes. She wore a 
crown decorated with beads that formed beautiful designs. 

The Osage had always been a proud, dignified, and 
courageous people. They gave Maria an honor name. This 
was a name her tribe would call her because she made them 
proud. Her grandmother selected the name Wa-Xthc- 
Thonha, which means Woman of Two Standards or of Two 
Worlds. This name showed that Maria belonged to both the 
Osage and the white worlds. Maria had been cheered many 
times before. The best time, however, was when the Osage 
cheered and clapped for Woman of Two Worlds. 

True to her new name, Maria did not forget the American 
Indian world while she danced in the white world. In 1957 
she perfonned with an Iroquois man named Tom Two 
Arrows. Wearing a tribal costume and a headdress made 
from porcupine quills, he performed dances from his tribe. 
Wearing a pink satin tutu and a jeweled crown, Maria 
danced ballet. Together Maria and Tom showed that 
American Indians could keep the old ways alive and still 
be part of the larger world. 



In 1960 Maria joined the American Ballet Theatre as its 
prima ballerina. Eventually she returned to the New York 
City Ballet. In 1966 Maria decided to hang up her ballet 
slippers and retire. She had toured and danced all over the 
world with great success. Now, she felt she should spend 
time at home with her family. Her marriage to Balanchine 
had not lasted. Her second husband was Henry D. Paschen, 
Jr. They had a daughter, Elise Maria. 

In 1967 an Indian organization called the Council of Fire 
awarded Maria the Indian Achievement Award. She also 
was made a member of the council. Maria spoke to 
American Indian groups about Indians and the arts. She also 
took part in programs at various universities to educate 
students about Native Americans. Maria continued her 
association with the dance world as well. For several years, 
she was the artistic director for the Lyric Opera Ballet in 
Chicago. In 1980 Maria and Marjorie founded the Chicago 
City Ballet. Marjorie, too, had enjoyed great success. Her 
career, however, had been centered largely in Europe. She 
danced with the de Cuevas Company and with the Paris 
Opera Ballet. 

Betty Marie, Wa-Xthe-Thonba, Woman of Two Worlds, 
Prima Ballerina — these names all belong to a woman 
known around the world as one of the greatest dancers ever: 
Maria Tallchief. 




ERIC 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



HISTORY OF MARIA TALLCHIEF 



1925 

1934 
1942 

1943 

1946 
1947 



1949 
1952 

1953 
1955 
1956 
1959 
1960 

1966 
1967 
1980 



Maria Tallchief was bom Elizabeth Marie Tall 
Chief on January 24, in Fairfax, Oklahoma. 

Maria's family moved to Los Angeles, California. 

Maria graduated from Beverly Hills High School 
and joined the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo. 

Maria danced her first major part with the 
Ballet Russe, 

Maria mairied George Balanchine. 

Maria and Balanchine left the Ballet Russe. They 
joined the Ballet Society, which later became the 
New York City Ballet. Maria became its leading 
dancer. 

Maria enjoyed great success in The Firebird, 

Maria danced Swan Lake. Her marriage to 
Balanchine ended. 

Oklahoma declared June 29 Maria Tallchief Day. 

Maria toured Europe. 

Maria married Henry D. Paschen, Jr. 

Maria's daughter, Elise Maria, was bom. 

Maria toured the Soviet Union and joined the 
American Ballet Theatre. 

Maria retired to spend time with her family. 

Maria received the Indian Achievement Award. 

Maria and her sister, Marjoric Tallchief, 
established the Chicago City Ballet. 




AMERICAN INDIAN STORIES 



. "These books are highly recommended and display rri^T; , ; 
understanding of American Indian ciiltiircs' than niany ." ."^^^s" 
■ ■ — American Indian Education Commission 




This series of multicultural biographies provides young readers 
■ ■ with an opportunity to study the lives and achievemenfso^ 
notable Native American^^^ 
Sl^'prinaary "sources enhancF^ and appfecj^^^f _, 

b^?"the uniqueness and vmety' of customs present within eacrfmbe 



tHitles'ih the Series 

■"Leronimo 



'.Carlos Montezuma 





tiohn Koss^ 
^ting Bui 



,^i^di1atailchief 
faijlmTHorpe^$7-, 
^arah \A/lnnemucca 




I- 

$•1 

O ^PUBLISHERS 



35 



BEST COPY AVAILABU 



