DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 422 882 



IR 019 023 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 



SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Wang, Deming D.; Lee, Richard C. ; Chen, Chunju 
The Role of Distance Education and Major Factors That 
Influence Minority Adults* Participation in Educational 
Programs . 

Wisconsin Univ. System, Milwaukee. Inst, on Race and 
Ethnicity. 

1998-00-00 

7p . ; In: Distance Learning * 98 . Proceedings of the Annual 
Conference on Distance Teaching & Learning (14th, Madison, 
WI, August 5-7, 1998); see IR 018 976. 

Information Analyses (070) -- Reports - Research (143) -- 

Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

♦Access to Education; *Adult Education; Continuing 
Education; *Distance Education; Educational Needs,* 
Educational Technology; *Equal Education; *Ethnic Groups; 
Higher Education; Literature Reviews; *Minority Groups; 
National Surveys; Policy Formation; Statistical Analysis; 
Student Educational Objectives 
National Center for Education Statistics 



ABSTRACT 



This paper describes a study partially supported by a grant 
from the Institute on Race and Ethnicity of the University of Wisconsin (UW) 
System. The study was designed to examine the major factors, including 
distance teaching and learning and relevant technological innovations, that 
affect adult education for ethnic minorities; for the purpose of this study, 
ethnic minorities include all African, Asian, Hispanic, and Native American 
adults. Data sets provided by the National Center for Education Statistics 
(NCES) were used to accomplish three objectives: (1) to investigate the 

extent and scope to which the minority groups are served by adult educational 
establishments, including the specific needs and existing barriers for 
minority adults to obtain distance education; (2) to examine the role and 
contributions of distance teaching and learning and relevant educational 
technologies in facilitating the access of adult education by ethnic minority 
groups; and (3) to stimulate further research interest and draw broader 
attention by sharing the initial results with scholars, policy-makers, and 
the general public, regarding issues about distance education, adult 
education, and minority education. Charts and graphics presenting research 
results are not included. (Author/DLS) 



******************************************************************************** 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 

******************************************************************************** 




^3 ED 422 882 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

□ This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 

* Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



Dean 



The Role of Distance Education and 
Major Factors That Influence Minority Adults’ 
Participation in Educational Programs 

Deming D. Wang, Ph.D. 

Director of Computer and Media Services 
Alma College 

Richard C. Lee, Ph.D. 

of Graduate Studies, Continuing Education and Summer Session 
University of Wisconsin- White water 



‘•PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE TH^S 

material has been granted by 
C.H. Olgren 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC). 



Chunju Chen, Ph.D. 
Director, Institutional Research 
University of Wisconsin- Whitewater 



Abstract 

This study has been partially supported by a grant from the Institute on Race and Ethnicity 
of the UW System for examining the major factors, including distance teaching and learning 
and relevant technological innovations, that affect adult education for ethnic minorities. 

Data sets provided by the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) were used to 
accomplish three objectives: First, to investigate the extent and scope to which the minority 
groups are served by adult educational establishments, including the specific needs and 
existing barriers for minority adults to obtain education; Second, to examine the role and 
contributions of distance teaching and learning and relevant educational technologies in 
facilitating the access of adult education by ethnic minority groups; Finally, to stimulate 
further research interest and draw broader attention by sharing the initial results with 
scholars, policy-makers, and the general public regarding issues about distance education, 
adult education and minority education. 

Background and Introduction 

During the years of 1991, 1993, 1995, and 1996, the National Center for Education Statistics 
(NCES) collected data through a series of national household education surveys (NHES), of 
which, an important dimension concerns the various activities, facilities, and environment of 
adult learning. In the surveys conducted in 1991 and 1995 respectively, components were 
added focusing on a wide range of adult education experiences. A collection of rich 
information was gathered from nationally sampled participants and non-participants of 
different adult education programs. 

NHES is a telephone survey of the noninstitutionalized civilian population of the United 
States. Households were selected by using random-digit-dialing methods, and data were 
collected using computer-assisted telephone interviewing. The sample size is 25,137 cases for 
1991 survey and 78,888 cases for 1995 survey, involving both participants and non- 
participants of adult education programs. One of the goals for NHES survey was to ensure a 
reliable estimates for subdomains defined by race and ethnicity. Estimates by race and 
ethnicity were key in developing the sample size. Blacks and Hispanics were sampled at 



RJC 



2 



The Role of Distance Education ❖ 423 



✓ 



higher rates to improve the reliability of estimates for these groups (NCES report. May 
1997). 

In recent years, fast technology advancement has made distance education and technology- 
assisted instructions an unavoidable phenomenon in all aspects of education programs, 
including adult education. In 1995, NCES added a group of questions which are directly 
asked the survey participants about whether they learned knowledge or preformed specific 
tasks by using computer instruction, by interactive video instruction without an instructor 
present; or by receiving instructions through telephone. In addition, the NHES survey 
coordinators informed the researchers of this article that they realize the increasing 
importance of distance education in adult education. In the NCES's planned 1999 NHES 
survey, distance education related questions will become a major section. 

Linking the distance learning methods the survey participants adopted, the available data 
sets contain detailed rich information of the subjects relevant to this study, including ethnic 
background, age, gender, family economic status, the whole family's education related 
issues, type of adult education programs participated, courses taken, instructional methods 
involved (computer-assisted, video instruction, etc.), approaches used to participate (by 
directly going to campus of an institution, or through certain kind of distance education 
facilities, such as by mail, radio /television, and other means /technologies), intensity of the 
study (part/full time and attending frequency), reasons for taking the course(s), specific 
barriers to participation in adult education, and results/ achievements. We have obtained 
permission from NCES to use the data in this study. 

Research Results 



Relevant Literatures 

An extensive literature review reveals basic patterns of current research on ethnic minorities 
and their access to education. To a large extent, most studies on ethnic minorities stress the 
changing demographic structures and the need to be aware of the developing trend and 
impact on the society. Echoes are repeated among these studies that the traditionally 
classified minority groups are playing an increasingly prominent role in national economic 
prosperity and social stability. Meanwhile, accesses to education have been inadequate for 
minorities, especially among the adults, while their actual needs are growing continually. In 
this particularly crucial area, efforts of empirical research have not kept pace in terms of both 
quantity and scope at the general level, and even less in some specific aspects, such as 
improving minority access by taking advantage of today's delivering technologies. 

Eight years ago, Jan Jackson insightfully pointed out that adult education in America is 
urgently in need of a much improved agenda as we are quickly approaching the twenty-first 
century (Jackson 1989). The society and the general public can benefit in multiple ways by 
becoming more aware of the special needs in a changing multicultural environment. It 
should be no surprise that what defined as minority groups today will together constitute 
the majority population in the foreseeable future. Meanwhile, insufficient access to 
education continues contributing to the limited job and life opportunities, consequent 
poverty, and various problems of the disadvantaged minority (Brazziel 1993; Knox 1993). 

Other related studies report that generally educational services to ethnic minorities are 
deficient and the situation is most detrimental for the adult population. The lack of a 




424 ❖ Wang, Lee, & Chen 



3 



national action to vigorously involve ethnic minorities in educational programs can be 
attributed to the low status of adult education, shortsightedness, biases or discrimination, 
and shortage of financial resources (Barrera 1994; Cassara 1991). Research findings proposed 
various challenges for the adult education programs in the United States to tackle in order to 
better serve the entire society by giving more attention to minority issues. To start with, the 
society need to realize that it serves the whole society better to replace the melting pot 
concept with cultural pluralism. Thus, persons from various backgrounds can have more 
appreciation of each other without forfeiting their cultural heritage. Accordingly, more 
cross-cultural education is necessary for all individuals to have a better understanding of 
each other's differences. Another challenge refers to the formulation and implementation of 
a national policy to provide pertinent, fundamental, and accessible educational 
opportunities for minority adults to make educational decisions and to empower 
themselves. Still another critical challenge is about establishing and maintaining dependable 
financing resources in a time of economic crisis, and so on (Cassara 1991). 

Research continues documenting strong evidence that education, especially adult education, 
may provide the key to unlock and develop the under-developed and under-utilized human 
potentials, and eventually, get out of the impasse of impoverishment and improve the 
despaired situation of powerlessness. Education is responsible and capable of responding to 
the emerging diversity of human needs and the changing world of work. Thanks to the 
invaluable resources of educational establishment, the society is blessed with all the facilities 
for effectively reaching all individuals regardless of their age, gender, economic status, and 
racial background (Jackson 1989). The remarkable penetration and expansion of distance 
education in all levels of educational institutions have continually improved the capacity of 
knowledge delivery and learning efficiency. Accelerating technological advancement has 
greatly strengthened the institution, expanding its horizons and opening new paths with 
ample resources at affordable costs. Constant educational innovations, combined with the 
continually improved campus infrastructure, promise the most optimum learning results 
with the flexibility of time, location, approach, and size of audience. The literature shows 
that this new horizon bring new promises and encouragement to adult learners. As some of 
the most recent research reveals, the non-traditional students, often the minority work force 
members, are highly motivated for degree programs provided through by distance learning 
(Manzo 1997; Parrott 1994; Portway & Lane 1994; Withrow 1997). 

There is an urgent need to gain relevant in-depth new knowledge in the most fundamental 
aspects of distance education to answer such practical questions as: Who are the current and 
prospective learners/ users of the various kinds of distance education facilities? What are 
their needs and expectations in the context of fast changing socio-economic-technical 
background? What are the trends, directions, and changes of development of course 
demands and capacity of offerings from remote sites? It is therefore both necessary and 
plausible to devote special efforts to promote minority education for the well-being of the 
whole society with a long-term commitment and sharp vision into the future. As the existing 
research indicates, there is an apparent gap between the fast development of distance 
teaching and learning systems, programs, curriculum and course offerings and a good 
understanding of the overall structure, scope, key features, and the trend of development 
and potentials instructional technology applications in remote modes of teaching and 
learning. 




The Role of Distance Education ❖ 425 



As a result of the national education goals and the concern about America's ability to 
compete in a global economy, there has been a heightened interest in enhancing and 
improving access to adult learning, with considerable amount of attention on minority 
education as a result of the dramatic demographic changes. Meanwhile, the proportion of 
public funding for education is decreasing, which makes it not necessary but imperative to 
study the role of distance education technology advancement. Next important agenda in 
order is the increasing demand for effective management of postsecondary education 
relying on information from solid empirical data for decision-making and for guidance of 
innovative teaching and learning activities. Based on the specific needs of adult learners, 
human being's teaching and learning would see the remarkable penetration and expansion 
of distance education in all levels of educational institutions. Constant educational 
innovations, combined with the continually improved campus infrastructure, promise the 
most optimum learning results with the flexibility of time, location, approach, and size of 
audience. 

Methodology 

The National Household Education Survey series contain rich information about educational 
background, language capabilities, apprenticeship, employment conditions, job related 
experience and activities, and household characteristics of the adult population. Such 
information is available and largely consistently collected in multiple years. This paper 
focuses on the traditionally under-represented minority adults and the relevance of distance 
education facilities to their access to, and success in, formal education. For the purpose of 
this study, ethnic minority include all African, Asian, Hispanic and Native American adults. 
Key variables have been carefully selected and/or constructed while the relevant cases are 
divided into subgroupings for detailed examination and comparison. 

Both descriptive and inferential statistics are employed for data analysis. Basic demographic 
characteristics are summarized using statistical charts and tables for simple presentation, 
comparison and elaboration. Factor analysis and cluster analysis are used to further explore 
the relationship among variables and to identify relevant underlying structures. In addition, 
canonical analysis are useful to examine the relationship between the two main sets of 
variables: adult education experiences and distance education facilities. A major proportion 
of the data analysis is performed using the SPSS, SAS and other statistical packages available 
on our IBM mainframe computer and workstations running the Windows version of 
applications. The results will be presented at the conference by charts and graphics. 

The principle investigators focus their research attention on four areas. First, the course- 
taking formats and learning activities of adult learners, e.g., whether they take the courses 
by mail, telephone, television, radio, newspaper, computer or interactive videos. Second, the 
reasons the adult learners decide to take the courses: to improve, advance, or keep up to 
date on their current job, to train for a new job or a new career, to improve their basic 
reading, writing, or math skills, to meet a requirement for a diploma, degree, or certificate of 
completion, or for a personal, family, social reasons, or for any other reasons. Third, the 
barriers which have kept the adult learners from participating in the required adult 
education programs: e.g. work schedule, meeting times of classes, cost of classes, location of 
classes, lack of transportation to classes, lack of child care, miscellaneous family 
responsibilities, lack of information about available classes, classes of interest are not offered, 
etc. Fourth, the types of courses they are taking: e.g., adult basic skills and general education 




426 ❖ Wang, Lee, & Chen 



5 



development preparation classes, English as a second language instruction, courses taken 
toward college degrees or vocational or technical certificate, apprenticeship programs, career 
or job-related courses, etc. 

With the focused aim on studying the role of distance education delivery approaches, the 
researchers studied the relationship between the formats the adult learners take courses and 
their specific barriers; to examine whether distance education delivery formats have any 
significant impacts on their participation patterns; to examine the relationship between their 
needs and their participation patterns; and to compare whether the variable of ethnicity has 
any significant impact on their adult education activities. 

References 

Barrera, A. (1994). Distance learning: The challenge for a multicultural society. Occasional 
Papers in Bilingual Education, 8. 

Brazziel, W. F. (1993, June). Shaping graduate education's future: Implications of demographic 
shifts for the 21st century. Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the Canadian 
Society for the Study of Higher Education, Ontario, Canada. 

Cassara, B. B. (1991, April). Multiculturalism: The Challenge to adult education in the United 
States. Paper presented at the Executive Committee Meeting of the International Council 
for Adult Education at Gothenborg, Sweden. 

Jackson, J. (1989) ACHE (Association for Continuing Higher Education) 1989 Proceedings. San 
Bernardino: California State University. 

Knox, A. B. (1993). Strengthening adult and continuing education. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass 
Publishers. 

Macias, R., & Rose, D. J. (1994, August). Wired for Knowledge. Hispanic, 7 (7), 17-18, 20, 22. 

Manzo, K. K. (1997, February). Lifestyle-friendly education: Non- traditional colleges and the 
off-campus approach. Black Issues in Higher Education, 13(26), 42-43. 

Parrott, S. (1994). Future learning: Distance education in community colleges. ERIC Digest. 

Portway, P. S. & Lane, C. (1994). Teleconferencing & distance learning. San Ramon, CA: 

Applied Business Telecommunications. 

Withrow, F. B. (1997). Technology in education and the next twenty-five years. Technological 
Horizons in Education Journal 24(11), 59-61. 

Autobiographical Sketches 

Dr. Deming Wang is currently the Director of Computer and Media Services at Alma College, 
MI. He received his doctorate from the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, with 
specialization in computer and information technology applications in the social sciences, 
statistical programming, and data management. He has over ten years of college level 




6 



The Role of Distance Education ❖ 427 



teaching experience in data analysis, research methodology, and computer systems and 
applications. 

Dr. Richard Lee is the Dean of Graduate Studies, Research and Continuing Adult Education 
and a Professor of Special Education at the current campus. He holds a Ph.D. in Special 
Education and Rehabilitative Clinical Child Psychology from the University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign (1979) and a masters of science (1976) and a bachelor of science (1975), 
both in Educational Psychology (Human Learning and Child Development emphases), from 
the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. The Dean is the author of five books and numerous 
research monographs, articles and professional papers reflecting the results of studies that 
employed a wide range of experimental and survey research methodologies. 

Dr. Chunju Chen is the Director of Institutional Research. Both her master and Ph.D. of 
Vocational and Technical Education were obtained from the University of Minnesota. Her 
daily job responsibilities involve a wide range of quantitative and quantitative research 
skills. She has presented at numerous professional conferences on adult education and 
extension. Her paper on perceptions of the priorities of Minnesota Extension Service's 
mission received the "Outstanding Research Award" from the Annual Central Region 
Research Conference of American Association for Agricultural Education. 

Address: Provost Office 

UW-Whitewater 
Whitewater, WI 53190 
Email: chenc@uwwvax.uww.edu 

Phone: (414) 472-1276 

Fax: (414) 472-1518 



ERIC 



428 ❖ Wang, Lee, & Chen 



7 



f 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title: 

CdtoFttLivcz. w D.rravc.^. 


H:AC-t/rAJC> /4 a>0 4J£, 


Author(s): a/ A~ 


Corporate Source: 




Publication Date: 


IfAJ/ l/US'-r*} W 







II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 



The sample sticker shown below will be The sampla sticker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be 

affixed to all Level 1 documents affixed to all Level 2A documents affixed to all Lave! 2B documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE, AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY, 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 


P «\® 




A 0 




J? 


<b& 




cV* 




cf 


TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




\ 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES . 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


1 




2A 




2B 



Level 1 


Level 2A 


Level 2B 




i 




i 


t 




is' 




□ 


□ 


Check here for Level 1 release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche or other ERIC archival 
media (e.g., electronic) and paper copy. 


Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche and in electronic media 
for ERIC archival collection subscribers only 


Check here for Level 2B release, permitting 
reproduction and dissemination in microfiche only 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce is granted, but no box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 



Sign 



here,-* 



O >se 

ERLC 



I hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 
to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 



Signature: * 

z/ 

Organization/Address: ^ 



44 



Organization/Address: 

UW a 



lo&t> A*' &i 3*4 



AlA'DtPjiJ M 






Printed Name/PosttiorVTitle: 



















Date: 



(over) 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

| 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significant^ more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) ' " 



Publisher/Distributor: 

Address: 8/3& 

yfi A fr/Jhr/J' Cj/ 

PriCS* eJt 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: ' 

ERIC Recessing and Reference Facility 
100 West Street, 2 nd Floor 
Laurel, Maryland 20707-3598 



O 

ERIC 

. J88 (Rev. 9/97) 

PREVIOUS VERSIONS OF THIS FORM ARE OBSOLETE 



TelepKWe: 301-497-4080 
Toll F raei 800-799-3742 
FAX 301^953-0263 
e-mail: ericfac@inet.ed.gov 
WWW: http://ericfac.piccard.csc.com 



