American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 


TRIBAL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DESIGNING 
CULTURALLY APPROPRIATE TECHNOLOGY-BASED 
SEXUAL HEALTH INTERVENTIONS TARGETING NATIVE YOUTH 

IN THE PACIFIC NORTHWEST 


Stephanie Craig Rushing, PhD, MPH, and David Stephens, BA 


Abstract: Media technologies, including the Internet, cell phones, and 
video games, offer new avenues to reach Native youth on sensitive health 
topics. Project Red Talon, a sexually transmitted disease (STD)/HIV 
prevention project that serves the 43 federally recognized tribes in Oregon, 
Washington, and Idaho, used community-based participatory research 
methods in partnership with the Northwest tribes to review existing 
technology-based interventions and generate recommendations for designing 
interventions that reflect the culture, needs, and organizational capacities 
of participating tribes and Native youth. These findings are now being 
used to guide the development of technology-based health interventions 
targeting American Indian/Alaska Native teens and young adults. 


INTRODUCTION 

The sexual and reproductive decisions of American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN or 
Native) teens and young adults are shaped by unique social norms and sexual contexts that include 
both traditional and contemporary cultural values. Influenced by years of federal policies designed 
to exterminate their populations, Native communities often view the arrival of new life favorably, 
regardless of the parent’s age. High teen pregnancy and sexually transmitted disease (STD) rates 
indicate that sexual activity in AI/AN communities starts earlier than among other American teens, 
and often occurs without the use of protective measures. Environmental factors such as poverty, 
geography, and inadequate health services further exacerbate the adverse sexual health outcomes 
that many AI/AN youth experience. 

Until quite recently, few sexual health interventions were designed for or evaluated in Indian 
Country. As a result, most Native youth do not receive sufficient reproductive health education and 
support. Media technologies like the Internet, cell phones, and video games offer new ways to bridge 


76 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

TECHNOLOGY-BASED SEXUAL HEALTH INTERVENTIONS 77 


this gap in ways that are familiar, accessible, and culturally appropriate for Native youth. Many 
approaches can be tailored to the maturity and interests of the individual, can be disseminated broadly 
regardless of geographic location, and can be privately accessed when and where the individual 
is ready (Bennett & Glasgow, 2009; Coyle, Doherty, Matthews, & Sharry, 2007; Lustria, Cortese, 
Noar, & Glueckauf, 2009; Portnoy, Scott-Sheldon, Johnson, & Carey, 2008). Media technologies 
thus hold great promise for public health practitioners seeking to reach Native youth, as vehicles 
for education and intervention related to sexual and reproductive health (Bull, Phibbs, Watson, & 
McFarlane, 2007). 

Project Red Talon has provided capacity-building assistance on STD/HIV prevention and 
surveillance to the 43 federally recognized tribes in Oregon, Washington, and Idaho for over two 
decades. In response to tribal interest, Project Red Talon surveyed over 400 Native youth on their 
media technology use and online health information seeking in 2009 (the Native Youth Media Survey), 
conducted a systematic literature review to identify available technology-based interventions, 
and facilitated a variety of community-based participatory research (CBPR) activities to generate 
recommendations for designing technology-based interventions that would best align with the 
culture, needs, and organizational capacities of tribes in the Pacific Northwest. Findings from the 
Native Youth Media Survey have been reported elsewhere in the literature (Craig Rushing, 2010; 
Craig Rushing & Stephens, 2011). This paper will share findings from the study’s literature review 
and CBPR activities. 

Community-based Participatory Research in Indian Country 

Respecting Indigenous research methods requires that communities have direct input in 
“developing and defining research practices and projects that relate to them” (p. 503), defining 
for themselves what is and what is not acceptable research (Battiste, 2008). Such a relationship 
can be achieved by using community-based participatory research (CBPR) methods that involve 
communities in selecting the scope and design of the study, the collection of data, the interpretation 
of research findings, and the dissemination of results (Minkler & Wallerstein, 2003). Additionally, 
there are several distinct benefits to using CBPR in Indian Country, including that it reflects and 
acknowledges tribal sovereignty, self-determination, and self-govemance; allows research to occur 
in circumstances where it otherwise wouldn’t; and better aligns with traditional research approaches. 
In their curriculum on Research that Benefits Native People, the National Congress of American 
Indians (2009) describes traditional research practices as: 

• based on the collective wisdom of community members, built through careful observation 
and experiences of natural patterns of life 

• learned, transmitted, and retained in the telling of stories 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

78 VOLUME 19, NUMBER 1 


• complex, interrelated, and based on diverse conditions 

• closely linked with cultural views of the world (p. 13) 

CBPR mirrors the values and strengths of many AI/AN nations, including respect for 
community processes and consensus, sincere equal partnership, and the ecological view of the 
individual as intricately linked with family and tribe. In CBPR, equal weight is given to both 
scientific and Indigenous expressions of knowledge (Cochran et al., 2008; Forster et ah, 2007), 
employing both Western and cultural lenses in the interpretation of data (Warner & Grint, 2006). 
CBPR acknowledges that “research is not culturally neutral” (p. 12), and that Indigenous knowledge 
is a necessary component of the research process (National Congress of American Indians, 2009). 
Consequently, CBPR has become an informal code of conduct for most research and surveillance 
now done in Indian Country. 

Background on Technology-based Interventions 

Media technologies, including the Internet, cell phones, and video games, are increasingly 
being used to disseminate health information and teach users new skills. To support healthy behavior 
change, research in the field suggests that technology-based interventions incorporate several 
important components, including: (a) messages that are tailored to the needs of the user; (b) features 
that enhance social support and communication; (c) content that is interactive and multimedia; (d) 
features that promote repeated use of the intervention; and, like other behavioral interventions, (e) 
content that addresses the core risk and protective factors associated with health outcomes (Craig 
Rushing, 2010; Noar, Black, & Pierce, 2009). 

Health messages can be tailored to an individual by eliciting information from the user, and 
then using that information to selectively display content in a manner that is relevant or engaging 
(Baylari & Montazer, 2009). Technology-based interventions have tailored their content using a 
variety of criteria, including users’ age, gender, race/ethnicity, sexual orientation, stage of change, 
perceived needs, and reported risk factors (Lustria et al., 2009). Tailored content can be used to 
bypass material that does not reflect the user’s individual needs, and can thus reduce intervention 
time requirements and enhance user retention (Kiene & Barta, 2006). Software and information 
technologies now make it possible to provide tailored interventions to an entire population, producing 
“mass customization” (Cobb, Graham, Bock, Papandonatos, & Abrams, 2005). Gaming research 
similarly suggests that integrated assessment tools and responsive adaptation can improve learning 
and cognition (Wilson et al., 2009). Assessment tools that provide immediate feedback give learners a 
clear understanding about how they are doing on the task, help students identify errors, and improve 
understanding and motivation to stay on task (Wilson et al., 2009). 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

TECHNOLOGY-BASED SEXUAL HEALTH INTERVENTIONS 79 


Tailoring is theoretically supported by the Transtheoretical Model (Prochaska, DiClemente, 
& Norcross, 1992). According to the model, behavior change involves progression through a series 
of predictable, though not necessarily sequential, stages. By understanding what processes are 
present at each stage, interventions can be aligned to the needs of individuals at any point along 
the continuum. Stage-based interventions have been shown to dramatically increase successful 
recruitment, retention, and completion, and promote movement through successive stages (Di Noia, 
Contento, & Prochaska, 2008). Tailoring is also supported by research in the communication and 
learning fields. Skinner and colleagues found that tailored information is more likely to be read, 
understood, perceived as personally relevant, and remembered (Skinner, Campbell, Rimer, Curry, 
& Prochaska, 1999). The literature suggests that learners experience greater success in learning 
environments that adapt to and support their individual learning orientations, and that patient 
satisfaction and care can be optimized by integrating the patient’s interests, strengths, and ideas 
into the treatment process (Baylari & Montazer, 2009; Coyle et al., 2007). As a result, computer 
tailoring has the potential to enhance both the reach and effectiveness of behavioral interventions 
(Lustria et al., 2009). 

Media technologies offer a variety of tools to instill social support and communication 
between users, including e-mail, instant messaging, text messaging, discussion boards, blogs, chat 
rooms, and social networking. The literature suggests that virtual peer-to-peer interaction can support 
healthy behavior change by creating and reinforcing positive social norms (Cobb et al., 2005; Gerber, 
Solomon, Shaffer, Quinn, & Lipton, 2007; Rhodes, 2004). Technology-based interventions are now 
being designed to facilitate sensitive conversations between adolescents and their parents, between 
adolescents and their health care providers, between peers, and between sexual partners. Virtual 
"discussions" between experts and peers can make learning a dynamic, two-way experience (Barak 
& Fisher, 2001; Baylari & Montazer, 2009). Providing expert feedback within tailored interventions 
has been shown to be more effective for helping smokers quit than providing tailored messages 
alone (Dijkstra, 2005). 

Media technologies can also incorporate a wide variety of interactive design elements, 
including graphics, animation, photos, videos, sounds, click-through modules, games, quizzes, 
surveys, polls, and links. Hypertext learning environments allow users to access multiple sources 
of information, enriching the informational experience (Bull et al., 2007). The selection, pace, 
and depth of information is controlled by the learner, meeting his or her unique educational needs 
(Coyle et al., 2007). These technologies accommodate diverse preferences and learning styles by 
presenting information in multiple ways - via text, audio, and visual elements (Ito, Kalyanaraman, 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

80 VOLUME 19, NUMBER 1 


Ford, Brown, & Miller, 2008). Several studies support the use of multimedia platforms to enhance 
learning, user satisfaction, and behavior change (Daft & Lengel, 1986; Liu, Liao, & Pratt, 2009; 
Mayer & Moreno, 1998). 

Just as seen in face-to-face treatment, the intensity and duration of technology-based 
interventions appears to be closely associated with subsequent health outcomes (Cobb et ah, 2005). 
In follow-up studies of smoking-cessation Web sites, those who successfully quit smoking logged in 
more frequently, spent more time online, and viewed more pages than those who continued to smoke 
(Cobb et ah, 2005). It is not yet kn own what frequency and intensity are needed for technology- 
based interventions to modify behavior, but repeat use is clearly an important component of such 
programs. 

To achieve this level of use, technology-based interventions must incorporate features 
that promote repetition. Retention tools (like reminder systems, personal contact with participants 
giving positive feedback, and incentives for returning—raffles, point systems, or giveaways) and 
compelling design features (like content that is new and salient, user-generated, and/or entertaining 
and interactive) have been reported by several investigators (Bull, Lloyd, Rietmeijer, & McFarlane, 
2004; Bull, Vallejos, Levine, & Ortiz, 2008). Other studies have incorporated booster sessions to 
reinforce information and maintain program effects (Bull, Pratte, Whitesell, Rietmeijer, & McFarlane, 
2009; Card & Kuhn, 2006; Metcalf et ah, 2005; Pedlow & Carey, 2004). Media interactivity has 
been found to increase user retention (Hurling, Fairley, & Dias, 2006), and gaming researchers have 
found that learner control (the ability to dictate the pace and sequence of activities), mystery (gaps 
in knowledge), and challenge can improve learning attitudes, motivation, and cognition (Wilson 
et ah, 2009). 


METHODS 

Founded in 1972, the Northwest Portland Area Indian Health Board (NPAIHB) is a tribally 
operated non-profit organization that provides health research, technical assistance, and policy 
advocacy on behalf of its member tribes. Housed within the NPAIHB’s Tribal Epidemiology Center, 
Project Red Talon works to reduce STD/HIV infections through research, surveillance, and health 
promotion practices. 

In 2005, Project Red Talon formed the Red Talon STD/HIV Coalition at the request of tribal 
health advocates to work collaboratively across Northwest tribes to reduce STDs and improve sexual 
health outcomes. Recognizing the need to provide better reproductive health education to Northwest 
teens and young adults, the group frequently reviewed mainstream STD/HIV prevention resources 
and interventions, but repeatedly found that their content did not reflect the life experiences of rural, 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

TECHNOLOGY-BASED SEXUAL HEALTH INTERVENTIONS 81 


Native youth. Interested in harnessing the privacy, reach, and customizability of technology-based 
interventions, the Red Talon STD/HIV Coalition included this research activity as an action item 
in 2009: “Identify innovative STD/HIV prevention strategies using computer-based programs and 
social networking sites; explore their possible relevance and utility in Indian Country” (Project 
Red Talon, 2009). 

To infonn the selection and development of culturally appropriate technology-based health 
sexual health interventions for youth, coalition members felt they needed to know more about 
youths’ current use of media technologies (types of technologies used, frequency and duration 
of use, preferred media features and activities) and to what extent they search online for health 
in formation (Craig Rushing & Stephens, 2011). Members were also interested in learning about 
the types of technology-based health interventions that were currently available in the published 
literature, their effectiveness, and organizational resources that would be needed to implement them. 
Members agreed that a Native Youth Media Survey and literature review would be useful activities 
to generate this information. 

To ensure human protections throughout the research process, the protocol was submitted to 
the Portland Area Indian Health Service’s Institutional Review Board (PA IHSIRB - #09-P-03) and 
Portland State University’s (PSU) Human Subjects Research Review Committee (HSRRC - #09880). 
Approval was obtained from both committees prior to data collection. Project Red Talon staff then 
worked with coalition members and tribal health educators to carry out the Native Youth Media 
Survey. Survey methods and results are reported elsewhere (Craig Rushing, 2010; Craig Rushing 
& Stephens, 2011). The literature review was simultaneously completed by Project Red Talon staff. 

Community-based participatory research (CBPR) activities took place throughout the year¬ 
long project (see Table 1). Because the study was conducted regionally, rather than with a single 
Northwest tribe, Project Red Talon staff sought input from project stakeholders multiple times in 
multiple settings, tribal coalition members, Native youth, and topical experts were all involved in 
shaping the study’s scope and design, contributed to data collection efforts, reviewed qualitative 
and quantitative data, offered recommendations for selecting and adapting technology-based 
interventions, reviewed draft reports and manuscripts, and helped disseminate study findings. This 
iterative process helped ensure resultant recommendations were relevant to the diverse needs and 
capacities of our Northwest tribes, while maintaining adherence to CBPR principles. 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 


82 VOLUME 19, NUMBER 1 


Table 1 

Research Methods 

Location, Date 

Informant Type, Demographics 

Research Activities 

Red Talon Coalition 

Meeting, Portland, OR 
January 7, 2009 

Tribal health advocates: 15 people 
(40% M, 60% F) representing 1 NW 
tribe, 5 tribal organizations, and 3 
partnering agencies. 

Finalized STD/HIV Action Plan, which 
included this research activity as an 
action item, after two prior meetings. 

January-July 2009 


Literature review 

February-March 2009 

8 community partners and topical 
experts 

Compiled survey tool, sent draft 
to community partners and topical 
experts for input and feedback 

NW tribe 

March 31, 2009 

12 youth, 3 parents 

Piloted survey tool with teens and 
their parents 

NW Indian Youth 
Conference, Spokane, WA 
April 3-5, 2009 

196 Youth: 

37% Male, 63% Female 

Collected survey data 

Red Talon Coalition 

Meeting, Seaside, OR 

April 8, 2009 

Tribal health advocates: 8 people 
(100% F) representing 2 NW tribes, 

2 NW tribal organizations, and 2 
partnering agencies. 

Participants were given copies of the 
survey and discussed potential data 
collection strategies and sites. 

NPAIHB Quarterly Board 
Meeting, Grand Ronde, OR 
April 20-23, 2009 

Delegates to the Northwest 

Portland Area Indian Health Board, 
representing 43 member tribes. 

Shared progress to date, discussed 
data collection strategies and sites. 

Tribal School A 

81 Youth, 48% male, 52% female 

Collected survey data 

Tribal School B 

28 Youth, 68% male, 32% female 

Collected survey data 

Tribal School C 

16 Youth, 44% male, 56% female 

Collected survey data 

Tribal School D 

43 Youth, 42% male, 58% female 

Collected survey data 

NPAIHB Quarterly Board 
Meeting, Tulalip, WA 

July 22, 2009 

Delegates to the Northwest 

Portland Area Indian Health Board, 
representing 43 member tribes. 

Shared progress to date, discussed 
preliminary data. 

Native STAND Youth 
Summit, Chehalis, WA 

July 27-31, 2009 

30 youth, 2 adult mentors 

Existing media interventions were 
described and demoed. Group 
discussions were used to gauge 
interest in available methods/ 
modalities. 


continued on next page 







American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 


TECHNOLOGY-BASED SEXUAL HEALTH INTERVENTIONS 83 


Table 1, Continued 

Research Methods 

Location, Date 

Informant Type, Demographics 

Research Activities 

Working with Native Youth 
training, Portland, OR 
August 11-13, 2009 

65 teachers, parents, and health 
educators 

Existing media interventions 
were described, demonstrated, 
and discussed. Small and large 
group discussions were used to 
elicit opinions and ideas about 
tech interventions and cultural 
considerations. 

November-December 2009 


Individual data reports were returned 
to participating tribes. 

Chemawa Indian Boarding 
School, Salem, OR 
November 23, 2009 

60 high school students 

Existing media interventions were 
described and demoed. Group 
activities were used to gauge interest 
in available methods/modalities. 

Adolescent Health 

Alliance, Salem, OR 
December 9, 2009 

Tribal health advocates: 35 
attendees, representing seven NW 
tribes, three Native youth treatment 
centers, one Urban Indian health 
clinic, NPAIHB, two universities, and 
three divisions of the Oregon State 
Department of Human Services. 

Participants reviewed and discussed 
survey data, technology-based 
interventions (abstracts, photos/ 
demos, and comparison charts), and 
the merits and drawbacks of various 
strategies. Attendees then prioritized 
options and offered recommendations 
for designing culturally appropriate 
interventions. 

Tribal school board 

January 20-22, 2010 

10 tribal school administrators 

Discussed school's data and strategies 
to disseminate findings. 

Adolescent Health 

Alliance, Shelton, WA 
February 24, 2010 

Tribal health advocates: 47 people 
representing 18 NW tribes, one 
Native-specific youth treatment 
center, two tribal organizations, one 
university, and two divisions of the 
Washington State Department of 
Human Services. 

Participants reviewed and discussed 
survey data, technology-based 
interventions (abstracts, photos/ 
demos, and comparison charts), and 
the merits and drawbacks of various 
strategies. Attendees then reviewed 
and refined recommendations for 
designing culturally appropriate 
interventions. 

35th annual NW Indian 
Youth Conference 

April 2010 

600 AI/AN junior and senior high 
school students 

Existing media interventions were 
described/demoed. Group discussions 
and activities were used to gauge 
interest in available methods/ 
modalities. 

NPAIHB Quarterly Board 
Meeting, Cow Creek, OR 
April 20, 2010 

Delegates to the Northwest 

Portland Area Indian Health Board, 
representing 43 member tribes. 

Shared progress to date; discussed 
priorities and recommendations 
for designing culturally appropriate 
interventions. 







American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

84 VOLUME 19, NUMBER 1 


CBPR with Tribal Coalitions 

In the Pacific Northwest, tribal coalitions serve the dual purpose of engaging tribes in 
planning and outreach, while providing direction to NPAIHB staff on desired goals and activities 
for the region as a whole. These coalitions meet at rotating locations throughout the Northwest, 
and attendance typically varies from 15-45 members. To maximize participation, meetings are 
scheduled in conjunction with other relevant tribal gatherings or trainings, and travel expenses for 
attendees are reimbursed by the NPAIHB. In 2009, the Red Talon STD/HIV Coalition merged with 
three other planning groups to create a more holistic body, forming the Northwest Native Adolescent 
Health Alliance. 

Coalition members are well aware of community norms, appropriate messages, traditional 
teachings, and effective strategies for reaching high-risk populations. As a result, they are regularly 
called upon to guide the development of educational materials produced by the NPAIHB. Meetings 
typically include a variety of partners, including tribal health advocates (health directors and 
educators, community health representatives, RNs, and youth prevention staff) and representatives 
from regional and national Indian Health Service programs, state and county Health Departments, 
Universities, and other tribal programs and partners. 

During the course of this year-long project, tribal coalition meetings were held quarterly. At 
the first two meetings, participants selected the research topic, reviewed survey instruments, and 
brainstormed data collection strategies and sites. Coalition members then administered the survey 
in their local communities, or facilitated its administration by Project Red Talon staff. 

When these activities were complete, two additional coalition meetings were convened 
to review survey data and discuss identified interventions. The first meeting had 35 attendees, 
representing seven Northwest tribes, three Native youth treatment centers, one Urban Indian Health 
clinic (NARA), two universities (Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland State University), 
and three divisions of the Oregon State Department of Human Services (HIV/STD/Tuberculosis, 
Indian Education, Alcohol and Mental Health). The second meeting was attended by 47 people 
representing 18 Northwest tribes, one Native youth treatment center, two tribal organizations (the 
NPAIHB, South Puget Intertribal Planning Agency), one university (University of Washington), 
and two divisions of the Washington State Department of Human Services (HIV/STD/Tuberculosis, 
Tobacco Prevention). 

Participants at the final two meetings discussed the merits and drawbacks of available 
intervention strategies, prioritized options in light of resultant data and community experience, 
and proposed and refined recommendations for designing culturally appropriate interventions. 
Comparison charts, demonstrations, and visual examples of available interventions were provided 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

TECHNOLOGY-BASED SEXUAL HEALTH INTERVENTIONS 85 


to support group discussion. Detailed meeting minutes were taken by Project Red Talon staff to 
capture participants’ input, and an automated response system was used at the final meeting to poll 
attendees on possible intervention designs. 

CBPR with Native Youth 

Project Red Talon staff also sought input from Native teens and young adults at several points 
throughout the study to inform the selection of technology-based interventions. Project staff piloted 
the survey tool with 10 teens and parents from a Northwest tribe, and integrated their suggestions 
before administering it regionally. Teens and young adults at all surveying sites were invited to 
participate in the distribution and collection of surveys, pens, and raffle tickets, and seemed to take 
interest in both the survey process and the findings that would emerge. 

Informal formative research was carried out with 25 high school students attending the 2009 
Native STAND Youth Summit, with 60 students attending Chemawa Indian School, a Bureau of 
Indian Education residential school, and with over 600 AI/AN junior and senior high school students 
attending the 35th annual Northwest Indian Youth Conference. At each of these gatherings, a variety 
of existing media interventions were shown or described to attendees, and interactive discussions 
and activities were used to gauge student interest. 

CBPR with Community Partners and Topical Experts 

Additionally, Project Red Talon staff consulted with community partners and topical experts 
to ensure resultant data would be useful and relevant to their work, including staff from the Indian 
Health Service’s National STD Program, Native Wellness Institute, and State Health Departments in 
Oregon and Washington. Several regional meetings were also used to infonn community stakeholders 
about the project’s progress, and to seek participants’ input and ideas. Feedback was gathered 
from 65 teachers, parents, and health educators who attended a three-day training on Working with 
Native Youth (August 11-13,2009). Tribal delegates to the NPAIHB and members of the NPAIHB’s 
Behavioral Health Committee were consulted quarterly throughout the year-long project. 

Literature Review on Technology-based Sexual Health Interventions 

The literature review was carried out by study co-authors Stephanie Craig Rushing, Director 
of Project Red Talon at the NPAIHB, and David Stephens, a part-time student intern. To locate 
appropriate articles, key terms were used in academic search engines (i.e. Academic Search Complete, 
Cochrane Library, PubMed, etc.), including technology, Internet, online, computer-based, cell phone, 
text message, and video game. These words were cross-referenced with terms like health promotion. 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

86 VOLUME 19, NUMBER 1 


health intervention, risk-reduction, and terms like sexual health, STD, pregnancy, contraception, 
condom, adolescent, teen, ox young adult. Resultant studies were screened in several stages using 
explicit inclusion criteria, referencing the full-text article when necessary. 

Twenty-nine interventions were selected for systematic review based on their delivery method 
(computer, Internet, cell phone, video game, interactive video/DVD), health focus (STD, HIV, or 
pregnancy prevention; abstinence, condom or contraception use; STD/HIV testing), and intended 
outcome (changes in behavior, knowledge, attitudes, perceptions, or skills). Both researchers coded 
the interventions independently on variables of interest to the study in a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet 
(see Table 2 and Craig Rushing [2010] for intervention matrices and operational definitions). 
Variables included: 

• Study Methods: aims, study design, participant recruitment. 

• Intervention Design: description, theoretical framework, purpose/health focus, 
implementation setting, duration, message content, message tailoring criteria, features 
and modalities, user control, privacy. 

• Target Population: age, gender, ethnicity, socioeconomic status. 

• Outcomes: changes in behavior, knowledge, attitudes, perceptions, skills. 

• Results: process or utilization data, retention, user satisfaction. 

• Organizational Requirements for Implementation: funding, space, incentives. 

• Technical Requirements for Implementation: software, equipment. 

• Personnel Requirements for Implementation: number, skills/training, gender. 

Operational definitions for each variable were summarized to ensure they were consistently 
applied throughout the process. On those occasions when the published literature was not sufficient 
to complete the matrix for a particular intervention, the Principal Investigator contacted the 
intervention’s corresponding author with follow-up questions via e-mail or phone. Thirteen out of 
16 investigators responded to such inquiries, answering questions directly or sending other pertinent 
documents for review. 





American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

TECHNOLOGY-BASED SEXUAL HEALTH INTERVENTIONS 87 


Table 2 

Technology-based Interventions Included in the Systematic Review 


Delivery 

Method 


Intervention 


1 . 

It's Your Game (IYG) 


2. 

Let's Talk About Sex 

Computer-based 



Modules 

3. 

Project L.I.G.H.T. 


4. 

Sexual Risk Reduction 


5. 

Computer-assisted 
Motivational 
Intervention (CAMI) 

Computerized 
Risk Assessment/ 

6. 

Youth Health Provider 

Diagnostic Tools 

7. 

Aid for Contraceptive 

Internet Class 

8. 

Decision-making (ACD) 

Health Info. Consumer 
Skills 

Informational 


www.sexualityandu.ca 

Web Site 

9. 


10. 

Keep it Real 


11. 

Trust Yourself, Reduce 
Your Risk 

Internet-based 

12. 

+CLICK (adapted from 
IYG) 

Modules 



13. 

Queermasters 


14. 

Smart Sex Quest 


15. 

WRAPP Internet 

Intervention 


Author 


(Shegog et al., 2007; Tortolero et al., 2008) 


(Ito et al., 2008) 

(Lightfoot, Comulada, & Stover, 2007) 

(Kiene & Barta, 2006) 

(Gold, Chiappetta, Young, Zuckoff, & 
DiClemente, 2008) 

(Paperny, 1997) 

(Chewning et al., 1999) 

(Kalichman et al., 2006) 


(Barak & Fisher, 2001, 2003) 

(Bull et al., 2007; 2008; 2009) 

(Roberto et al., 2008; Roberto, 
Zimmerman, Carlyle, & Abner, 2007; 
Roberto, Zimmerman, Carlyle, Abner, et 
al., 2007) 

(Markham, Shegog, Leonard, Bui, & Paul, 
2009) 

(Kok, Harterink, Vriens, de Zwart, & 
Hospers, 2006; Mikolajczak, Kok, & 
Hospers, 2008) 

(Bull et al., 2004) 

(Bowen, 2005; Bowen, Williams, Daniel, & 
Clayton, 2008) 



X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 


X X 

X X X X 

X 


X 

X X 


X 

X 

X 


continued on next page 







American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

88 VOLUME 19, NUMBER 1 


Table 2, Continued 

Technology-based Interventions Included in the Systematic Review 


Delivery Method Intervention Author 


-= J2 + 

+■> — Z 
3 3 > 

P -O S! 
> < 1 


* 


l/l 


2 


Chat Room 

16. PowerON 

(Moskowitz, Melton, & Owczarzak, 
2009a;b) 


X 

Virtual World 

17. Sexual Health Sims - 
Second Life 

(Beard, Wilson, Morra, & Keelan, 2009) 


X 

E-mail-based 

18. Online Prevention 
Program 

(Lau, Lau, Cheung, & Tsui, 2008) 


X 

Online STD 
Testing 

19. STDTest.org & syfilistest. 
nl 

20. IWanttheKit.org 

(Koekenbier, Davidovich, van Leent, 
Thiesbrummel, & Fennema, 2008; Levine, 
Scott, & Klausner, 2005) 

(Owens et al., 2009) 

X 

X 

X 

Cell Phone 

21. Cell Phone Reminders 

(Puccio et al., 2006) 

X 

X 


22. Hookup & TeenSource 

(Woodruff, 2009) 

X 


Text Messaging 

23. Sexlnfo 

(Levine, McCright, Dobkin, Woodruff, & 
Klausner, 2008) 

X 


Service 

24. The Birds & Bees Text 
Line 

(Hoffman, 2009) 

X 



25. Text to Change 

(Text to Change, 2009) 

X 

X 


26. What Could You Do? 

(Downs et al., 2004) 

X 


Video 

27. Video to Promote Dual 

(Roye, Perlmutter Silverman, & Krauss, 

X 



Methods 

2007) 



Video Game 

28. Baby Game and 

Romance 

(Paperny & Starn, 1989) 

X 



29. Life Challenge 

(Thomas, Cahill, & Santilli, 1997) 

X 



MSM = Men who have sex with men 








American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

TECHNOLOGY-BASED SEXUAL HEALTH INTERVENTIONS 89 


RESULTS 


Literature Review 

As shown in Table 2, 29 interventions fulfilled the project’s inclusion criteria for systematic 
review (see Appendices of Craig Rushing [2010] for intervention abstracts and additional matrices). 
Reviewed articles included preliminary feasibility and usability studies, randomized controlled trials, 
quasi-experimental studies, and non-experimental utilization reports. Study participants varied in 
age, gender, ethnicity, and sexual orientation. Twenty-one interventions targeted young adults, seven 
targeted men who have sex with men, and four targeted people who were HIV-positive. Most of the 
interventions included in the review specifically addressed sexual risk factors, but two addressed 
a wide range of health topics pertinent to youth (like sexual activity, alcohol use, marijuana use, 
substance abuse, sexual abuse, contraception, and suicide attempts). None of the interventions were 
designed for AI/AN populations, and none of the evaluation studies included a significant number 
of AI/AN participants. 

Altogether, 22 of the interventions were delivered using a computer or CD-ROM, 12 required 
Internet access, four were delivered via a cell phone using text messages, two were primarily video- 
based, and three solely involved a computer-based video game. The interventions were implemented 
in a variety of settings (e.g., clinics, schools, community centers, at home), and were administered 
by a range of trained and untrained personnel (e.g., clinicians, health educators, teachers, or self- 
administered). Many included messages or visual content that was aligned to the users’ age (n = 
29), gender (n = 13), race/ethnicity (n = 5), sexual orientation (n = 7), stage-of-change (n = 4), self- 
identified informational needs (n = 9), or reported risk factors (n = 14). To create tailored content, 
18 imbedded risk, needs, or readiness assessments directly into the program. Slightly fewer (n = 13) 
incorporated "virtual" interactions with a health care provider or user-generated goal- setting activities 
or self-monitoring tools. Twenty-two included skill-building exercises or personal development 
tools, like goal-setting activities, boundary-setting activities, condom demonstrations, or activities 
that helped users practice healthy communication skills. Fourteen required users to participate in 
multiple sessions, 15 involved interactions with peers or peer role models, and 15 involved virtual 
or in-person communication with health experts. Most of the interventions (n = 21) were interactive, 
requiring active participation by the user (i.e., as opposed to passively reading text or watching a 
video). Fewer (n = 12) were intensely multimedia, integrating text, audio, video, games, quizzes, 
and links to other sources within the intervention. 

The interventions reported varying levels of effectiveness, and tracked a variety of cognitive 
and behavioral outcomes. Only one (3%) reported changes in perceived sexual risk or consequences, 
three (10%) reported changes in intention or motivation, and three (10%) reported changes in 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

90 VOLUME 19, NUMBER 1 


perceived peer norms or behaviors. Ten (34%) interventions reported changes in participant 
knowledge about STDs, HIV, or condoms, seven (24%) reported changes in sexual values or attitudes, 
and nine (31%) reported changes in participant skill or self-efficacy. Altogether, 12 (41%) reported 
changes in condom or contraception use, STD/HIV screening rates, or sexual activity (11 of which 
were statistically significant at the p<.05 level). 

Despite this seemingly low level of effectiveness, fewer than half of the interventions 
were truly designed to assess behavioral outcomes. Instead, many were intended to evaluate the 
intervention’s acceptability and feasibility, and thus involved small sample sizes, did not track 
behavioral outcomes, or did not assess changes in behavior over time. Thirteen (45%) were evaluated 
using a cohort or non-experimental design to test preliminary effectiveness, acceptability, or 
utilization rates. Thirteen (45%) were evaluated using randomized controlled trials, and three (10%) 
were evaluated using non-randomized controlled trials. Studies that did include follow-up with a 
sufficient number of participants showed promising changes in knowledge, attitude, and behavior. 

CBPR Recommendations for Intervention Selection and Adaptation 

After reviewing data from the Native Youth Media Survey, abstracts describing available 
technology-based sexual interventions, charts comparing their features and effectiveness, and 
photos or demonstrations of available programs, tribal coalition members discussed the merits 
and drawbacks of available strategies, prioritized options in light of resultant data and community 
experience, and proposed recommendations for designing culturally appropriate interventions. 
During these meetings, participants identified several traits that they felt ought to be considered 
when designing or adapting interventions. Specifically, interventions should: 

• Contain Accurate Age- and Gender-Appropriate Content. Interventions should 
contain gender-specific infonnation and age-appropriate content for younger and older 
youth, using the tailoring capabilities of computer-based technologies. Health information 
should be monitored and “medically accurate.” 

• Start Early and Encourage Abstinence. Prevention messages should target pre- and 
young teens. We need to start “when children are younger,” before they are sexually 
active, and be sure to include “a bigger focus on abstinence.” 

• Be Holistic and Real. Participants noted that many existing technology-based 
interventions did not address other important adolescent health issues. Interventions 
targeting Northwest AI/AN youth should be more holistic. Early sexual debut, substance 
abuse, violence, and suicide are symptoms of deeper social and emotional challenges, 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

TECHNOLOGY-BASED SEXUAL HEALTH INTERVENTIONS 91 


including poverty, discrimination, and sexual abuse. Interventions targeting AI/AN youth 
must be real, reflect the unique life experiences of Native youth, and address the root 
social determinants of their health. 

• Be Based in Culture. Interventions targeting Northwest AI/AN youth should incorporate 
cultural materials, “like tribal stories or history to teach important concepts.” None of 
the interventions reviewed by participants contained text, photos, or design elements 
specific to AI/ANs. 

• Focus on Assets and Skills. Instead of stigmatizing sexuality, interventions should 
focus on “positive messages and protective factors,” including both the physical and 
“emotional aspects of relationships.” It is important for interventions to demonstrate and 
allow youth to practice important skills (like refusal skills, condom negotiation skills, 
and how to use a condom), “get them involved in their own health and well-being,” and 
permit users to navigate through the content that most interests them. 

• Encourage Dialogue While Maintaining Privacy. Interventions should include content 
that supports dialogue with trusted adults (“not necessarily parents”), and “ways for 
local adults to provide follow-up if a teen needs additional resources.” Participants also 
felt that youth should be able to access private, “confidential” information and services. 

• Be Interactive. Interventions should incorporate a wide range of interactive features, like 
quizzes and games, as well as the ability to contact or converse with experts. Participants 
particularly liked the interventions that had a human voice guiding teens, “making the 
social interactions more realistic.” 

• Incorporate Evaluation Plans. New programs should also incorporate evaluation 
strategies to continuously monitor their use and “measure their effectiveness.” 

Participants also identified several potential barriers that they felt ought to be considered 
when designing or adapting technology-based interventions for AI/AN youth. These included: 

• Staffing and Intervention Setting. Participants expressed concern about interventions 
that were labor intensive, and interventions that required technical expertise or multiple 
people to implement. To be most widely implemented, interventions should be flexibly 
designed for use in home, community, or clinic settings. If interventions are designed to 
be implemented by local health educators, they must be easy to pick up and ready to use. 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

92 VOLUME 19, NUMBER 1 


• Multimodal Formats. When possible, technology-based interventions should include a 
variety of teaching/modeling tools, take into consideration the “different reading/literacy 
capabilities of youth, even within grade levels,” and include print versions “for those 
who do not have computers.” 

• Shorter Length/Duration. Participants noted that some technology-based interventions 
took an hour or more to complete or required youth to return to the clinic multiple times, 
and were concerned about student retention. On the whole, intervention activities should 
not require multiple clinic visits, and should be conscientious of possible “attention 
span issues.” 

• Cost. The only cost concerns voiced by participants were in relation to text messaging 
interventions, which they thought might be problematic for some youth (depending on 
individual calling plans). 

• Maintaining Youth’s Interest and Attention. Participants also noted that “there are a 
lot of interesting sites on the Internet that teens frequent already.” Online interventions 
will have to be “as good as the technologies that teens are already using, or teens may 
not use them.” 

(It should be noted that a mix of teachers, parents, and health educators participated in these meetings; 
their comments were not collected in such a way that they could be stratified by informant type.) 

When asked about the potential utility of various intervention strategies, particularly in 
relation to their own communities’ programs, resources, and needs, tribal partners used an anonymous 
automated response system to indicate that computer- or Internet-based skill-building tools would be 
most useful (91%) for their community, followed by informational Web sites or social networking 
sites (82%), electronic assessment or diagnostic tools (81%), services that would allow teens and 
young adults to order STD test kits or condoms online (81%), and programs that offered youth live 
instant message or text counseling with an expert (74%). Participants indicated that they would 
prefer interventions that could be administered by someone at the regional level, by a local health 
educator, or, if appropriate, by the youth themselves. Few felt that it would be highly problematic 
for them or their tribe to deliver a computer-based intervention (13%), an Internet-based intervention 
(17%), or an intervention requiring a TV/DVD (13%). More people expressed concern, however, 
about delivering interventions via cell phone (36%). 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

TECHNOLOGY-BASED SEXUAL HEALTH INTERVENTIONS 93 


DISCUSSION 

While data from the Native Youth Media Survey offered insight into which technologies were 
most often used by AI/AN youth, the literature review and additional CBPR activities provided 
critical information needed to select strategies that aligned to the priorities and organizational 
capacities of the Northwest tribes (Craig Rushing, 2010). The literature review provided partners 
with a better understanding of the types of technology-based interventions that were possible, and the 
skills and resources that would be needed to implement them. Partners discussed the effectiveness 
of various approaches, and design features that have been shown to maximize behavioral impacts. 

CBPR processes also took into consideration other factors that have been shown to affect 
intervention effectiveness and sustainability, including the availability of staff with appropriate skills 
and training, the availability of requisite space and equipment, the perceived merits and drawbacks of 
available intervention modalities and settings, and the availability of current and recurring funds to 
implement selected interventions, as well as more nuanced Indigenous knowledge about Northwest 
AI/AN communities (Center for Substance Abuse Prevention, 2009). CBPR activities substantially 
improved the intervention alignment process by giving insight to tribal values and priorities, and 
potential capacities and constraints affecting participating tribes. 

CBPR activities also enhanced the interpretation of qualitative and quantitative data collected 
by the project, employing both Western and cultural lenses. For example, while cell phones were the 
media technology most frequently used by Northwest Native youth (according to survey results), 
youth, parents, and health educators expressed much less interest in phone-based interventions 
than they did in Internet- or video-based approaches. This apparent divide between youth’s current 
technology use and reported intervention priorities may stem from the strong preference (expressed 
by both survey respondents and CBPR partners), that youth receive sexual health information from 
a trusted adult. Role modeling, experiential learning, and storytelling are teaching tools traditionally 
valued by AI/AN communities, and are highly dependent upon human interaction (Cajete, 2008; 
Goodluck, 2002). Compared to the other strategies offered and discussed, rote text messaging 
services (that often lack modeling, interaction, and visual cues) may have felt less congruent with 
traditional teaching modalities. 

CBPR participants were particularly concerned that some technology-based interventions 
might unintentionally reduce communication or fail to support needed follow-up with youth. This 
concern highlights the importance of using technology-based interventions to enhance, rather than 
replace, traditional sources of health information, including health professionals and family members 
(Fox & Jones, 2009). Other critical insights gained through CBPR included the importance of 
empowering Native youth to get involved in their own health and well-being, while also addressing 
the deeper social and emotional conditions that contribute to their disproportionate risk-taking. 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

94 VOLUME 19, NUMBER 1 


CBPR strategies increased our understanding of the ethnographic culture of AI/AN youth, 
and the social and environmental contexts in which they live. Participants pointed out that Native 
youth “culture” is not solely defined by race/ethnicity. Like other teens and young adults, Native 
youth identify with and reflect multiple identities (e.g., athletes, skaters, nerds, gangsters, straight/ 
two-spirit/lesbian/gay/bisexual/transgender/questioning, etc.). Northwest Native youth did express 
a greater preference for accessing sexual health information on Web sites containing Native-specific 
content than on sites targeting all U.S. youth, but to reflect their full lived experience, interventions 
targeting AI/AN youth should portray a range of adolescent and cultural identities. 

Like all research, this study had several strengths and limitations worth noting. These findings 
represent data from the Pacific Northwest and cannot be generalized to other regions or individual 
tribes. Many of the youth who participated in CBPR feedback sessions were involved in tribe- or 
school-sponsored health and wellness activities, and may have reported higher levels of interest 
than typical youth. The continuity of our coalition membership was hampered by our inclusion of 
participants from a geographically disbursed three-state region. This challenge was met by rotating 
meetings throughout the Northwest, covering travel expenses for tribal participants, and by iteratively 
reviewing project data and refining recommendations at each subsequent meeting. Fortunately, the 
project was strengthened by the support of the Northwest tribes, who repeatedly expressed interest 
in the research subject and its findings. Collecting data and feedback from multiple tribes helped 
ensure that resulting recommendations and priorities reflected a wide spectrum of perspectives and 
experiential realities. Guided by CBPR values, this process took active steps to address potential 
validity threats associated with analyzing data using only a Western interpretive lens. 

CONCLUSION 

Like all behavioral interventions, to be truly effective, technology-based sexual health 
interventions must address the core risk and protective factors associated with teen pregnancy 
and STDs, cultivate individual skills, and foster frequent and repeated use. If designed properly, 
youth-driven multimedia technologies could achieve these goals, while reflecting traditional and 
contemporary AI/AN culture, values, teachings, and experiences. To meet everyone’s needs, age- 
and gender-appropriate sexual health information should be made available in a variety of formats, 
through a variety of channels. This CBPR study suggests that integrated, multimedia approaches 
offer the best opportunity to reach the greatest number of Native youth in the Pacific Northwest. 
The NPAIHB and Northwest tribes are now using this data to inform the development of several 
technology-based interventions targeting AI/AN teens and young adults. 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

TECHNOLOGY-BASED SEXUAL HEALTH INTERVENTIONS 95 


Stephanie Craig Rushing, PhD, MPH 
Northwest Portland Indian Health Board 
2121 SW Broadway, Suite 300, Portland, OR 97201 

E-mail: scraig@npaihb.org 


REFERENCES 

Barak, A., & Fisher, W. A. (2001). Toward an Internet-driven, theoretically-based, innovative approach 
to sex education. Journal of Sex Research, 35(4), 324-332. doi: 10.1080/00224490109552103 

Barak, A., & Fisher, W. A. (2003). Experience with an Internet-based, theoretically grounded 
educational resource for the promotion of sexual and reproductive health. Sexual and Relationship 
Therapy, 75(3), 293-308. doi: 10.1080/1468199031000153928 

Battiste, M. (2008). Research ethics for protecting Indigenous knowledge and heritage: Institutional 
and researcher responsibilities. In N. K. Denzin, Y. S. Eincoln, & F. T. Smith (Eds.), Handbook 
of critical and Indigenous methodologies (pp. 497-511). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 
Inc. 

Baylari, A., & Montazer, G. A. (2009). Design a personalized e-leaming system based on item 
response theory and artificial neural network approach. Expert Systems with Applications, 36(4), 
8013-8021. doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2008.10.080 

Beard, E., Wilson, K., Morra, D., & Keelan, J. (2009). A survey of health-related activities on Second 
Life. Journal Of Medical Internet Research, 11(2), el 7. Retrieved from http://www.jmir.org/ 

Bennett, G. G., & Glasgow, R. E. (2009). The delivery of public health interventions via the Internet: 
Actualizing their potential. Annual Review of Public Health, 30, 273-292. doi: 10.1146/annurev. 
publhealth.031308.100235 

Bowen, A. (2005). Internet sexuality research with rural men who have sex with men: Can we recruit 
and retain them? Journal of Sex Research, 42(4), 317-323. doi: 10.1080/00224490509552287 

Bowen, A. M., Williams, M. L., Daniel, C. M., & Clayton, S. (2008). Internet based HIV prevention 
research targeting rural MSM: Feasibility, acceptability, and preliminary efficacy. Journal of 
Behavioral Medicine, 37(6), 463-477. doi: 10.1007/s 10865-008-9171-6 

Bull, S., Lloyd, L., Rietmeijer, C., & McFarlane, M. (2004). Recruitment and retention of an online 
sample for an HIV prevention intervention targeting men who have sex with men: The Smart 
Sex Quest Project. AIDS Care, 16(S), 931-943. doi: 10.1080/09540120412331292507 

Bull, S., Phibbs, S., Watson, S., & McFarlane, M. (2007). What do young adults expect when they 
go online? Lessons for development of an STD/HIV and pregnancy prevention website. Journal 
of Medical Systems, 31(2), 149-158. doi: 10.1007/sl0916-006-9050-z 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

96 VOLUME 19, NUMBER 1 


Bull, S., Pratte, K., Whitesell, N., Rietmeijer, C., & McFarlane, M. (2009). Effects of an Internet- 
based intervention for HIV prevention: The Youthnet trials. AIDS and Behavior, 13(3), 474-487 
doi: 10.1007/s 10461-008-9487-9 

Bull, S., Vallejos, D., Levine, D., & Ortiz, C. (2008). Improving recruitment and retention for an 
online randomized controlled trial: Experience from the Youthnet study. AIDS Care, 20(8), 
887-893. doi: 10.1080/09540120701771697 

Cajete, G. (2008). Seven orientations for the development of indigenous science education. In N. K. 
Denzin, Y. S. Lincoln & L. T. Smith (Eds.), Handbook of critical and Indigenous methodologies 
(pp. 487-496). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc. 

Card, J. J., & Kuhn, T. (2006). Development of online suites of social science-based resources for 
health researchers and practitioners. Social Science Computer Review, 24(2), 255-261. doi: 
10.1177/0894439305281498 

Center for Substance Abuse Prevention. (2009). Identifying and selecting evidence-based 
interventions: Revised guidance documentfor the strategic prevention framework state incentive 
grant program. Rockville, MD: Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse 
and Mental Health Services Administration. 

Chewning, B., Mosena, P, Wilson, D., Erdman, H., Potthoff, S., Murphy, A., & Kuhnen, K. K. 
(1999). Evaluation of a computerized contraceptive decision aid for adolescent patients. Patient 
Education and Counseling, 35(3), 227-239. doi: 10.1016/S0738-3991 (99)00014-2 

Cobb, N., Graham, A., Bock, B., Papandonatos, G., & Abrams, D. (2005). Initial evaluation of a 
real world Internet smoking cessation system. Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 7(2), 207-216. 
doi: 10.1080/14622200500055319 

Cochran, P. A., Marshall, C. A., Garcia-Downing, C., Kendall, E., Cook, D., McCubbin, L., & 
Gover, R. M. (2008). Indigenous ways of knowing: Implications for participatory research and 
community. American Journal of Public Health, 95(1), 22-27. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2006.093641 

Coyle, D., Doherty, G., Matthews, M., & Sharry, J. (2007). Computers in talk-based mental health 
interventions. Interacting with Computers, 19(4), 545-562. doi: 10.1016/j.intcom.2007.02.001 

Craig Rushing, S. N. (2010). Use of media technologies by Native American teens and young adults: 
Evaluating their utility for designing culturally-appropriate sexual health interventions targeting 
Native youth in the Pacific Northwest. Doctoral dissertation, Portland State University, Portland, 
OR. Retrieved from http://dr.archives.pdx.edu/xmlui/handle/psu/4743 

Craig Rushing, S., & Stephens, D. (2011). Use of media technologies by Native American teens and 
young adults in the Pacific Northwest: Exploring their utility for designing culturally appropriate 
technology-based health interventions. The Journal of Primary Prevention, 32(3), 135-145. doi: 
10.1007/s 10935-011-0242-z 

Daft, R., & Lengel, R. (1986). Organizational information requirements, media richness and structural 
design . Management Science, 32, 554-571. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.32.5.554 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

TECHNOLOGY-BASED SEXUAL HEALTH INTERVENTIONS 97 


Dijkstra, A. (2005) Working mechanisms of computer-tailored health education: Evidence from 
smoking cessation. Health Education Research, 20(5), 527-539. doi: 10.1093/her/cyh014 

Di Noia, J., Contento, I. R., & Prochaska, J. O. (2008). Computer-mediated intervention tailored on 
transtheoretical model stages and processes of change increases fruit and vegetable consumption 
among urban African-American adolescents. American Journal of Health Promotion, 22(5), 
336-341. doi: 10.4278/ajhp.22.5.336 

Downs, J. S., Murray, P. J., Bruine de Bruin, W., Penrose, J., Palmgren, C., & Fischhoff, B. 
(2004). Interactive video behavioral intervention to reduce adolescent females' STD risk: A 
randomized controlled trial. Social Science & Medicine, 59(8), 1561-1572. doi: 10.1016/j. 
socscimed.2004.01.032 

Forster, J. F., Rhodes, K. F., Poupart, J., Baker, F. O., Davey, C., & Forster, J. F. (2007). Patterns 
of tobacco use in a sample of American Indians in Minneapolis-St. Paul. Nicotine & Tobacco 
Research, 9(Suppl 1), S29-S37. doi: 10.1080/14622200601083434 

Fox, S., & Jones, S. (2009). The social life of health information. Washington, DC: Pew Internet 
and American Fife Project. 

Gerber, B. S., Solomon, M. C., Shaffer, T. F., Quinn, M. T., & Fipton, R. B. (2007). Evaluation 
of an Internet diabetes self-management training program for adolescents and young adults. 
Diabetes Technology & Therapeutics, 9(1), 60-67. doi: 10.1089/dia.2006.0058 

Gold, M. A., Chiappetta, F., Young, A. J., Zuckoff, A., & DiClemente, C. C. (2008). Female 
adolescents' educational choices about reproductive health modules. American Journal of 
Sexuality Education, 3(1), 65-86. doi: 10.1300/J455v03n01_05 

Goodluck, C. (2002). Native American children and youth well-being indicators: A strengths 
perspective (pp. 1-58). Portland, OR: National Indian Child Welfare Association. 

Hoffman, J. (2009, May 3, 2009). When the cellphone teaches sex education. The New York Times, 
p. ST1. 

Hurling, R., Fairley, B. W., & Dias, M. B. (2006). Internet-based exercise intervention 
systems: Are more interactive designs better? Psychology & Health, 21(6), 757-772. doi: 
10.1080/14768320600603257 

Ito, K. E., Kalyanaraman, S., Ford, C. A., Brown, J. D., & Miller, W. C. (2008). “Fet's talk about 
sex”: Pilot study of an interactive CD-ROM to prevent HIV/STIs in female adolescents. AIDS 
Education & Prevention, 26(1), 78-89. doi: 10.1521/aeap.2008.20.1.78 

Kalichman, S. C., Cherry, C., Cain, D., Pope, H., Kalichman, M., Eaton, F., . . . Benotsch, E. G. 
(2006). Internet-Based Health Infonnation Consumer Skills Intervention for People Fiving With 
HIV/AIDS. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74(3), 545-554. doi: 10.1037/0022- 
006X.74.3.545 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

98 VOLUME 19, NUMBER 1 


Kiene, S. M., & Barta, W. D. (2006). A brief individualized computer-delivered sexual risk reduction 
intervention increases HIV/AIDS preventive behavior. Journal of Adolescent Health, 39(3), 
404-410. doi: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2005.12.029 

Koekenbier, R. H., Davidovich, U., van Leent, E. J. M., Thiesbrummel, H. F. J., & Fennema, H. S. A. 
(2008). Online-mediated syphilis testing: Feasibility, efficacy, and usage. Sexually Transmitted 
Diseases, 35(8), 764-769. Retreived from http://joumals.lww.com/stdjoumaFpages/default.aspx 

Kok, G., Harterink, R, Vriens, R, de Zwart, O., & Hospers, H. J. (2006). The gay cruise: Developing 
a theory- and evidence-based Internet HIV-prevention intervention. Sexuality Research & Social 
Policy: Journal ofNSRC, 3(2), 52-67. doi: 10.1525/srsp.2006.3.2.52 

Fau, J. T. F., Fau, M., Cheung, A., & Tsui, H. Y. (2008). A randomized controlled study to evaluate 
the efficacy of an Internet-based intervention in reducing HIV risk behaviors among men who 
have sex with men in Hong Kong. AIDS Care, 20(7), 820-828. doi: 10.1080/09540120701694048 

Fevine, D., McCright, J., Dobkin, F., Woodruff, A. J., & Klausner, J. D. (2008). SEXINFO: A sexual 
health text messaging service for San Francisco youth. American Journal of Public Health, 
98(2), 393-395. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2007.110767 

Fevine, D. K., Scott, K. C., & Klausner, J. D. (2005). Online syphilis testing - confidential and 
convenient. Sexually Transmitted Diseases, 32(2), 139-141. Retrieved from http://joumals.lww. 
com/stdjoumaFpages/default.aspx 

Fightfoot, M., Comulada, W. S., & Stover, G. (2007). Computerized HIV preventive intervention 
for adolescents: Indications of efficacy. American Journal of Public Health, 97(6), 1027-1030. 
doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2005.072652 

Fiu, S.-H., Fiao, H.-F., & Pratt, J. A. (2009). Impact ofmedia richness and flow on e-leaming technology 
acceptance. Computers & Education, 52(2), 599-607. doi: 10.1016/j.compedu.2008.11.002 

Fustria, M. F. A., Cortese, J., Noar, S. M., & Glueckauf, R. F. (2009). Computer-tailored health 
interventions delivered over the web: Review and analysis of key components. Patient Education 
& Counseling, 74(2), 156-173. doi: 10.1016/j.pec.2008.08.023 

Markham, C. M., Shegog, R., Feonard, A. D., Bui, T. C., & Paul, M. E. (2009). +CFICK: Harnessing 
web-based training to reduce secondary transmission among HIV-positive youth. AIDS Care, 
21(5), 622-631. doi: 10.1080/09540120802385637 

Mayer, R. E., & Moreno, R. (1998). A cognitive theory of multimedia learning: Implications for 
design principles. University of California, Santa Barbara, CA. Santa Barbara, CA. Retrieved 
from http ://www.unm. edu/~moreno/PDFS/chi .pdf 

Metcalf, C. A., Malotte, C. K., Douglas, J. M., Jr., Paul, S. M., Dillon, B. A., & Cross, H. (2005). 
Efficacy of a booster counseling session 6 months after HIV testing and counseling: A randomized, 
controlled trial (RESPECT-2). Sexually Transmitted Diseases, 32, 123-129. Retrieved from http:// 
journals.lww.com/stdjoumal/pages/default.aspx 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

TECHNOLOGY-BASED SEXUAL HEALTH INTERVENTIONS 99 


Mikolajczak, J., Kok, G., & Hospers, H. J. (2008). Queermasters: Developing a theory- and 
evidence-based Internet HIV-prevention intervention to promote HIV-testing among men who 
have sex with men (MSM). Applied Psychology: An International Review, 57(4), 681-697. doi: 
10.1111/j. 1464-0597.2008.00342.X 

Minkler, M., & Wallerstein, N. (2003). Community-based participatory research for health. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 

Moskowitz, D. A., Melton, D., & Owczarzak, J. (2009a). PowerON: The use of instant message 
counseling and the Internet to facilitate HIV/STD education and prevention. Patient Education 
& Counseling, 77(1), 20-26. doi: 10.1016/j.pec.2009.01.002 

National Congress of American Indians. (2009). Research that benefits Native people: A guide for 
tribal leaders. Retrieved from http://www.ncaiprc.org/research-curriculum-guide 

Noar, S. M., Black, H. G., & Pierce, L. B. (2009). Efficacy of computer technology-based 
HIV prevention interventions: A meta-analysis. AIDS, 23(1), 107-115. doi: 110.1097/ 
QAD. 1090b 1013e32831c35500. 

Owens, S. L., Arora, N., Quinn, N., Peeling, R. W., Holmes, K. K., & Gaydos, C. A. (2010). Utilizing 
the Internet to test for sexually transmitted infections: Results of a survey and accuracy testing. 
Sexually Transmitted Infections, 86, 112-116. doi: 10.1136/sti.2009.037226 

Paperny, D. M. (1997). Computerized health assessment and education for adolescent HIV and STD 
prevention in health care settings and schools. Health Education & Behavior, 24(1), 54-70. doi: 
10.1177/109019819702400107 

Paperny, D. M., & Starn, J. R. (1989). Adolescent pregnancy prevention by health education 
computer games: Computer-assisted instruction of knowledge and attitudes. Pediatrics, 53(5), 
742. Retrieved from http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/ 

Pedlow, C. T., & Carey, M. P. (2004). Developmentally appropriate sexual risk reduction interventions 
for adolescents: Rationale, review of interventions, and recommendations for research and 
practice. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 27, 172-184. doi: 10.1207/sl5324796abm2703_5 

Portnoy, D. B., Scott-Sheldon, L. A. J., Johnson, B. T., & Carey, M. P. (2008). Computer-delivered 
interventions for health promotion and behavioral risk reduction: A meta-analysis of 75 
randomized controlled trials, 1988-2007. Preventive Medicine, 47(1), 3-16. doi: 10.1016/j. 
ypmed.2008.02.014, 

Prochaska, J. O., DiClemente, C. C., & Norcross, J. C. (1992). In search of how people change: 
Applications to addictive behaviors. The American Psychologist, 47(9), 1102-1114. doi: 
10.1037/0003-066X.47.9.1102 

Project Red Talon. (2009). Red Talon STD/HIV tribal action plan, 2009-2011. Northwest Portland 
Area Indian Health Board. Portland, OR: Author. Retrieved from http://www.npaihb.org/ 
epicenter/project/prt_tribal_action_plan/ 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

100 VOLUME 19, NUMBER 1 


Puccio, J. A., Belzer, M., Olson, J., Martinez, M., Salata, C., Tucker, D., & Tanaka, D. (2006). The 
use of cell phone reminder calls for assisting HIV-infected adolescents and young adults to 
adhere to highly active antiretroviral therapy: A pilot study. AIDS Patient Care & STDs, 20(6), 
438-444. doi: 10.1089/apc.2006.20.438 

Rhodes, S. D. (2004). Hookups or health promotion? An exploratory study of a chat room-based 
HIV prevention intervention for men who have sex with men. AIDS Education & Prevention, 
16(4), 315-327. doi: 10.1521/aeap.l6.4.315.40399 

Roberto, A. J., Carlyle, K. E., Zimmerman, R. S., Abner, E. L., Cupp, P. K., & Hansen, G. L. (2008). 
The short-tenn effects of a computer-based pregnancy, STD, and HIV prevention program. 
Communication Quarterly, 56( 1), 29-48. doi: 10.1080/01463370701839255 

Roberto, A. J., Zimmerman, R. S., Carlyle, K. E., & Abner, E. L. (2007). A computer-based approach 
to preventing pregnancy, STD, and HIV in rural adolescents. Journal of Health Communication, 
72(1), 53-76. doi: 10.1080/10810730601096622 

Roberto, A. J., Zimmerman, R. S., Carlyle, K. E., Abner, E. L., Cupp, P. K., & Hansen, G. L. 
(2007). The effects of a computer-based pregnancy, STD, and HIV prevention intervention: A 
nine-school trial. Health Communication, 21(2), 115-124. doi: 10.1080/10410230701306990 

Roye, C., Perlmutter Silverman, P, & Krauss, B. (2007). Abrief, low-cost, theory-based intervention 
to promote dual method use by Black and Latina female adolescents: A randomized clinical 
trial. Health Education & Behavior, 34(4), 608-621. doi: 10.1177/1090198105284840 

Shegog, R., Markham, C., Peskin, M., Dancel, M., Coton, C., & Tortolero, S. (2007). "It's your 
game": An innovative multimedia virtual world to prevent HIV/STI and pregnancy in middle 
school youth. Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, 129(?t 2), 983-987. Retrieved 
from http://booksonline.iospress.nl/Content/View.aspx?piid=6252 

Skinner, C., Campbell, M., Rimer, B., Curry, S., & Prochaska, J. (1999). How effective is tailored 
print communication? Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 21(4), 290-298. doi: 10.1007/bf02895960 

Text to Change. (2009). Retrieved from www.texttochange.com 

Thomas, R., Cahill, J., & Santilli, L. (1997). Using an interactive computer game to increase skill 
and self-efficacy regarding safer sex negotiation: Field test results. Health Education & Behavior, 
24(1), 71-86. doi: 10.1177/109019819702400108 

Tortolero, S. R., Markham, C. M., Peskin, M. F., Shegog, R., Addy, R. C., Escobar-Chaves, S. L., & 
Baumler, E. R. (2008). It’s your game. Keep it real: Delaying sexual behavior with an effective 
middle school program. Houston, TX: Center for Health Promotion and Prevention Research, 
University of Texas Health Science Center. 

Warner, L. S., & Grint, K. (2006). American Indian ways of leading and knowing. Leadership, 2(2), 
225-244. doi: 10.1177/1742715006062936 




American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research 
Journal published by the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health 
Colorado School of Public Health/University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( www.ucdenver.edu/caianh) 

TECHNOLOGY-BASED SEXUAL HEALTH INTERVENTIONS 101 


Wilson, K. A., Bedwell, W. L., Lazzara, E. H., Salas, E., Burke, C. S., Estock, J. L., . . . Conkey, 
C. (2009). Relationships between game attributes and learning outcomes: Review and research 
proposals. Simulation Gaming, 40(2), 217-266. doi: 10.1177/1046878108321866 

Woodruff, A. J. (2009). Hookup program usage summary: April-June 2009. San Francisco, CA: 
Internet Sexuality Information Services, Inc. 


FOOTNOTE 

1 Hypertext: text displayed on an electronic device with links to other text, tables, or images that 
can be accessed immediately. 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

We would like to tha nk the tribes of Idaho, Oregon, and Washington for their public health 
leadership, and their ongoing support of Project Red Talon. All credit in this undertaking should 
be given to our tribal partners, whose impassioned commitment to AI/AN health has made this 
project a success. We also tha nk John Spence and members of the Portland Area IHS IRB for their 
constructive reviews of this article. 




