DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 478 056 



RC 023 785 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

SPONS AGENCY 
REPORT NO 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

CONTRACT 
AVAILABLE FROM 

PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Nelson, Karma; Simonsen, Linda; Swanson, Elisabeth 
Research Issues for Mathematics Education in Rural 
Communities: Focus on Native Americans. Working Paper. 

Ohio Univ. , Athens. Appalachian Collaborative Center for 
Learning, Assessment, and Instruction in Mathematics. 

National Science Foundation, Arlington, VA. 

WP-13 

2003-00-00 

42p. 

NSF-0119679 

For full text: http://kant.citl.ohiou.edu/ACCLAIM/ 
rc/rc_sub/pub/3_wp/Nelsonl3 . pdf. 

Information Analyses (070) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

Academic Standards; Alternative Assessment; American Indian 
Culture; ^American Indian Education; ^Culturally Relevant 
Education; Educational Change; ^Educational Needs; 

Educational Practices ; Educational Research; Elementary 
Secondary Education; ^Mathematics Education; ^Research Needs; 
Reservation American Indians; Rural Education 
^Montana 



ABSTRACT 

Low student achievement for Montana’s Native American 
students has been a recognized fact since the beginning of the reservation 
period. The current push for mathematics and science education reform, 
coupled with federal and state accountability mandates, enhances 
opportunities for learning but also challenges Native students’ culture and 
priorities. Native student learning in mathematics is influenced by 
contextual factors: federal, state, and local policy mandates; Native 
culture, community, language, and ways of knowing; the culture of poverty; 
isolation; and classroom practice. This paper reviews current research on 
several contextual factors, making connections between the literature and 
observations in schools on or near Montana’s reservations. The first section 
looks at the history of the reservations and educational opportunities for 
Native students; the impact of policy, poverty, and isolation on these 
students and their schools; and the impact of Native American culture on the 
educational lives of students. The second section examines issues of 
standards and equity for mathematics education; it includes research and 
discussion on culturally responsive teaching, curriculum, and assessment. The 
third section discusses obstacles, challenges, and opportunities for 
achieving equity within this system and proposes research topics to help 
educators address them. Topics include local control; access and isolation; 
student mobility; and the lack of adequate tracking systems for student 
attendance, achievement, and district expectations. The conclusion describes 
what is working in schools on two Montana reservations and the future 
research needed to define a vision for closing the achievement gap for Native 
students. (Contains 30 references) (SV) 




Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



o:^37^5 



Working Paper No.l3 



VO 

o 

oo 



Q 



tt} 






Working Paper Series 




Appalachian Collaborative Center for Learning, Assessment and Instruction in Mathematics 



Research Issues for Mathematics Education in Rural Communities: Focus on Native 
Americans 



Karma Nelson, Linda Simonsen and Elisabeth Swanson 
CLT West, Montana State University 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
y CENTER (ERIC) 

liPThis document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



* Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



ACCL^M’s mission is the cultivation of indigenous leadership capacity for the improvement of school 
matbg^i^s in rural places. The project aims to (1) understand the rural context as it pertains to learning and 
articulate in scholarly works, Including empirical research, the meaning and utility 
and teaching among, for, and by rural people. 



^ERiC 



®1S§T COPY AYAIMBll 



2 



1 



Copyright © 2003 by the Appalachian Collaborative Center for Learning, Assessment, 
and Instruction in Mathematics (ACCLAIM). All rights reserved. The Working Paper 
Series is published at Ohio University, Athens, Ohio by the ACCLAIM Research 
Initiative. 




OHIO 

UNIVERSITY 



ACCLAIM Research Initiative 
All rights reserveci 



Adciress: 21 OA McCracken Hall 
Ohio University 
Athens. OH 45701-2979 

Office; 740-593-9869 

Fax: 740-593-0477 

E-mail; howleyc@ohio.edu 

Web: http://kant.citl.ohiou.edu/ACCLAIM/index.htm 



Funded by the National Science Foundation as a Center for Learning 
and Teaching, ACCLAIM is a partnership of the University of Tennessee 
(Knoxville), University of Kentucky (Lexington), Kentucky Science and 
Technology Corporation (Lexington). Marshal! University (Huntington, 
WV), University of Louisville, and Ohio University (Athens, OH). 




This material is based upon the work supported by the National Science Foundation Under Grant No. 
0119679. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those 
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. 




3 



RESEARCH ISSUES FOR MATHEMATICS EDUCATION IN RURAL COMMUNITIES: 



FOCUS ON NATIVE AMERICANS 



One of the most significant themes that emerged from researchers, educators and parents in 
Indian country was an eagerness to see research translated into practice — research that focuses 
on effective educational practices and ways to implement them. 

Introduction 

According to figures released by the Montana Office of Public Instruction in September 
2002, 38 of the 43 schools placed on the state’s “schools in need of improvement” list are on or 
near Montana’s seven Indian reservations that serve a majority of the states’ Native American 
students. Indeed, “Indian children in Montana public schools are in a crisis situation” (Montana 
Office of Public Instruction, 2001). This is not news. In 1991, 40 of 46 schools on the list were 
reservations schools. The state only uses one criterion to place a school on the list: if scores of 
students in two of the three tested levels (grades 4,8, and 12) fall below the 45"* percentile on the 
Iowa Test of Basic Skills (ITBS) norm-referenced tests for two consecutive years, the school is 
categorized as “in need of improvement” (R. Lukenbill, personal communication, September 3, 
2002 ). 

Another indication of the crisis situation includes dropout rates for students on these 
reservations. During the 1 996 school year, the dropout rate on the Northern Cheyenne 
reservation was about 50%. Although 144 Native American students from the reservation 
attended high school in 1996, there were 788 Northern Cheyenne students of high school age 



2 



(Montana Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, 2001) Where were the 
remaining 644 students? It appears that in addition to those who dropped out, many students on 
the reservation weren’t initially enrolled in the local high school. 

As this paper will indicate, low student achievement for the majority of Native American 
students in Montana has been a recognized and often accepted fact since the beginning of the 
reservation period. According to the Montana Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on 
Civil Rights (2001, p. 61), “Indian children in Montana public schools are not excited about 
their own future or the future of their friends and relatives.” In light of this, there is an urgent 
need to turn the trend around with the help of well-documented research on issues facing Native 
American education. 

The current push for mathematics and science education reform, coupled with federal and 
state accountability mandates, enhance the opportunities for learning, yet at the same time 
challenge the culture and priorities of these students. Native American student learning in 
mathematics is influenced by several contextual factors: a) federal, state and local policy 
decisions and mandates, b) Native American culture, community, language, and ways of 
knowing, c) the culture of poverty, d) isolation, and e) classroom practice. The authors will 
review the current research on several of these contextual factors, making connections between 
research literature and situations observed in schools on or near Montana’s reservations. 

This paper is divided into four sections. The first section looks at the history of the 
reservations and the resulting educational opportunities for Native American students, as well as 
the impact of policy, poverty and isolation on these students and schools. The section concludes 
with a discussion of the impact of Native American culture on the educational lives of students. 
The second section looks at issues of standards and equity for mathematics education; it includes 



O 




5 



3 



research and discussion on culturally responsive teaching, curriculum, and assessment. The third 
section looks at the obstacles, challenges and opportunities for achieving equity within this 
system and proposes research topics to help the educational community address them. The 
section includes discussions of local control, access and isolation, student mobility and the lack 
of adequate tracking systems for student attendance, achievement and district expectations. The 
paper concludes with a conversation of what is working in schools on two adjacent Montana 
reservations and the future research needed to define a vision to close the achievement gap for 
Native American students. 

Although research has increased our knowledge of teaching and learning practices in 
mathematics that have proven successful for Native American students, “the interpretation of 
what this research means in the ways teachers are trained, schools are organized, curriculum is 
designed and instruction is delivered is still needed” (Deyhle & Swisher, 1997). Integrating 
successful research-based practices into the complex educational systems that educate preservice 
and inservice teachers, generate and implement policy, design curriculum, and provide 
accountability for the various stakeholders is a challenge for all who take up the charge. This 
challenge becomes more complex when set in Native American cultural contexts in rural and 
poor communities. 




4 



The Impact of History, Culture, Isolation and Poverty on the Mathematics Achievement for 

Montana’s Native American Students 

History of Reservations in Montana 

In 1990, two thirds of Montana’s American Indians resided on reservations, land bases 
the tribes reserved through treaties with the United States government in exchange for other 
lands (Montana Office of Public Instruction, 2001). Figure 1 depicts the approximate size of the 
seven Montana reservations. These reservations were established through treaties from 1851 
through 1916. Montana’s Native American students make up 10.5% of the state’s public school 
population. The majority of these students attend schools on or near these seven reservations. 

Figure 1 

The reservations are located in sparsely populated areas of immense natural beauty. To 
get an idea of the distances between these reservations, picture a map of the state of Montana 
placed on the eastern third of the United States. If you placed the northwest comer of the state 
on Chicago, the southeast comer would almost reach Washington, D.C. In addition to being 
rural and isolated, these schools are in counties that consistently rank among the poorest in the 
United States. 

The schools on or near the reservations are considered small (less than 300 students for 
elementary schools and 900 for the high school level) as defined by the Matthew Project, a study 
designed to find the correlation between school size and socioeconomic status (Howley, Strange, 
& Bickel, 2000). The majority of Native American students attend public schools on or near the 




7 



5 



reservations. The remainder attend one of the state’s two Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) 
schools, larger urban school districts, or parochial schools. Some of the districts are K-12 with 
various elementary, middle school and high school configurations, while others are K-6 or K-8 
schools with self-contained classrooms. On each of Montana’s seven reservations is is a two- 
year tribal college, established to provide local, affordable post-secondary education to 
reservation young people. 

Throughout the hundreds of treaties negotiated between the various tribes and the US 
government from the late 1700’s through 1871 (Juneau, 2001), American Indians have 
theoretically always had a voice in the education of their youth. The state, however, only 
recently acknowledged as much: Article X, Section 1(2) of Montana’s State Constitution (1972) 
contains the following language: 

The state recognizes the distinct and unique cultural heritage of American Indians and is 

committed in its educational goals to the preservation of their cultural integrity. 

Yet, “little has been done to fulfill this commitment and incorporate it into educational 
agencies, including public schools” (Montana Office of Public Instruction, 1999, p.6). 
Throughout the past 30 years several legislative “plans” and recommendations have been written 
addressing the needs of the American Native students, but few concrete laws or policies have 
backed these recommendations up with financial support. As of 1 997, the token effort the 
Montana legislature gave to recognizing the richness of the Native American culture and the 
need for addressing the educational issues of its students was to designate one day a year as 
American Indian Heritage Day. 

Recent efforts to address Indian education include the passage of House Bill (HB) 528 in 
1999. The language in this bill encourages every Montanan to learn about the distinct and 



O 




8 



6 



unique heritage of American Indians in a culturally responsive manner, to work cooperatively 
with Montana tribes or those tribes that are in close proximity, and to provide the means by 
which school personnel will gain an understanding of and appreciation for the American Indian 
people. In addition, districts may require that all of their certified personnel satisfy the 
requirements for instruction in American Indian studies. School districts are encouraged to 
satisfy the requirements for instruction of Native American culture (Montana HB 528). One 
explanation for the lack of specific directives in the law is the state’s strong emphasis on local 
control. The lack of specific directives contributes to the statement in the Indian Education For 
All Act of 1999 that “Indian students still attend schools where they do not see themselves 
present in classrooms, policies or curriculum. Non-Indian students still attend schools where 
they do not learn about their Indian peers with whom they will continue to work and live.” 

In 1996 and 1997, representatives throughout state involved with the education of Native 
American youth addressed their concerns to the Montana Advisory Committee to the U.S. 
Commission on Civil Rights. The speakers shared statistics, personal viewpoints, teaching 
experiences and educational concerns from all levels. As a result of these hearings, the 
committee found that in spite of a great deal of verbal acknowledgment of the problems, the 
results were negligible. The committee addressed these issues by recommending “concrete, 
numerical goals with specific timetables be established to move Indian education ahead in 
Montana” (July, 2001). The nine specific recommendations outlined by the Advisory 
Committee will be discussed within the context of various sections of this paper. 

Rural Schools in Poor Communities 

There are both opportunities and challenges for students living in the communities on or 




9 



7 



near Montana’s reservations. Most of the schools on the reservations are located in 
predominately Native American rural communities beset with poverty. The nearby off- 
reservation schools are larger by Montana standards, and the student population includes a mix 
of Native and non-Native students. 

The Matthew Project first examined the impact of poverty on students in rural schools in 
a multi-state study concluded in 1989. This study, which focused on the hypothesis that school 
size mitigates the influence of poverty, was replicated in the late 1990’s with seven additional 
states including Montana (Howley et al., 2000). For the purposes of the study, poverty was 
measured by the number of students on free or reduced-priced lunch. In contrast to previous 
research that indicated the strong negative influence of poverty on student achievement 
(Campbell & Silver, 2000), The Matthew Project found that the influence of poverty was reduced 
when schools enrolled fewer than 300 students at the elementary level or fewer than 900 at the 
high school level (Howley et al., 2000). The study found that the less affluent the community, the 
better students performed in smaller schools. In Montana, there “is startling evidence that 
students in smaller schools and districts outperform larger ones, even though they serve poorer 
communities”(Lewis, 2001). A question that needs to be answered is if this finding holds true 
for students in reservation schools. 

Students in poor, rural communities encounter numerous challenges. Those include the 
limited number of out-of-school experiences to which they have access, which in turn limits the 
amount and type of prior knowledge needed for building new knowledge. Parents often have 
limited educational experience themselves and are therefore distrustful of schools or of new 
educational methods used in the classroom. Often the community is not included in discussions 
of the rationale for curricular changes the districts implement. Lastly, changes in administration 



O 




10 



8 



are frequent on the reservations; Campbell and Silver (2000) note that the high administrative 
turnover that characterizes schools in poor communities has often resulted in numerous 
curricular changes with little support or understanding of previously implemented initiatives. 

Several districts with small schools have found the use of “place-based” education to be 
successful. Place-based education draws on local history, environment, culture and economics as 
a rich source of curriculum. The goal of place-based education is to groimd learning in local 
phenomena and students’ learned experiences (Smith, 2002). This form of education is foimded 
on John Dewey’s belief that many children have to put aside their life experiences in order to 
adapt to the ideas and activities of the public school. In contrast, place-based education 
encourages students to build on those life experiences. 

The elements of place-based education are in alignment with successful research-based 
educational models for educating Native American students. Local culture and community 
values are used as the basis for the curriculum, helping blur the line between the school and the 
community. Learning experiences emphasize students as the creators of knowledge rather than 
the consumers of knowledge created by others. Teachers serve as guides and facilitators of 
student learning, often serving as team members of a project. Student work is assessed on the 
basis of its usefulness to the community and sustainability rather on the basis of sorting and 
ranking schools and students (Smith, 2002). 

Possible research topics regarding Native American students attending rural schools in poor 
communities: 

D Do the results of the Matthew Project, i.e. that school size mitigates the effects of 
poverty on student achievement, hold true for rural reservation schools? 

D What impact does the use of place-based education have on student achievement in 
mathematics in schools with a majority of Native American students? 



O 




9 



D Which types of pedagogy are most successful in raising student achievement for Native 
American students in poor, rural schools? 



Influence of Native American Culture 

Many Native American students have been raised in a very rich culture quite different 
from that of many of their teachers and administrators. A Native Alaskan teacher comments: 

“In order to teach you, I must know you” (Delpit, 1995). Not only are the cultures of Native 
American students different from that of their teachers, but the cultmes of various tribes can be 
very different. Although there are cultural values common to members of the various Native 
American tribes, each tribe has its own language, spiritual belief systems and traditions. In 
general, the Native American culture is holistic, integrating the community, the individual, the 
environment, and spirituality. In traditional Native American communities, what is good for an 
individual is inextricably linked to the good of the entire community. Although there is a 
differentiated role for each individual that abides by the social order, drawing attention to one’s 
self creates ill will within the Native American community (Northwest Regional Laboratory, 
2002 ). 

In the classroom, no one traditional learning style fits all American Indian children, 
either as individuals or as members of tribal groups (Montana Office of Public Instruction, 2000). 
To improve student learning, however, it is critical to situate mathematics education within the 
context of the culture in which it is being taught (Davison, 2002). In addition to culture, factors 
like gender, linguistics and socioeconomics all play a role in students’ ability to learn 
mathematics (Cooper & Dunne, 1998; Zevenbergen, 2000 as cited in Boaler, 2002). 




12 



10 



A first step in addressing the needs of the American Indian students is to establish an 
environment that conveys the value and strength of their cultural differences (Deyhle & Swisher, 
1997). These cultural differences surface in areas of parental expectations, linguistics, 
assessment, and the value placed on certain aspects of learning and student behavior. For 
example, in the Native American culture, students are encouraged to learn by observing the 
adults in their lives and waiting to try out a new skill until they are fairly certain they know how 
to do it. Confusion can occur when the classroom teacher urges students to “guess and check” 
or “try” a method of solving a problem before the students feel confident enough to attempt it. 

The relationship between parents and children is more egalitarian in many Native 
American communities than is found in middle class families in the Unites States. Native 
American adults respect children as independent-thinking adults at a very early age. Children are 
encouraged to be quietly independent and self-assured, often taking care of themselves at a very 
young age in contrast to the expectations of the traditional classroom, in which children are 
viewed as lacking the ability to take responsibility for themselves. As such. Native American 
parents are less likely to intrude or interfere with the decisions their children make (Deyhle & 
Swisher, 1997). Non-Indian teachers often view this behavior as a lack of parental discipline. 
Juneau paraphrases Lone Wolf, a Blackfoot Indian, who remarked “that among his people, 
children were never punished by striking them. That was no way to teach children; kind words 
and good examples were much better” (Juneau, 2001). These differences in cultural and family 
expectations of Native American homes certainly have the potential for affecting the teaching- 
learning process in public school systems dominated by white middle-class values (Montana 
Office of Public Instruction, 2001). 



ERIC 




11 



The impact developing a firm cultural identity has on school success is apparent in Lin’s 
study cited in Demmert (2001) of 87 American Indian students attending a Montana college. Lin 
found that those students from more traditional Native families were more task- and 
achievement-oriented, had higher grade point averages, and spent more time doing homework 
than those from more modem families, who cared more about professors’ opinions, yet ironically 
skipped more classes (p. 28). Although there has been a great deal of research that supports the 
importance of family and community attitudes on Native students’ academic achievement, 
Demmert, reviewing the literature on Native education, stated that more research is needed to 
sort out under what circumstances parental and community involvement works most powerfully. 

Cleary and Peacock (1998) make the following compelling challenge for all teachers of 
Native American students. 

The most important endeavor for teachers in Indian schools and in schools that 
serve Indian children is to see themselves as learners, learners who are open to 
understanding the reasons that children and communities are the way they are, 
learners who are willing to discover and consider the cultures of the school and 
the home of the child, and learners who are willing to change their ways of 
teaching so that children have a better chance in school and a better chance to 
have purpose and hope in their lives thereafter” (p. 6). 

Strang & von Glatz (2001) and Demmert (2001) recommend the following research 
topics on connections between cultural identity and student achievement : 

D Is there a shared definition of culture between indigenous communities and the 
dominant culture? (Strang & von Glatz, 200 1 ) 




12 



D Are there cultural values within American Indian/Alaska Native communities 
that are lost when children attend school? If so, are there methods of teaching that will 
help to revitalize certain aspects of that culture? (Strang & von Glatz, 2001) 

D What are localized, culturally specific ways of knowing, teaching and doing that 
can be translated into educational frameworks or models? (Strang & von Glatz, 2001) 

D How is student achievement in mathematics affected when curriculum and 
instruction are guided by locally authenticated and aligned content standards, and student 
performance assessments incorporate high expectations based on tribal history and 
culture? (Strang & von Glatz, 2001) 

D How does the student’s “sense of self’ (reflected in his/her sense of competence 
and sense of status) relate to motivation, academic achievement and retention in school? 
(Demmert, 2001). 

In addition to the questions above, we propose exploring the following topics: 

D How do teachers from other Native or non-Native cultures serving in a 
particular Native American currently learn about their students’ history, languages, and 
cultural identity? 

D To what degree do teachers currently integrate this knowledge in local 
mathematics programs? 

D What strategies can teachers, schools or communities apply to provide teachers 
with the cultural knowledge necessary to support their students’ mathematics learning? 

D What factors contribute to the effectiveness of programs that show a positive 
association between academic performance and the presence of Native language and 
culture? 



Mathematics Standards and Equity 

The recent national emphasis on content standards has included a focus on equity issues. The 
need to ensure mathematical literacy for all children is critical because “a society in which only a 




13 



few have the mathematical knowledge needed to fill crucial economic, political, and scientific 
roles is not consistent with the values of a just democratic system or its economic needs.” In the 
future, “those who understand and can do mathematics will have significantly enhanced 
opportunities and options for shaping their futures” (National Council of Teachers of 
Mathematics, 2000, p.2). Mathematics standards are not confined simply to content, or what we 
will teach, but also include how we will teach that content and what methods we will use to 
determine student knowledge. This section will address culturally responsive practices in all 
three areas - content knowledge, pedagogical knowledge, and assessment practices. 

The rationale for establishing math and science standards for all students is based on research 
that began in the 1950’s. This research consistently indicates that the United States system of 
education is not providing an “equitable” education in math and science for all students - 
particularly for students of color (Schoenfeld, 2002). Mathematics and access to mathematics 
has long been recognized as a critical filter (Sells study as cited in Schoenfeld, 2002, p. 13) 
preventing or enabling students’ access to technological literacy and higher education. 
Mathematics not only filters students out of classes, but may lead some to drop out of school or 
greatly restrict their career options (Hilberg, R.W., Salton, Youpa, & Tharp, 2002). 

Equity is the first of six principles for school mathematics in NCTM’s Principles and 
Standards for School Mathematics (2000). Equity does not mean that all students receive exactly 
the same instruction; rather, it demands that all students have access to the same concepts 
through appropriate accommodations and varied teaching and assessment practices. As 
discussed in the section on culture, equity should focus on making the content accessible for the 
student by setting it in a cultural context that has meaning for him or her. A quality education as 
once defined “does not necessarily translate into a fair and equitable education” (Montana Office 



O 




16 



14 



of Public Instruction, 2001). To summarize, today’s mathematics standards may confront 
strongly held beliefs and values about schooling - for example, beliefs about who can learn what 
type of mathematics and how they come to know that mathematics. This outcome is as 
significant as the documents, tools and other products created by the standards (Jamentz as cited 
in Nelson-Barber, 1998). 

Equitable solutions to the educational problems Native American students encounter are 
important in order to guarantee economic security, the ability and freedom to make informed 
choices, and the ability to fulfill their own particular life aims within their own communities and 
beyond (Nelson-Barber & Estrin, 1995). We must not fail them for “to fail children in 
mathematics, or to let mathematics fail them, is to close off an important means of access to 
today’s society” (Schoenfeld, 2002, p.l3). 

Standards-based reform holds potential promise for addressing issues of equity. One 
reason for optimism is that the reforms promote a common vision of what students are expected 
to know and be able to do. In general, standards-based curricula encourage a more holistic, real- 
life, active learning sort of pedagogy, more consistent with the constructivist and sociocultural 
perspectives of learning that have proved effective with Native American students. Reform 
efforts typically include multiple forms of assessment rather than the singular use of norm 
referenced tests, which are thought to be culturally biased and antithetical to the ways Native 
American students perform (Fox, 2001). 

Standards-based programs, however, also hold areas of concern for Native American 
children if members of the Native American community are not given input into identifying the 
content, selecting curriculum materials for classroom use, or designing appropriate methods for 
assessing student learning. The Native American community, parents and grandparents have 



O 




15 



waited for decades for legislation and educational initiatives to provide true equity for their 
children (Montana Office of Public Instruction, 2001). As the educational and Native American 
communities in various regions seek ways to grant access for all students to mathematical 
knowledge validated by the students’ culture, it is important for the research community to 
support their work by addressing questions like those below. 



Recommended research topics on standards and equity: 

D Are there classrooms in which American Indians/Alaska Natives are receiving 
standards-based instruction? How does one document implementation of standards and 
assessment systems? (Strang & von Glatz, 2001). 

D What are the characteristics of schools serving American Indian/Alaska Native 
students in which standards are implemented appropriately? (Strang & von Glatz, 2001) 

D What are the barriers to implementation of new standards and assessment 
systems in schools serving Native students? (Strang & von Glatz, 2001). 

D What is the nature and longevity of the implementation of reform efforts in 
classrooms serving poor communities, particularly in rural and reservation areas? What 
are the implications of that reform on student achievement in mathematics? 

D In states serving significant numbers of Native American students, are national 
mathematics education standards (e.g. National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 
2000) supported by state-level content and performance standards, and by the state 
assessment systems currently in place or under development? 

D What differences exist between national and state level mathematics education 
standards, and national standards and guidelines for Native American learning (e.g. 
NWREL, 2002; NIEA, 1999; and AISES, 1994)? Given current researched-based 
understandings of students’ mathematics learning, especially for Native Americans, what 
are the implications for student learning of the differences between these two categories 
of standards? 




Culturally Responsive Pedagogy 



Providing an equitable mathematics education for all students requires us to closely 
examine our teaching, the curriculum materials we use, and our methods for determining what 
students know and are able to do. This section focuses on the types of pedagogy that have 
proven successful in meeting the needs of Native American students in mathematics . 

It has long been assumed that good teaching in one culture or commimity is good 
teaching in another. Research on culturally and linguistically diverse commimities indicates that 
this is not always the case, as knowledge and ways of knowing are both culturally and 
historically situated (Nelson-Barber & Estrin, 1995). Appropriate discourse in one community 
does not look the same as discourse in another. Methods of questioning, probing, the role of the 
teacher and asking for student input differ in various cultures. There is a need to study 
“culturally responsive pedagogy” in order to better understand successful practices for teaching 
mathematics to Native American students. In addition to structural and curricular remedies, we 
need to focus on what teachers need to successfully teach Native American students. 

Contributing to the development of guidelines to inform teachers of teaching and learning 
approaches that are successful with Native American students is an important goal for 
researchers. This will assist instructors as they attempt to “bridge cultures and situate learning in 
meaningful contexts (Nelson-Barber & Estrin, 1995, p.7). The guidelines developed by the 
Alaska Native Knowledge Network (1997) with the help of the Alaskan Rural Systemic Initiative 
show what is possible. This extensive set of principles for preparing culturally responsive 
teachers who could implement the Alaska Content and Performance standards was based on 
research findings on successful teaching practices in culturally diverse classrooms. With 



17 



attention to the unique characteristics of each tribal culture, these could be adapted for use in 
Native American settings outside of Alaska. 

Current research suggests that certain instructional sequences are more successful than 
others for teaching Native American students. A recommended instructional sequence builds on 
Native American students’ intuitive and ethnomathematical knowledge. Ethnomathematical 
knowledge, including forms of mathematics embedded in culturally linked activities in everyday 
life and the workplace, can provide critical foundations for students. From this knowledge base 
the students can move to an understanding of symbolic representation and procedural knowledge 
that leads to understanding the underlying principles and theory. This sequence does not occur 
in a linear fashion, as students often move back and forth between these various stages of 
understanding (Trumbell, Nelson-Barber, & Mitchell, 2002). 

The instructional sequence for Native American students should combine a constructivist 
approach to learning complemented with a sociocultural perspective. The constructivist 
approach “recognizes students as active meaning-makers,” building on their prior knowledge, 
while the sociocultural perspective “recognizes the importance of social and cultural systems 
and their associated values and expectations on students’ learning” (Trumbell et al., 2002). 
Reform pedagogies reflect both approaches by encouraging instructors to teach concepts in 
meaningful contexts through the processes of inquiry and exploration. These explorations can 
make connections with, and reinforce the value of. Native American culture. Proponents of 
culturally responsive pedagogy also recommend that several types of assessments be available so 
that students can demonstrate what they know and are capable of instead of relying on one “test” 
(Trumbell et al., 2002). The teacher’s mediation of the different curricular and assessment 
approaches described above is central to promoting equity. The teacher’s task then centers on 



O 




20 



18 



helping students make connections between their personal meanings, culture-based systems, and 
the systems of the school (Nelson-Barber & Estrin, 1995). 

Conflicts between reform pedagogy and Native American students’ ways of learning can, 
however, occur when the observational and contextual learning modes of Native American 
students conflict with the traditional verbal interchange that occurs in many classrooms today. 

As noted earlier. Native American students are more likely to observe behavior until they feel 
competent to successfully attempt a problem in contrast with the trial-and-error method 
encouraged by many teachers in today’s classrooms (Deyhle & Swisher, 1997; Trumbell et al., 
2002 ). 

Cormmmication between students and teachers from diverse cultures can be confusing, 
and misunderstandings can occur as their communication styles interact. A dialogue between 
teacher and students, in which the students’ prior knowledge and experience is woven into new 
concepts and ideas, can be very different from the traditional Western form of teacher-dominated 
classroom dialogue. When students are engaged in shared open-ended questioning and large and 
small group discussions that center aroxmd Native students’ own culture and experiences, they 
are quite eager to join in the discussion. This challenges the deficit notion that Native American 
students are non-responsive to teacher questioning (Tharp & Yamauchi, 1994). 

Some overall suggestions follow for teachers and schools that wish to encourage a more 
culturally responsive classroom. 

1) Respond to the strengths and differences of Native American children based on a deep 
understanding of their culture (American Indian Science & Engineering Society, 

1994; Hilberg et al., 2002; Nelson-Barber & Estrin, 1995; 2002; LAB at Brown 
University, 2001). 



O 




21 



19 

2) Situate classroom practice in holistic contexts, including the recognition of the 
importance of spirituality in the culture (American Indian Science & Engineering 
Society, 1994; Nelson-Barber, 1999; 2002). 

3) Align classroom experiences with assessed cultural needs and concerns of the 
community. ( American Indian Science & Engineering Society, 1994; Hilberg et al., 
2002; 2002) 

4) Use research based instructional methods known to address the learning needs of 
Native American students, such as the constructivist and sociocultural approaches 
discussed above (Deyhle & Swisher, 1997; Hilberg et al., 2002; Nelson-Barber, 1999; 
Nelson-Barber & Estrin, 1995; LAB at Brown University, 2001). 

The preparation of non-Native teachers must include experiences leading to a deeper 
understanding of Native American culture, its family and community structures and its history. 
“A caring teacher with the belief that all students can learn and a deep understanding of their 
culture are critical factors in Native American students’ success” (Deyhle & Swisher, 1997, 
p.l22). 

Research possibilities for establishing a culturally responsive classroom: 

D What mentoring and professional development systems could be put in place for pre- 
service, early career, and experienced teachers in schools serving a majority of Native American 
students to ensure culturally responsive teaching? 

D What are the characteristics of a high-achieving, culturally diverse mathematics 
classroom in which family and community values are validated? (Strang & von Glatz, 2001). 
How is the validation of family and community values measured? 




22 



20 



D What instructional practices have been demonstrated to be effective in helping 
American Indian and Alaska Native students achieve mathematically in reservation and off- 
reservation schools? 

D What effect does the use of computers as instructional tools have for Native American 
students? 

Curriculum 

The approaches for establishing a culturally responsive classroom discussed in the 
previous section share many characteristics with standards-based pedagogy that form the basis of 
what are known as standards-based curricula. Soon after NCTM’s Curriculum and Evaluation 
Standards (1989) was published, it became apparent that commercial curriculum materials were 
not available to help teachers implement these standards. Furthermore, teachers did not have the 
content or pedagogical knowledge necessary to implement the type of instruction the standards 
envisioned. Since that time, several standards-based curricula (for example, the Connected 
Math Project, Six through Eighth Grade Mathematics, Math in Context, Core-Plus) have been 
produced that show promise in helping Native American students close the achievement gap in 
mathematics (Fox, 2000; Boaler, 2002). The standards themselves, some researchers believe, 
also hold promise for Native American students, especially if tribes and communities become 
involved in setting their own culturally responsive standards (Demmert, 2001). 

Although research indicates students in poor and rural communities learn best through 
approaches that encourage a combination of constructivist and sociocultural pedalogical 
approaches to teaching and conceptual understanding (Knapp, Marder, Zucker et al. 1995, as 
cited inNCTM, 2000; Fox, 2000), many districts in poor and rural communities rely instead on 




23 



21 



procedurally driven, also known as skills-driven, curriculum materials. There are many reasons 
schools choose a skills-driven curriculum. They range from a high-stakes emphasis on norm- 
referenced test performance, perceived university expectations, a teaching staff lacking the 
necessary mathematics content or pedagogical knowledge, and a propensity to choose familiar 
materials over less traditional ones. This traditional view may include not only what is taught 
and how it is taught, but also who can succeed in learning mathematics. In her work in low- 
income and culturally diverse communities, Gutierrez (1996, 1999, 2000, 2002) as cited in 
Boaler, (2002), concluded that the greatest hope for providing equitable teaching environments is 
to focus on practices of teachers using reform curricula. 

To their credit, many of the schools serving Native American students on these 
reservations are attempting to use standards-based curriculum materials that are based on the 
learning and teaching philosophies described above. Research indicates, however, that most 
teachers in the United States are not prepared to successfully implement these materials (TIMSS 
USDOE, 1997; Ma, 1999). Mathematics education in the United States often consists of 
teaching isolated skills or procedures without building on prior knowledge. This type of 
teaching frequently occurs in low-income schools based on the “conventional wisdom” that 
students are deficient and that the curriculum should follow a fixed sequence of lessons, 
emphasizing practice and moving from basic to more advanced skills without ever addressing 
problem-solving or reasoning (National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 2000). This is a 
belief reinforced by the use of norm-referenced tests as the only mandated assessment in many 
states. 

In her work with two middle school teachers implementing the Connected Math Project, one 
of the NSF supported reform curricula, Boaler (2002) found that the ways in which the teacher 



O 




24 



22 



mediated the curriculum for the students had a greater impact on student learning than the 
interaction between the student and the curriculum. For example, the teachers in these schools 
introduced real-world mathematical activities by participating in the conversations with the 
students regarding the task. Students were never left to interpret text-based problems alone. She 
concluded that the teachers and their teaching are central to the promotion of equity (pp. 246- 
249). 



Research topics regarding reform based curriculum: 

D What methods do teachers use to successfully enact reform curriculum for students in 
Native American classrooms? (Boaler, 2002, p. 245). 



Assessment 

To design appropriate assessments for what students know and can do, it is essential to 
take into account the ways in which Native American children have traditionally been assessed. 
Relying on standardized testing alone is bad practice and bad policy (Elmore, 2002). It limits 
students’ opportunity to demonstrate what they know and are able to do in ways that will be 
discussed later in this section. 

The No Child Left Behind Act, passed by the United States Congress in January 2002, 
gives states twelve years to ensure that all students are proficient in math and science as defined 
by individual states and determined by annual testing in grades 3-8. Although a criterion- 
referenced test is being designed to reflect Montana’s content standards in mathematics, the state 
currently requires all students to take the norm-referenced ITBS test to determine grade-level 




25 



23 



proficiency. This practice occurs in spite of the fact that it conflicts with recommended standards 
and guidelines for culturally responsive assessment of Native American students (Bordeaux, 
1995; Elmore, 2002). Since the main purpose of standardized tests is to sort students, items that 
most students can answer are not included, which makes the test of little use in assessing what 
students can actually do relative to what they have been taught. The use of standardized tests 
alone to measure performance has met with a great deal of criticism nationwide and could 
shortchange Native American students (Bordeaux, 1995). 

Indigenous peoples have traditionally used performance assessments to determine how 
each individual could best contribute to the survival of the tribe, clan or village. These 
“assessments” were designed to support the teaching and learning of students’ imderstanding of 
the skills, cultural traditions and values as determined by parents and the commimity and to 
inform local communities about the work its students can do. Success was seen as both a 
personal achievement and a community asset. Recognizing individual achievement based on a 
norm-referenced test works in opposition to the importance of place and tribal bonds the Native 
American commimities encourage (Deyhle & Swisher, 1997; National Council of Teachers of 
Mathematics, 2000). 

A brilliant example of this type of performance assessment occurred during the summer 
of 2002 on the Crow reservation in Southeast Montana. With the help of an architect from the 
Seattle-based Red Feather Development group, three middle school Crow girls used money they 
won in the national Bayer/National Science Foundation competition to build a straw-bale study 
hall building for tribal members. “For the 1 1,000 members of the Crow tribe, such tangible 
accomplishments are rare” (Nijhuis, 2002), but are a much greater validation for the individuals 




26 



24 



and the community than the assessment the state uses to determine student knowledge and school 
accoimtability. 

Nowhere is the effect of standardized testing more harmful than when it separates the 
school from the community, teachers from assessment, and relegates important decisions to 
distant policymakers. In its draft policy statement on assessment and accountability in public 
schools, the Rural School and Commimity Trust (2002) states that one of the greatest risks in 
testing is the effect it has on teachers and how they teach. These policy decisions force teachers 
and districts to focus curriculum materials and teaching on skills and procedures rather than 
using a more holistic, constructivist conceptual approach known to be more effective in teaching 
Native American students 

The real challenge for schools on or near the reservations is that of providing a 
worthwhile mathematics program while facing the limitations of standardized assessment 
(National Coimcil of Teachers of Mathematics, 2000). As schools and communities collaborate 
to establish a coherent set of norms and expectations, they must also determine how those 
expectations will be assessed. The Rural Schools and Commimity Trust (2002, p. 2) is currently 
designing an assessment system that could be adapted by local districts and schools. The essence 
of these assessments will require students to apply what they know to real world problems. 
Students will be required to not only demonstrate what they know but also that they know how to 
use that knowledge. This assessment process will include designing a project, using authentic 
rubrics and internal and external project reviews, involving a critical friends group or mentor, 
and engaging in a portfolio review process. After these expectations and assessments have been 
agreed upon, students and schools can be assessed for internal accountability. In this way 
assessment is integrally connected with the goals of teaching and learning. Until there is an 







27 



25 



investment in this type of assessment by the community and educators, low-performing schools 
may get worse relative to high-performing schools (Elmore, 2002). In the meantime, we must 
not use the current focus on limited assessments as an excuse for adhering to a skills-based, 
rather than a standards-based, curriculum and instructional approach (Campbell & Silver, 2000). 



Possible research topics regarding assessment: 

D What combinations of assessments could be used to validate community values 
for mathematics education, and also serve as evidence of proficiency for math content 
and performance standards needed for state and federal accountability? 

DHow do innovative assessment practices, such as the place-based assessment 
system recently proposed by the Rural Trust, affect student achievement? 

D Are there assessment instruments and procedures that penalize some students 
more than others (e.g. according to gender, ethnic/linguistic background etc.)? What are 
critical dimensions or features of tests or rubrics that facilitate more accurate portrayals of 
students’ knowledge and skills? What methods of assessment have proved successful by 
schools serving Native American students? (Strang & von Glatz, 2001). 

D What processes could be used to validate mathematics assessments and tests for 
Native American students? For example, how might cultural validity (as delineated in 
Solano-Flores & Nelson-Barber, 2001) be determined? 

D What policy factors influence Native American student achievement on various 
types of assessments (student transfer policies, attendance policies, test factors, support 




28 



services, policies for developing curriculum and selecting curriculum materials etc.)? 
(Strang &, von Glatz, 2001). 

D To what extent are Native communities, tribes, villages etc. involved in 
developing and implementing standards and assessments? What are the differences 
between assessments and standards systems developed by and with input from Native 
educators and those developed by non-Natives? (Strang & von Glatz, 2001) 

D How does one determine the authentic assessment instruments and procedures 
for assessing student learning; do these vary for different content areas of mathematics 
and for diverse populations? 

DHow can student assessments better take into account traits of the learner 
(values, culturally defined “ways of knowing,” etc.) that might critically interact with 
and distort or advantage the assessment of student learning? 

DWhat are the levels of achievement on standardized assessments (e.g., NAEP) 
for Native American students by grade level or age, state, type of school (public, tribal, 
BIA), and tribe, and how have those levels changed over the last 10 years? 20 years? 
(Strang & von Glatz, 2001). 



Obstacles And Challenges For Montana’s Indian Reservations 

This section will describe some of the obstacles and challenges that one of the authors. 
Nelson, along with other faculty and graduate fellows associated with the NSF Center for 
Learning and Teaching in the West, have identified in their work with mathematics and science 



27 



teachers and administrators of Native American students on and near Montana’s Indian 
reservations. These observations occurred as Nelson and others conducted field work with the 
schools on two Montana reservations during the past year and a half During this time, Nelson 
and others met with superintendents and building principals at each school, followed by 
individual and joint meetings with mathematics and science teachers in grades 5-12. The 
obstacles and challenges identified by these schools and their students fall into three broad 
categories: student mobility, access and communication, and local control. We will briefly 
describe the issues in each category and make suggestions for further research. Details of this 
work can be found in (Nelson, Simonsen, & Swanson, 2002). 

Student Mobility 

Students on or near the reservations in Montana have traditionally moved freely among 
the local schools without regard to academic ramifications. The reasons for mobility include 
academic needs, discipline and attendance problems, moving to live with other extended family 
members, and playing on a winning athletic team. On these two reservations, the schools are 
governed by nine separate school districts, including one parochial and one tribal school. Each 
district has a separate curriculum, uses different teaching materials, and has separate attendance 
and discipline policies. In testifying before the Montana Advisory Committee to the U.S. 
Commission on Civil Rights, tribal education committee members found it was impossible to 
determine the dropout rate because of the high-mobility of students. Counselors do not have 
time to track these students. “Kids can move out and we can’t catch up with them. Many are lost 
through the cracks” (2001). 




30 



28 



The recent federal No Child Left Behind Law (2002) stipulates that students from failing 
schools be given the opportunity to transfer to another school at the expense of the failing school 
In the case of students in the reservation schools, transferring freely among schools has worked 
to the detriment of student success. If all students were to transfer from the reservation schools 
that are on the state’s “schools needing improvement” list to off-reservation schools, it could 
indicate the demise of on reservation schools and the much-needed involvement of the local 
community. 

In order to follow the movement of students between schools, the Montana Advisory 
Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights (2001, p. 62) recommended implementing 
improved procedures to track and follow up on Native American students as they move between 
schools and school districts. In addition to enrollment data, the tracking system could serve as a 
database for varying curricula and materials used across the system schools. 



Possible research issue addressing student mobility: 

D How can several small districts work together as a system to benefit the needs of all 
students including those who frequently move among the schools in the system? 

D Do high student mobility rates have implications for achievement and assessment for 
Native American students attending school on or near Montana’s reservations? If so, what can 
be done? (Strang & von Glatz, 2001). 

DWhat is the actual student mobility rate between schools? What percentage of the 
students in a school transfer within a given year? How many times does a student move among 
schools during a three-year period? 




29 



Access and Communication 

Another challenge for educators and students in these reservation schools centers around 
the issues of communication and access. The nine districts serving the two reservations’ students 
are scattered over several thousand square miles. Driving from a school on one side of a 
reservation to a school on another can take more than an hour. During this time cell phone 
service is not available and other services such as food and fuel are scarce. Internet service is 
sporadic and slow for most of the schools on these reservations. The servers are often down or 
not working. 

Establishing a learning community within a school or school system requires consistent 
collaboration among teachers and administrators. On-line communication can be a useful tool 
when distances are great and opportunities for face-to-face communication are limited. When 
Internet service is not reliable, however, teachers will not depend on it or use it to its full 
potential. This limited access and communication limits the ability of teachers to collaborate for 
professional growth. 

The lack of consistent on-line service also hurts student learning. If there are too few 
students in a single school or too few qualified teachers for a particular class, on-line classes can 
fill a void. If the technology to access these courses is either unavailable or inconsistent, the 
ability of students to participate in on-line classes is compromised. The mathematics to which 
students have access must not be contingent on where they live or the social conditions in which 
they live. Students in poor, rural communities must have the same access as those in more 
affluent communities, even though the delivery method may be different (Campbell & Silver, 
2000 ). 







32 



30 



Suggested topics of research on issues of access and communication: 

D How do limitations in on-line access affect student performance? 

DHow does the difficulty of on-line communication affect the types of 
instructional practices carried out in the classroom? 

D What on-line courses are available to students and what success do students 
have who are enrolled in them? 

DWhat are some barriers that limit collaboration between schools and community- 
based organizations? What are some factors that enhance and strengthen collaboration? 
(Strang & von Glatz, 2001). 

DTo what extent and for what purposes are distance-learning methods used in 
schools serving Native American students, by grade level, type of school, community 
characteristics, and tribe? (Strang & von Glatz, 2001). 



Local Control 

A third obstacle schools encounter is that of local control. Local influences over what 
students are required to know and how they demonstrate this knowledge has traditionally been 
the cornerstone of public education in the United States. In Montana, school districts and 
communities closely protect the right to exercise a wide latitude in executing their own priorities 
and policies. While this practice may have advantages, it also has the effect of diffusing and 
dividing accountability for all of its students. The Advisory Committee to the U. S. Commission 
on Civil Rights (2001) strongly urged the creation of a central governing body with the authority 




33 



31 



to require statewide compliance with the constitutional mandate to guarantee the equitable 
education for all Montana’s students.. 

On Montana’s reservations, several small rural districts may serve the same population of 
students, but each district has locally developed curricula or belongs to different curriculum 
consortia. The educational communities in these districts choose their own texts and materials to 
implement that curriculum. These materials can vary widely in philosophy and structure. 

Policies regarding the make up of the school day, the number and length of periods, and the 
school calendar can vary widely. As students transfer between schools, this inconsistency limits 
the access students have to a coherent curriculum. 

In addition to determining the content taught and the materials used, local control also 
determines who stays and who leaves administrative and teaching positions. Many local school 
boards are comprised of Native Americans who are long time residents of the reservation 
community, while the majority of the teachers are non-Native. As stated earlier, Indian ways of 
knowing and learning can be at odds with the local educational community. When the 
philosophies of what should be taught, how it should be taught, who should teach it, and how the 
knowledge of students should be tested conflict, friction occurs. Clearly, a priority of researchers 
and practitioners is to continue the efforts to encourage collaboration between teachers, 
administrators, and community and tribal members to ensure that all students have equal access 
to quality mathematics opportunities. 

Suggested areas of research on the issue of local control: 




34 



32 



D What are some cultural barriers that limit collaboration between schools and 
tribal- and community- based organizations? What are some factors that enhance and 
strengthen collaboration? (Strang & von Glatz, 2001). 

D Under what circumstances can parental and community involvement have the 
greatest effect on curriculum and classroom practices resulting in increased student 
achievement? 

D What type of accounting or tracking system could be used to encourage 
consistency of policies, curricula and assessment expectations for students attending 
school within these systems? 



What’s Working on Montana’s Reservations 
The previous list of challenges and obstacles to improving student achievement on 
Montana’s reservations highlights the need to concentrate on the system of schools on or near the 
reservations that serve the same population of students. This section will outline events that have 
occurred and appear to have the potential for positive impact on closing the mathematical 
achievement gap for students within these reservation systems. 

Recently the new Center for Learning and Teaching in the West (CLTW) sponsored an 
open forum for mathematics and science teachers on or near the two reservations. Teachers were 
given the opportunity to share how they felt their students were doing, what was working to 
ensure success in mathematics and science for these students, and what materials they were 
using. In addition, they were given the opportunity to discuss identify changes they felt were 
needed to help students succeed. Teachers were eager to share their thoughts; many commented 




33 



that this was the first opportunity they had had to openly address their successes, concerns, and 
beliefs. Extending and building on this type of collaboration has great potential to lead to 
changes that can help close the achievement gap for students in mathematics and science in 
these schools. 

Another example of what’s working is the outreach program of the local tribal colleges. 
Rural Systemic Initiatives sponsored by the National Science Foundation and carried out by 
tribal colleges have encouraged reservation teachers to use various NSF sponsored standards- 
based curricula. Although research indicates these materials are very challenging for teachers to 
implement and require a great deal of professional development and community support, 
teachers are eager to try materials that might make a difference in their students’ mathematics 
achievement. A multi-faceted program of standards-based curricula, multiple forms of 
assessment, high-quality math and science preservice education and professional development, 
administrative support for teachers, and parent and community involvement will improve 
achievement rates and lower dropout rates (Demmert, 2001). Collaboration between all levels of 
educational practitioners with the community appears to be having a positive effect in this 
direction. 



Summary of Suggested Research 

Many of the research questions given in this paper came from the authors’ interpretations 
of teacher and administrator interviews and classroom observations. Other suggestions came 
from the American Indian and Alaska Native Education Research Agenda (Strang and von Glatz, 
2001) - the result of an executive order signed by President Bill Clinton (Executive Order 
No. 13096, 1998). Among the activities that stemmed from this order was a nationwide effort to 



O 




36 



34 



involve tribal leaders and Native education researchers and professors to develop a research 
agenda. This effort is significant because it was guided by Native commitments to self- 
determination, the perpetuation of Native languages and cultures, and a commitment to finding 
effective ways of educating Native children and youth. Because of the commitment of members 
of the Native American community, this research has the potential to significantly improve the 
schooling ofNative American students (Demmert, 2001; Deyhle & Swisher, 1997). 

Major underlying themes for approaching research on Native American education include 
a focus on success, tribal sovereignty, and sensitivity to tribal differences (Strang & von Glatz, 
2001). We need to better understand the pedagogy, standards, assessment, and curriculum 
materials that have been successful in educating Native American students. 

Researchers must work closely with members of the Native American community and 
respect the tribal rights of that community during the research process. Native American 
permission for the research design, methodology and instrumentation is critical, following 
practices like those currently in place in the Navajo Nation. Ideally, Native Americans should be 
members of the research teams. The inclusion ofNative Americans in the entire research effort 
will ensure better collaboration and provide for higher quality research. 

There is clearly a need for research that involves Indian teachers, students, parents, and 
elders in both urban and rural schools, off and on the reservations, in discussions and policy 
development impacting the education of their children. The timely emergence of empowerment 
and community-based models for research and evaluation provide a path for inclusion of these 
stakeholders in conducting research in Native American education. 

The structure and purpose of schools, and the society in which these schools are situated, 
must be carefully considered during the evaluation of the success or failure of American Indians 

O 

ERIC 



37 



35 



in their K-12 and postsecondary experiences (Deyhle & Swisher, 1997). Throughout the paper, 
the authors have suggested research questions that could help shed light on the influence of the 
culture of the Native American student as it encourages or subverts their understanding and use 
of mathematics. 



Concluding Remarks 

Somewhere after your third or fourth visit to the schools on the reservations, you find 
yourself anxious to return. The land is beautiful and raw, the distances are vast, the children are 
bright and the need for understanding and collaboration among all stakeholders is great. 

Research has provided us with the characteristics for successful mathematics reform and the 
successful education for Native Americans. Research has also given us an array of issues to be 
addressed as we work with the systems in which these children live and in which their teachers 
teach to increase student achievement. 

Research has helped educators make a difference. We know more about how culturally 
responsive teaching affects student learning. We know that teachers grounded in the culture of 
the students they teach make a difference. We know that for those individuals who have strong 
cultural identities and know their language, a culturally relevant curriculum is less important. 
Conversely, for those who are less grounded, cultural integration of the curriculum is more 
important. We know that when research is perceived as a partnership between the researcher and 
the community and is sustained over time, the results benefit all parties concerned. Still needed, 
however, is the “interpretation of what this research means in the way teachers are trained, 
schools are organized, curriculum is designed and instruction is delivered” (Deyhle & Swisher, 
1997, p. 182). 



O 




38 



36 



It is important to look beyond the performance of individual students to the systems in 
which they are educated (Nelson-Barber & Estrin, 1995). Establishing a coherent curriculum 
among the reservation schools and the development of teaching philosophies consistent with 
research of best practices for Native American students needs to occur. A tracking system 
should be developed for use across the system to ensure students do not fall through the cracks, 
and that they encounter some form of consistency in their educational experiences as they move 
between schools. Ongoing professional development and collaboration among teachers, schools 
and districts needs to be established, giving them a forum to share methods they’ve found 
successful as well as to discuss recent research on the many issues of education for Native 
American children. Collaboration over these great distances needs to occur both on-site and on- 
line. Finding ways and means to encourage this collaboration is key to providing support for 
teachers, students, and the community. Research on the issues suggested in this paper will guide 
us in this work. 

There are many challenges for these systems. State and federal accountability policies 
are having a tremendous effect on schools that are already struggling to integrate their rich 
cultural values with the predominant educational culture. Montana’s tight economic situation, 
like that currently faced it many states, makes it difficult for the state to provide financial support 
for designing assessments to more equitably address what students know and are able to do. The 
remoteness of this region’s reservations schools, combined with the relatively low teacher 
salaries typical in a rural state like Montana, makes it difficult to find quality teachers to replace 
those who leave. Technical support to provide consistent on-line communication and support for 
ongoing professional development and collaboration is critical. 




39 



37 



The problem is not whether we can make a difference for these children; the issue is how 
to support and maintain these efforts in a complex system influenced by many factors. For too 
long the needs and interests of our Native American children have been either ignored or glossed 
over. Now is the time for Native and non-Native educators to come together with members of 
the Native American community to establish clear research-based guidelines and expectations for 
Native American children and to collaboratively work within the educational systems to ensure 
that those guidelines and expectations become reality. 



References 



American Indian Science & Engineering Society. (1994, 1995). Education American 

Indian/Alaska Native elementary and secondary students: Guidelines for mathematics, 
science and technology programs. Paper presented at the Educational Needs of American 
Indian/ Alaska Native Students in Science, Mathematics and Technology, Boulder, Co. 

Boaler, J. (July, 2002). Learning from teaching: Exploring the relationship between reform 

curriculum and equity. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 33(4), pp. 239- 
258. 

Bordeaux, R. (1995). Assessment for American Indian and Alaska Native learners. ERIC. 
Retrieved August, 2002, from the World Wide Web: 
vsrww.ed.gov/databases/ERIC Digests/ed3 85424.html 

Campbell, P. F., & Silver, E. (2000). Task Force on Mathematics Teaching and Learning in 
Poor Communities-. National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. 

Cleary, L.M. & Peacock, T.D. (1998). Collected Wisdom. Needham heights, Ma. Llyn & 

Bacon. 

Davison, D. M. (2002). Teaching mathematics to American Indian students: A cultural approach. 
In J. E. Hankes & G. R. Fast (Eds.), Changing the faces of mathematics: perspectives on 
indigenous people of North America (pp. 19-24). Reston, Va.: National Council of 
Teachers of Mathematics. 

Delpit, L. (1995). Other people's children. New York: The New Press. 

Demmert, W. G., Jr. (2001). Improving academic performance among Native American students: 
A review of the research literature. Charleston, WV.: ERIC; Clearinghouse on Rural 
Education and Small Schools. 

Deyhle, D., & Swisher, K. (1997). Research in American Indian and Alaska Native education: 
From assimilation to self-determination. In M. W. Apple (Ed.), Review of research in 
education 22 (pp. 1 13-191). Washington, D.C.: American Educational Research 
Association. 




40 



38 



Elmore, R. F. (2002, September - October). Testing trap: The single largest - and possibly most 
destructive - federal intrusion into America's public schools. The Harvard Magazine, 105, 



Fox, S. J. (2001). American Indian/Alaska Native education and standards-based reform 

[Internet]. ERIC Digest. Retrieved August 7, 2002, 2002, from the World Wide Web: 

Hilberg, R. S., R.W., D., Salton, S. S., Youpa, D., & Tharp, R. G. (2002). Standards for effective 
mathematics education for American Indian students. In J. Hankes & G. R. Fast (Eds.), 
Changing the faces of mathematics: Perspectives on indigenous people of North America 
(pp. 25-35). Reston, Va.: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. 

Howley, C., Strange, M., & Bickel, R. (2000). Reserach about school size and school 

performance in impoverished communities. ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and 
Small Schools. Retrieved June 6, 2002, 2002, from the World Wide Web: 

Juneau, S. (2001). A history and foundation of American Indian education policy. Helena, Mt.: 
Montana Office of Public Instruction. 

Lewis, A. (Ed.). (2001). Add it up: Using research to improve education for low-income and 
minority students: Poverty and Race Research Action Council. 

Ma, L. (1999). Knowing and teaching elementary mathematics. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. 

Montana Advisory Committee. (2001). Equal educational opportunity for Native American 

students in Montana public schools. Helena, Mt.: Montana Advisory Committee to the 
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. 

Montana Office for Public Instruction. (1999). Indian education for all. Office for Public 
Instruction. Retrieved August 28, 2002, from the World Wide Web: 

Montana Office for Public Instruction. (2001). Essential understandings about Montana indians: 
Office of Public Instruction. 

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). Principles and standards for school 
mathematics. Reston, Va.: NCTM. 

National Indian Education Association (1999). Form for the century Indian education 

blueprint. Retrieved February 10, 2003 from the World Wide Web: 
http://www.niea.org/blueprintla.htm 

Nelson, K., Simonsen, L., &Swanson, E. (2002). Fundamental components for developing 
culturally rich mathematics education in Montana reservation schools. Manuscript in 
preparation. 

Nelson-Barber, S. (1999). A better education for every child: The dilemma for teachers of 
culturally and linguistically diverse students: Mid-Continent Research for Education 
Learning. 

Nelson-Barber, S., & Estrin, E. T. (1995). Culturally responsive mathematics and science 

education fro Native students. San Francisco, C.: Far West Laboratory for Educational 
Research and Development. 

Nijhuis, M. (2002, August 20). Crow girl's winning science project is not the last straw. 

Christian Science Monitor. 

Northwest Regional Laboratory. (2002). Learn-Ed Nations Inventory; A tool for improving 

schools with American Indian and Alaska Native students. Portland, Oregon: Northwest 
Regional Laboratory. 



35. 



ERIC 




39 



Rural Schools and Community Trust. (2002). An invitation to discuss assessment and 

accountability in public schools: A draft policy statement of the Rural School and 
Community Trust. Randolph, Vt.: Rural Schools and Community Trust. 

Schoenfeld, A. H. (2002). Making mathematics work for all children; Issues of standards, testing 
and equity. Educational Researcher, 31{\), 13-25. 

Smith, G. A. (2002). Place-based education: learning to be where we are. Phi Delta Kappan, 
55(8), 584-595. 

Solano-Flores, G., & Nelson-Barber, S. (2001). On the cultural validity of science assessments. 
Journal for Research in Science Teaching, 38, 5. 

Strang, W., & von Glatz, A. (2001). American Indian and Alaska Native education ressearch 
agenda: Working group. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education Office of 
Educational Research and Improvement 

Tharp, R. G., & Yamauchi, L. (1994). Instructional conversations in Native American 
classrooms. ERIC. Retrieved August 26, 2002, from the World Wide Web: 
www.ed.gov/databases/ERIC Digests/ed3 76733.html 

Trumbell, E., Nelson-Barber, S., & Mitchell, J. (2002). Enhancing mathematics instruction for 

indigenous American students. In J. E. Hankes & G. R. Fast (Eds.), Changing the faces of 
mathematics: perspectives on indigenous people of North America (pp. 1-18). Reston, 

Va.: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. 

Lab at Brown University, (2002). Culturally responsive teaching: Nine principles. Northeast and 
Islands Regional Educational Lab at Brown University. Retrieved May 2, 2002, from the 
World Wide Web: http://www.lab.brown.edu/tdl/ 




42 




U.S. Department of Education 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 



ERIC 

tticfilloul Reaorco totonailiM Cess 



NOTICE 



Reproduction Basis 



X 



This document is covered by a signed "Reproduction Release (Blanket)" 
form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all or classes of 
documents from its source organization and, therefore, does not require a 
"Specific Document" Release form. 



This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may be 
reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form (either 
"Specific Document" or "Blanket"). 




EFF-089 (1/2003) 



