DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 352 172 PS 020 968 

AUTHOR Sears, Nedra C»; Medearis, Linda 

TITLE Natural Math: A Progress Report on Implementation of 

a Family Involvement Project £or Early Childhood 
Mathematics among Children of the Oklahoma Seminole 
Head Start and Boley Head Start. 
SPONS AGENCY Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education, Oklahoma 
City. 
Oct 92 

48p,; Paper presented at the Meeting of the Rocky 
Mountain Research Association (Stillwater, OK, 
October 1992) . 

Speeches/Conference Papers (150) — Reports ~ 
Descriptive (141) — Information Analyses (070) 

MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

Academic Achievement; American Indian Culture; 
American Indian Education; ''^American Indians; *Black 
Students; Cultural Activities; '^Kindergarten 
Children; Literature Reviews; '"^Mathematics 
Instruction; Outcomes of Education; Parent 
Participation; ^'^Parents as Teachers; Parent School 
Relationship; '^Preschool Children; Preschool 
Education; Program Descriptions ; Program 
Effectiveness 



The Natural Math project was undertaken to encourage 
parents of Native American and Black preschool and kindergarten 
children to engage in math activities and games at home. Natural Math 
also attempted to integrate Seminole culture into math materials. The 
project originally included only Seminole preschool and kindergarten 
children. Later, Boley school, located in a rural Black community, 
petitioned for inclusion. Natural Math activities included: (1) the 
provision of start-up supplies and other materials to the children 
and their families; (2) an initial meeting to explain the project and 
the proper use of the materials; (3) a portable computer lab; (A) a 
math fair; and (5) the distribution of materials for the summer. 
After their participation in the project, former Head Start children 
were tested for verbal, math, and social skills, and parents were 
surveyed. Participating students had highe:: raw scores than the 
students of the previous year. At Boley School, Natural Math 
materials were introduced to the children before they were given to 
parents, with several advantages resulting. An extensive literature 
review covers adult literacy and communication among Native 
Americans; a Native American perspective of giftedness; the role of 
culture in education; demographic and academic achievement data for 
six tribes; and Native American early childhood education and Head 
Start programs. A 36-item bibliography is included. (AC) 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 

ABSTRACT 



Vr ?V Vc Vc Vc 5V Vc Vc Vc V c Vc Vc Vc Vc "ft Vc ?V Vc "k Vc Vc ?V Vc Vc ?V ■krft'fe V: Vr Vc i<')*fk'k Vc Vc sV 5'c ?V Vc Vc iV Vc Vc iV Vc Vc Vc Vc t't j'c 

Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

from the original document . ''^ 

Vc ?V ?V i( Vc Vf V? Vc Vc Vc -k Vc Vc Vc Vc Vc Vc Vc Vc Vc :k it: -k Vc Vc Vc k Vc Vc Vc :k k Vc Vc Ve Vc Vc :k k k:k-ki( ik Ve ?V Vc k^fti/fkidk Vc ?VVc A Vc Vc -k k kici(i( -k 



U.S. DF.PAnTMENTOf EOUCATK>N 
Office of Educational RaaearCh and Improvemant 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER {ERIQ 

a(This document has b««n reproduced as 
received trom tf^e person or offlnmration 
originating it 

□ Minor Changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 

a Points of View or opinions stated m thiS docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
CERt position or policy 



■fi:- 

r,C Natural Math 

Progress Report on Implementation of a Family Involvement Project for Early Childhood 
Mathematics Among Children of the Oklahoma Seminole Head Start and Boley Head Start 



Nedra C. Sears 
and 

Linda Medearis 

East Central University 

Ada, Oklahoma 74820 

Recognitions, dedication and acknowledgements 

This project was funded by the Eisenhower Fund for the Improvement of Mathematics and 
Science and supported by East Central University and the Oklahoma Regents of Higher Education. 

The project staff wishes to thank the tidministrators, teachers and aides of the Seminole 
Nation Head Start, Justice School Administration and teachers, Boley School administration, Head 
Start teachers and aides, elementar>' teachers, and parents, grandparents, children and other family 
members who helped and were involved in various ways. In addition, a special recognition of the 
emerging promise of the project artist, Kevin Hickman, who through his talent interpreted the 
concepts for the children in outstanding artistic products. 

This project is for the children of Justice and Boley schools. 

Presented to the Rocky Mountain Research Association 

October 1992,Stillwater Oklahoma 



( ■ ^ 

-PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
■ MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



ERIC 



Abstract 

This field research and development project has a goal of determining if family interaction 
in math activities with preschool ( 3 and 4 year old) children can lead to higher performance by the 
children at the kindergarten level and to a higher level of family-child interaction with math through 
activities and games. In the absence of clear evidence that cultural patterns cause lower 
achievement particularly in math, the basic assumption of the project is that all children regardless 
of culture have the potential to succeed in mathematics and that differences among groups are the 
result of patterns of learned behavior and not innate. Critical features of project development 
were consideration of the standards for the National Council for Teachers of Mathematics, the 
performance level of children entering kindergarten after the Head Start experience, the 
developmental needs of 3 and 4 year old children, consideration of current research on emergent 
literacy, and the cultural features of the Seminole people. During the first evaluation, teachers, 
parents and administrators expressed positive attitudes toward the activities while providing 
suggestions for improvement. A significant part of the project involved the use of art in the 
creation of materials appropriate for the children and families. Another popular feature was the 
limited use of cultural motifs such as the clan patterns in the creation of puzzles. The screening of 
kindergarten children who had been involved in the Natural Math project suggested that Natural 
Math results in improved raw scores of children entering kindergarten. The response of families to 
training sessions indicated that families are willing and interested in helping their child if provided 
with tools and suggestions. 



Introduction 



Helen Cheek stated that mathematics was the critical filter which excluded Indian students 
from access to education in such fields as medicine, engineering, and the sciences. (Cheek, 1983) 
Cheek went on to describe findings that Indian students performed poorer in mathematics than 
Blacks, Hispanics, and White students in spite of average performance on tests of intelligence. A 
review of the .1992 NEA report on Ph. D.s in higher education revealed that few Indians are 
teaching in higher education particularly in fields related to mathematics. 

The question of why there is a disparity between expected and actual performance levels 
in mathematics among Indian students has been described and sometimes attributed to a conflict 
between the "learning styles" of Indian students and the teaching styles of primarily non-Indian 
teachers. Evidence that such "learning styles" are the basis of the poor performance in 
mathematics has not been specifically shown. Phillips (1983) observed differences in conversation 
etiquette and interaction styles particular to the Indian tribal members of the Warm Springs 
reservation. Children developed a distinct style of language interaction by the age of two even if 
the family did not live on the reservation or speak the native language (Phillips, 1983). The 
strength of the development of the personal interaction style among young children indicates the 
important influence of families on the thinking and interaction patterns of young children. These 
patterns of learned behavior seem resistant to change. Attempts to change the cultural style and 
language of Indian children has resulted in cultural tmgedy for tribes throughout North America. 
Indian people in the 90's seem to be working to rebuild this important link to their heritage. In 
rebuilding the cultural link, can success in other areas be enhanced for Indian children? 

Few projects which specifically addressed math improvement among Indian elementary 
students were found. The projects indicite little or no progress in changing the math achievement 
patterns among Indian children whether on or off reseivations with one exception. (McLaughlin, 
1982) No projects were located which specifically addressed emerging mathematics literacy 

3 

ERIC 



among Indian children. In math education however, interest in the constructivist approach in 
elementary mathematics has support by such theorists as Kamii (1990). Kamii argues that each 
person constructs their own knowledge of number through creating and coordinating relationships. 
Building on the work of Piaget, Kamii defines logico-mathematical knowledge as that which must 
be constructed by the child and the social knowledge as that which is passed on by the culture 
itself. There is no evidence to support Kamii's argument for the children of the Seminole tribe 
since no studies have been done with this particular population. However, Kamii presents a 
logical argument in favor of developing a wide knowledge of relationships with which subsequent 
construction of logico-mathematical knowledge can be constructed by the child. Kamii *s 
observations have particularly strong implications for the children in this study. 

This project was developed because of the low achievement of the children in a public 
school with a large population of Seminole children. Initial discussions with teachers and 
administratoi-s led to a more complete analysis of test data which determined that mathematics was 
the lowest area for the students. In spite of extra tutoring and assistance through such programs as 
Chapter 1, the children were not achieving, particularly in mathematics. Parent support was 
another area which educators feU was low. School pei-sonnel described low levels of parent 
involvement in school functions and lack of encouragement to the children in such activities as 
completing homework. Parents were observed as they attended school open house functions. 
These observations tended to contradict the descriptions of Seminole i parents. Seminole parents 
seemed very interested in looking at the classroom and the work of the students. They also 
clustered with their children in small groups examining grade cards carefully. However, few of 
them seemed confident in approaching the teacher to talk. Conversations with the teachers seemed 
dominated by the white parents. These observations of parents indicated that lack of interest was 
perhaps not as important as the development of confidence in approaching school authorities. The 
consideration of how parents can become involved in the math success of their children began to 
emerge as issue to consider. Thus, issues of math achievement and parent involvement seemed to 
be essential elements for the success of these elementary school students. . 

1 SemlnolG Is used to Indicate the dominate Indian culture. Other Indian people such as Creeks are also 
present In the target population, although to a lesser degree. 

4 



ERLC 



5 



Statement of the Problem 

The issue of how math achievement can be enhanced among Indian children has not been 
well defined as to the relevant variables, the cultural context requirements, and whether or not 
"learning style** for mathematics is an actual difference among the groups or a learned behavior. 
The important role of the family in the early development of thinking and interaction^ has been 
suggested by Phillips (1983). This study proposed to investigate the effects of early family and 
child math activities on school readiness and parent involvement. 

Review of Related Literature 

Academic achievement among Indian students seems to be evaluated from a global or 
monolithic perspective because of limited research evidence with respect to individi al tribal units. 
This global approach tends to obscure some of the the real differences and needs of the various 
indigenous people, tribal units and various cultural settings. This minimal amount of data from 
tribes is one of the most important reasjOns why educational research has proven to be of limited 
value in solving specific educational problems for Indian people. In the search for answers and 
models on which to fomulate a program, achievement among various tribes was reviewed because 
of lack of inforiTiation available about Seminole Indian children. Factors which seem to be most 
germane to this project were: ( 1) the issues of adult's ability to help (adult literacy), (2) giftedness 
from an Indian perspective (what is important in the culture), (3) the role of culture in educational 
materials and instruction, (4) parent involvement and academic achievement, (5) emergent literacy 
and (6) meeting the standards of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. 

1. Aduh Literacy and Communication 
Hosey and others (1983) conducted a study to determine how well Native Americans of 
the Northwest (Portland, Oregon area) comprehended the infonnation published related to self care 
of diabetic conditions. Adult Indians in this Health Center had a high rate of diabetes and seemed 
to be unable to do effective self care. Testing revealed that the average literacy rate for Vh of the 

2 Interaction refers to oral communication, body language, play, and social Interaction. 

5 

o u 

ERIC 



patients was about at the fifth grade level (n^56). The other 1/3 was below the fifth grade level on 
a modified Wide Range Achievement Test. A review of all the information pamphlets provided the 
clients revealed that the average readability for 17 commercially prepared pamphlets was at the 
10th level. This project designed new pamphlets at or below the fifth grade reading level and 
included more culturally relevant language and illustrations. Follow up tests of clients showed that 
74 % of the readers were able to read and understand the new materials at least at an instructional 
level. This study suggests that parent information which might be provided by schools consider 
the problem of readability. The critical factors seems to be 

1. Readability at about the fifth grade level 

2. Using graphics with culturally relevant features. 

3. Minimizing shifts of ideas. 

4. Large lowercase print and personalized tests. 

5. Each booklet focused on one topic with a maximum of four learning objectives. 

The role of adult litemcy plays an important role in the parent involvement. Inability to 
read, write and compute easily is a serious barrier to families who might otherwise be willing to 
participate in school activities and work with their children. Attempts to develop parent 
involvement programs should consider the issue of adult literacy when considering options. 
Communication with Native American Families. 

Research relating to communication with families has been also studied as it relates to the 
fields of counseling. Everett, Proctor, and Cartmell summarized the barriers to service delivery to 
Native American children and their families relating to counseling services. Because of a shoitage 
of non-Indian psychologists and counseling professionals, those providing such services are most 
likely to be non-Indian. While counseling services are not directly related to academic 
performance, the skills and cultural awareness necessary to counsel parents and students on a wide 
variety of topics relating to school and home can be enhanced with a better understanding of the 
needs of Indian students and families. This study provided some clues for communication with 
families but gave little specific information about the target population. 



6 

•• V 



The role of oral language and the development of child-adult interactions was studied by 
Phillips (1983) through direct observation of two groups. Phillips affirmed the communication 
style differences between non-Indians of Madras, Oregon and tlie Native Americans of the Warms 
Springs Reservation. Her observations of individuals and groups as well as classrooms on the 
reservation and in town support views of researchers like Little-Soldier ( 1989) on the break down 
of verbal interaction among Native children after the early years. This breakdown may be related 
to the movement toward the more foimal highly structured lecture/recitation mode referred to by 
Little-Soldier. Phillips compared the first and sixth grade students in both the non-Indian and 
Reservation schools. A distinct difference between the Indian children was noted. Sixth grade 
students rarely spoke in class while non-Indian children competed for verbal control of the 
classroom. Teachers who were primarily non-Indian give higher grades to students who are 
verbally involved in the classroom, according to Phillips. 
■ -f 

' ' Little-Soldier's (1989) comments concerning the role of Head Start in language 
development seem to be in agreement with the observations of Oklahoma Seminole children who 
came into the kindergarten from Head Stan, Language interaction seemed to be greater among 
children who had participated in Head Start programs- Teachers of the Oklahoma Seminole 
children reported an increase in verbal activity among children who had previously attended Head 
Start. This development of oral fluency is a critical factor in the language success of children 
entering elementary school and influences the teachers* attitudes towards the students as being 
able or less able to function in the classroom. 

The role of language development among young children has also been observed by 
Phillips (1983). Phillips observed families and the development of interaction patterns among the 
Warm Springs Indians. She indicated that children from the very beginning are expected to 
develop physical control of themselves and a calm response to events. Verbal excitement is not 
encouraged. Children develop a high receptive vocabulary and are expected to follow the verbal 
directions of adults. As children become older, they show their interest through the eyes instead of 
the whole face. Wann Springs Indians believe that older people (40+) should be the ones to speak 
rather than younger people. They believe that someone of that age has wisdom and verbal control. 

7 

8 

ERLC 



Younger people are to do physical things while older people are the speakers. Physical control of 
the body in motion, such as balance, is prized and cncoumged among the young as in dai;cc and 
team sports. Babies arc tassed in the air and playfully wresded at a very young age. They are also 
kept close tc an aduh at all times. Children are used to being among many people all their lives and 
do not necessarily have one authority figure. Gestures and body language develop before children 
enter school. This mode of intemction is very resistant to change unlike language which may be 
lost through the generations. Speaking English is not the main problem in the classroom. It is the 
pattern of interactions which are confusing to Indian children when they reach school. They often 
do not comprehend the teacher's message and do not know the protocols for correct response. As 
children get older, they tend not to speak up in class because of the communication problem as well 
as the tendency of avoiding showing they know things and appearing above their friends. Indian 
people work together on projects without leaders in the non-Indian sense. The division of labor 
follows an invisible order which is cooperative. Children on group projects concentrate on the task 
with no need for someone to tell them what to do. 

Some important points from the Phillips work for the classroom are: 

1. Students may not respond in an observable way in large groups. 

2. Students may not respond in an observable way in small groups. 

3. Students may work better one to one or 

4. Students may work better on a large group project and offer suggestions which are 
either accepted or ignored by others without comment. 

Phillips describes the group interaction of adults. Adults preferred to sit in circles rather 
than rows. This was to prevent someone who may be mad at you from looking at your back 
which is considered a very terrible thing. The eyes are considered weapons which can damage 
another person with a glare. 

Seminole of Florida 

Robbins (1984) studied the relationship of juvenile delinquency and Indian social concepts 
among Seminole youths of Florida. Seminole youths between 10 and 15 ye^rs of age were studied 

8 



5 



using a self report of delinquent activities. In addition, data were collected on the social 
relationships or "attachments'' that these youths had. Tlie study confirmed that Seminole youths 
like most youths report a high number of activities which fall into the category of delinquent. 
Seminole youths would select the "don't know" response when asked about the behavior of peers. 
Attachments among Indians were difficult to pin down using the instrument which is typically used 
to measure such attachments. In the discussion, Robbins explained that the culture of the Seminole 
family and extended family did not lend itself to the instrument used. Seminole family members 
mrely express personal feelings or affection within the family group. As one Seminole put it, 
"You don't say something that you already know." The family structure is different from the non- 
Indian family which made attachments difficult to trace. Children may go out alone at night and no 
one goes to look for the child. It is presumed tliey will return when they want to return. Parents in 
the non-Indian sense did not always do the parenting. One youth said that when his parents 
worked, the grandparent was the one who knew where the children were. When the grandmother 
died, he became the one who knew. While the "parent" role is defined differently, it is still present 
and workable within the traditional Seminole culture. Control of behavior has been reliable in the 
traditional Seminole family and tribal structure. No family wants children to misbehave or do the 
wrong thing. The traditional methods of control of behavior has eroded as the breakdown in 
culture and traditions has diminished. Robbins goes on to explain that the Seminole youth will 
express an non-Indian view when describing their relationships with teachers and others in the 
non-Indian society. Semiiiole youths seemed able to adapt their social behavior to the non-Indian 
or Seminole behavior with relative ease according to Robbins. The theory of social conflict or 
confusion seems to lack relevance. However, weakening the traditional tribal culture and control 
seemed to weaken the ability of members to maintain stable family and social relationships within 
the tribe. The dual social struetbre theory is unlikely to be well understood by school authorities 
and non-Indian society as a whole, which may lead to confusion among teachers and silence 
among Seminole students and families. 

The search for other studies of the Seminoles with respect to learning have not been 
successful. Publications on the Oklahoma Seminoles have focused on cultural considerations and 
history. According to Howard and Lena (1984) the population of Oklahoma Seminoles at that time 

9 



was estimated to be over 9,000 as compared to 2,000 Florida Seminolcs. The Seminole people 
vary in their views particularly with respect to culture. As a people, they tend to be intelligent, 
fiercely independent, and extremely talented in almost every area. Observations of children in the 
school sr*tting reveals that children are vciy respectful to elders and teachers. This pattern seems to 
follow the general Seminole pattern of respect for older people. Seminole children in the 
classroom seem to be rarely in trouble for talking out of turn or disruptive behavior. In meetings 
where parents are present, children wander on their own and do not get into trouble. The Seminole 
people of Oklahoma seem respectful of individual privacy and do not speak out in groups when 
others who have more authority or wisdom are present. One may find the Oklahoma Seminole of 
today share many of the characteristics of other groups such as conversation etiquette, but they 
tend to be much more private in sharing their ideas and culture. 

2. Giftedness from an Indian Perspective 
Tonemah (1987) reviewed the concept of giftedness among Native Americans. He stressed 
the need for multi-dimensional assessment and reviews one survey of what giftedness means to 
Native Americans among 266 American Indian educators. High intelligence was ranked highest 
closely followed by high creativity, high academic achievement, high problem solving skills, self 
discipline, respect for tribal elders, leadership ability, respect for others, artiwStic talent, mathematics 
ability, task commitment and scientific ability. Qualities such as stoiytelling, athletic prowess, 
tribal cultuml knowledge and language skills are also important attributes among Indian educators. 
Tonemah's summary is the basis of a assessment instalment which could be used to help in the 
identification of the gifted Native American- This instrument could also be useful in identifying 
curricular areas which are frequently neglected in the education of young Indian children 
particularly when tribal affiliations are disturbed. Indian children in today*s schools have few 
opportunities to obtain basic infonnation about their own particular tribal heritage and language or 
the heritage of other Native American groups. The non-Indian stream of culture has for the most 
part obscured the potential for knowledge of Native peoples. Giftedness is often viewed as a 
^'something" that a person has in spite of environment and training, but just as the non-Indian and 
Native American view of giftedness includes both personal characteristics and environmental 
characteristics, the Native American child with potential gifts may not flourish in the absence of an 

10 

11 



environment which provides the opportunity for learning and acquiring the gifts and skills. The 
American Indian Gifted and Talented Assessment Model ( AIGTAM) may be a beginning point for 
a review of the differences in assessing giftedness h various areas, Wlnle mathematics and science 
play a role in this assessment, the AIGTAM criteria places a great emphasis on the skills and 
abilities which relate to cultural elements such as music, dance, storytelling and knowledge of 
culture. Those elements which are most prized in the Indian culUzre seem to be those which arc the 
most neglected in the non-Indian culture, 

3. The Role of Culture in Education 
Education plays an important role in the transmission and maintenance of culture. Cultural 
relevance has been shown to be the cr.tical difference for some children. The TIPS (Teaching in 
Pueblo Settin^^) program of the Santa Fe Indian School, has demonstrated that children of the 
Pueblos can be successful in science when teaching is done by high school students of the Santa 
Fe High School (Nav^ahoe students). The project is a clear indication of the success of teaching 
within the culture and using the culture as a framework for education instead of imposing a new 
culture with education. High school students are currently teaching in the Laguna Elementary, 
Acoma Sky City Community School, Pueblos Pintado, Hotevilla Bacavi Community School, 
Tesuque Day School, Santa Clara, and Crownpoint. Jeremiah Cronin, project director, indicated 
that cultural relevance in one pueblo is not always well accepted in the next pueblo. His 
observations illustrate the complexities of ethnosciencc and some problems in developing and 
implementing a culturally relevant curriculum for what may appear as a homogeneous group. 
(Cronin, 1992) The success of the program. fiowever, provides support to the argument that 
culturally relevant teaching can make a difference for learning subjects such as science which has 
been a traditionally difficult subject for indigenous people. 

4. Demographic Infonnation and Academic Achievement 
Academic achievement among Native American people has been characterized by spotty success. 
In the following section, projects and studies which provide specific infoitnation regarding critical 
factors are included. Cun'ent census data on the status of the American Indian in Oklahoma have 
yet to be released. The following studies are by tribal affiliation wherever possible. 



11 



Benally (1987) summarized findings relating to American Indian Education in a review of 
educational issues. Keys idear, from this review are: 

1. American Indians were one of the fastest growing and youngest ethnic groups in the 
country with the median age of 18 in 1984. 

2. The school dropout rate of American Indians and Alaska Natives was the highest of all 
ethnic groups (29%). 

3. With every year in school, the achievement gap between American Indians and white 
students widens especially in mathematics (2.4 years difference in the sixth grade). 

4. Native Americans arc the most poorly represented in the natural sciences most likely as 
Check (1983) states because mathematics forms the critical filter for success in the sciences. 

5. Native American view themselves as hopelessly incom.petent in math and science. 

6. Opportunities to provide special help in math and science through university programs 
are mostly located in Colorado and New Mexico. 

7. High rates of child neglect seems related to the frequency of dysfunctional families 
among Native Americans. With the break up of extended families, the traditional child rearing 
assistance support has disappeared and parents find it harder to be "good parents." Many Indians 
of today or their parents were reared in boarding schools away from their own home and have not 
had culturally appropriate models for child rearing. 

8. Feelings of loss of control or power in their own lives contributes to a sense of 
frustration among Indians. 

9. Parents have a lack of iiivolvemenl with their child's teachers because they lack 
experience in interacting with school personnel and feel they do not understand the curricular and 
counseling needs of their children. They are doubtful about how their input might be received by 
the school and they do not wish to feel intimidated or appear foolish so they remain inactive... but 
they are not disinterested. 

10. Outdoor education is particularly appropriate for Native American children because of 
the involvement in meaningful learning in a natural context. 

Cheyenne 

McLaughlin, et. al, (1983) reported successful outcomes in reading, spelling and 

12 

1j 



mathematics for the Behavior Analysis Model of Follow Though among the North Cheyenne 
children in a public school and BIA reservation school. Students who hud been in the schools 
since kindergarten were classified as the cohort and those who had transferred into the school were 
the non-cohoit group. Classrooms were identified as adhering to the program model and those 
which did not. Model implementation was defined as (a) use of the sponsor-iapproved curricula; 
(b) a functioning motivational system (token economy or contingency contracting); (c) use of 
parents and relatives as aides; (d) an emphasis on instruction in the basic academic skills. One 
hundred percent (100%) of the classrooms achieved at or above grade levels in reading in the 
classrooms where the model was implemented while 12.5% (cohort) and 50% (non-cohort) of the 
classrooms were at or above grade level in reading in non-implementation classrooms. Math 
achievement was 100% and 87.5% at or above grade level in model implementation classes while 
at 0% and 12.5% in non-implementation rooms was reported. Spelling was 62.5% at or above 
grade level in implementation as compared to 12.5% and 0% in non-implementation classrooms. 
Achievement was measured with the Wide Range Achievement Tests. (McLaughlin, et al,1983) 
This study indicates that when a good mode! of instruction is followed in the classroom there can 
be positive outcomes for Cheyenne children. It also shows that when classroom teachers leave out 
or substitute for important parts of the model of instruction, children do not do as well in the 
classroom. This study is important because it strongly refutes the notion that Indian children 
somehow lack the ability to perform in various academic areas. 

Choctaw 

The classroom language patterns of Choctaw (Mississippi) students were compared with 
non-Indian (Lawrence, Kansas) students to determine wnether the perceived differences in 
language between non-Indian and Native American Indian students could be verified through 
observations. (Greenbaum, 1985) Analysis of tape recorded classroom interactions revealed a 
significant difference between the non-Indian and Choctaw students. Choctaw students had lower 
duration of utterance as a group, lower individual utterance durations, gazed at peers rather than the 
teacher or other objects more, participated in choral speaking more and made more butting-in 
interruptions, and required a longer pause before responding to questions. In addition, teachers of 
Choctaw students asked twice as many questions than teachers of non-Indian students. Choctaw 

13 

hi 



students seem to have a different standard of conversation etiquette than the non-Indian teachers. 
Teachers dominate and control the flow of conversation through switchboard participation. 
Teachers give cues and nonverbal indicators of when the teacher is finished talking and approval of 
students to participate in talking. Choctaw students are familiar with different conversation 
interaction customs and do not recognize the non-Indian patterns of nonverbal behaviors. Students 
also do not look at the teacher but instead gaze at each other perhaps seeking appropriate cues. 
This diminishes the observation of the teachere nonverbal switching signals. 

Teachers may perceive Native Americans as inattentive, laconic, dull-whted, silent and 
unresponsive while Native Americans may perceive non-Indians as bossy and too directive. 
However, Choctaw students seem to differ from some other Native American cultural groups in 
being more disruptive and noisy as compared with Sioux, for example. Uttle research has been 
done on cross cultural differences in verbal behavior among the 300 American Indian tribes. The 
tendency to view Indians as having a single set of behaviors seems unrealistic (Greenbaum, 1985). 
Greenbaum indicated that Choctaw students' butting-in and disruptive behavior seemed to reflect a 
different set of social skills among the students mther than a deliberate attempt to misbehave. This 
pattern of dismption in the classroom seems to be characteristic of some minority classrooms. This 
study shows that differences in classroom conversation etiquette can be observed, but it would be 
misleading to suggest that this same pattern is present among Indians as a group. Seminole 
children do not seem to follow this conversation style. Observations indicate that they are usually 
more subdued and reticent in responding verbally. More work in the area of tribal conversation 
styles would be needed before accurate statements can be made on particular cultural units. 

Crec (Alberta Canada) 

Among Cree adolescents studied (Camew & Clark, 1985) the use of tutoring and 
computers seemed to achieve some positive goals which tends to indicate that some forms of 
intervention can be successful. The degree to which "mentoring" can serve to interpret learning 
tasks within the framework of the culture may be a critical element in the process. Another 
question is the issue of how well the computer can serve as a culturally neutml tool for learning. 

Camew & Clerk (1985) report that efforts to intervene in the cognitive functioning of Cree 

14 



adolescents of Alberta Canada have met with mixed results. A program of cognitive education, 
introductory Logo, and extended computer activities, along with reading, writing and mathematics 
resulted in positive outcomes in cognitive functioning and improved achievement in all areas except 
mathematics. Wliile attitudes toward academic subjects £md schooling did not change, attendance 
was improved. Students responded favorable to the use of the word processor for writing 
activities seeming to prefer this to writing with paper and pencil, 

Leith and Sientz, (1984) reported on successful teaching strategies in Northern Manitoba 
schools. Six teaching strategies under four major approaches were studied among both elementary 
and secondary students. These included the following: 

A. Rational approach-teacher directed toward a generalization based on reason. 

A- 1 Demonstration-Questioning 
A-2 Values Discussion 

B. Guided Discovery Approach-Teacher guides students to take an active part in 
discovering relationships among phenomena either tight or open ended. 

B- 1 Activity Centei-s 
B-2 Activity Sessions 

C. The experimental approach-Use if the experimental method, 
(scientific method) 

D. Group Problem Solving 

E. Information-Centered assignment-students work independently and search for 
information on a topic. 

F. Individual Assignment 

Student teachers used all of these stmtegies but Demonstrating-Questioning was the most 
popular at both elementary and secondary while Activity Sessions were the second most popular at 
the elementary level. Activity Sessions and Infoimation-Centered tied for second at the secondary 
level. Elementary students preferred the Activity Sessions and Group Problem Solving strategies 
and liked least the Demonstration-Question and Information-Centered. Secondary students like the 
Values Discussion and Information-Centered and disliked Demonstration-Questioning. 

15 

ERLC 



Success was determined through obseivations and tests by teachei s. Problem solving was 
most successful for elementary students and Individual Assignment was rated highest for 
secondary. Values discussions was deemed the least successful for both elementary and 
secondary. A Pearson product moment correlation between attitudes and success show no 
relationship between student attitudes towards strategy and the corresponding success. This study 
like other studies of Native American children tends to support the idea that group problem solving 
is the most successful for elementary students while individual assignments tend to be better for 
secondary students. Questioning techniques were least favored by the Indian students but most 
favored by the student teachers. 

Ojibway (Alaska) 

Persi and Branatti (1987) compared the performance of low achieving Ojibway students to 
a matched group of non-Native students on the Category Test (relating to Full Scale IQ) and to 
explore test performance and levels of academic achievement. Results supported the contention 
that Natives would show better performance than non-Natives on a culture free test, however, the 
results also show that slow academic progress is related to lower levels of performance on 
psychometric intelligence measures such as the Category Test. Results of this study tend to 
confirm that culture free tests may be less biased toward Native American but at the same time, 
low performance on such tests are good predictors of academic perfomiance. 

McShane (1988) investigated the relationship of intellectual and psychoHnguistic abilities to 
the achievement gains of Ojibway Indian reservation children. McShane concluded that 
knowledge of an upper elementary school Indian child's scores on the WISC-R Block Design, 
Object Assembly, and Picture Arrangement subtests, along with knowledge of ITPA Visual 
Association, Auditory Closure, Grammaiic Closure and Sound Blending performances would 
provide educators or psychologists with valuable predictive information aboiu the children's 
probable ability to make gains in reading, language and mathematics. McShane indicated that 
attention to the development of these skills might enhance the achievement levels of Indian 
children. 

16 



ERLC 



IV 



Browne's (1984) study of 197 Native Americans of the Northern plains on WISC-R 
scoring patterns drew attention to the lower variance on the verbal performance of Indian children 
with a standard deviation of L6 for the verbal average for the whole groups 1.7 for females and 
1.6 for males. Younger children showed a slightly higher standard deviation of 1.7 as compared 
with older children (1.5). McShane did not specially deal with the low variance in the verbal 
performance of Indians compared with non-Indian but his data tends to indicate this same pattern 
of low variance in verbal performance. This seems consistent with the findings of Phillips (1983) 
whose studies of verbal patterns among Indians indicates that Indian children are not reinforced for 
verbal performance but for physical perfomiance. Verbal development is considered a thing to 
come later in life according to the Phillips study. Browne's study tends to support the contention 
that Indian children often perfom differently than general populations and particularly on right- 
hemispheric processing tasks such as Picture Completion, Mazes, Object Assembly,and Block 
Design. The results indicate that Indian children have higher performance level than verbal scores 
on the A\1SC-R. While this indicator may sometimes be used as an indication of intellectual 
disability, Browne supports the idea that this pattern is an indication of right hemispheric 
preferences among Indian children. 

Tlingit (Alaska) 

Guilmet (1984) reported that few Tlingit (Alaskan Native) students ever learned 
mathematical physics and no physics courses were offered in Tlingit high schools. Those who 
attempted physics failed miserably. He attributes this failure to the effect of cultural patterns of 
cognition. Tlingit and other native or subsistence cultures learn by imitating behavior of others 
with litt'e oral language used by the "teacher.'' Learning and retention seemed best when the task 
was in a story context for the Tlingit. 

Guilmet (1984, p. 12) supports his argument with Berland's theory that the social 
environment-efTects contribute to cognitive development. Even non-verbal intelligence tests do not 
seem to adequately measure cognition because the theoretical basis of such tests tend to ignore 
situational causes of children's learning. Different cultural experiences can increase or retard the 

17 



rate at which a child may progress through Piaget's stages of cognitive development toward the 
goal of fonnal thinking. Ethnoscience would stmcture the teaching/leaming model of science on 
the characteristics of teaching and learning that characterizes the culture of the student. Each stage 
of development would use Piagetion like tasks based on the cultural modality of the student as 
steps toward the goal of formal propo?>itional thinking. Thus ethnocognition forms the framework 
for thinking, building on the indigenous knowledge base. 

Questions to be asked in determining the ethnocognition parameters for developing a 
culturally relevant curriculum might include: 

At what ages do children become involved in subsistence or living skill activities? 

What subsistence or living skills are important in the group? 

What activities do children observe prior to participation? . . 

What oral descriptions of activities are heard by children of differing ages? 

Do adults give oral descriptions of activities to the young regarding correct behavioi? 

Do adults intentionally or unintentionally model correct behavior? 

Do young practice subsistence or living skill activities during play? 

Do older children or peers help children learn the subsistence tasks? 

Can we transfer the traditional teaching methods into the classroom? 

Answers to these questions can provide clues to the development of an appropriate 
cognitive model for the cultural group of interest. 

Guilmet (1984) provides a model of science development for Tlingit children based on their 
interaction with the physical world rather than the mathematical based science which predominates 
Western culture and tradition. Within the interactional model of science for the Tlingit, Guilmet 
includes the following guidelines: 

• 1. Children acquire knowledge of the natural world by watching others rather than through 
oral descriptions of relationships and concepts. 

2. Information is acquired in the context of use such as developing a wild game call to 
closely mimic the sound of the bird, or testing the snowcrust to determine whether a snowmobile 
can be supported. 

18 



ERLC 



13 



3. Other examples of concept building through action include; using stones to count sets of 
objects, constructing a circle by using a rope fixed at one end and a stick at the other end, using 
stories to align tasks with traditional ways of working. 

4. Use of task completion and ways of working to determine the cognitive level such as the 
ability to conserve when working witli clay. 

Guilmet (1984) explains that there is not presently a theoretical base to explain how 
children from different cultural contexts use different ways of working to achieve mastery of 
information and skills and at the same time move through the various Piagetian levels of cognition 
to the level of propositional thinking. Perhaps at this point one might go back to thinking about 
what has been said by Tonemah in describing the gifted Native American. 

Over and over, the value of developing ability to use imagery for control and thinking is 
mentioned. Perhaps each culture moves through imagery in different ways. Ultimately each child 
from each culture must form a image bank and link it to the language strands which can prompt 
recall and manipulation. Perhaps the story links the relationship among the various images in the 
correct sequence. The essential feature of the story method is the strong link between image and 
word. Teachers* talk is not linked to images for the child and is therefore not meaningful. The 
cognitive development is therefore retarded to the lowest level at which the child can link image and 
language. By watching while the adult is showing and doing the child can more fuUy develop the 
link between image and concept. This is not only true for the ethnic minorities but for most 
children. Non-Indian culture tends to interpose and substitute language for experience so that the 
"experience of language becomes the reality**, an abstract form of experience which often has no 
basis in living experience. This concept of language in non-Indian and Asian cultures is what sets 
them apart from learning patterns of minority and native peoples which is more focused in real, 
concrete, experiences with life. 

Guilmet (1984) would seem to discount the notion that the Tlingit are living in an 
intellectually deprived subculture. The prevailing view that minority children do noi achieve 
because of intellectual deprivation fails to take into account that children of every minority achieved 

19 

ERLC 



propositional thinking in the absence of ^'intellectual stimulation" as viewed from the traditional 
viewpoint. What is missing in the minority education is experience with language, science and 
mathematical models similar to the nonJndian or Asian experience which is the criteria for 
achievement in schools. The question is how can a transition from reality based thinking to 
abstract thinking on the non-Indian model be achieve , without the loss of relevance of the minority 
culture and with the strength of traditional Western rational thinking? At what age can this be 
accomplished and in what way can this be done? Certainly, the Tlingit child will not achieve 
mastery of science without the mathematics which forms the foundation, but new steps to 
mathematical reasoning will need to be developed to achieve this objective. 

Math Scores of Navahoe (Arizona and New Mexico), Choctaw 

Cheek (1983) suggests that mathematics has become the "critical fiher'* which often 
prevents minority and females from attaining careers in high paying jobs. The amount of 
mathematics studied can serve as a predictor of future income. The low representation of Native 
Americans in occupations within the sciences and engineering maybe related to this critical filter of 
mathematics which is required in all such programs. According to Cheek, Native American 
students at the tenth grade level performed poorer than black, Hispanics or White students. In the 
state of Washington, the average score for Native Americans in 1980 was at the 33rd percentile. 
Cheek further states that average standardized test scores of Mississippi junior high Choctaws 
range from 17.8 percentile in 1977 and went up to 26.3 percentile in 1979. During that same 
period 12th graders ranged from 5 to 18.1 percentile among Choctaw public school students. 

Cheek indicates that educators today might most likely encounter students for whom 
"Indian English" is more common than American Indian language. This Indian English retains the 
phonemic patterning and phonological constrains characteristic of the community's traditional 
language. The Indian language rules have priority ov^r the standard English rules. Word forms 
such as non-inflected forms of to be as well as sentence formation of the traditional language are 
typically carried over into the studenfs use of English. Other characteristics of Native American 
students related to language and ethnocognition are: 

1. Sioux high school students performed significantly less well than non-Indian students 

20 

O 6 ; 



on tests of English grammar, vocabulary, and reading comprehension and less well than foreign 
students on reading comprehension. 

2. Among 142 American Indian students from all over the United States given the test of 
English as a foreign language, 82% scored in the range needing some to considerable assistance in 
second language training in college. 

3. Dropout rates are high among Indian students with only about 7% of the high school 
graduates completing college. 

4. Eighty (80) Papago children taking the Illinois Test of Psycholinguistic Abilities were 
significantly below the noim group on 12 of 1 3 subtests the only exception being visual sequential 
memoiy. 

5. Twenty-one (21) Nez Perce kindergarten children scored significantly lower than 21 
comparable non-Indian kindergarten children on measures of receptive vocabulary, receptive 
syntax, and expressive syntax. 

6. Sixty (60) Flathead children scored significantly higher than a nonn group in manual 
expression and verbal expression, they scored significantly lower in auditory reception and 
auditory memory. 

1. Forty-seven (47) American Indian kindergarten children scored significantly lower than 
61 non-Indian rural kindergartners on a test of auditory comprehension of language both at the 
beginning of the school year and after 20 weeks of school, even though both groups showed 
significant gains in auditory comprehension over the 20 week period. 

8. A sample of about 5,000 Navajo second grade students was about .7 of a grade level 
equivalent behind national norms on the paragraph meaning subtest of the Stanford Achievement 
Test and that this difference increased to a grade level equivalent of about 2.4 behind national 
norms in the sixth grade. 

Cheek (1983) summarized the problems of Indian children attempting to acquire English 
language at the same time they arc expected to master writing, math, and other content area skills. 
While these problems are not unique to Native American students, they occur among students who 
might be expected by teachers to have mastered English. Students who may use informal English 
orally may in fact have difficulty thinking in standard English patterns and comprehending 

21 



vocabulary which is beyond their speaking vocabulary. Some recommendations from the Cheek 
study are: 

) . Activity based approaches in mathematics learning related to real world experience, 

2. Use of computer assisted instruction to supplement the direct instruction. Computei-s 

provide the individual pacing and privacy which are conducive to the learning style of the Native 

American student. 

Mentoring has been found to be effective in programs such as the Title 11 progmm for the 
Isleta Pueblo (Navahoe). The 1985-86 program report indicated that Algebra was the area most 
requested for tutoring. Improved achievement of competencies in- all areas was found in at least 
1/3 of the participants. Language (Spanish) and social studies achievement seemed to improve 
most over all among these students with middle school students seeming to make greatest gains. 

Kaulback (1984) conducted a review of literature in which studies of Papago, Nayajoe and 
Alaskan Inuit had been studied. Studies to that point in time, indicated a preference for visual 
processing of information and are most successful on visual tasks whereas tasks saturated with 
verbal content tend to be more difficult. Kaulback warns that such results may indicate that verbal 
tasks may be more related to the receptive and expressive levels of English language rather than an 
inability to process auditory infoimation. He summarizes Berry's 1 97 1 study of the visual spatial 
skills of the Inuit when compared with subjects from Sierra Leone, Africa. Inuit. subjects far 
surpassed the Sierra Leone subjects on all measures of visual discrimination ability an,d spatial 
skills. He refers to Kleinfeld*s study (1983) of the Inuifs remarkable visual skills in the literature 
on perceptual skills among the Eskimos in which asserts that perceptual strengths should be taken 
into account in teaching. 

Schrankel and DeGracie (1986) analyzed the schoolTecordS'6f the M^s^ Public Schools 
(population 51,555 students) to determine the long temm effectiveness of the Chapter 1 program 
and the interaction of the various other programs to which students might be assigned. The district 
population is primarily white non-Indian (84 percent), with Spanish surname the second largest 
category (10 percent) and Native American (2 percent) and Black (2 percent) the third largest 

22 



categories of students. The district provided Chapter 1 , Indian Education, Migrant^ and English 
as a Second I^guage (ESL) programs. Of interest in the study was the length of stay in vaiious 
programs. Chapter 1 was 1.4 years, ESL 1.4 years, Indian Education 1.7 years, and Migrant 
Education 2 years. Longitudinal analysis of a first grade cohort with 3 and 4 years of service in 
Chapter 1 showed that the avemge reading and math NCE scores declined with increased length of 
sei-vices. Gains made were not sustained. In comparing the retention rates among program 
participants, Chapter 1 students were retained less often than other categorical programs. Native 
American students with 5.2 percent retention was higher than Migrant (4 percent) and less than the 
ESL programs with 8.7 percent. Overall, retention of students in the Indian Education program 
showed a pattern of increasing rates in the four years under study. Starting from a retention rate 
similar to Chapter 1 (2.3 percent) the rate rose to 5 percent in 1980-81. There was no change in 
1982-83, but in 1983-84 the retention rate rose to 8 percent. The retention mte of the first graders 
remained at 12.5 percent in the first two years, rose to 18.1 percent in 1982-83, and declined to 16 
percent in 1983-84. Retention tended to be highest in grades seven and eight with rates ranging 
from 14 to 100 percent. Services provided included were Title IV-A and Johnson O'Malley 
(JOM). The number of students participating ranged from 177 in 1980 to a high of 277 in 1982- 
83. Participants were divided almost equally by gender. While this analysis does not attempt to 
speculate on the reasons for the high retention rates among Native Americans, it does demonstrate 
that the students were viewed as Native American only (not by tribe) and that retention rates among 
these students increased rather than declined. The retention rates among ESL students might be 
attributed to lack of ability to function in English, no such logical explanation can be surmised to 
explain the retention of Native American students. 



5. Emergent Literacy 



Language Learning and Head Start 

Little-Soldier ( 1989) summarized the socio-cultuml context of language learning and made 

several important points. He stated that Head Start may have had a significant impact in launching 

Indian pupils into successful school careers. The Head Stan emphasis on oral language skills 

seems to carry over into fonnal schooling. The eariy success with English and the involvement of 

23 



the families of pupils hclpvS make a smoother transition from home to school, Little-Soldier also 
states that armngcmcnt of the classroom seems to make a big diffej encc to Indian children. 
Flexible, informal furniture arrangements conducive to group work seems to work welL According 
to Little-Soldier, teachers report that Indian students tend to be *Tield-sensitive learners'', , They 
are in tune witli their surroundings and function more effectively when a personal relationship with 
teachers has been established. When the classroom becomes more formal with the 
lecture/recitation mode and with rows of chairs, students tend to become more quiet and less 
actively involved in the oral interaction. Student to student dialogue, and group problem solving 
techniques should be used as often as possible with Native American learners since it encourages 
oral language. Teachere should model correct speaking for students but avoid correcting oral 
errors except during formal language lessons. Teachers should listen sincerely to what students 
have to say without interrupting. Little-Soldier suggests that teachers learn as much as possible 
about the families of children in the classroom such as their lifestyle, values, aspirations, etc. He 
is speaking primarily of Navajo culture, Little-Soldier^s research among the Navahoe provides 
important insight into the important role of Head Start, however, teachers should keep in mind that 
attitudes towards privacy vary among tribes ^nd families. This tendency towards privacy may 
prove to be a barrier in gaining information about lifestyle and values. 

Early Childhood Education and Head Start, 

Weikart (1988) gives strong evidence fjor the effectiveness of quality preschool programs 
for disadvantaged or at-risk children, Weikart cites the findings of the Perry Preschool Project 
which involved the long term study of the effects of preschool on a number of important societal 
factors including family demographics, child abilities, scholastic accomplishments, involvement in 
delinquent and criminal behavior, use of welfare assistance, and employment. When 123 students 
were studied at age 19> important differences were found between preschool attendees and non- 
attendees. Fewer preschool graduates were classified as mentally retarded, more completed high 
school, more attended college or job training, more preschool graduates held jobs, more supported 
themselves by their own or spouse's earnings, more were satisfied with work, fewer were arrested 
for criminal acts, more experienced a lower birth rate and fewer were on public assistance, 

24 

ERLC 



Weikait (1989) also cites the High/Scope preschool curriculum study as an example of 
how important good preschool curriculum is in fostering positive outcomes for children. It is not 
just preschool, but excellence in preschool, which Wcikart advocates. Collaboration between 
teaching staff and parents as partners in the education of the young child is one of the 
cliaracteristics of the excellent preschool program. 

Not all educatoi-s believe that young children should participate in forma! schooling 
experiences. Specifically, eariy childhood programs aimed at increasing the academic perfomiance 
of young children have been called "miseducation" by Elkind (1986). Zigler (1986) also argues 
that we arc driving children too hard and taking away their childhood with schooling that is 
harmful to their development. Their concern has been supported by a study of black children in 
which the extension of formal schooling to four year olds and kindcrgartners did not improve and 
in some cases hindered academic achievement and child development. 

In spite of this concern about negative effects for formal schooling on the development of 
young children, other studies have found other long-term improvements among children who 
participated in Head Start, Copple (1987) found that Head Start children more often avoided 
serious school problems, had less retention in grade, had better attendance, and missed fewer 
standardized tests. 

Rachal and Garbo (1988) found that eariy childhood participants were less likely to be 
retained and were less likely to be placed in special education classes. Rachal and Garbo suggest 
that the reduced placement may be due to the slightly elevated IQ scores immediately after Head 
Start and even though this effect levels off by fourth grade, most special education placement is 
done in the early grades. 

Clement (1983) found Head Start graduates were more likely to complete high school. 
Sixty-seven percent were more likely to complete high school while 47 percent of the controls 
graduated. The rate of employment of 19 year olds was higher for those who hftd attended 
preschool (50%) as compared to non-preschoolers (32%). When studying rates of welfare 

25 



receivers, seventeen per cent (17%) of the preschool graduates received welfare as adults while 
thirty seven per cent (37%) of non-preschoolei's received welfare as adults. 

According to Caldwell (1987), studies of Head Start typically find that the mcasui;able 
differences in those who do and do not attend Head Start disappear by the end of the second year 
of elementary school. The major effects seem vo be in the social effects and in long term effects on 
retention and assignment to special education. In spite of the short term academic effects, the 
development of these positive outcomes seem to support the continuation of Head Start and 
expansion of the the program. 

The implications of these studies on the present study seem to indicate that short term 
effects on academic performance may not be as important as the development of the skills needed 
to cope with formal schooling for both the children and their families. 

6, Meeting the Standards of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics 
A critical variable in mathematical education for young children is appropriate instmctional 
goals. The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) has defined the direction of 
mathematics education including the direction of mathematics education for the young child. Three 
goals liave been published.(NCTM, 1989) 

1 . Address the relationship between young children and mathematics. 

2. Recognize the importance of the qualitative dimensions of children's learning. 

3. Build beliefs about what mathematics is, about what it means to know and do 
mathematics, and about children's view of themselves as mathematics learners. 

The goals of the NCTM reflect the recognition that mathematical thinking is a 
multidimensional process in which children's attitudes towards mathematics and towards 
themselves as users of mathematics play a significant role in later studies. Tlius, early experiences 
at home and school are critical in laying the foundations of emergent mathematics literacy just as 
they have been shown to do for language literacy. For this reason, home, family and culture of the 
child may play a critical role. 

26 

27 



Summary 

The literature on achievement in mathematics among Indian people setais limited. 
Likewise research as to how to improve the mathematics functioning of Indian children is sparse at 
this time. However, some useful inforaiation can be gleaned from the previous research. First, 
the family of the Indian child is the most important teacher of the child. Traditional values and 
ways of thinking seem to dominate all subsequent educational experience. Among the most valued 
ways of teaching is the use of stories and observation. Another important principle is that Indian 
families may include and value members of the extended family in interactions and child rearing 
activities. The term "parent" is too limited in describing who may influence the child. The Robbins 
(1984) study indicates the limitations of traditional social measures which describing the Indian 
family. Children may seek support from a wide variety of family members who function in a 
supportive role. Language skills seem to be a limiting factor in school learning, however, language 
skills and reading seem to be more readily influenced by educational programs with the exception 
being the Follow-through project previously described. Mathematics seems to be a significant 
stumbling block to many Indian people and is a significant barrier to subsequent training in many 
professional fields of study. In interviews with adult Seminoles who v/ere college graduates or 
non-graduates, most all indicated that math was the hardest subject and they were poor in math. 
Adults seem to indicate a preference for avoiding math whenever possible. When math was 
mentioned, adults, both male and female, made fearful sounds, shook their heads and remarked 
negatively about their ability to do math. The success of Head Start has been a bright spot for both 
Indian and non-Indian children in making the transition to school and in subsequent school 
success. Head Start also has the potential and the directive to foster parent involvement. 

Statement of the Hypothesis 

The literature fails to provide evidence or specific guidelines relating to the issue of math 
education among the children of the Oklahoma Seminole tribe or few other Indian tribes. Testing 
reveals that students from many tribes perform lower in mathematical thinking yet a causal 
relationship between culture and math ability has not been shown. There is no evidence that 

27 



children of a particular culture will achieve or fail to achieve because of the influence of culture. 
There is strong evidence that Head Start, parent-child interaction, and expectations play an 
important role in the level of readiness for school and in the ability of of all children to cope v^ith 
the school culture. Therefore, it was hypothesized that children whose families were involved 
with the child in math activities and experiences in the home would demonstrated higher scores on 
the ABC inventory and families will report increased levels of intemction on the Parent-Child 
Interaction Questionnaire. 

Method 

Selection of Sub jects 

The population for this study was preschool children of the Seminole Nation Head Start 
and Justice Elementary. The Seminole Nation of Oklahoma operates four Head Start classes in 
two locations in Seminole county Oklahoma. These classes include 3 and 4 year old's with a high 
population of Seminole children. Subjects were selected from the population by choosing all the 
children who attended the Seminole Nation Head Start and the kindergarten children who attended 
Justice elementary school during 1991 and 1992. 

Although the original plan was limited to the Seminole Nation of Oklalioma, Boley School 
petitioned the project to participate. The Boley school students population is black and is located 
in a rural black community. Boley also has a Head Start program on the school site. Thus, 
students from the Boley Head Start and Boley kindergarten program were included in the project 
group. The number of students selected for the study was approximately 140 students in five Head 
Start and two Kindergarten classes. 

Instruments . ■ * 

Because the study was initiated by the need expressed by Justice school, the screening 
instrument for the Justice kindergarten, the ABC Inventory was used to measure expected 
performance levels for children entering kindergarten at that school. The ABC inventory is a 
measure of both verbal, math, and social leatning items. Math items included recognition of coins 

28 



and sorting them by size (penny, nickel, quarter), shape recognition, counting, body parts through 
drawing (one to one correspondence) and days of the week. The instrument is administered by the 
kindergarten teacher on a one-to-one basis. This instrument is limilec in addressing the math 
standards of NCTM and includes some concepts which early childhood specialists consider 
inappropriate for the child of five (days of week) but this instrument was in use by the school and 
pretest data were available to facilitate the study. It also yielded raw data scores which could be 
used for comparison purposes. 

The Parent Child Interaction Questionnaire was developed for this study by Linda 
Medearis. This self-report measure asked families to respond to statements related to family 
activities which included some form of mathematics or literacy. This instrument is similar to an 
instrument which is used to measure emerging literacy in reading. The researchers hoped to 
measure how families interacted with their children before and after participation in the project. 
Because of the characteristics of the population and the self-report nature used, this instrument was 
felt to have limited value. Specifically, literacy among some family members was limited. The 
inability to personally interview all the subject families is a serious limit to this instrument. 
Construct validity was supported by comparison with the concept of emerging literacy for 
preschoolers and comparison with the standards of the NCTM. (See Appendix A for copy of 
Instalment) 

Interviews of teachers and parents were conducted at evaluation meetings to elicit further 
information on the progress of the project and areas in need of change. Notes and summaries of 
these meetings were collected by the project evaluator and project staff for mid-point evaluation 
and final evaluation. Obsei-vations of families at meetings were made to determine the interest level 
and understanding of the project among family members. 

Additional data was collected through evaluation of the materials at presentations to teachers 
of varying tribes. The teacher evaluation instrument further asked them to describe additional 
cultural areas which they felt should be included in the project and whether they felt the project 
materials were appropriate for their populations. The purpose of this evaluation was to determine 



how well the project seemed to be relating to the needs of the teachers of Head Start and the parents 
of children in their classes. 



Design 

A pre-experimental static-group comparison was used to compare screening data of the 
199 1 students (Ayithout Natural Math) and the 1992 students (with Natural Math). 





Group 


Assignment N 


. Treatment 


Posttest 




1 


Non-Random 


No Natural Math 


ABC Inventory 




2 


Non-Random 


Natuml Math 


ABC Inventory 



Figure 1. Pre-experimental Static-Group Comparison 



•The static-grpup comparison design is considered a "barely defensible'' design but was used in this 
prelinainary or exploratory study because of time limits, population limits, and the need to apply the 
only appropriate methodology consistent with the field conditions. 

JUniits.. . , , 

The failure to randomly select subjects for the control and experimental groups is the most 
serious limit of the research. In addition, because there was no pretest data, it is difficulty to 
determine how equal the groups were originally. Other potential threats to the study were history 
(n)aturatiDn) and mortality (students leaving). The study is also limited by the limited control on 
whether or not famihes actually carry out the activities in the home. In addition, students entered 
Head Start during the year which meant some children and families entered the project after the 
start date. .. 



ERIC 



30 



Procedures 



Upon notification of project approval, meetings were held with administrators of the 
Seminole Nation Head Start and Justice Elementary to confirm a timeline for implementation and 
set critical dates for family meetings. Project staff developed, published and put together the first 
take home packs. These start-up packs provided children and families with needed tools for 
working through the activities. Each pack included developmentally appropnate scissors, map 
pencils and sharpeners, glue, an activity calendar, a math story book written for the children, 
snowflake detectors and snowflake bingo games. Materials for this project were written and 
created by the Natural Math staff with emphasis on games and materials which were familiar 
enough and easy enough that inexperienced family members with low levels of math and reading 
abilities could participate. 

A family meeting was held to explain the project and show family members how the 
materials might be used. Songs were sung together and the story was read aloud to parents and 
other family members in attendance to model the "reading aloud" part of the project. . Refreshments 
were served and a considerable amount of time was devoted to getting acquainted and social 
interaction. Packets for families were given out to those in attendance, and additional packets to 
teachers of those children whose families were not present to be given to children at school. It was 
explained that the Natural Math project was for families and their children and was not specifically 
for use in the school. It was believed that teachers, with the heavy load already in their programs 
would be reluctant to accept additional outside tasks. 

This pattern of monthly development and parent meetings was continued all spring with the 
addhion of the portable computer lab with selected eariy childhood math programs. The purpose 
of this component was to allow parents to get acquainted with computers with their children before 
the children began using them in school and to see if children 3 and 4 years of age could 
satisfactorily use the computers. Parents were encouraged to explore the programs and tell what 
they thought of the use of computers with children. 

31 



During, the month of May, a math fair was held in which stations were set up for children 
and their family mem.bers to visit and "test" their skill in a fun atmosphere. One booth let children 
make green frogs by folding a square into a triangle and placing it in a "pond." Another booth 
asked children to count as far as they could in English and Seminole. - Children received ^carnival- 
type prizes after they finished the task at each booth. 

In late spring, evaluation meetings were held in three locations to discuss the project with 
the project evaluator. Boley and Seminole Nation Head Start teachers, administrators, and parents 
were invited to attend. Suggestions to improve the project were made at that time. 

During the summer, mail home packets were prepared to encourage parents to continue the 
pattern of family interaction. Tht only different criteria for the summer packs was the need to make 
sure that materials would be flat enough to mail in the standard mailing envelope. Staff members 
solved such problems of how to mail paint for the 4th of July painting materials used for the 
design" objective. 

A training session was held for Head Start teachers from various tribes throughout 
Oklahoma at the pre-scrvice cooperaiive training. Teachers were given 1 1/2 hr. sessions working 
with the materials. Afterward, they were asked to evaluate the materials for appropriateness and 
usefulness in Head Start and for cultural relevance. 

In August and early September, children from the Justice Head Start who were to attend 
the Justice kindergarten were screened by the kindergarten teacher. Scores of the control group 
had been collected from the previous year's screening. 

A final evaluation meeting was held in late September with teachers and administmtors of 
the schools involved in the projects to detennine whether the project had met the project goals for 
the first year. 
Results 

32 



ERLC 



A t-test for independent samples was used to analyze test data between the control and - 
experimental groups. Descriptive statistics were also used to describe the outcome. No significant 
difference was found in the results of the t-test. The small number of subjects and inability to 
control for the degree of program involvement contributed to this outcome. However, the mean 
for the experimental group was larger tlian for the control group. (See Figure 2.) 



90 



30 













Before Natural Math 




WWh Natural Math 






Control Group 




Experimental Group 






N=8 




N=12 






Iv1ean«80.25 




Mean=87.385 






Group I RS 


Group II RS 



Figure 2 Comparison of Means of Screening Scores on ABC Inventory 



The result of the statistical analysis is not surprising considering the size of the groups and 
the limited controls in the study. The experimental group included children who participated fully 
in Natural Math, those who had limited experience with Natural Math as well as some children 
who entered kindergarten without having Natural Math. Screening scores among kindergarten 
children provide a limited view of how well children are prepared to enter formal schooling. Test 
scores do indicate that a better performance of children on the screening test was obtained. In an 
observation of the children in the first few weeks of kindergarten, Natural Math children who had 

33 

o ' 

o 

ERLC 



fully participated seemed to be doing well in classroonfi activities. 
Parent Questionnaires 

Few questionnaires were returned by parents. Those who returned the questionnaires 
indicated that the Natural Math program had helped their children. Some parents said they had 
increased their use of math games and gave more attention to the use of numbers in the 
environment. They expressed appreciation for the materials. Parents were reluctant to offer 
criticisms but seemed to favor the stories, games, calendar activities, and puzzles. When choosing 
their favorite activities, fewer parents chose puppets. The researchers were unable to find out why 
puppets are less favored by this group, however the idea of famous Seminole "paper dolls" has 
been well received. When questioned about who interacted with' the children, parents, uncles, 
aunts, cousins, grandparents, and friends were mentioned as participants. This tends to support 
the findings of Robbins (1984) in the importance of the extended family in support to children 
within the Seminole tribe. 

Obtaining questionnaires from families was very difficult. Observations and one to one 
conversations with parents and family members proved more useful in gaining information. 

Observations 

In visits to Seminole Nation Head Start sites, teachers and administrators said that parents 
and children liked the games and stories. Teachers particularly liked the monthly activity calendar 
and expressed the desire to use the materials in their classrooms. They had been careful to follow 
instructions about not using it in the classroom. They agreed that probably a meeting once each 
month was too many for their parents many of whom did not have transportation to meetings. 
However, a daytime meeting combined with a school open house in the fall resulted in high 
attendance at all Seminole Nation Head Start Sites. This was not true at Boley which had low 
parent attendance. 

In visiting the Boley school site,^ teachers had disregarded the instructions and introduced 
the materials in the classroom. This proved to be fortunate for the project. Parents reported that* 

34 



I 



the children knew how to play all the games. Children insisted on parents playing with them. 
When parents were reluctant, children found other people like aunls, older siblings and neighbors 
to play. Boley is a very small town and it was reported that children were on the street comers 
doing their math cheers and playing with their "magic elastic." They also were creative in devising 
new strategies for using the coins in counting by fives. It was also reported by Boiey parents that it 
was important to have the bag with handles for the children to carry home and to use as a storage 
area for the materials. Children demonstrated a protective attitude toward their own stuff and used 
the bag to keep it in. This shows the importance of considering the method of transport and 
storage for young children in honies in which space may be at a premium. 

One unexpected outcome of the project has been the use of materials by older students. 
Teachers and parents reported that older siblings and classmates who used the materials with the 
preschool children were acquiring math concepts and clarifying ideas which they had previously 
not mastered. This outcome seems to confirm that some basic understandings are not always' 
acquired through the traditional textbook approach without some prior experiential knowledge of 
basic ideas such as one to one correspondence. 

The use of computers with three and four year old children was investigated by bringing 
the portable lab to various meetings of parents and children. Researchers were concerned about the 
need to have software which was within the ability level of the children and would offer speech 
capabilities as well as appropriate mathematical experiences. The computers chosen were Apple 
Macintosh Classic because of cost and portability considerations. The software chosen was Math 
Rabbit (1989) which was described as appropriate for preschool through first grade. Four math 
games are included in this package including Clown's Counting Games, Tightrope Game, Circus 
Train Game, and Mystery Matching Game: Prior to the project, the program Number Maze (1989) ' 
was not considered within the capability of the young children. Number Maze consists of a maze 
activity which allows the child to move through magic doors when appropriate math responses are 
given. However, the program was included in the project for possible use by older children who 
might be attending the programs. Observations of the children revealed that children in the 
Barking Waters Project were quite able to use Number Maze and used it on an exploratory basis, 

35 

ERLC ^^'^ 



sometimes alone and sometimes with others. No observations of Boley children were made using 
this program because of the time limits. The experience with observations of the young children 
and the programs seems to indicate that what seems developmentally appropriate for one group 
may not be so for another group. More research into the exploratory abilities of young children 
with various programs in early childhood mathematics would provide impoitant infonnation about 
how children solve problems in game situations. 

Observations of the children and families at the Seminole Nation Head Start indicated that 
the Seminole children were unusually adept at using the computer and the mouse and in using Math 
. Rabbit. Most parents 'Worked with their children or- watched as the children worked. No 
, instructed was given to the children but help was offered as needed. Children worked with other 
^children or alone with great attention to the program. Children easily used the Clowns Counting 
game and moved on to other games with relative ease. The Seminole Nation Head Start children 
are quiet and highly focused in their use of the computers. They were able to use the mouse easily 
and hear tlie computer voice even when many children and adults worked at the same table. 

When computers were taken to the Boley Head Start room, children had more initial 
difficulty in focusing attention on the computer. They seemed slower to catch on to the use of the 
mouse and to grasp the relationship between the use of the mouse and what was going on with the 
game. They tended to gaze across the room and press the mouse button repeatedly. Another 
. problem was the noise level. It was difficult for the children to hear the sound on the computer 
. speakers because they generated so much noise themselves. Their interest and excitement was 
, most often expressed verbally. For this group, external speakers or headphones would be more 
appropriate. The results of these observations tends to support the idea that not all groups respond 
in quite the same manner to new technology and learning topis. Boley children are quick verbally 
and in large motor activities whereas the Seminole children seemed quick in fine motor and 
grasping relationships. ' ' ' 

Parents from all the sites were interested in the computers and many of them worked with 
their children. Some were less confident in approaching the machine but watched behind their 

36 



children. 

Teachers convinced the project staff (hat a mistake was made in not allowing the teachers to 
use the materials before they were sent home for use by parents. In some cases, the child was the 
pci^on who initiated the interaction because they were familiar with the activities. 

Original plans included the purchase of counting books for the children. Unfortunately, the 
best books were quite expensive and were limited in the math concepts developed. The decision 
was made to write books for the children in which specific math concepts were integrated with a 
story line appropriate for the Oklahoma location and for the developmental level of the children. At 
the firet meeting families listened with smiles of approval as the story "Winter Mouse" was read 
aloud. Parents were asked if first names of family members could be used as the nsunes of story 
characters. Subsequent stories and games featured the names of children and family members for 
the character names. This personalization of the characters proved to be a popular feature for the 
subjects and made the writing task easier. 

Integration of cultural topics proved to be more difficult in spite of the importance of this 
issue to the project. For the Oklahoma Seminoles, culture presents several problems. Firsts there 
is a sense that the cultural pattenms of the Seminole are a Florida phenomena. Garbarino (1989) 
described the descendants of the Seminole who had moved to Oklahoma this way, *'These 
Seminole, however, are not a recognized tribe, and *hey have retained litde of the traditional 
Seminole culture." It is obvious that little is known about the culture of the Oklahoma Seminoles 
outside the immediate area and that Garbarino is unaware of the Seminole Nation of Oklahoma 
which far exceeds the population of the Florida Seminole. The dominate role of the Florida culture 
seems to have been caused by excessive tourism in Florida and a reluctance of Oklahoma 
Seminoles to develop and publish children's materials concerning their own very rich culture. 

Traditional stories arc used to teach lessons to the young and may have many different 
interpretations. Many Oklahoma Seminoles of today no longer know their clan name and clan 
symbols or attend clan meetings. Language is an important cultural component among the 
Seminole but most young people can no longer "talk Indian." Some Seminole people do not wish 

37 



to see the cultural stories used in children's material because of the danger of offending the tribal 
elders while othei's are indifferent to such considerations. At a meeting to study the clans and clan 
patchwork held hi the museum, all the members of the audience were older people (including the 
researchers) except for one museum worker. 

Within the Natural Math project, cultural items were included with care because of the n^ed 
to respect the beliefs of the tribal members of all ages and yet to include the cultural patterns within 
the materials, Seminole cultural materials are particularly suited to the Natural Math project because 
of the patterns and motifs which are associated with the various clans. These syiiibols have been 
preserved in the art form of patchwork designs whiph form one of the important visual art forms qf 
the tribe. One example of how culture has been used is in the development of shape puzzles such 
as the bird claw design of the bird clan and the turtle clan puzzle. These puzzles emphasize the 
math concepts as well as culture of the tribe. There was no direct interpretation of cultural 
materials since families were the primary interpreters of such material. This method allows each 
family to share cultural stories in their own way or simply use it as a puzzle with no reference to 
the background. 

Teachers from the tribes of Oklahoma were particulariy attracted to the clan puzzles even if 
the teachers were not from the Seminole tribe. A survey of teachers revealed that they were 
especially in need of materials in which language, cultural motifs, traditional stories, important 
people of the tribe and familiar scenes from Oklahoma were included. 

An generation of Indian people were send to government boarding schools and taught to 
reject Indian languages and culture. The result is that young Seminole people of today may have 
missed the cultural link with previous generations. The Seminole Nation of Oklahoma like other 
Indian tribes, value the important cultural features which make them who they are as a people. 
Non-Seminoles also respond with respect to these same cultural features as was demonstrated by 
the number of other tribes and people who indicated the desire to use the materials with their own 
Head Start programs. With the growth in cultural self-determination, Indian people including the 
Seminole, will pass along the culture of the tribe to generations before it is lost forever. 

38 



Implications of the Project 



This project has demonstrated that cultural motifs, stories, symbols and other cultural 
features can be integrated within math materials as well as language arts and reading for young 
children. It has also been shown that when this is done, adults as well as the children are attracted 
and motivated to interact with such activities. As one teacher stated, " You have made math (yuk) 
fun and interesting." Another mother wrote, "Thank you for caring for my child." This is a 
critical feature in eariy childhood education for minority children. Unless those who care for the 
children are interested in engaging young children in math play, the foundations of math literacy 
will continue to be limited to a few children of the well educated or mathematically gifted. Math 
will continue to be something that is only taught in school from math books and workbooks. This 
is unfortunate, because math is a natural activity for human beings and has been celebrated with the 
games and patterns of all peoples from all culuires. 



39'-^ 



Bibliography 



Adair, Normand and Blesch, George; (1985) ABC Inventory: to Determine Kindergarten and 
School ReadinCvSS ., Educational Study and Development Muskegon, Michigan. 

Benally, Elaine Roanhorse, and Oihers,(1987), Issues in American Indian Education, Mexican 
American Education, Migrant Education, Outdoor Education, Rural Education, and Small 
Schools, ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools, Las Cruces, N. 
Mex. 

Browne, Dauna Bell ( 1984),WISC^R Scoring Patterns Among Native Americans of the Northern 
Plains, White Cloud Journal of American Indian Mental Health , Vol. 3 No: 2. 

Caidv/cll, B. M.(1987), The challenge of third-grade slump. PrincipaK 66. 10-14. 

Camew, Frederick I.; Clark, W. Bruce,(1985). Cognitive Education and Native Adolescents: A, 
Pilot Study, Institute for Computer Assisted Learning, Calgary University, Technical 
Report. 

Clement, J. (1983). Evidence continues to mount on benefits of preschool. Report on Preschool 
Education, 15, 4-6. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 234 886) 

Check, Helen Neely, (October, 1983) A Suggested Research Map for Native American 
Mathematics Education, Journal of American Indian Education ^ . 

Copplc, C. E. (1987) Path to the future: long term effects of Head Start in the Philadelphia school 
district. Research/technical report (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 289 
598) 

Cronin, Jeremiah. (1992), TIPS, Santa Fe Indian School, Box 5340, Santa Fe, NM. 87502 

40 



ERLC 



Elkind, D. (1986). The Miseducation of Children: Superkids at Risk . New York: A. A. Knoff. 



ERIC 



Everett, Frances; Proctor, Noble; & Cartmell, Betty; Providing (1983),Psychological Services to 
American Indian Children and Families, Professional Psychology: Research and Practice , 
Vol. 14, No. 5. 

Garbarino, Merwyn S.(1989), The Seminole , (Children's book from the Indians of North America 
Series) Chelsea House Publishers, New York. 

Guilmet, George M.(1984, March 15), American Indian and Alaska Native Education for High 
Technology: A Research Strategy for Creating Cultumlly Based Physical Science and 
Mathematics Education. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Society for Applied 
Anthropology, Toronto, Ontario, Canada,). 

Greenbaum, Paul E.(1985,Spring) Nonverbal Differences in Communication Style Between 
American Indian and non-Indian Elementary Classrooms, American Educational Research 
Journal. Vol. 22, No. l,pp 101-115 

Hosey, Gwendoljm, and Others (1983), Designing and Evaluating Diabetes Education Material for 
American Indians, The Diabetes Educator ^ Vol. 16, No. 5 p. 407-414. 

Howard, James H. and Lena, Willie (1984), Oklahoma Seminoles, Medicines. Magic, and 
Religion. University of Oklahoma Press: Norman, 

Kamii, Constance (1990), Number in Preschool and Kindergarten , Washington, D. C. National 
Association for the Education of Young Children. 

Kaulback, Brent (1984) Styles of Learning Among Native Children: A Review of the Research, 
Canadian Journal of Native Education , Vol.: 1 1 No: 3. 

41 



Leith, Sylvia and Sientz, Kenneth (1984), Successful Teaching Strategies in Selected Northern 
Manitoba Schools, Canadian Journal of Native Education . Vol.: 1 2 No: 1. 



Little-Soldier, Lee (1989), Sociocultural context and language learning of Native American pupils. 
Journal of Rural and Small Schools . Vol. 3.2 {Note to Researchers: Writings by Little- 
Soldier are also referenced as Soldier} 

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics(1989, March), Curriculum and Evaluation 
Standards for School Mathematics . NCTM. 

Number Ma2e,(i988) Great Wave Software, 5353 Scotts Valley Drive, Scotts Valley, CA 95066 

Math Rabbit, (1989) The Learning Company, 6493 Kaiser Drive, Fremont, CA 94555 

McLaughlin, T. F.; Williams, Randy Lee;Truhlicka, Maria; Cady, Moneda; Ripple, Billie Jean; 
Eakins, Darwin.(1982, Summei/Fall) Model Implementation and Classroom Achievement 
in the Northern Cheyenne Behavior Analysis Follow Through Project, Child & Family 
Behavior Therapy . Vol. 4(2/3). 

McShane, Damian (1988), The Relationship of Intellectual and Psycholinguistic Abilities to the 
Achievement Gains of American Indian Children, Canadian Journal of N ative Education. 
Vol.: 15 No: 3. 

Orlansky, M.D.; Trap, J. J. (1987, April),. Working with Native American Persons: Issues in 
Facilitating Communication and Providing Culturally Relevant Services, Journal of Visual 
Impairment & Blindness . 

Pcrsi, Joseph and Brunatti, Gina (1987), Cognitive Measures and Cultural Bias: A Comparison of 
the Performances of Native and Non-Native Low Achievers, Canadian Jour n al of Native 

42 



ERIC 



43 



Education. V ol: 14 No:L 



Phillips, Susan Urmston (1983), The Invisible Culture: Communication in Classroom and 
Community on the Wami Springs Indian Reservation . lx)ngman, New York, 

Rachal, J., & Garbo, D, (1988), A three-year longitudinal study of the sustained effects of early 
childhood education on the kindergarten and first grade performance of former program 
participants. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research 
Association, New Orleans, (ERIC Reproduction Service No. ED, 295 757). 

Robbins, Susan P. (1984).; Non-Indian Concepts and Indian Reality: A Study of .Juvenile 
Delinquency , The Joumal of Contemporarv Social Work. Family Service America. 

Sciirankel, Steve; DeGracie, James S. (1986, December, 16), Analysis of School District Records 
to Describe the Long-Term Effects of Chapter 1 Services on the Participants in the Mesa 
Public Schools and an Assessment of the Confounding Effects of Participation in Other 
Categorical Programs. Final Report, Mesa Public Schools, AZ. Dept. of Research and 
Evaluation, 

Tonemah, Stuart (1987) Assessing American Indian Gifted and Talented Students' Abilities, 
Joumal for the Education of the Gifted . Vol, 10, No. 3, 

Trinity, Annette (1990, Autumn), Creating Educational Pathways: A Montana University Teams 
Up With Tribal Colleges, Winds of Change. A Magazine of American Indians . 

Weikart, David P,(1988) Quality in Early Childhood Education, (From Warger, Cynthia, ed. 
Resource Guide to Public School Eariv Childhood) , Alexandria, VA: ASCD. 

Zigler, E. F,(1986). Should four-year olds be in school? Prindp al65, 11-14. 

Zigler, E. F. (1987), Formal schooling for four- year-olds? no American Psvchologist , 254-59, 

43 



Appendix A 
Parent Child Interaction Questionnaire 
by Linda Medearis 



44 



Appendix D 



Natural Math 
Evaluation Survey 



HOME MATH PARENT/CHILD 
INTERACTION QUESTIONNAIRE 

Copyright 1991 
Linda Medearis 

The following questions will help you look at what you are doing to 
promote math with your child at home. Answer each question by circling 
the number for your response. The numbers mean: 1=Never, 2=Not often, 
3=Sometimes, 4=Frequently, 5=Always. 



1. Do i recite counting rhymes to my child? 1 2 a 4 5 



2. Do I have a regular time to explore math 

in our home? 1 2 3 4 5 

3. Do I play the game "What are the numbers 

printed on the cereal boxes, street signs, and 

buildings? 1 2 3 4 5 

4. Do I show an interest in math on TV, exploring 

it with my child through conversation? 1 2 3 4 5 

5. Do I take time to talk to my child about his 

new interest or new experiences in math 1 2 3 4 5 

6. Do I take my child outside and allow him/her 

time to observe likenesses and differences in 
the world around us? 1 2 3 4 5 

7. Do I model using mathematics as a daily 

behavior? 1 2 3 4 5 

8. Do I use positional words to my child("on" 

the table, "over" the box)? 1 2 3 4 5 

9. Do I teach him/her rote counting? 1 2 3 4 5 



10. Do I teach him/her shapes(square, circle. 



triangle, rectangle)? 1 2 3 4 5 

HOME MATH PARENT/CHILD INTERACTION QUESTIONNAIRE PAGE 2 



ERIC 



11. Do I teach him/her the names of nnath 

symbols($, =,+,-)? 1 2 3 4 5 

12. Do 1 let him/her help me cook? 1 2 3 4 5 

13. Do I tell him/her often how much I 

appreciate him/her? 1 2 3 4 5 

14. Do I teach him/her to count objects? 1 2 3 4 5 



4G 



