DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 351 691 



CS 213 588 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



ABSTRACT 



RandiCy Jasna 

The Role of Native American Traditions in the College 
Composition Classroom. 
21 Mar 92 

1^P»; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Conference on College Composition and Communication 

(43rd, Cincinnati, OH, March 19-21, 1992), 
Speeches/Conference Papers (150) — Guides - 
Classroom Use - Teaching Guides (For Teacher) (052) 

MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage, 

^American Indian Culture; ^American Indian 
Literature; American Indians; Cultural Context; 
^Figurative Language; Higher Education; ^Literary 
Genres; Literary Styles; Reading Materials; ^Writing 
Instruction 

Native Americans; Oral Tradition; Writing Contexts 



By including more of the works written by Native 
Americans, college composition students benefit from a wealth of 
literary works, and perhaps they will be able to move beyond 
preconceptions about the difficulties of comprehending traditional 
Native American texts. Two speeches (Leslie Marmon Silko's speech 

Language and Literature from a Pueblo Indian Perspective" and N 
Scott Momaday»s speech "Man Made of Words") show how the wealth of 
imagery, vividness of prose, innovative presentation of meaning, and 
Ideas about language translate into the composition classroom, Silko 
uses metaphor to draw attention to the linear and non-linear rhetoric 
of Native American literature. She also explores the idea that 
stories do not really end but rather that a story is a beginning of 
other stories. Momaday discusses in detail the essential qualities of 
landscape and how it ties together the individual and culture. Native 
American literature offers a wealth of possibilities for the 
composition teacher. Native American texts can teach students a sense 
of community and encourage reader participation because part of 
understanding the story lies with the listener. In addition, students 
can also benefit from realizing the strong reverence for language in 
Native American texts. Storytelling can be incorporated into class 
work to show that everyone is a storyteller and has stories to tell. 
(RS) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 
from the original document. 'V 



Jasna Randic 
CCCC, Cincinnati 
March 21, 1992 

The Role of Native American Traditions in the 
College Composition Classroom 

This paper hopes to help teachers become more aware of the 
presence of alternative discourse patterns such as Native 
American writing. By incorporating a wider and more diverse 
reading scholarship into the classroom, and including more of the 
works written by Native American writers, the students will be 
able to benefit from the wealth of literary works, and perhaps 
they will be able to move beyond the preconceptions we have about 
the difficulties of comprehending traditional Native American 
texts . 

The focus of this paper is Native American tradition. In 
particular, I'd like to discuss two speeches: Leslie Marmon 
Silko's speech given at the 1981 Modern Language Association, 
entitled "Language and Literature from a Pueblo Indian 
Perspective," and N. Scott Momaday's speech "Man Made of Words," 
in order to show how the wealth of imagery, vividness of prose, 
innovative presentation of meaning, and ideas about language 
translate into the composition classroom. 

Native American oral tradition is based on language, 

" BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



-PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)"' 



U.S. OCPAm-MENTOF EDUCATION 

OHtce of Educationti Res«arch tnd Improvemenr 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
/ CENTER (ERIC) 

OThis document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
original<r>o it 

C Mtnor changes have been mide to improve 
reproduction quality 

• Points of view or opinions staled in this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERl position or policy 



2 

literature, and trust. Central features of this tradition 
involve: memory, imagination, the movement of narrative into 
prose, the movement from analytic to narration, the mythic to 
contemporary, and the history of time and creation. In these 
stories/ speeches, culture and communication come together, and 
imagination, land, and memory work together to create stories. 

In the oral tradition of Native Americans one can see how 
culture and communication are linked. The organizational 
patterns, coherence and narratives of Native American texts 
reflect their cultures and tradition. The rhetoric of Native 
American literature is both linear and ron-linear. In this sense 
then, Native American oral tradition differs from the Western 
tradition. Leslie Marmon Silko uses a metaphor to draw attention 
to this. She says at the beginning of her speech that "the 
structure of Pueblo expression resembles something like a 
spider's web" (54). Silko's speech itself does not have a linear 
structure. It resembles and echoes her own metaphor of a 
spider's web — where "with many little threads radiating from a 
center . . . the structure will merge as it is made and you 
simply listen and trust, as Pueblo people do, that meaning will 
be made" (54). Here Silko is identifying the major 
characteristics of the oral tradition. The oral tradition can be 
likened to a performance where all things come into play: 
expression, voice, physical presence of the storyteller, time of 
year, setting, season, context, and others. The oral tradition 
also demands that the listener listens and trust the speaker as 



ERLC 



he/she weaves the threads into a web conveying meaning. In fact, 
Silko emphatically stresses that "these views of structure and 
the dynamics of storytelling are some of the contributions which 
Native American cultures bring to the English language or at 
least to literature in the English language" (56) . Both Silko 
and Momaday agree that as Native American writers they find and 
express in their speeches a deeper meaning of language and 
communication, and are both able to create and recreate the past 
with a layering effect; moving effortlessly from the present to 
the future, to the mythic and to the contemporary. 

In her speech, "Language and Literature from a Pueblo 
Indian Perspective," Silko explains what is meant by the term 
linear and non-linear structures. According to Silko, the linear 
and the non-linear work together. Linearity provides order and 
form, whereas the non-linearity accounts for the intrusions: the 
movement back in time, the notion of time difference and the 
breaks in time, and the evocation of the ancestors. Hence, 
Pueblo perspective is "concerned with including the whole of 
creation and the whole of history and time" (54) . In other 
words, the writer needs to weave a spider's web, whose whole 
structure reveals meaning. According to Silko, the Native 
American writer begins her story by going back to the Pueblo 
Creation story and Tseitsinako, Thought Woman. The "all- 
inclusive" origin story holds and functions as the "maker of 
identity." In other words, evoking the ancestors is a reminder 
to the listeners of who they are and where they belong — a 



4 

reminder that the people are a narrative, a story. This 
translates into a multiplicity of selves, because we travel back 
and forth in constant movement from the mythic past to the 
present. 

Another element of Native American writing that Silko 
explores is the idea that stories do not really end but rather, a 
story is a beginning of other stories (56) . She also explains 
that as you listen to a story, there are many other stories 
within a story. As she states, "there is always, always this 
dynamic of bringing things together, of interrelating things. It 
is an ..mperative in Pueblo oral literature, it seems to me, and 
it occurs structurally in narrative and in fiction" (64). This 
element of interrelatedness, of cohesion of many elements going 
on at the same time and playing a role in creating and 
contributing meaning, is very prominent in the oral tradition. 
It is also very much a part of the lifestyle of the Native 
American people that is inevitably woven into stories. 

Audience and listeners in Native American works have a 
kind of "shared experience" because they rely on each other's 
background knowledge, of culture and world view to provide the 
necessary insight in order to obtain meaning. Listeners take 
responsibility. They listen and create meaning; they take part 
in creating their own stories with a multiplicity of voices and 
intrusions. In fact, Silko believes that a part of a story is 
already within the listener and it is the storyteller's role to 
"draw the story out of the listeners" (57) . 



ERLC 



5 

Storytelling has yet another function. It is "the heart 
of the Pueblo people" (60), and it is a "way of life" (59) • 
Stories are used for different instances. For example, when a 
tragic event occurs, a funny story is meant to console. Often the 
stories will move toward a balance of the funny and the serious. 

Momaday, like Silko, creates a non-linear structure for 
his presentation. He introduces the focus of his concern in the 
following manner: "I want to say something about such things as 
ecology and storytelling and the imagination" (162) , and then he 
states, "Let me tell you a story" (162). The story he tells is 
about his own experience while finishing The Way To Rainy 
Mountain where he envisions the evoked female spirit of his 
ancestor Ko-sahn. Thus, right away he pulls the reader into the 
text and provides vivid examples of "imagination," because he 
imagines himself with the ancestoral spirit, of "storytelling," 
because there is a constant movement into stories, and of 
"ecology," because he discusses the importance of landscape and 
the "deep, ethical regard for the land" (167) that the image of 
Ko-sahn evokes. Momaday's view is that The Way to Rainy 
Mountain , "is a whole journey, intricate with notion and meaning; 
and it is made with the whole memory, that experience of the mind 
which is legendary as well as historical, personal as well as 
cultural" (170) . 

Hence, in both Silko's and Momaday's texts, the history of 
Native American people is closely linked, and inseparable from 
the land* Deep reverence for the land is a recurrent theme in 



Native American literature. La Vonne Brown Ruoff explains this 
tie with the land; . . • "because the earth nurtured them and 
because their tribal origins and histories are associated with 
specific places, Native North Americans have a strong sense of 
the sacredness of these places" (8). Thus, harmony and balance 
manifests itself in Native American writing because of the 
narrator's closeness to the land, and his/her skillful use of 
language to say the words and tell the stories. 

Momaday in his essay "Man Made of Words" discusses in 
detail the essential qualities of landscape and how it ties 
together the individual and culture. Momaday evokes the image of 
Ko-sahn, an ancestor that is a representative of his 
consciousness, and this creation takes on a living presence. He 
explains: "I had projected myself — imagined myself — out of 
the room and out of time. I was there with Ko-sahn in the 
Oklahoma July . . . That ancient, one-eyed woman Ko-sahn stepped 
out of the language and stood before me on the page" (163-64) . 
Imagination is at the core of Momaday 's ability to reconstruct 
the past. His evocation of Ko-sahn is an example of the strong 
power inside the writer's mind which permeates a literary work, 
and in so doing, the meaning that is created will take a tangible 
form and will be continuously rendering meaning for other 
generations (Allen 578). Momaday believes that "none of us lives 
apart from the land entirely; such an isolation is unimaginable" 
(166) , and Paula Gunn Allen agrees with him when she says: "the 
primary impulse of the imagination is wholeness ... It closes 



7 

the circuit . . . between I and other, creating a coherent 
relationship, a meaningful vision of what is" (566) • 

Also prominent in Native American tradition and literature 
is the notion and belief of circularity and cycles. Everything 
in life is cyclical, linear and non-linear: the land, the 
seasons, images^ time; reliving in memory; imagination. And it 
is in this circular motion that we find harmony and balance. 
This prominent trait of circularity is evident in both Silko's 
and Momadays's essays. They both weave their writing in and out 
of stories to make a point and illustrate their message, and in 
so doing they reflect the cultural patterns of Native American 
tradition where numerous elements and factors play a role in 
creating a balance and a structure with a variety of meanings. 
As Paula Gunn Allen observes, "the way of the imagination is the 
way of continuity, circularity, and completeness," whereas, the 
way of the intellect is the way of segmentation, discontinuity, 
and linearity" (563) . 

To illustrate the emphasis on words, language, and story in 
the Native American oral tradition, I would like to refer to the 
story of "The Arrowmaker" as told by Momaday in his book The Way 
to Rainy Mountain. The story of the arrowmaker is for Momaday "a 
link between language and literature" ... "a remarkable act of 
the mind, a realization of words and the world . . . and it 
illustrates . . . something of the essential character of the 
imagination . . . man made of words" (171) . 

The story is about language and words and meaning conveyed 



ERLC 



8 

through words. It centers on a "procession of words toward 
meaning" and within this context Momaday brings in the notion of 
risk and responsibility present in language (172) . For example, 
the arrowmaker asks of the intruder only a name, an 
identification which, of course, requires an understanding of the 
words and language. He says matter-of-f actly with utmost care 
"liet us talk easily, as of ordinary things" (172) . Since the 
intruder does not answer, the arrowmaker knows at once that his, 
i.e. the arrowmaker 's, life is in jeopardy. The story 
illustrates vividly how language, and culture, are 
interdependent. This is another example of Silko's metaphor of 
the storyteller weaving a spider's web, and we must wait and 
trust that meaning will be made. As Paula Gunn Allen notes, it 
is the justification of particular symbols in a specific sequence 
that makes the inner meaning apparent and leads to an 
understanding between audience and story (565-66) . 

As we have seen, the Native .?Vmerican oral tradition is 
strongly based on language, literature, and trust. Stories speak 
not only about the land, the ancestors, but also provide what 
Keith H. Basso calls "metacommunicative message" (108). Basso 
explains this term through Nick Thompson's statement that the 
stories: ". . . go to work on your mind and make you think about 
life. . . So someone stalks you and tells a story about what 
happened long ago . . . All of a sudden it hits youl It's like 
an arrow, they say. Sometimes it bounces off — it's too soft 
and you don't think about anything. But when it's strong it goes 



ERLC 



9 



9 

in deep and starts working on your mind right away" (111) . 

Finally, we need to examine what contributions can all this 
have in college composition classroom. Native American 
literature offers a wealth of possibilities for the composition 
teacher. For instance, one can examine Silko's work in terms of 
the Rhetorical Analys s assignment. The focus here would be on 
the rhetorical devices writers use to create an effective story. 
Another way of using Native American texts in the composition 
classroom is to examine a text from what Ruppert calls the 
psychological and sociological perspective. By bringing into the 
classroom Native American literary works, students find that the 
Native American approach to texts moves beyond just the 
psychological and sociological perspective to include the 
mythical and the communal aspect as well. Thus, the 
understanding of the text reflects a much broader perspective. 
James Ruppert points out that "the text will effectively need to 
teach any reader how to read the work, and, thus, how to perceive 
new evoked realities and new modes of knowledge" (223) . As an 
example, Ruppert examines Momaday's House Made of Dawn from four 
different perspectives: mythological, communal, psychological, 
and sociological. Consequently, non-native American students can 
be taught and encouraged by the text to develop their own mythic 
imagination. Similarly, native American students can also be 
encouraged to be aware of the linear dimension in the texts of 
the Western tradition (Ruppert 223) . 

Native American texts can teach students a sense of 



ERLC 



10 



10 

community and encourage reader participation because part of 
understanding the story lies with the listener. Silko calls this 
a "spider web" — where you listen and trust so that meaning will 
be made. Native American texts offer the student an awareness of 
"performance": a balanced intermingling of many elements such as 
mixture of expression, voice, physical presence of storyteller, 
time of year, setting, and an awareness of the layering effect of 
language to account for the writer's movement from the 
contemporary mode to the mythic. 

In addition, the students in composition classes can also 
benefit from realizing the strong reverence for language in 
Native American texts because the "spider web" effect and the 
"layering" effect create "all inclusive" stories that capture the 
past and the present. 

Despite the vast potential of using Native American texts in 
the composition classroom, it must be remembered that each 
student. Native American or not, also has his/her own stories to 
tell. Hence, storytelling can be incorporated into class work to 
show that everyone is a storytt^ller and has stories to tell. For 
instance, the whole class could participate in telling stories 
and adding details so students will be able to get a sense of 
their own community. In his proposal to integrate American 
Indian autobiography in a composition course, David Sudol 
outlines assignments that are based on reading autobiographies by 
Native Americans and then writing students' own autobiographies. 
He provides several strong reasons for teaching American Indian 



11 

autobiography. Besides his own interests in the genre and his 
desires to expand the canon, Sudol believes such a course would 
appeal to a wide audience: it will attract students interested in 
Native American peoples; "it may also attract female students by 
including works of American Indian women"; "minority students, 
especially Native Americans, who have few classes that 
acknowledge their ethnic experience"; and finally, such a course 
would "appeal to young adults, so many of whom are struggling to 
find themselves" (28) • 

Silko sums up the importance and relevance of using Native 
American writing in the composition classroom when she says that 
it can create in us an understanding and "appreciation for the 
boundless capacity of language which, through storytelling, 
brings us together, despite great distancer between cultures, 
despite great distances in time" (72) . 



o 12 

ERIC 



References 



Allen, Paula Gunn, "Bringing Home the Fact: Tradition and 

Continuity in the Imagination, " Recovering the Word , Eds, 
Brian Swann and Arnold Krupat, Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1987: 563-79. 

Basso, Keith H. "'Stalking with Stories': Names, Places, and 
Moral Narratives Among the Western Apache," On Nature: 
Nature, Landscape and Natural History , Ed, Daniel Halpern, 
San Francisco: Northpoint Press, 1987: 95-116. 

Krupat, Arnold, T he Voice in the Margin; Native American 
Literature and the Canon , Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1989. 

Momaday, Scott N. "The Man Made of Words." Literature of the 

American Indian: Contemporary Views and Perspectives . Ed. 
Abraham Chapman. New York: New American Library-Meridian, 
1975: 96-110. 

, The Way to Rainy Mountain , Albuquerque: University of New 

Mexico Press, 1969, 
Ruoff , A, LaVonne Brown, American Indian Literatures; An 

Introduction, Bibliographic Review, and Selected 

Bibliography , New York: The Modern Language Association of 

America, 1990, 

Ruppert, James, "Mediation and Multiple Narrative in Contemporary 
Native American Fiction." Texas Studies in Literature and 
Language. 28.2 (1986): 209-25, 



Silko, Leslie M. "Language and Literature from a Pueblo Indian 
Perspective • " English Literature; Opening Up the Canon , 
Eds. Leslie Fiedler and Houston Baker, Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins UP, 1981: 54-72, 

Sudol, David, "American Indian Autobiography and Written 

Composition: A Course Proposal," Studies in American Indian 
Literatures , 3.2 (1991): 28-35. 



