DOCUMENT RESUME- 



ED 352 649 



CS 213 590 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

REPORT NO 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 



Trimmer, Joseph, Ed.; Warnock, Tilly, Ed. 
Understanding Others: Cultural and Cross-Cul tural 
Studies and the Teaching of Literature. 
National Council of Teachers o£ English, Urbana, 
111. 

ISBN-0-8141-5562-6 
92 

269p. 

National Council of Teachers of English, 1111 W. 
Kenyon Rd. , Urbana, IL 61801-1096 (Stock No. 
55626-0015; $15.95 members, $21.95 nonraembers) . 
Books (010) — Collected Works - General (020) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MFOl/PCll Plus Postage. 

^Cross Cultural Studies; Cultural Awareness; Cultural 
Context; Cultural Differences; Higher Education; 
''^Literary Criticism; ^Literature Appreciation; 
^Multicultural Education 
Literature in Translation 



ABSTRACT 

This book of essays offers perspectives for college 
teachers facing the perplexities of today's focus on cultural issues 
in literature programs. The book presents ideas from 19 scholars and 
teachers relating to theories of culture-oriented criticism and 
teaching, contexts for these activities, and specific, 
culture-focused texts significant for college courses. The articles 
and their authors are as follows: (1) "Cultural Criticism: Past and 
Present" (Mary Poovey) ; (2) "Genre as a Social Institution" (James F. 
Slevin); (3) "Teaching Multicultural Literature" (Reed Way 
Dasenbrock) ; (4) "Translation as a Method for Cross-Cultural 
Teaching" (Anuradha Dingwaney and Carol Maier) ; (5) "Teaching in the 
Television Culture'* (Judith Scot-Smith Girgus and Cecelia Tichi) ; (6) 
"Multicultural Teaching: It's an Inside Job" (Mary C. Savage); (7) 
"Chicana Feminism: In the Tracks of *the* Native Woman" (Norma 
Alarcon) ; (8) "Current African American Literary Theory: Review and 
Projections" (Reginald Martin); (9) "Talking across Cultures" (Robert 
S. Burton); (10) '*Walter Mitty in China: Teaching American Fiction in 
an Alien Culture" (H. W. Matalene) ; (11) "Text, Context, and Teaching 
Literature by African American Women" (Sandra Jamieson) ; (12) 
"Sethe's 'Big, Bad' Love" (Chauncey A. Ridley); (13) "Baldwin, Bebop, 
and 'Sonny's Blues'" (Pancho Savery) ; (14) "Filiative and Affiliative 
Textualizat ion in Chinese American Literature" (David Leiwei Li); 
(15) "The Unheard: Vietnamese Voices in the Literature Curriculum" 
(Renny Christopher); (16) "Narrative Theory in Naguib Mahfouz's 'The 
Children of Gebelawi'" (Suzanne Evertsen Lundquist); and (17) "The 
Mixed Blood Writer as Interpreter and Mythmaker" (Patricia Riley). 
(SR) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. * 

* * :it A * A :t 1^ * * yc :^ :^ iV 5V * A * * :V yc A * jff * :^ * * iV :^ * 



UNDERSTANDING 

OTHERS 

Cultural and Cross-Cultural Studies and 

the Teaching of Literature 





PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDLlC/>r!ONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 




OfcHA^TMINTWeOOCATlON 

EDUCATIONAL ftesCynCES INFOflMATfON 
CENTER (EftiC) 

C This documeni hat b€«n reproduced as 
received from th« p«rton or organi/afion 
Originahng >( 

Q Minor cnang«i n«ve been made lo imorove 
reproduction Quality 



• Poind of view Of opinionsstated m ims docu- 
ment do not nec«SMrily represent olfiCiai 
OERl pOiit>on or podcy 



Edited by Joseph Trimmer and Tilly Wamock 



2 EEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Understanding Others 



College SecxViOn Committee 

Tilly Wamock, Chair 
University of Arizona 

Lil Brannon 
SUNY at Albany 

Doris O. Ginn, CCCC Representative 

Jackson State University 

Brenda M. Greene 

Medgar Evers College, CUNY 

Linda H. Peterson 

Yale University 

James F. Slevin 

Georgetown University 

Joseph F. Trimmer 

Ball State University 

Art Young 
Clemson University 

James Raymond 

University of Alabama 

H. Thomas McCracken, CEE Representative 

Youngstown State University 

Janet Emig, Executive Committee Liaison 

Rutgers University 



Understanding Others 



Cultural and Cross-Cultural Studies 
and the Teaching of Literature 



Edited by 

Joseph Trimmer 
Ball State University 

Tilly Wamock 
University of Arizona 



Nattonal Council of Teachers of English 
1111 Kenvon Road, Urbana, Illinois 61801 



NCTE College Editorial Board: Rafael Castillo, Gail E. Hawisher, Joyce Kinkead, 
Charles Moran, Louise Wetherbee Phelps, Charles Suhor, chair, ex officio, 
Michael Spooner, ex officio 



Manuscript Editor: Amita Kachru 
Interior Design: Tom Kovacs for TGK Design 
Cover Photograph: Carl Pope 
Cover Design: Doug Burnett 

NCTE Stock Number 55626-3050 

© 1992 by the National Council of Teachers of English. All rights reserved. 
Printed in the United States of America. 

It is the policy of NCTE in its journals and other publications to provide a 
forum for the open di&cussion of ideas concerning the content and the teaching 
of English and the language arts. Publicity accorded to any particular point 
of viev^ does not imply endorsement by the Executive Committee, the Board 
of Directors, or the membership at large, except in announcements of policy, 
v^here such endorsement is dearly specified. 



Library of Cong.vess Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Understanding others : cultural and cross-cultural studies and the teaching of 
literature / edited by Joseph Trimmer, Tilly Wamock. 
p. cm. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-8141-5562-6 : $21.95 

1. American literature — Minority authors — Study and teaching. 2. Plu- 
ralism (Social sciences) in literature — Study and teaching. 3. Literature 
and society — United States — Study and teaching. 4. Ethnic groups in 
literature — Study and teaching. 5. Minonties in literature — Study and 
teaching. 6. Ethnicity in literature — Study and teaching. 7. Culture in 
literature — Study and teaching. 
I. Trimmer, Joseph F. II. Wamock, Tilly. 

PS153.M56U53 1992 92-31580 
810.9'920693— dc20 CIP 



O 



Contents 



Introduction 

I Theories 

1. Cultural Criticism: Past and Present 

Mary Poovey 

2. Genre as a Social Institution 

James F. Slevin 

3. Teaching Multicultural Literature 

Reed Way Dasenbrock 

4. Translation as a Method for Cross-Cultural Teaching 

Anuradha Dingwaney and Carol Maier 

II Contexts 

5. Teaching in the Television Culture 

Judith Scot-Smith Girgus and Cecelia Tichi 

6. Multicultural Teaching: It's an Inside Job 

Mary C Savage 

7. Chicana Feminism: In the Tracks of "the" Native Woman 

Norma Alarcon 

8. Current African American Literary Theory: 
Review and Projections 

Reginald Martin 

9. Talking Across Cultures 

Robert S. Burton 
10. Walter Mitty in China: Teaching American Fiction 
in an Alien Culture 
H. W. Matalene 



vi Contents 
III Texts 137 

11. Text, Context, and Teaching Literature by 

African American Women 139 
Sandra Jamieson 

12. Sethe's "Big, Bad" Love 153 

Chauncey A. Ridley 

13. Baldwrin, Bebop, and "Sonny's Blues" 165 

Pancho Savery 

14. Filiative and Affiliative Textualization in 

Chinese American Literature 177 
David Leiwei Li 

15. The Unheard: Vietnamese Voices in the Literature 
Curriculum 201 

Renny Christopher 

16. Narrative Theory in Naguib Mahfouz's The Children 

of Gebelawi 213 
Suzanne Evertsen Lundquist 

17. The Mixed Blood Writer as Interpreter and Mythmaker 230 

Patricia Riley 

Index 243 

Editors 253 

Contributors 254 



8 



Introduction 



Most of us who have spent our careers teaching literature probably 
agree with Clifford Geertz that "something is happening to the way 
we think about the way we think" (1983, 20). Although we would 
revise that statement to read "something is happening to the way we 
think about literature/' we would see the irony in citing a cultural 
anthropologist to announce a change in the direction of literary study. 
Indeed, given the themes of recent scholarship, public debate, and 
professional chatter, we might even suggest that literary study is being 
revised into cultural studies. 

To some, this change may seem no more than an extension of 
conventional practice. We have always believed that studying culture 
was virtually synonymous with studying literature, because culture, in 
Matthew Arnold's sense of the word, referred to those great works of 
literature that contained "the best that has been known and thought" 
(42). We have also believed that our literature students needed cultural 
"background." We have introduced them to historical periods (the 
Middle Ages), artistic monuments (the Elizabethan stage), and intel- 
lectual movements (Romanticism) so that they could understand the 
forces that influenced the literature we have asked them to interpret. 

For others, however, this shift toward cultural studies has prompted 
a revolution in theory and practice. The problem begins with the word 
culture. Although Arnold used it to ^'afine an exclusive and coherent 
literary tradition, Raymond Williams sees it as "one of the two or 
three most complicated words in the English language" (1983, 87). Its 
historical origins twist through the worlds of art and work, and its 
current usage evokes both ''material production" and '^signifying and 
symbolic systems" (91). 

Borrowing insights from disciplines as diverse as anthropology 
linguistics, and philosophy, contemporary theorists have explored the 
multiple meanings of culture to determine how those meanings enrich 
and complicate our study of literature. Tlieir speculation has uncovered 
questions that encourage teachers of literature to rethink the funda- 
mental assumptions of their practice: How do words and worlds 



vii 



viii 



Introduction 



interact? How does this interaction create cultural contexts? How do 
texts reproduce traces of those contexts? What is a literary text? How 
does a literary text relate to other texts? What do we do when we 
study texts, and which ones should we study? 

The "cultural studies" set in motion by this line of inquiry is 
complicated further when it is conducted in a comparative setting. 
"Cross-cultural studies" is an inevitable result of our life in the "global 
village" But theorists who speculate on different cultural formations 
within and across the borders of Western culture discover questions 
that alert teachers of literature to the territorial constraints of their 
practice: How do cultures represent themselves to outsiders? What 
roles do class, gender, race, and ethnicity play in that representation? 
How are these terms in conflict, and how are they subject to change 
over time and in different places? How do texts written in one culture 
address multicultural audiences? How do outsiders interpret and evaN 
uate texts written in other cultural contexts? How do texts from other 
cultures contest and reconfigure the kind of literary works canonized 
by Arnold's sense of culture? 

The poetics, politics, and pedagogy involved in answering these 
questions were the subjects of the 1989 (Cultural Studies) and 1990 
(Cross-Cultural Studies) Summer Institutes for Teachers of Literature 
sponsored by the College Section Steering Committee of NCTE. The 
conversations begun at those institutes have continued in various 
forums, prompting teachers throughout the country to begin reporting 
on the way cultural and cross-cultural studies have changed their 
thinking about literature. 

This book attempts to represent the energy, diversity, and complexity 
of those conversations. The ideas and images that surfaced at the two 
Summer Institutes certainly provided ample evidence for Williams's 
assertion that culture is a difficult word to define. Other theorists, such 
as Gloria Anzaldua, Kenneth Burke, Terry Eagleton, Clifford Geertz, 
Trinh T. Minh-ha, Mary Louise Pratt, Robert Scholes, and Catharine 
Stimpson have helped us see how the complicated and contrary 
definitions of culture connect to literary study. And the two hundred 
manuscripts we read in making this book have convinced us that 
cultural and cross-cultural studies have started to revise and reanimate 
the teaching of literature. 

We have organized the seventeen essays in this collection under 
three subtitles, "Theories," "Contexts," and "Texts." The authors did 
not write their essays to fit this arrangement, but our selecting and 
sorting suggested that these terms provide a focus for certain groups 



Introduction 



ix 



of essays. The terms are interconnected, however, in many subtle and 
significant ways, so that a case could be made for rearranging essays 
in any one section under the subtitle of another sr ::don. 

In our introduction to each of these sections, we suggest several 
ways to interpret the organizing subtitle and provide commentary on 
the contributions of each essay. But like Williams, we find our terms 
difficult, conflicted, and problematic. So rather than use them to create 
a false sense of coherence, we encourage readers to use them as points 
of departure, as prompts for interrogating individual essays and for 
discovering connections among and barriers between the essays in this 
collection. 



Theories 

The section opens with two essays that theorize about cultural studies: 
Mary Poovey traces the history of the movement from Raymond 
Williams through feminism and poststructuralism; James Slevin ex- 
plores genre as a cultural formation that shapes our views of literature 
and literacy. The second pair of essays speculates on the problems of 
cross-cultural studies: Reed Way Dasenbrock suggests a theory for 
interpreting texts from other cultures; Anuradha Dingwaney and Carol 
Maier explain how various mediations complicate such acts of inter- 
pretation. 

Contexts 

The essays in this section exhibit various approaches to cultural and 
cross-cultural contexts. The first three essays consider context in social 
and school settings: Judith Scot-Smith Girgus and Cecelia Tichi examine 
the contexts that television has created for their students; Mary C. 
Savage reveals how the ethnic backgrounds of four teachers from the 
Bronx interact with the multicultural patterns in their neighborhoods 
and schools; and Norma Alarcon probes the political and personal 
contexts that mark the historical conflicts in her culture. The last three 
essays define context in university settings: Reginald Martin recounts 
how literary theorists have evoked either the "integrationist" or the 
"separatist" context for interpreting literature; Robert S. Burton ques- 
tions the kind of academic multiculturalism that turns complex contexts 
into simple categories; and H. W. Matalene reports on his attempt to 
provide contexts for a text to students in another culture. 



X 



Introduction 



Texts 

The essays in this section focus on individual texts. The first three 
essays employ different strategies of interpretation: Sandra Jamieson 
uses rhetorical theory to disclose the contexts embedded in three 
African American texts; Chaimcey A. Ridley uses African mythology 
and folklore to explain the contextual assumptions in Toni Morrison's 
Beloved; and Fancho Savery uses the history and politics of bebop to 
enrich his reading of James Baldwin's "Sonny's Blues." The next three 
essays present new texts from different cultures: David Leiwei Li 
surveys the variety of literature written by contemporary Chinese 
Americans; Renny Christopher argues for the study of texts by Viet- 
namese American authors; and Suzanne Evertsen Lundquist introduces 
us to the narrative strategies of Egyptian novelist Naguib Mahfouz. 
The last essay focuses on the work of Leslie Marmon Silko as Patricia 
Riley reveals the "mixed blood" traditions that mark Ceremony. 

The essays in this collection are distinguished by their mixture of 
theory and practice, their discovery of the hidden in the known, and 
their struggle to make the unfamiliar accessible. We thank the speakers 
and participants at the Summer Institutes for providing the rich 
conversation that enabled us to find and arrange these engaging essays. 
We also thank College Section members, manuscript reviewers, and 
three special readers — John Trimbur (Worcester Polytechnic Institute), 
John Warnock (University of Arizona), and Patti White (Ball State 
University) — for their comments and criticism on the preparation of 
this manuscript. 

Works Cited 

Arnold, Matthew. 1966-1977. Collected Prose. Vol. 3. Ann Arbor: University 
of Michigan Press. 

Geertz, Clifford. 1983. Local Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretative An- 
thropology. New York: Basic Books. 

Williams, Raymond. 1983. Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society. Rev. 
ed. New York: Oxford University Press. 



I Theories 

A theory is a scheme of ideas which attempts to explain practice. As 
Terry Eagleton suggests, "Without some kind of theory however 
unreflective and implicit, we would not know what a 'literary work' 
was in the first place or how we were to read it" (1983, viii). But 
theory is not an absolute scheme. Indeed, as Trinh T. Minh-ha points 
out, "Theory no longer is theoretical when it loses sight of its own 
conditional nature, takes no risk in speculation, and circulates as a 
form of administrative inquisition" (1989, 42). Literary theory is best 
understood as provisional and plural, as projecting different ways of 
representing the practice of interpreting texts and their relationship to 
their cultural contexts. 

The four essays in this section "speculate" on the intricate system 
of cultural forces that inform and impede our teaching of literature. 
Mar)' Poovey uses her experience at a Bruce Springsteen concert to 
introduce the major issues that mark the movement toward cultural 
criticism. She outlines the humanist and structuralist versions of this 
movement before moving or to consider the contributions of feminism 
and poststructuralism. By combining these theories, Poovey proposes 
a three-tiered enterprise that calls for "the study of culture as an 
interdependent set of institutional and informal practices and dis- 
courses; the study of the traces this larger social formation produces 
in individual texts; [and] the study of the role of our own prac- 
tice . . . plays in reproducing or subverting the dominant cultural for- 
mation/' 

James Slevin also uses an extended example, his analysis of Don 
Quixote, to illustrate how genre functions as a ailtural formation. His 
literary analysis prompts him to consider how the socializing genres 
of academic discourse define and control what we learn. He examines 
three earlier theories on this subject to demonstrate that the university 
is not a unified discourse community; that students need to critique, 

1 



2 



Theories 



not merely mimic, the genres in this community; and that teachers 
and students need to rethink the power relationship in the university 
culture. This examination leads Slevin to theorize and practice new 
ways to use literary and literacy texts in the classroom. 

Reed Way Dasenbrock redefines the "practical difficulties" of reading 
texts written in another culture as a "theoretical issue." Contemporary 
theorists, he reminds us, have revalued the role of the reader by 
arguing that meaning is not what "an author 'put[s] in' a work, 
but . . . what we can make of the work here and now." But such 
theories assume an undifferentiated concept of reading, and thus fail 
to represent the cross-cultural situation. For that reason, Dasenbrock 
uses the ideas of analytic philosopher Donald Davidson to construct 
a new theory that enables readers to come to terms with the cultural 
anomalies they encounter in alien texts. 

Finally, Anuradha Dingwaney and Carol Maier demonstrate how 
an understanding of multiple mediation is crucial to any theory of 
reading Third World texts. For their example, they analyze / . . . Rigoberta 
Menchii: An Indian Woman in Guatemala, a text that was dictated by 
Menchu (in her recently acquired Spanish) to Elisabeth Burgos-Debray 
(a Colombian anthropologist living in Paris) and then translated into 
English by Ann Wright. As they sort out these mediations, including 
their own interaction with the text and their students, Dingwaney and 
Maier reveal how acknowledging the interplay of appropriation and 
inaccessibility leads to a more informed cross-cultural teaching of 
literature. 

Works Cited 

Eagleton, Terry. 1983. Literary Theon/:An Introduction. Minneapolis: University 

of Minnesota Press. 
Minh-ha, Trinh T 1989. Woman, Native, Other: Writing Postcoloniality and 

Feminism. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 



1 Cultural Criticism: 
Past and Present 



Mary Poovey 

Johns Hopkins University 



In September 1988, I joined 75,000 other people in Philadelphia's 
J.EK. Stadium for one of three U.S. performances of the Amnesty 
International rock and roll tour. After six hours of driving music, hard 
bleacher seats, and all of the distractions of a restless crowd, Bruce 
Springsteen, "the Boss," took the stage. Just above the roar of thousands 
I could make out a few bars of music — a solo piano, then a plaintive 
harmonica, straining coarsely longingly. A hush fell over the crowd; 
then, perfectly in unison, seventy-five thousand voices lifted the words 
into the night: 

The screen door slams 
Mary's dress waves 

Uke a vision she dances across the porch 
As the radio plays. . . . 

From "Thunder Road" to "Cover Me," from "Jungleland" to "Cad- 
illac Ranch," the crowd never missed a word. It was a moving, eerie 
experience. Although I could hear Springsteen's guttural voice amplified 
a hundred times beneath the burden of the devoted, the music I heard 
him sing was no more authentically "Springsteen" than was the image, 
also amplified a hundred times and projected onto a giant screen just 
to one side of the stage. From where I sat, the "real" Springsteen was 
a figure the size of a matchstick; the image that made this match figure 
larger than life was curiously, infuriatingly, out of synch with the 
words that the crowd carried so reverently. So there it was: the miracle 
of rock and roll in a technological age — that phenomenon in which 
the familiarity of the art object so completely anticipates the experience 
that the "event" as such only exists as a repetition, and there is never 



This essay appeared in a somewhat different form in College English 52(6) (October 
1990;; 615-25. Used With permission. 



4 



Mary Poovey 



an "original/' not even in the moment of supreme presence, the 
moment of performance itself. 

The next day, seeking to capture what I felt I had just missed at 
the concert, I went out and replaced the Springsteen records I had 
lost in my divorce. Even with state-of-the-art stereo equipment, how- 
ever, the recordings no more captured the authentic Springsteen than 
the concert had. In fact, ironically, the recordings brought back to me 
primarily the memory of the concert, with those seventy-five thousand 
devotee^ Mnging the memorized words, singing over Bruce but some- 
how r ng him more real even than himself. 

TT.c decentering of Bruce Springsteen that I experienced then is 
only one example of the postmodern art phenomenon. The tiny figure 
displaced by the giant image has already been displaced by records, 
CDs, and now by videos, all of which are readily available for purchase 
at your neighborhood store. But such simulacra do not so much repeat 
the live performance as they substitute, and even prepare, for it. Even 
if you have never experienced Bruce Springsteen "live" (and even if 
you have, you've probably not seen him), you know what it's like 
because you've seen (and even bought) the video, even though you 
know that most of the video's "concert" footage was choreographed 
and edited for the tape. Then, too, there's MTV and the snippets of 
rock and roll used to sell all kinds of products on TV and radio, from 
Levi's 501 jeans to Oldsmobile cars. And here it might interest you to 
know that Springsteen was the most valuable rock and roll figure in 
1985-86 (worth 12 million to Lee laccoca's Chrysler Corporation) 
precisely because Springsteen refused all endorsement deals. As a 
consequence, ad agencies recruited an army of Springsteen look- 
alikes — all the while exploiting the irony that if Springsteen did endorse 
a product, his value would plummet (Frith 1988, 90). Even Springsteen, 
whose "authenticity" and "sincerity" are carefully produced and 
marketed to sell his unique status in rock and roll, doesn't exist as 
such. "Springsteen" is only an effect of multiple representations, which 
allude to and quote each other, while the original recedes into a haze 
of nostalgia, a fantasy of what rock "used" to be. 

The pui-pose of this essay is not just — or even primarily — to argue 
that college teachers of English ought to teach rock and roll (or even, 
to give it its more respectable title, "popular culture"). Instead, my 
argument, which will be partly defensive and partly — mostly — cele- 
bratory, will be about what we can learn from the rock and roll art 
object. The defensive part is this: for most of our undergraduates, the 
experience of MTV, television, and rock and roll constitutes an important 
part of the training they have received in how to read before they 

i O 



Cultural Criticism: Past and Present 



5 



enter our classrooms. To ignore this and teach only close readings of 
texts that we present as static and centered is to risk making institu- 
tionalized education seem even more irrelevant to many of our students' 
past experiences and extra-curricular lives than I suspect it already 
feels. The celebratory part will take me longer to develop. It goes 
something like this: the reconceptualization of the art object urged 
upon us by the postmodern phenomenon of rock and roll can be seen 
as part of a turn in contemporary "literary" criticism. I'm not going 
to argue that rock and roll single-handedly caused literary criticism to 
take a new direction; rather, this turn is as much the product of the 
cultural and material forces that have produced this stage of rock and 
roll as is the postmodern rock and roll phenomenon itself. For the 
purposes of this essay, I want to look at this turn as the conditions 
that have made possible the practice that has been called "cultural 
criticism." 

I want to sketch out one history of cultural criticism now as a 
strategy for moving toward a definition of its practice and so we can 
see what's at stake in this critical turn. In an essay on "Cultural 
Studies/' Stuart Hall describes the emergence of this kind of criticism 
in the 1950s as a "significant break" ir the history of criticism. In 
such a break/ Hall writes, "old lines of thought are disturbed, older 
constellations displaced, and elements old and new, are regrouped 
around a different set of premises and themes" (1980, 57). Cultural 
criticism, in short, changes the basic paradigm of our interpretive 
practice; as a consequence, the nature of the questions we ask changes, 
as do the forms in which they are posed and the kinds of answers 
that will be considered adequate or even relevant. 

Significantly, of the three texts with which Hall associates this break, 
only one — Raymond Williams's Culture and Society — deals extensively 
with literary texts. What Richard Hoggart's The Uses of Literacy and 
E. R Thompson's The Making of the Englisk Working Class and Culture 
and Society have in common is not a preoccupation with texts that are 
considered to be "the best that has been thought and said" but the 
constitution of "culture" as an object of analysis. Each of these writers 
argues that without some concept of culture, we cannot understand 
historical transformations or the place of those texts considered to 
incarnate "the best that has been thought and said." The self-con- 
sciousness of the three texts Hall cites, moreover — their attention to 
the fact that such critical work invariably participates in (rather than 
simply reflecting upon) what counts as culture — dovetailed with the 
agenda of the New Left so as to place the politics of intellectual work 
squarely at the center of cultural studies. In practice, this means that 



17 



6 



Mary Poovey 



cultural criticism necessarily takes itself as one of the objects of its 
own scrutiny, since critical practice — whether in the form of teaching, 
lecturing, or writing — is viewed as a constitutive part of culture and 
therefore as always already political — as a participant, or even an 
intervention, in the exercise of power. 

Hall's essay focuses on two of the dominant paradigms by which 
culture has been conceptualized within the practice of cultural studies. 
The first paradigm emphasizes the coherence of culture and its avail- 
ability to rational investigation and human action. One facet of this 
paradigm comes from Williams's work; it defines culture as "a general 
social process: the giving and taking of meanings ... the process of 
community" (quoted in Hall 1980, 59). Not only do meanings form 
part of social process, but so too do the social practices that we 
normally think of as separate. Culture is therefore conceptualized as 
the patterns of organization that underwrite and link all parts of the 
social formation, making of it a "common" culture, a social totality 
Even when conflict is written into this model, as it is in its second 
fonnative facet — that offered by E. P. Thompson — culture is still a 
whole, encompassing both the meanings and values that social groups 
create and the lived practices through which individuals experience 
those meanings. For literary critics and teachers of writing, the point 
of this is that it militates against separating literacy and literary texts 
from other kinds of social activity; to do so, the argument goes, is 
artificially to rupture (or repress) the totality of which literacy and the 
literary text are integral parts. 

If this first paradigm is "humanist," in the sense that it emph^^sizes 
the experience and agency of individuals within the social totality, 
then the second paradigm Hall describes is "structuralist," in the sense 
that it emphasizes the systems of relations that underwrite and 
determine what counts as individual experience. Derived from the 
linguistics of Ferdinand de Saussure, the anthropology of Levi-Strauss, 
and the structural Marxism of Louis Althusser, this paradigm describes 
culture as the ensemble of categories and signifying systems that 
provide the terms through which humans understand our world, from 
which we derive our identity, and in which we formulate and express 
desire (including what seems to be, but is not, "free" choice). For the 
most part, these categories and systems are not visible; we participate 
in them unconsciously, and one of the effects of ideology is to obscure 
the operation of these determinate deep structures. Here is Althusser, 
writing on the relation between "structures" and consciousness: 

Ideology is indeed a system of "representations," but in the 
majority of cases these representations have nothing to do with 



IS 



Cultural Criticism: Past and Present 



7 



"consciousness." ... It is above all as structures that they impose 
on the vast majority of men, not via their "consciousness." ... It 
is within this ideological unconsciousness that men succeed in 
altering the "lived" relation between them and the world and 
acquiring that new form of specific unconsciousness called "con- 
sciousness.'' (quoted in Hall, 1980, 66) 

This structuralist paradigm therefore pushes experience, intention, and 
rationality away from the center of culture and analysis; it recasts 
experience, intention, and (what seems like) rationality as the effects 
of representations and signifying systems, not their unproblematic 
origins. For teachers of literature and writing, this means that any 
analysis that focuses on the reader's report of her experience of reading, 
the author's intention, or the referential meaning of a text (what is it 
about?) is seen as participating in the ideological masking of the system 
of relations in which reading and textual production take place. 

These paradigms clearly have limitations which need to be carefully 
worked through. Williams's notion of "community" for example, 
simply assumes the existence of a nation-state at the same time that 
it leaves unclear how the various dialects that problematize the nation- 
state's ideal of a "common language" fit into this "community" 
Althusser's emphasis on ideology as an unconscious determinate, 
meanwhile, makes it difficult to imagine how human beings can know 
or challenge the "structures" that give them their places and identities. 
Instead of developing these points now, however, I want to highlight 
the productive implications of Hall's second paradigm in particular; I 
also want to supplement Hall's genealogy with two more contributors 
to what I take to be cultural criticism. I want to make it clear from 
the beginning that I do not intend to offer an alternative definition of 
culture in this essay. Indeed, one of the outcomes of my line of 
argument may well be to show why no stable definition of culture is 
as useful as a definition that remains strategic — that is, always con- 
testatory and that is always defined in relation to a particular context 
and set of political needs. Most of us who define ourselves as cultural 
critics try to start from practice — the practice of reading, of writing, 
of teaching. What is called cultural criticism, then, is not the criticism 
of a static object (culture) but a method of critique — a set of questions 
and some suggestions of the criteria we might use to determine the 
adequacy of answers. 

To my mind, one of the most provocative implications of the revision 
that the structuralist paradigm works upon the humanist paradigm is 
that it restores to the model of culture the fact of difference. That is, 
whereas Raymond Williams's emphasis on community (and even, in 



8 



Mary Poovey 



a different way, Thompson's celebration of class "experience") stresses 
the homogeneity of culture, the structuralist position directs us to 
examine the specificity — the difference — of practices, institutions, and 
discourses. Beyond this, moreover, this paradigm implicitly directs us 
to uncover the exclusions by which any entity (such as culture) achieves 
the illusion of coherence and autonomy. In other words, in the humanist 
paradigm (and here I'm going to extend Hall's analysis beyond the 
humanist paradigm of early cultural studies to any humanist para- 
digm — indeed, to humanism itself) difference is repressed in order to 
produce the illusion of a unified, totalizing, universal truth. This 
repression is not always conscious, nor is it always attributable to 
identifiable individuals. Instead, this process of repression, which 
produces and proceeds by exclusions, is a function of any process of 
definition in an epistemological system that depends upon non-con- 
tradictory logic and unitary identity. This process of repression, in 
other words, is the process by which any concept is stabilized as a 
self-contained and coherent entity. Once we see this repression of 
difference as constitutive of the (illusion of) autonomy, coherence, and 
universal truth, then differences become available as a terrain for 
contestation. To explain more fully what I have in mind here, let me 
turn to two of the contributors that Hall's account excludes: feminism 
and poststructuralism. 

This is not the place to rehearse the history of the feminist movement 
in the United States, inside or outside the academy (but I ask you all 
to have that in mind as the subtext for my comments). For my purposes, 
it is sufficient to note one of the unexpected eifects of the political 
movement that developed in the 1960s alongside (and in a complex 
relation to) the Civil Rights Movement. One part of the feminist 
argument was that what was taught in schools — the canon — did not 
represent "human nature" or "universal truth" because the canon 
excluded a significant part of the human population. This argument 
inadvertently called attention to the fact that any claim to totality, 
representativeness, or universality depends upon excluding some groups 
from that totality — precisely because the differences among those 
groups cannot be assimilated into an internally coherent whole. In 
practice, this meant that attempts to rectify the inadequacies of the 
canon — to add women (or peoples of color) so as to make the totality 
more "representative" — paradoxically exposed the fact that what had 
counted as representativeness did — and always wuuld — involve ex- 
clusions, which were constitutive of (the illusion of) coverage or 
representativeness in the first place. 



Cuii'ural Criticiom: Fast and Present 



9 



Within the women's movement, this principle became painfully 
clear in the 1970s, as some women of color and lesbians argued that 
feminism itself involved significant exclusions — that feminism system- 
atically repressed the differences among women in order to reify a 
single, homogenized entity — VSbman — which could be opposed to (the 
also falsely homogenized entity) Man. Within the practice of literary 
studies, meanwhile, this principle was also being driven home — 
uncomfortably — by various poststructuralists, who argued, among 
other difficult things, that the very assumptions of humanism (including 
the humanist version of feminism) systematically repressed the differ- 
ences vrithin the individual, that humanism translated the differences 
v^thin the individual into a difference between individuals so as to 
manage the threat to autonomy that difference posed. 

For the purposes of this discussion, I want to emphasize only two 
tenets of poststructuralism, and I vdW plead guilty in advance to the 
crime of oversimplification. The first relevant tenet of poststructuralism 
is the critique of stable identity As developed most provocatively by 
Jacques Derrida and Michel Foucault, this argument suggests that the 
identity of any entity is stabilized only by repressing the play of 
differences within and between what look to be (but are not) separate 
things. This means, for example, that "life" derives its essential identity 
not through some fixed difference from (or opposition to) another 
stable entity, "death," but by simultaneously invoking and repressing 
the degrees of difference that actually link life to death. In some ways, 
the most telling demonstration of this principle is offered by the 
"border cases," those points along the chain of differences that prob- 
lematize the very ideas of an oppositional definition and stable identity. 
Typically, these border cases v^ll be sites of the most aggressive social 
contestations, for they threaten to undermine the certainty upon which 
humanism bases its claim to authority. So, for example, abortion and 
euthanasia are fiercely contested, for the one points to the uncertainty 
of life, the other to the indeterminacy of death. 

The second relevant poststructuralist principle is the critique of 
referentiality. Derived from Saussure's linguistic theories, this principle 
holds that words do not generate meanings by referring to their 
originals — things — but rather through the orderly (but artificial) op- 
erations of the self-contained system of language, or the signifying 
chain. The implication of this thesis is that a metaphysics, like hu- 
manism, that is based on presence — that says that the original is more 
authentic than the representation, the idea is more important than the 
sign, and the intention is more significant than the additional effects 
words generate — excludes any recognition of the operations of lan- 



r, ^ 



10 



Mary Poovey 



guage, which always produce meanings other than and in excess of 
the original idea or intention. Taken together, these two critiques — of 
the unified subject and of reference — virtually reverse the practices of 
humanism. Whereas humanists want to investigate origins, stability, 
truth, identity, mimesis, and the rational subject, poststructuralists 
focus on representation: language as a system of relations, the instability 
of meaning, the artificiality of truth, the contradictory nature of identity, 
the generative capacity of language, and the de-centered subject. 

When the critiques of identity and reference derived from post- 
structuralism and (more complexly) from feminism are added to the 
preoccupation Stuart Hall describes with culture as the ground of 
human activity, the result is something like the three-tiered enterprise 
that I am calling cultural criticism: the study of culture as an inter- 
dependent set of institutional and informal practices and discourses; 
the study of the traces this larger social formation produces in individual 
texts; the study of the role our own practice — in this case, teaching — 
plays in reproducing or subverting the dominant cultural formation. 
What are the implications for teachers of literature and writing of 
conceptualizing literature as somehow a part of the social formation 
called culture? This is, of course, a complex issue, which has already 
been addressed by vvnters such as Richard Johnson (1986-1987) and 
John Trimbur (1988). 1 want now just to offer my contribution to the 
subject. 

The basic premise, as I see it, of a cultural criticism infomed by 
poststructuralism is that concepts we treat as if they were things are 
seen as the effects of representations and institutional practices, not 
their origins. A recent essay by Paula Treichler (1987) about AIDS 
provides a good example of how this fundamental change in the 
problematic mandates new questions and new answers. Whereas the 
humanist approach would assume that the disease entity AIDS has 
been scientifically proven to exist and would examine either the 
accuracy of various representations as measured against the original 
or the interrelation of various representations to see what they reveal 
about the original, the new problematic argues that what counts as 
AIDS at any given moment is partly a function of representations. 
This doesn't mean that what we now call AIDS would no longer be 
transmitted by sexual contact if we changed the way we talk about it, 
but it does mean that the way individuals experience the disease and 
the social resources devoted to treatment, prevention, and cure do 
depend on the various signifying systems in which the representation 
of AIDS is lodged. As long as AIDS is conceptualized primarily by 
one mode of transmission, for example — as a sexual disease — it will 




Cultural Criticism: Past and Present 



11 



belong to the signifying chains that include; on the one hand, syphilis, 
gonorrhea, and hepatitis and, on the other, transgression, sin, dirtiness, 
contagion, death. Sexual intercourse is only one means by which AIDS 
is transmitted, of course, and its mode of transmission is only one 
feature of the retrovirus, but because this mode of transmission has 
dominated discussions of the disease, AIDS now seems to be bound 
to the moralistic equation of the 1980s: sex - sin - death; those who 
practice illicit sex deserve to get sick and die. That this equation is not 
necessarily the only interpretation of AIDS available, however, is clear 
from the work of gay activists and members of groups like ACT UP, 
who have promoted other sets of associations by insisting on alternative 
representations of the disease. 

If we accept the notion that what we think of as autonomous 
entities are actually the effects of representation, then we are faced 
with the dissolution of the entity that has grounded our institutional 
authority and expertise — literature. The kind of cultural criticism I am 
describing argues that what has come to count as a literary text since 
the nineteenth century has depended on a set of institutional practices 
which includes a system of schooling, the disciplinary division of 
knowledge, and the departmental division of labor These practices 
allow some kinds of human productions to be received as textual 
embodiments of values thai are held to be important and representative 
(if not universal). Defining some kinds of human productions as 
"literature," moreover, depends upon privileging and stabilizing the 
individual work — a process that depends, in turn, upon ignoring the 
differences among various editions of the work, not to mention the 
difference between, for example, the textual version of a play and its 
various performances. Defining some productions as literature also 
depends upon repressing the connections between texts and the cultural 
processes of which they can be said to be a part, whether these 
processes are understood as the mode of production of the text (its 
composition, publication, marketing, and place within the system of 
advertising and reviewing) or its participation in the production of 
social meanings and effects. Defining some productions as literature 
also depends upon defining some other kinds of productions as "not- 
literature": journalism, for example, is clearly not literature. But then 
there are those problematic border cases. If Moby Dick is literature, 
what about Uncle Tom's Cabin? If Uncle Tom's Cabin comes to be counted 
as literature, what about Harlequin romances? political tracts? jour- 
nalism? 

In part, such exclusions and the systems of repressed relations to 
which I have just alluded are what cultural criticism restores to visibility. 



12 



Mary Poovey 



To do this, one version of the practice takes as its object of study not 
just the individual text, but something extrapolated from a wide variety 
of texts and reconstructed as the ideological and material conditions 
of possibility for these texts. This new object of analysis — not culture 
as some reified entity, but an abstraction that constitutes the field from 
which what counts as culture comes into visibility — is in the first 
instance formal: it is a principle of organization, or, better still, a system 
of relations that stabilizes identity by provisionally inscribing differ- 
ences. Inevitably, of course, this formal principle also has content, for 
it exists only in and through representations. In the mid-Victorian 
period, for example, the conditions of possibility for all kinds of texts 
and practices consisted of a binary conceptualization of reality, which 
was articulated most "naturally," hence persuasively, upon the sexual 
difference. That is, the most characteristic formal feature of mid- 
Victorian culture was the articulation of identity as a series of binary 
oppositions, the most fundamental of which — and here is the content — 
was the opposition male/female (Poovey 1988, 4-15). 

To describe this object of analysis as a "system" of institutions and 
practices or even a characteristic "relation" conveys the impression that 
it is internally organized, coherent, and (relatively) static. But there is 
another, equally important dimension to this object of analysis: it is 
uneven. In the most fundamental sense, this unevenness is a function 
of that process I have already described — the process by which our 
non-contradictory system of logic artificially reifies entities by (momen- 
tarily) repressing the play of differences. This unevenness is also a 
function, however, of the relative autonomy of various parts of the 
social formation. That is, various institutional practices change according 
to pressures specific to those institutions as well as in relation to deep 
structural changes within the entire social formation. Unevenness means, 
on the one hand, that there is no strict parallelism among the different 
parts of the social formation. It also means, on the other hand, that, 
occasionally and to some groups of people under conditions that need 
to be discussed, the underlying contradictions and instabilities become 
visible and available for analysis and resistance (Poovey, 1-4). 

Depicting culture as an uneven system of relations dissolves the 
conventional opposition between texts and institutional practices or 
events because it casts all of these supposed entities as effects of — 
but also participants in^ — the play between a culture's deep structure 
and its various representations. It suggests that one important subject 
for analysis will be the specificity of a culture's deep structure — its 
particular combination of coherence and incoherence, which under- 
writes the society's identity and its susceptibility to change. The 



Cultural Criticism: Past and Present 



13 



privileged sites for such analysis will be, on the one hand, the 
mechanisms that efface the constitutive instability of institutions and 
texts and, on the other hand, the contexts in which differences that 
have been repressed threaten to emerge into visibility. This model also 
suggests that cultural critics should abandon the goal of devising 
"complete'' interpretations of individual texts in favor of analyses that 
reconstruct the debates and practices in which texts initially partici- 
pated. The privileged sites of this analysis will be textual details that 
(also) belong to (other) contemporary vocabularies and discussions and 
the textual contradictions or symbolic solutions that make what we 
now think of as the text's "context" part of the fabric of textuality 
itself. (For examples of this kind of work, see Brown 1987, 41-61; 
Poovey 1988, 89-125.) 

This kind of analysis, then, will most typically have a historical 
component (although the kind of comparative work anthropologists 
do is also relevant). The historical component is important because 
one is initially trying to describe how and under what determinant 
conditions entities and concepts acquired coherence: how did "litera- 
ture" as a set of texts, reading procedures, attitudes, and institutional 
practices come into being? As part of this analysis, critics will look at 
the historical process of reification: the specific exclusions by which 
concepts have come to be stabilized, the processes of institutionali- 
zation, crede dalization, and professionalization that occur alongside 
and in reiadon to the emergence of discrete categories. Because of the 
importance of the dynamic of exclusion as part of this process, and 
because of the particular exclusions that have characterized Western 
civilization, race, gender, class, and ethnicity will assume particular 
importance in such analyses. While these categories have particular 
importance now, however, I do not want to exempt race, gender, class, 
and ethnicity from the kinds of historical and critical scrutiny I am 
calling for. Each of these categories has also been artificially homog- 
enized and reified by historical processes that have been characterized 
by strategic exclusions. I suggest that we ask how race, gender, class, 
and ethnicity work — how they produce and disrupt meanings — but I 
also suggest that we ask, for example, who is included under the 
designation "black" at any given moment? Who is excluded? How 
does this term relate to other culturally laden signifiers — not just 
"white," but also "evil," "unemployed," "unwed," and "beauHful"? 

Changing the object of analysis as I have suggested here constitutes 
an intervention in the current definition and practice of literary criticism 
and the teaching of writing. Implicitly, it calls into question many of 
the institutional structures in which most of us teach — the disciplinary 



14 



Mary Poovey 



division of knowledge, the reification and reproduction of a literary 
canon, the departmental segregation of teachers within the academy, 
a tenure process that rewards primarily specialized scholarship. It also 
calls for some new organizations of our time and resources: more 
team-teaching, more interdisc ^linary teaching (or "de-disciplinary" 
teaching, as Cornel West phrases it [1987, 200]), a more systematic 
willingness to examine the conditions of possibility for our own 
classroom practice, the commitment to problematize the syllabus and 
examine its strategic exclusions, a willingness to look at the social 
construction of such apparently unassailable entities as "literacy," 
"aesthetic value," and "literature." I also realize that the practice I've 
sketched out here doesn't solve — or even raise — all of the problems 
this kind of inquiry introduces. More theoretical work needs to be 
done on the nature of the relationships among different parts of the 
social formation, the role pleasure plays in the production of meaning, 
and the question of how power can be seized and wielded once we 
have problematized agency and the individual subject. We also need 
some ways to tackle the practical problems that emerge from the 
conflict between such a radical transformation and the institutions in 
which most of us work. What role, for example, could canon-revision 
play in such a transition? Can one teacher change her practice without 
demanding department-wide changes (or incurring the wrath of her 
colleagues)? How can those of us who have a traditional training in 
literary history and composition as a process learn to ask the kinds of 
questions this practice implies? 

In even suggesting that we change the object of critical analysis, I 
may sound like a visionary, but I don't suffer from the delusion that 
these changes are on the horizon. For one thing, we work in an 
institutional structure that resists such radical transformation — and 
here I'm not talking just about the school system but also about a 
publishing industry that makes millions of dollars every year from the 
textbooks, anthologies, and editions that keep most of us teaching 
(more or less) the same thing year after year For another thing, most 
of us — I, anyway — have considerable investment in literature — and 
here I don't mean just that we've spent years learning how to read 
and teach but also that we care about certain texts and authors and 
even canons. "Think of the loss/' I sometimes tell myself, even though 
I also think, "Just imagine the gain! Just think what's at stake!" 

If I'm not a visionary, imagining that this change will transform our 
teaching overnight, then neither am I a pessimist. For, no matter how 
rigid the institutional or curricular constraints we work under, one of 
the conditions that almost always obtains in the work of teaching is 



Cultural Criticism: Past and Present 



15 



the relative autonomy of our power over what actually occurs in the 
classroom. Even if one must teach from a textbook, even if one must 
prepare students to succeed in a standardized examination, the v^ay 
one teaches is, in almost all cases, left up to the individual teacher. 
The kinds of changes I have been describing here can begin in the 
individual classroom — even if one does not teach Bruce Springsteen. 
I don't think that changes at the individual level are enoug'*^. in the 
final analysis. Changes in one's own practice need to be accompanied 
by attempts to reconsider the curriculum, the organization of the major, 
who is hired and at what age. Nonetheless, we don't need to wait for 
sweeping institutional changes to begin rethinking what we do. Our 
students, after all, are already living the changes I have only sketched 
out here. 

Works Cited 

Brown, Laura. 1987. "The Romance of Empire: Oroonoko and the Trade in 
Slaves." In The New Eighteenth Century: Theory, Politics, English literature, 
edited by Felicity Nussbaui . and Laura Brown, 41-61. New York: Methuen. 

Frith, Simon. 1988. "Picking up the Pieces." In Facing the Music, 88-130. New 
York: Pantheon. 

Hall, Stuart. 1980. "Cultural Studies: Two Paradigms." Media, Culture and 

Society 2: 57-72. London: The Open University. 
Johnson, Richard. 1986-1987. "What Is Cultural Studies Anyway?" Social Text 

16: 38-80. 

Poovey, N4ary. 1988. Uneven Developments: The Ideological Work of Gender in 
Mid-Victorian England. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Treichler, Paula. 1987. "AIDS, Homophobia, and Biomedical Discourse: An 
Epidennic of Signification." Cultural Studies 1(3): 263-305. 

Trimbur, John. 1988. "Cultural Studies and Teaching Writing." Focuses 1(2): 
5-18. 

West, Cornel. 1987, "Minority Discourse and the Pitfalls of Canon Formation." 
Yale Journal of Criticism 1(1): 193-201. 



A. / 



2 Genre as a Social Institution 



James R Slevin 
Georgetown University 

Part One 

He knows his genre from the inside out; his genre is his fix on 
the world. 

— Rosalie Colie, The Resources of Kind 

In Cervantes' Don Quixote, home is the site of boredom, disillusionment, 
anxiety, and even betrayal. And journeying, which is actually only 
wandering, only "getting away" without necessarily having anywhere 
to go, originates in the need to escape the unsettled and unsettling 
problems of home. Ennui is the most conspicuous of these problems. 
Going mad helps. 

Alonso Quixana, who, as we first meet him, is about to rename 
himself Don Quixote, is a lonely, childless, aging man, with not much 
to do and no one to do it for. In this condition, we are told, he turns 
into an avaricious reader, disregarding his duties to the estate, aban- 
doning his other pleasures, and even selling his lands in order to 
devote himself to the reading of chivalric romances. 

In short, he so immersed himself in those romances that he spent 
whole days and nights over his books; and thus with little sleeping 
and much reading, his brains dried up to such a degree that he 
lost the use of his reason. ... So true did all this phantasmagoria 
from books appear to him that in his mind he accounted no 
history in the world more authentic. (Cervantes 1957, 58) 

And, to act rather than just continue to be, he decides to restore to 
his own time the world of these books. 

Instead of his home, he elects to inhabit a discursive institution, a 
genre, and through him that genre inhabits the world. He wants, in 
our more modern terms, to be more fully and grandly the author of 
his own life. He wills to invent in his acts, however intertextually, the 
narrative that another will transcribe. He wants both to choose the 

16 



CO 



Genre as a Social Institution 



17 



character he will be and to choose the genre he will be written in, so 
that every action of his life may become, unashamedly, both originating 
and intertextual. His life thus becomes a genre, and Don Quixote, as 
he leaves his home for the first time, imagines how his departure will 
be narrated by some future, adoring chronicler. Home, for him, becomes 
this anticipated narration of the life he is setting out to author. His 
anticipation takes this form: 

Scarcely had the rubicund Apollo spread over the face of the vast 
and spacious earth the golden tresses of his beautiful hair, and 
scarcely had the little painted birds with their tuneful tongues 
saluted in sweet and melodious harmony the coming of rosy 
Aurora, . . . when the famous knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, 
quitting his downy bed of ease, mounted his renowned steed, 
Rozinante, and began to ride over the ancient and memorable 
plain of Montiel. . . . O happy era, O happy age, wherein my 
famous deeds shall be revealed to the world, deeds worthy to be 
engraved in bronze, sculptured in marble, and painted in pictures 
for future record. (62-63) 

For Don Quixote, the romance genre becomes a form within which 
experience is not only understood but made possible. But it is embed- 
ded, here and throughout the book, within another genre — one we 
now call a novel. So we as readers are provided another, quite different 
lens — a counter-genre, as it were — to inhabit as a context. For we have 
previously encountered an alternative rendering of Don Quixote's 
departure, a clear, realistic, straightforward account of his abandoning 
home — the same event we have just seen through Don Quixote's 
chivalric eyes. 

And so, without acquainting a living soul with his intentions, and 
wholly unobserved, one morning before daybreak (it was one of 
the hottest in the month of July), he armed himself cap-a-pie, 
mounted Rozinante, placed his ill-constructed helmet on his head, 
braced on his buckler, grasped his lance, and through the door 
of his back yard sallied forth into the open country, mightily 
pleased to note the ease with which he had begun his worthy 
enterprise. . . . And ... he rode slowly on while the sun rose with 
such intense heat that it would have been enough to dissolve his 
brains, if he had had any left. (62) 

In my epigraph, Rosalie Colie argues that Don Quixote "knows his 
genre from the inside out; his genre is his fix on the world" (31). But 
she adds that this does not necessarily distinguish him from the rest 
of us. We are instructed, we come to learn from this novel, that what 
we see and how we see it are intimately related to the discursive 
genres we inhabit at any given moment. Our world seems to be a 



18 



James F. Slevin 



construction of available forms; we see, think, feel in what the 
Renaissance called "kinds" (31). 

And so our way of grasping and living in the world depends on 
the genres to which we give precedence, on our personal generic 
hierarchy. And this, in turn, depends on what and how we have 
learned. 

Part Two 

Genres may have several mutual relations, such as inclusion, 
mixture [and] contrast. Another is hierarchical: relation with respect 
to "height." So classical critics regarded epic as higher than 
pastoral. . . . [H]eight was more than a rhetorical dimension: its 
normative force is unmistakable. 

— ^Alistair Fowler, Kinds of Literature 

What are the "kinds" that we ask our students to learn and inhabit? 
What are we doing to introduce them to these forms? And what are 
the ideological dimensions of this process? 

Most critics and theorists identify a limited number of aspects of 
discourse that form the basis for generic identification. I will draw 
here on the fifteen categories suggested by Alistaif Fowler in his book. 
Kinds of Literature: An Introduction to the Theory of Genres and Modes 
(1982). His catalogue of generic features is consistent with most of the 
work in this field, but more exhaustive and helpful. Unlike Fowler, I 
am concerned not just with literary genres but vvith the whole range 
of discursive forms, literary and nonliterary, polite and popular. I have 
grouped Fowler's catalogue of features into five more general categories. 

1. Aspects of the subject matter (topics, chaf^cter types, conven- 
tional plot devices, etc.) 

2. Aspects of meaning (thematic properties, thesis) 

3. Aspects of organization (relation of parts among themselves) 

4. Pragmatic aspects (the relation between speaker and implied or 
actual audience) 

5. Aspects of style (diction, syntax, figures) 

A genre is characterized in part by the manner in which these properties 
can be chosen, emphasized, and integrated according to established 
and publicly available codes. Tzvetan Todorov emphasizes the social 
nature of this process: 

In a society, the recurrence of certain discursive properties is 
institutionalized, and individual texts are produced ex\d perceived 



Genre as a Social Institution 



19 



in relation to the norm constiliited by this codification. A genre, 
literary or otherwise, is nothing but this codification of discursive 
properties. (1976, 162) 

'^hat is, a genre is an inherited social form, a "discursive institution," 
wit^ la which a writer fuses meaning, structure, linguistic f<^.atures, and 
pragmatic purposes and effects. 

Generic institutions can be embedded in other institutions, and 
serve these interests, as Richard Ohmann has shown us in the Pentagon 
Papers and as all of us know from teaching students forms of discourse 
in the academy. So, when we discuss student writing, and especially 
when we try to identify the qualities that deserve our attention and 
reward, we often practice disguised forms of genre theorizing. We are 
arguing about the features that mark a particular genre, and we often 
propose (either directly or indirectly) that genre and those features as 
the normative code for discursive practice generally. In seeing our 
work this v^ay, I hope to encourage a more satisfying analysis of our 
own efforts to identify, promote, and question certain norms in writing. 
We might even come to understand how we can help students think 
critically about these norms as well. This is crucial, because every 
course we teach, I believe, proposes at its core a system of generic 
norms into which students are expected to grow. Such growth will 
depend on their capacity to question as well as to understand our 
norms. 



Part Three 

Don Quixote is certainly not alone in living a literary text. Indeed, the 
roads and mountains that he travels seem overpopulated by men and 
women who have left their urban <;lwellings or country manor houses 
to take up residency among rocks and sheep. As in Shakespeare's 
comedies, there seems to be a pastoral compulsion, as characters 
assume idyllic disguises, frequently reversing sexual roles, usually to 
pursue personal desire or to escape the unwelcome desires of another 
Not pastoral alone, however; there is also what Claudio Guillen (1971) 
calls pastoral's "counter-genre": picaresque. Generic disguise, it seems, 
is how you protect your inner life, or find an inner life you lack or 
have lost, when you can no longer protect or find yourself at home. 
In the case of the picaresque hero, it's also a way to elude the cops. 

Many of the characters enter the narrative as self-consciously living 
literary kinds. They are used to it and find in Don Quixote an epitome 
of generic style, around whom they gather by choice. By the end of 



2C 



James F. Slevin 



Part I, no fewer than thirty characters are staying at an inn with him, 
and most are engaged in an elaborate drama, extending to fifteen 
chapters, to fool him into returning home. Let me see if I can say this 
succinctly: these are characters, dissatisfied with their social roles, who 
assume literary roles, and then go on to play an additional role in an 
elaborate "chivalric romance" plot that is really in the genre of the 
"hoax." 

How different, really, is Don Quixote from all the other, "normal," 
characters in this novel? All seem to suffer from an epidemic of literary 
madness. 



Part Four 

In the past ten years, there have been numerous investigations of the 
generic hierarchies that form the aims of the introductory English 
course; these investigations have focused specific attention on the 
question of "academic discourse." I want to look particularly at three 
of the earliest of these inquiries, articles which can be said to have 
originated this cmical process and which have served as points of 
reference for later discussions. 

Elaine Maimon was among the first to undertake such study, and 
in her article "Maps and Genres: Exploring Connections in the Arts 
and Sciences," she seeks to expand the range of genres to which we 
should introduce our students. "A required composition course," Mai- 
mon believes, "should be an introduction to composing academic 
discourse in the arts and sciences" (1983, 117). To that end, she has 
devoted much of her work to finding out from her colleagxies in other 
fields the generic conventions that govern the discourse they require 
from students. In this essay, she describes the genre of the "lab report," 
noting such basic elements as voice and form, both of which "reflect 
the scientist's disengaged stance on experience" (114); and she sets 
forth a neoclassical "decorum" of required, permissible, and inappro- 
priate features (e.g., precise reporting and clear subdivisions are re- 
quired, but humor or cleverness is not permissible). 

She compares this process to an apprenticeship whereby one not 
only develops a skill but enters a new community Maimon sees "liberal 
education [as] a process of learning how scholars behave, in the general 
academic community and in the small social groupings of their disci- 
plines," and our purpose in a writing course is to "help students 
become socialized into the academic community" (122). "Our real goal 
is to initiate beginners into the community of educated people" (120- 



r. o 



Genre as a Social Institution 



21 



21), to lead them "from the community of the less educated to the 
community of the culturally literate" (122). 

I welcome the generic orientation of her work and her expansion 
of generic considerations beyond the literary. But I wish to raise some 
questions about the approach she takes, and to suggest some difficulties 
I have found in trying to work with it in my university's vmting- 
across'the-curriculum program. 

First, it is not clear to what extent the analogy with apprenticeship 
precisely corresponds to the aims, methods, and realistic possibilities 
of a broad first-year writing course. Genuine apprenticeship (which 
still exists in some crafts) is a long process, sometimes extending for 
as many as ten years. Because it involves intensive guidance and 
rigorous review by an expert, it in some ways trivializes this practice 
to compare it to what can be done in one fourteen-week course. 

Moreover, the analogy carries with it an association of indenture, 
of the young and powerless to the established and powerful, which 
explains, I believe, why it is attractive to some faculty but also why I 
encounter from others serious objections to the whole notion of 
apprenticeship. I have many colleagues, some of them accomplished 
teachers and scholars, who think that apprenticing students to the 
discipline, or to academic discourse, is not what they are about at all. 
They resist any effort to define our educational goals as "socializing 
students into the academic community," because they object to the act 
of socializing, period. Perhaps they are naive. My point is simply that 
we should realize that, following Maimon's model, we might be 
preparing students for a view of disciplinary study not universally 
shared, one that might do them a disservice in comprehending the 
goals of many of their courses later on. 

Second, the variety of discourses marking different academic dis- 
ciplines makes clear and indisputable that the academy is not a unified 
discourse community. Moreover, from my twelve years of experience 
working with colleagues from other disciplines, I am not sure that I 
believe that even individual disciplines are in fact discourse commu- 
nities, or even communities. In advancing her notion that "genre 
conventions are constructed by a community that has practiced writing 
particular kinds of texts," Maimon cites Stanley Fish and his notion of 
the authority of "interpretive communities" (Maimon 1983, 112-13). 
But such a view confronts the same problems that Fish encounters: 
How does one account for differences within the community? Although 
the sciences may be an exception (I really am not sure), humanities 
and social science disciplines are profoundly heterogeneous. At my 
institution, there are widely varying and often competing forms of 



22 



James E Slevin 



discourse and methods of investigation not only between but within 
the individual disciplines of philosophy, economics, political science, 
English, sociology, and theology Now I realize that community mem- 
bers don't have to agree; but these folk" are at each other's throats, 
often claiming (occasionally with pride) that they cannot comprehend 
what the others are doing. (Perhaps they are more aptly compared to 
families?) So, when we imagine the composition course as introducing 
students to the discourse of each community, I am not sure I know 
what referent the term "discourse" — not to mention what referent the 
term "community" — might have. 

In his influential article, "Inventing the University," David Bartho- 
lomae addresses many of the same questions raised by Maimon, 
though his approach differs in several important ways. While Maimon 
studies specific disciplinary genres and conventions, Bartholomae is 
concerned "with university discourse in its most generalized form — 
as it is represented by introductory courses — and not with the special 
conventions required by advanced work in the various disciplines" 
(1985, 147). And, while Maimon derives her generalizations from 
faculty in the different fields (the "masters," as it were), Bartholomae 
looks at papers written by basic writers, examining how these ap- 
prentices try to approximate "university discourse" and where and 
why they succeed or fall short. Just as Maimon demonstrates a talent 
for analyzing and synthesizing what she learns from her colleagues, 
Bartholomae is an intelligent and sensitive reader of student texts and 
draws from that examinahon astute generalizations about the features 
of student writing in academic situations. Like Maimon's, his essay is 
important because it addresses a number of very good questions in a 
sophisticated way. 

He orients his discussion by drawing a contrast between his own 
work and that of the cognitivists, objecting to their psychologizing of 
writing, their sethng the writer's "thinking" apart from its textuality. 
In summarizing his position, he notes that "it should be clear by now 
that when 1 think of 'knowledge' I think of it as situated in the 
discourse that constitutes 'knowledge' in a particular discourse com- 
munity, rather than as situated in mental 'knowledge sites' " (145). He 
is arguing, really, for the primary importance of generic repertoires in 
our appreciation of a student's rhetorical situahon. He locates the 
student within "a language with its own requirements and agendas, 
a language that limits what we might say and that makes us write 
and sound, finally, also like someone else" (142). 

Sounding like someone else seems to be the nature of academic 
discourse for the beginning writer. Bartholomae examines hundreds of 



Genre as a Social Institution 



23 



placement exams to understand the features of the most successful 
papers, and I think we can abstract from his observations a Bartho- 
lomaean description of the universal "academic" genre. Aspects of 
subject and theme focus on the transcendence or complication of naive 
positions, so that the writer establishes his or her own view in relation 
to another view which seems inadequate to the question being ad- 
dressed. The form of the essay reflects this self-conscious dialectical 
strategy — from the organization of the whole piece to paragraphs to 
sentences — so the style will be marked by just such a contrastive 
syntax and a specialized vocabulary that, in its reliance on Latinate 
terms, approximates academic diction. The audience for the genre of 
academic discourse is always someone more knowledgeable than the 
writer, creating rhetorical difficulties in the creation of the writer's 
persona, which must, somehow, earn the right to be heard. 

Bartholomae sees the development of students as writers as a means 
of "vmting their way into a position of privilege" (157), and he seems 
specifically to want to define a form, which in the hands of others 
risks becoming a fonnula, for achieving this position of privilege. 
While Bartholomae, in this article and elsewhere, has problematized 
this notion of privilege and sought ways of reconceiving power relations 
within the academy, that nuance has not always been noticed by those 
who have derived their own analyses, curricula, and pedagogies from 
him. Indeed, their narrow focus on the students' need to earn the 
privilege to speak is, for one thing, inconsistent with the way many 
faculty envision students in their classes. The word "privilege," in all 
its current and even obsolete meanings, implies a special advantage 
over others, an advantage usually awarded (without necessarily being 
earned) by a superior authority. Not just sentimental egalitarians, but 
even many of the most traditional curmudgeons, grant students the 
right, even in bad grammar, and even in an egocentric style, to have 
their say and have it taken seriously. Thus, a narrow focus on the 
students' development of a position of privilege ignores the practice 
of even the most traditional teacher who takes students' idiosyncratic 
positions as rightfully theirs. 

But the more basic problem, as I see it, is that if students are to 
understand their positions as writers within the complex generic system 
(not the single genre) we call "academic discourse," they need to avoid 
imitating its surface form and receiving instruction in its conventions; 
rather, they iriust engage in the kind of analysis in which Bartholomae 
himself is engaged. That is the point Bartholomae himself makes, his 
most important point, really, and unfortunately the one that has often 
been lost. Students need, consciously and rigorously, to examine their 



24 



James R Slevin 



discursive predicament as he does, and with the same unsentimental 
eye. They need to think about the form, think about the situation in 
which they find themselves, and think about the various alternatives 
open to them. This critical examination is more important than the 
production of the form and is, at any rate, crucial to its mastery. 
Students might conclude that apprenticing themselves to this form is 
the best or only alternative, but it would help if they were fully aware, 
through their own investigation and analysis, of the situation that 
makes it so. And then again, they might conclude, to invoke Bartho- 
lomae's own title, that it is time to "reinvent the university" and to 
rethink for themselves their position in this institution. This "reinven- 
tion of the university" need not be a matter of developing counter 
forms, or resorting exclusively to personal forms that may only 
perpetuate the predicament students are already in. What it can be, 
however, is an active, politically, and socially conscious examination 
of academic forms that proceeds from a critical appropriation, and not 
from an imitation, of those very forms. 

Part Five 

Sancho Panza is not entirely unlike Don Quixote. To begin with, they 
are much alike in their need to find or make something different of 
their lives. Sancho wants tc be a governor, or a count, maybe even a 
king, and he is willing to take an apparently absurd risk to achieve 
what he wants. And he believes (truly believes) what he must (for 
example, that this old, lean man is somehow really a knight) to keep 
alive his hope and greed. 

But mostly they differ. Where the knight sees giants and chivalric 
armies, Sancho sees windmills and sheep. When Don Quixote seeks 
to fast and fight, Sancho Panza eats and retreats. But primarily they 
differ because one can read and write, and the other cannot. Indeed, 
the main contrast between the two characters, especially at the begin- 
ning of the novel, resides in the contrast between literacy and orality 
that concerns Cervantes throughout. Don Quixote, the literate man 
gone mad in his literacy, a generic lunatic, lives in a fictional history, 
guided by his predecessors in kind. In contrast, Sancho Panza, the 
man who keeps reminding us that he cannot v }ad or write, lives in 
the discursive resources of oral culture: folk wisdom embodied in the 
genres of proverbs, maxims, and folktales. There is a generic hierarchy 
here, though, and it is not just Sancho's constant "babbling" that 
bothers Don Quixote — it is Sancho's utterly alien, proverbial, ahistorical 



Genre as a Social Institution 



25 



way of thinking about the world. The knipht tries everything he can 
think of to silence this illiteracy, insisting that the proper squire must 
earn the privilege of speaking by speaking well. In other words, Sancho 
must ascend in the generic hierarchy. 

The book suggests that illiterates are not the most cooperative pupils, 
but they learn well. Sancho will not, in fact, shut up, even though he 
isn't listened to. As the narrative proceeds, however, he begins to enter 
the world — the linguistic world — of the chivalric romance, serving 
what might be called an "apprenticeship" to his master, and he 
becomes more and more a proper squire in this great tradition. He 
learns — from direct instruction but mostly from immersion in the living 
text he follows — how to win the right to be heard. So the first half 
of the novel closes on the squire's lament, an elevated genre, over the 
body of his apparently dead knight. The bathos here depends on his 
almost complete mastery of the form. 

O flower of chivalry, one single blow of a cudgel has finished the 
course of your well-spent years! O glory to your race, honor and 
credit to all La Mancha, and even to the whole world, which, 
now that you are gone, will be overrun with evildoers, who will 
no longer fear punishment for their iniquities! O liberal above all 
the Alexanders. ... In a word, knight-errant, which is the highest 
thing anyone could say! (511-12) 

What is happening here is not just a command of a style; it is the 
absorption of an attitude, a way of looking at the world, which 
constilTjtes for the character a second language and a second culture. 
The process of Sancho's initiation into this language and culture, this 
fix on the woi^ld, is explored throughout, and his maturing eloquence 
is perhaps most evident during his encounter, in the novel's second 
part, with a duke and a duchess who mysteriously cross their path. 
Sent by his master, Sancho greets the duchess with the following 
complex, rather elegant, and characteristically prolix introduction. Let 
me remind you that this is the (still) illiterate peasant speaking. 

This same Knight of the Lions, who was called a short while ago 
the Knight of the Rueful Figure, sends by me to say that your 
greatness be pleased to give him leave that, with your good 
pleasure and consent, he may come and carry out his wishes, 
which are, as he says and I do believe, nothing else than to serve 
your lofty nobility and beauty, and if you give it, your ladyship 
will do something that will redound to your honor, and he will 
receive a most marked favor and contentment. (740) 

In its diction, careful subordination, and elevated tone, it constitutes 
a striking contrast to the powers of language with which Sancho began 



26 



James E Slevin 



his discursive "apprenticeship." By this point, his initiation is complete, 
and he has been confirmed, literally "so to speak," in the dominant 
discursive institution. 

For his master, too, this is a moment of confirmation. Accustomed 
to a less than gracious treatment, he is taken aback at the reception 
provided by these two nobles, who actually extend to him all the 
conventional courtesies of the genre, receiving him entirely in the 
forms of romance. At this critical juncture in the plot, we read that 

All this astonished Don Quixote, and for the first time he felt 
thoroughly convinced that he was a knight-errant in fact and not 
in imagination, for he saw himself treated in the same way as he 
had read that such knights were treated in past ages. (745; 
emphases added) 

This moment of reception constitutes a completed initiation for one, 
a complete confirmation for the other. As wt might understand it in 
the academy, it is the moment a first-year student receives his or her 
first "A," the moment a graduate student receives his or her first "this 
may be publishable." It is surely a moment too p/ecious to spoil. So 
let us leave them for the time being in their contentment, this special 
moment in which genre and social context form one harmonious 
whole, and turn to matters of genre less comfortable. 

Part Six 

In several fine essays, Patricia Bizzell has contextualized the situation 
of students in ways that few other scholars have even attempted, 
especially with respect to academic discourse. Her ground-breaking 
1982 review article on writing-across-the-curriculum textbooks, "Col- 
lege Composition: Initiation into the Academic Discourse Community," 
uses the work of Bordieu and Passerson, Bernstein, Shaughnessy, and 
others to show how inequalities of social class affect students' abilities 
to master academic forms. She asserts that 

We have not examined the relationship between the academic 
discourse community and the communities from which our stu- 
dents come: communities with forms of language use shaped by 
their own social circumstances. We have not demystified academic 
discourse. (193) 

In examining current textbooks, she asks whether they "initiate students 
into academic discourse in such a way as to foster a productive critical 
distance on the social processes whereby knowledge is generated and 
controlled" (197). The ultimate goal is, in her terms, to "demystify 



06 



Genre as a Social Institution 



27 



disciplinary activity" (203), and she praises those texts that explain 
that academic genres derive from the specific discursive and meth- 
odological conventions of individual disciplines. The best textbooks 
teach students that disciplinary conventions are not "part of nature/' 
but socially constructed conceptual models that are shared by members 
of any academic discipline. 

This admirable review clarifies important issues, though it remains 
ambiguous about two key terms that have marked subsequent work 
in this area: "initiation" and "demystification." Initiation, in the passive 
modality usually invoked, has the connotations of a ritualistic intro- 
duction into some secret, mysterious, or even occult knowledge; it is 
an action performed by someone in authority, on and for another In 
this case, the student is the receiver of an action, an "initiate." Haunting 
this ceremonial or ritualistic sense of the term is its original meaning 
in Latin and in English, "to begin, commence, set going, originate" 
(OED), a meaning preserved in our sense of the term "initiative." But 
it is precisely this meaning that is usually suppressed in the metaphor 
of initiation. Instead, we have a sense of someone led and let into an 
understanding of the mystery but not into an active, initiating rela- 
tionship with that mystery, and not even into a critical examination 
of it. In this process of being ritually initiated, one takes for granted, 
and more unfortunately, one is often asked to serve the mysterious 
practices that accompany this otherwise secret knowledge. 

This service is related to the ambiguity of the term "demystification." 
It can mean, in a way consistent with the metaphor of initiation, that 
one simply comes to understand practices that were not understood 
before. That meaning and aim should be clearly distinguished from 
another sense of the term — the sense evident in Bizzell's most recent 
work — in which demystification is part of a genuinely critical exami- 
nation that not only clarifies an otherwise mysterious knowledge, but 
questions and even challenges it. Of course, it is hard to know how 
beginners could do that, could be the agents, the active initiators, of 
this kind of scrutiny. But that's a pedagogical problem (to which I will 
soon turn), not a problem of the aims of education. If we think they 
should, then we will figure out how to help them do it. If we simply 
provide descriptions and explanations of academic conventions, the 
students are not, for all that, active subjects engaged in the critical 
process of analyzing, questioning, and genuinely demystifying. They 
remain instead passive initiates. 

Significantly, this cridcal process is the very project that Bizzell 
herself has undertaken and invited her readers to join: 



28 



fames F. Slevin 



Thus, our examination of new college textbooks takes us beyond 
the question of what is happening in composition studies. Because 
of the centrality of writing to the academic enterprise, we find 
ourselves examining the xoorth of academic intellectual work itself 
when we question the conventions of academic discourse. . . . (205- 
6; emphases added) 

It is "we" (herself and us, her readers) who have entered into this 
analysis, and it has led us to examine the worth of academic intellectual 
work itself through the "question[ing]" of academic discourse. 

It is not clear why students couldn't do that, as a part of learning 
the forms. One can agree that it is desirable to join this community 
and one can value what is made possible when students control the 
genres of academic discourse without washing to see students as 
initiates. I think the problem we face rests in the tension between the 
metaphor of initiation in which we have become ensnared, and our 
desire, finally, to provide for students a critical distance that makes 
the process of joining the academic discourse community something 
quite different from an "initiation." 

As I have noted elsewhere (Slevin 1988), providing such a critical 
distance has more than a pedagogical rationale. It seems to me a 
n*?cessary aim if we are, in fact, to prepare our students for the highly 
complex and often unpredictable world of academic disciplines as they 
now exist. In his discussion of what he terms "the refiguration of 
social thought," Clifford Geertz notes: 

This genre blurring [among and within the disciplines] is 
philosophical inquiries looking like literary criticism . . . scientific 
discussions looking like belles lettres morceaus . . . histories that 
consist of equations and tables or law court testimony . . . theo- 
retical treatises set out as travelogues . . . methodological polemics 
got up as personal memoirs. . . . 

[T]he present jumbling of varieties of discourse has grown to 
the point where it is becoming difficult either to label authors ... or 
to classify works. . . . Something is happening to the way we think 
about the way we think. (1983, 19-20) 

What's happening is precisely what students need and have a right 
to know. Academic genres and conventions are not stable, ahistorical 
entities; they change and merge. The whole issue of what the academic 
genres are, and what writers do with them and within them, cannot 
be grasped apart from a critical perception of thek institutional and 
historical contexts. 

This critical dimension of the students' encounter with academic 
genres cannot be deferred; it cannot be seen simply as some later stage 
of a process that begins as uncritical acquiescence. At the very least 



Genre as a Social Institution 



29 



we should be wary of any desire to be exempt, in our own classes, 
from a critical impulse we will require everywhere else. And anyway, 
it seems to me im^ :>sible ever to attain a critical distance on anything 
unless you can, from the beginning, seek to question its assumptions, 
examine what it does and does not do for you, and consider what it 
is doing to you — that is, explain it socially and historically. Even literacy, 
and especially academic literacy, must be examined in this way, from 
the beginning of the process of attaining it; it must be examined in 
terms of what one gives up as well as what one gains, in terms of 
what it makes possible and what it takes away. The process of critical 
education must examine education itself as a social and institutional 
practice among others. Nothing should be exempt from such critical 
inquiry, least of all the immediate objects and aims of the introducton* 
writing course. 

Part Seven 

Suspended, contented, for this long interruption, are our heroes from 
La Mancha, enjoying their moment of harmony and confirmation on 
the esplanade of a lovely country manor in the second part of their 
adventure. All is well with them. 

Actually, no. For, you see, the duke and the duchess are themselves 
avid readers of romances and, what's more, they have read with great 
delight Part I of Don Quixote, which now appears as a material text, 
a real book, in the second part. Many of the privileged characters in 
Part II have read it, but not Don Quixote and Sancho Panza. Life is 
like that: You live your text, but you can't seem to get a copy of the 
damn thing. 

Discursive forms are social properties, and they are related to the 
uses and abuses of social power. The duke and the duchess have only 
perverse literary interests in the two main characters, whose anival is 
simply an opportunity for these nobles to play out and control in life 
what they love in their reading. Playful and detached, they treat the 
central characters as puppets; they appropriate control of the genre, 
reducing it from romance to farce. They are, in this respect, a function 
of a traditionally scripted social institution and are, in this functioning, 
emblems of all institutional figures, perhaps even those employed by 
universities. 

So we witness the transformation of Quixote's and Sancho's lives 
into another's drama, well scripted and often quite spectacular. From 
this point on, in scene after scene, what happens to tlaem is the r^'sult 



30 



James R Slevin 



not of their own folly, but of the machinations of the "nobles" who 
are toying with them for their own pleasure and self-esteem. There is 
thus a sense in which Don Quixote is no longer at the center of the 
narrative, no longer the "subject" of his own imagined history, because 
he is no longer the one imagining it. 

For now, in immediate ways, Don Quixote and Sancho are being 
written by their noble hosts, who spend their time — for lack of anything 
else to do — creating dramas of all kinds in which the two central 
characters are deceived into participating. In these twenty-five chapters, 
the longest section of the novel, we find contrived love stories, chivalric 
contests, political adventures, and even blasphemous resurrection 
rituals. The duke and the duchess supplant Don Quixote as the agent 
of his actions, and hence as the riuthor of his life. 

Cervantes is concerned here with "authorship" in the specific sense 
of who gets to create the life of whom. The power to author one's 
life becomes a test of critical consciousness and a function of "class," 
and Don Quixote has neither. Cervantes explores this theme of the 
authorship of the social text throughout his novel, suggesting that a 
society not capable of a critical examination of its own conventions is 
engaged in nothing more than a game played by those in power in 
order to manipulate others. 

Of course, this only makes apparent by grotesque exaggeration what 
has been happening to the novel's protagonists all along. The manip- 
ulation by the duke and the duchess can be read as a metaphor not 
just for the abuses of genre, but for the nature of genre as a social 
institution, not unlike other institutions that control what individuals 
do and think and become. So it is fair to say that, all along^ it is the 
genre that has been writing its "inhabitant," Don Quixote, and through 
him, his initiate, Sancho, not the other way around. They have never 
really been in charge — discursive institutions have. The apparently 
simple truth i ^he novel's most resonant point: Don Quixote doesn't 
know how to read. 

C^^rvantes uses his novel to provide and invite a critical examination 
of this social-aesthetic practiLj. The novel, a generic innovation that 
transforms as it joins the literary system, thus establishes a critical 
perspective not just on the genre of chivalric romances, an easy target, 
but also on the social processes Oi inhabiting genres and of being 
initiated into them. And to that extent, Cervantes, by reshaping the 
generic hierarchy through this particular narrative, provides a model 
for the interpretation and critical study of discursive forms, of genres 
as social and socializiug institutions. 



Genre as a Social Institution 



31 



In a period of generic transformation, very much like our own, he 
provides a comprehensive exploration not just of romance, but of 
picaresque and pastoral, dialogue and treatise, literary criticism and 
surveys of rhetoric, theological meditation and political tract, song, 
farce, sonnet, lampoon, elegy, lament, and many other forms. Cer- 
vantes' book includes and examines them all, demonstrating that, 
through a study of genres — a book about books and specifically about 
kinds of books — we can explore our ways of seeing and our ways 
with words, genuinely demystifying what they are and what they do. 

And this is what, I believe, education means. This is how I have 
tried to teach in my first-year courses. 

My allusions are to two books I ask my students to read. Ways with 
Words (1983) is Shirley Brice Heath's important study of language 
learning and life somewhere in rural Carolina, and it is quite simply 
one of the best studies of genre as a social institution to appear in the 
last twenty years. It traces, in gripping detail that supports and in 
some cases carries her analysis, the relationship between the social 
position of children, their forms of discourse as embedded in social 
structures, and their capacity to master, or be mastered by, the dominant 
modes of school reading and writing. My students and I begin there, 
learning together from her how to undertake such study, how to 
investigate these matters as she does. We also consider what is perhaps 
a more important point: Heath writes in a genre, ethnography, tlae 
status of which is at best problematic among humanities scholars. If 
not exactly an outcast, it is a suspect form, low in the generic hierarchy 
of academic discourse. So Heath's book both talks about and enacts 
the problem of genre as a social institution. 

We move then to John Berger's Ways of Seeing (1972), a study of 
painting and the discourse about it. This book's genre, too, a television 
documentary transformed into print, is of problematic status. Berger 
examines the relationship between several genres of painting (the 
portrait, the nude) from a Marxist-feminist perspective that relates 
visual conventions to the social structures and economic exchanges 
that enable them. 

We read Richard Ohmann's analysis (1980) of the genre he terms 
"discourse of plural authorship," a genre that embraces Terkel's Working 
and Rosengarten's All Cod's Dangers, among other "disestablished" 
books. We read studies of the essay form as it has been historically 
available, or rather unavailable, to women. We read texts that explore 
the nature and processes of literacy and literate action (Douglass's 
Narrative of the Life of An American Slave; Shaw's Pygmalion; Silko's 
Storyteller). Of course, woven through the course from beginning to 



32 



James F. Slevin 



end is Don Quixote, to see what we can make of it and what such 
making can itself make of v/hat we are trying to do. 

While the focus of the course is student writing — examined in the 
institutional context of the academy's expectations for them and its 
own uses of writing — the reading list makes clear that we are at least 
partly concerned with finding a new use for literature and, perhaps, 
a new way of envisioning its academic study at least in the introductory 
course. Cervantes' multi- and metageneric narrative offers a way of 
reading and seeing that resituates students' relationships to literature 
in terms of their own work as vmters. By not restricting the generic 
focus of the course to the genres of academic vmting, we open up 
more traditional literary genres to the same critical scrutiny engaging 
them as cultural practices with political and social implications. In a 
"general" way the course thereby bridges gaps between literary and 
non-literary texts and forms. But it tries to do something more as well. 

Specifically it helps literature speak more immediately to our stu- 
dents about the situations in which educators and students find 
themselves. Among the debates that now mark the discipline is this 
one: Does "literature" belong in the literacy class — or does it distract 
the students and teacher from the students' writing, in favor of endless, 
tiresome interpretations of canonical books? Since I find this question 
itself somewhat endless and tiresome, I would simply turn it around. 
Rather than "the place of literature in the classroom," the question 
becomes "the place of the classroom m literature." \hat has been, to 
some degree, the tendency of my reading of Don Quixote, but that 
text is not exceptional in this regard, as contemporary readings of 
Silko, Douglass, and Shaw make immediately clear 

So, let me conclude with one more example, which just happens 
to be the last text in the course I have been sketching. When teaching 
The Tempest, we look for sites of teaching and learning as they are 
explored in a play about the relationship between learning (study, 
"Prospero's Books") and life (political action and responsibility); we 
consider this learned magician, for whom "the liberal arts . . . being 
all [his] study, . . . [he] to [his] state grew stranger, being transported / 
And Rapt in secret studies" (1.2.73-77). And, noting Prospero's claim 
to be Miranda's unparalleled "schoolmaster" (1.2.172) and Caliban's 
master, we can examine the educative forces for and against "literacy" 
that are at work in the formation of these characters as objects of 
Prospero's tuition. I would suggest that ideas about personal respon- 
sibility, freedom, dialogue, and "education," very broadly conceived, 
have an important place in this way of reading Shakespeare's great 
play of writing, p and the powers or the imagination. For that 



Genre as a Social Institution 



33 



reason alone, this work has a critical place in the class that introduces 
students to the work of the academy. 

We use all of these texts to write about and to write from, trying 
their conventions ourselves and examirung those conventions. And, 
as we think and write about these texts, we do the same with specific 
academic genres, inviting teachers from other departments to bring in 
their writing for our consideration. But we do this work in conjunction 
with a reading of Maimon, Bartholomae, and Bizzell not just to learn 
what they know, but to learn how to do the kind of analysis and 
probing of generic conventions that they have done, perhaps adding 
some questions they do not entertain. And, finally, if I think my 
students can bear the tedium, I ask them to read this article. If I've 
done anything like a reasonable job, they'll be able to take it apart 
almost as well as my gentle reader has already begun to do. 

Works Cited 

Bartholomae, David, 1985. "Inventing the University." In When a Writer Can't 
Write: Studies in Writer's Block and Other Composing Process Problems, edited 
by Mike Rose, 134-65. New York: Guilford Press. 

Berger, John. 1972. Ways of Seeing. London: Penguin. 

Bizzell Patricia. 1982. "College Composition: Initiation into the Academic 
Discourse Community/' Curriculum Inquiry 12: 191-207. 

Cervantes. Don Quixote. 1957. Translated by Walter Starkie. New York: New 
American Library. 

Colie, Rosalie. 1973. The Resources of Kind. Edited by Barbara Lewalski. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Douglass, Frederick. 1960. Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, An 
American Slave, edited by Benjamin Quarles. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Fowler, Alistair. 1982. Kinds of Literature: An Introduction to the Theory of 
Genres and Modes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Geertz, Clifford. 1983. "Blurred Genres: The Refiguration of Social Thought." 
In Local Knoniedge: Further Essays in Interpretive Anthropology, 19-35. New 
York: Basic. 

Guillen, Claudio. 1971. Literature as System: Essays Toward the Theory of Literary 

History. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Heath, Shirley Brice. 1983. Ways with Words: Language, Life, and Works in 

Communities and Classrooms. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. 
Maimon, Elaine. 1983. "Maps and Genres: Exploring Connections in the Arts 

and Sciences." In Composition and Literature: Bridging the Gap, edited by 

Winifred Bryan Hoi*ner, 110-25. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Ohmann, Richard. 1976. English in America: A Radical View of the Profession. 

New York: Oxford University Press. 



34 



James R Slevin 



. 1980. "Politics and Genre in Nonfiction Prose/' New Literary History 

2: 230-41. 

Rosengarten, Theodore, comp. 1974. All God's Dangers: The Life of Nate Shaw. 
New York: Knopf. 

Shakespeare, William. 1987. The Tempest, edited by Stephen Orgel. Oxford: 

Oxford University Press. 
Shaw, George Bernard. 1916. Pygmalion: A Romance in Five Acts. London: ' 

Penguin. 

Silko, Leslie Marmon. 1981. Storyteller. New York: Arcade Publishing. 

Slevin, James. 1988. "Genre Theory, Academic Discourse, and Writing Within 
Disciplines." In Audits of Meaning, edited by Louise Smith, 3-16. Ports- 
mouth, NH: Heinemann and Boynton/Cook. 

Terkel, Studs. 1974. Working: People Talk About What They Do All Day and 
How They Feel About What They Do. New York: Pantheon. 

Todorov, Tzvetan. 1976. "The Origin of Genres." New Literary History 8: 159- 
70. 



4o 



3 Teaching Multicultural Literature 



Reed Way Dasenbrock 

New Mexico State University 



For the purposes of this article, I am going to assume that I do not 
have to argue for the inclusion of works from non-Western cultures, 
and from marginalized groups and peoples in our own country, in the 
curriculum of our schools and colleges. Demographics and economics 
make virtually moot any argument about this. As our schools are 
increasingly comprised of minority students, and as we realize how 
badly those schools are failing those students, it should be obvious to 
almost everyone that we cannot go on acting as if American literature 
has been written primarily by white males, most of whom are from 
New England. And as trends in our own and in the world economy 
create an increasingly interdependent world economy, non-Western 
nations are playing an increasingly powerful international role. It 
should, again, be obvious to virtually everyone that we cannot go on 
talking about just the Western tradition, as if the West Asia that 
developed mathematics and monotheism and the East Asia that 
invented printing and gunpowder and that increasingly finances our 
debt-ridden economy can or should be ignored. We need to incorporate 
the heritage of a variety of peoples and cultures into our curriculum. 
I hope I can safely assume agreement on this point, and I will not 
devote space here to arguing for this proposition.^ The question to 
take up now is: how? 

I think it only sensible to be cognizant of every difficulty that stands 
in the way. Many teachers who are prepared to grant the abstract case 
that this is something we ought to be doing still have a substantial 
reservation about actually doing it. This is usually expressed to me in 
fundamentally the same way: "I'd like to teach something non-Western 



In the original draft, this chapter was titled "Understanding Others: Teaching 
Multicultural Literature." The editors wish to thank Reed Way Dasenbrock for allowing 
them to use the first part of his title in the title of the book. 

35 



36 



Reed Way Dasenbrock 



but it's not really my field." Or, "I don't really feel that I have control 
over the text." Or, most directly, "I don't think I knov^ enough about 
it to teach it." Now, this may seem like a practical difficulty, to be 
solved by such practical means as teachers' aids and curricular materials. 
But I think it is really a theoretical difficulty, for such statements imply 
a consistent set of theoretical beliefs. I think that those beliefs are 
wrong, and seeing how they are wrong may help us in the present 
instance. 

To say "I don't know enough to teach this literature" is to reaffirm 
a model of interpretation in which the "proper" interpreter is the 
already informed interpreter. This is the model behind most forms of 
literary scholarship, but it takes on a particular form when dealing 
with cross-cultural conununication. When dealing with texts situated 
in another culture, we feel that what is needed is someone knowl- 
edgeable about the cultural and historical contexts of the work. The 
proper interpreter of an African novel is therefore an expert about 
Africa, and in practice this usually leads to the conclusion that the 
proper interpreter of African literature is an African. In fact there have 
been fierce — if inconclusive — debates in the criticism of African lit- 
erature about whether non-Africans should be writing about African 
literature at all. European critics have been attacked as "colonialist 
critics," and the choice of the political metaphor here is telling.^ 
Europeans once illegitimately "owned" Africa and were ousted only 
after a struggle for decolonization and independence. Comparably, 
those African critics and writers calling for the "decolonization" of 
the study of African literature are callir.g for the cultural independence 
of Africa. And though I use African criticism as an example because 
the dispute has been fiercer here than elsewhere, comparable tensions 
exist in other "new literatures" in English.^ 

If the choice of the proper critical standpoint is described in this 
way, as a choice between colonialist and decolonized mentalities, then 
clearly the decolonizers have the stronger argument. If readers from 
the outside who read texts from non-Western countries can be described 
as taking possession of these texts, just as the Europeans once took 
possession of these countries, then indeed this should justly be criti- 
cized. And certainly some of the attempts to study the new literatures 
in English emerging around the world have fallen into such a pattern. 
But that way of dividing the terrain — in proclaiming the local per- 
spective the right one — discourages more than just a colonialist ap- 
propriation of the literature. It discourages outside reading of any kind. 
In this way, a movement insisting on the importance of the study of 
non-Western literature ends up arguing that the only culture one can 



^3 



Teaching Multicultural Literature 



37 



study is one's own. Such a view logically leads away from — not 
toward — the incorporation of non-Western literature in an American 
curriculum, as in this view the only literature most of us could know 
well enough to teach would be American literature. And in this view, 
the American literature the predominately white professoriate could 
teach would be precisely and exclusively the old canon, since by the 
same logic no white professor can know the African American or 
Chicano experience well enough to teach these literatures. 

However, it seems more than a little ironic that these metaphors of 
possession and exclusivity would take hold in this field when they 
have been coming under such attack elsewhere. For certainly the 
donninant trend in literary theory over the past generation has been 
in a direction diametrically opposed to this way of thinking. The logic 
of arguing that only Africans are in a position to read African literature 
well is an intentionalist or author-oriented one. The position of 
authority is the author, and the aim of the interpreter (and the teacher) 
is to try to approximate as much as possible the position of the author, 
to know what the author knows. But a number of currents in literary 
theory have sharply challenged this by arguing that it is either 
impossible or illogical to approximate to the author's position, and 
have tried in a number of ways to revalue the position of the reader 
as opposed to the author. This is explicitly the agenda of reader- 
response criticism, as seen in the work of Stanley Fish, Wolfgang Iser, 
and others. It can also be seen in the hermeneutics of Hans-Georg 
Gadamer. Meaning, for Gadamer, is not what an author "puts in[to]" 
a work; rather, it is what we can make of the work here and now. For 
Gadamer as well as for Fish, the meaning of a work of art is not fixed, 
but can be seen as a kind of trajectory through time and across history. 
Fish argues that meanings are authorized not by the author or by the 
text, but by shifting and plural interpretive communities. Gadamer 
assigns the text a greater role in the creation of meaning than does 
Fish, but for Gadamer as well as for Fish, the standpoint of the reader 
is much more decisive than that of the author. 

A more radical position is that advanced by deconstruction. Ac- 
cording to Jacques Derrida, the traditional mode of interpretation, 
which consists of attempting to capture an author's intended meaning, 
what the author wished to say, is an impossibility, a notion radically 
at odds with the drift inherent in all written texts. The error made in 
such an approach is that we impose the condition of speaking on 
writing: because a written text is capable of being meaningful iu the 
absence of the author and even in the absence of the intended receiver, 
writing breaks with any voiter's controlling intentions. Writers have 



38 



Reed Way Dasenbrock 



no control over what use will be made of their texts, over the contexts 
in which they will be placed, which means ultimately that they have 
no control over the meaning of their writing. 

So all of these analyses of reading leave room for a reader different 
from an author; the problem, particularly for the study of cross-cultural 
texts, is that they leave too much room. The reader is everywhere, the 
author is nowhere. Hermeneutics, reader-response criticism, and de- 
construction all insist that we understand only on our own terms. We 
understand what is like us, or, to put it another way, the way we 
understand is precisely by making the artwork like us. This general 
point would be stated differently by these three schools: Gadamer 
would say that we can understand only what we are connected to 
historically; Fish would say that to assert understanding is to assert 
connectedness; and Derrida and Paul de Man would say that this 
assertion is always necessary for reading but is always a bit hollow 
For all these critics, to read is to take possession, to take control: for 
Fish, this move always succeeds; for Derrida and de Man, it always 
fails; for Gadamer, it succeeds where we share a cultural horizon with 
the work. 

There are, of course, important differences among these schools 
that it would take a long and detailed exposition to convey with any 
adequacy, but none of these approaches is adequate to the cross- 
cultural situation, the situation where we encounter a work of art from 
an entirely different society. Reader-response criticism, hermeneutics, 
and deconstruction all fail us here because of their undifferentiated 
concept of reading: in every act of reading, we seem to do the same 
thing. Yet we are not always in the same position vis-a-vis what we 
read, and it seems to me that every teacher is reminded of this in 
every class. We read differently from our students, and for any teacher 
to have any success in the classroom, he or she needs to know and 
respect, to use the revealing current phrase, "where our students are 
coming from." But that can coexist with a desire to have them end up 
someplace else, to teach them to read differently (which means to be 
different) by the end of the course. Where they are coming from is 
not necessarily where they will, or want to, end up. And I think we 
should be able to see that current theories of interpretation fail to 
describe the classroom for just the same reasons that they fail to 
describe the cross-cultural situation. These different schools presuppose 
that what is necessary for interpretation is a confident possession of 
the text, something we may have for works of Western culture but 
not for non-Western works, something our students may not have for 
any of the classics of our own cultural heritage. Teachers aware of 



Teaching Multicultural Literature 



39 



this, and aware that the canon is contested anyway, often move, 
sometimes in desperation, to finding works students can "relate to," 
works they already possess with some confidence. Cultural studies 
provides support for this when it argues that we need to move from 
studying a ^ew "classics" at the top of the cultural pyramid to looking 
at the various systems of cultural signification that constitute our 
culture; in practice, this can mean discussing Bruce Springsteen rather 
than Dante's Commedia, as Mary Poovey does, which is undoubtedly 
far more likely to allow our students the successful possession of what 
they study from their own culture. 

But what I am interested in instead is questioning the logic of 
interpretive possession. I don't think our students need to be encour- 
aged to study their own culture or our own culture, however we define 
it; they vAW probably do so anyway, whether with our tools or their 
own. What I would encourage instead of cultural studies is cross- 
cultural studies, the development of curiosity about — if not any "ex- 
pert" knowledge of — other cultures, other peoples. If we are to do 
this, we must break with our assumption that the only proper place 
from which to apprehend a work of art is the position of possession, 
the position of the expert. What we need is a model of reading, of 
interpretation, which redescribes the scene of reading not as a scene 
of possession, of the demonstration of knowledge already in place, or 
as a failure of possession, but as a scene of learning. 

Learning, particularly the position of needing to learn, is something 
literary theory has always, unfortunately, dis valued in relation to the 
position of being an expert. When 1 took my son at the age of four 
to see Mozart's The Magic Flute, I was surely the more "expert" 
spectator, more informed about what we were seeing and what lay 
behind it, but my concentration and excitement could not equal the 
rapt attention of someone utterly engrossed in his first opera. The 
informed position is not always the position of the richest or most 
powerful experience of a work of art. And this becomes even more 
true when crossing cultural barriers: the unknown can be powerful 
precisely because it is unknown. But this is not to defend ignorance, 
to defend remaining unknowledgeable. For one can see something for 
the first time only once; after that, the choice is to become more 
knowledgeable, more expert, more informed, or to stay uninformed 
without the intense pleasure of initial acquaintance. 

Thus there is no real choice to be made between the initial 
uninformed response and the later expert one; the experience of art 
ideally leads one from the first to the second. Knowledge does not 
come first and control the experience of the work of art; the experience 



^ 1 



40 



Reed Way Dasenbrock 



of the work comes first and leads the experiencer towards knowledge. 
Therefore it is not the expert reader who counts, but the reader willing 
to become expert, for only by becoming expert do we gain as well as 
lose in the process of gaining familiarity with art. Here, I am restating — 
with a crucial reemphasis — the old dictum descending from Longinus 
that the test of a work of art is the test of time, the test of how long 
it continues to be of interest to a reader or a community of readers. 
The reemphasis is that remoteness can be a function of cultural 
difference among contemporaries as well as a difference in time. The 
test of time is also a test of space. 

But how can we overcome such rem.oteness in space or time? The 
contemporary analytic philosopher Donald Davidson, in his work on 
communication and interpretation, has given us a useful set of terms 
for describing this process."* Davidson says that when we encounter 
someone else for the first time, we encounter that person with a "prior 
theory," a set of expectations about the meanings of the words that 
person will employ. If we have no information about that person, we 
will employ, to use another of Davidson's terms, "interpretative charity," 
which is to say that we will assume that the person speaks the same 
language, has the same beliefs, means the same things by the same 
words that we do. To begin to interpret, we begin by assuming 
similarity, a backdrop of similarity. But this "prior theory" is never 
adequate to the task of interpretation, for the only person who speaks 
exactly the way I do, means exactly what I mean by my words, is 
myself. Oscar Wilde once said that England and America were two 
countries divided by a common language, but this is only a striking 
formulation of what is always the case. Even within shared languages 
there can be remarkable differences, which is why interpretation is 
necessary. And if this is true for speakers of the same language, it is 
much more obviously true for speakers of other languages. So if we 
interpret according to a prior theory and the prior theory never works, 
what do we do? According to Davidson, we develop a "passing theory," 
which is to say that as we gather information and inferences about 
the person being interpreted, we make subtle adjustments to our prior 
or general theory to fit the particular person being interpreted. If I say, 
"It's a cold day out," and the person to whom I am speaking says, 
"No, it's quite hot," I am faced with an interpretive anomaly. Two 
interpretations are possible. The speaker could mean the same thing 
by hot that I mean by cold, in which case the difference between us 
is a matter of words; or, what is rather more likely, the difference 
between us is a matter of beliefs, that what strikes me as cold strikes 
the other person as hot. 



Teaching Multicultural Literature 



41 



This is a simple example, but it is not a trivial one, for Davidson's 
point is that it is meanings and beliefs that keep us apart as much as 
words. We can share a language but not share a set of beliefs, and 
the beliefs will dictate our particular use of the language. This is 
particularly true of a language like English, the official language of 
more than forty countries, countries that share a language but not 
much else. Anyone who has ever been asked in England what time 
one would like to be knocked up in the morning knows what I am 
talking about. Meanings — not words — keep us apart here. 

Davidson's papers on interpretation theory, mostly collected in 
Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation (1986), do not discuss the 
interpretation of literary works,^ nor do they give us everything we 
need for a theory of cross-cultural interpretation, but they give us the 
crucial starting point. Three aspects of his work are crucial. First, the 
central movement in interpretation is from an assumption of similitude 
to a location of and an understanding of difference. Second, this 
understanding of difference leads not to an inability to interpret but 
to an ability to communicate across that difference. It is not essential 
for us to use the same words or mean the same things by those 
words — what is essential is that we understand what others mean by 
their words and what they understand ours to mean. We can understand 
someone, even if we do not share a set of beliefs or a language, as 
long as we knov/ what the other's beliefs are. What enables us to do 
this is our ability to construct passing or short-term theories to interpret 
anomalous utterances. Faced with an anomaly, vAth something that 
doesn't fit our prior theory, we adjust that prior theory, incorporating 
what we learn from encountering that anomaly into a new passing 
theory. This leads into the final crucial point about Davidsonian 
interpretation, its stress on how the interpreter changes, adapts, and 
learns in the encounter with the anomalous. In short, we assume 
similarity but inevitably encounter difference. The encounter with 
difference, however, is productive, not frustrating, because it causes 
change in the interpretive system of the interpreter 

Da\ddson's stress on the evitability of change in the interpreter 
differentiates his work sharply both from traditional intentionalist, 
author-centered accounts of meaning, and from the newer reader- 
oriented schools of interpretation. The rock on which intentionalist, 
authorial accounts of interpretation have foundered is the irreducible 
plurality of our responses to a work of art, and it is this plurality that 
has given rise to reader-oriented schools of interpretation. How can 
the author's meaning be relevant or discernible if so many readers 
have read the text so differently? Davidson is not concerned with the 



42 



Reed Way Dasenbrock 



meta-interpretive question of whether our interpretations can ever 
really be said to be true. His more descriptive account of interpretation 
simply notes that we continue to adjust our interpretations until we 
think they are true, until we stop having to adjust them because of 
the anomalies we perceive. For Davidson, interpretation is not an arena 
of certainty, an arena in which one interpretation is proven correct, as 
much as it is an arena of change. And this again seems right when 
applied to art. In the encounter with a great work of art, we do not 
remain unchanged, and our experience of art is not just analytical and 
cognitive, concerned solely with the truth of the statements we and 
others make about it. 

If Davidson's account of an interpreter creating a passing theory in 
response to the anomalous seems generally right for all artistic inter- 
pretation, it seems particularly accurate for the encounter with the 
works of another culture. The uninformed reader is often the reader 
whom writers of the new literatures in English have primarily in mind, 
for a variety of complex reasons, many demographic and economic. 
A Chicano writer writing in English has many more non-Chicano than 
Chicano readers, and a Kenyan writing in English many more non- 
Kenyan than Kenyan readers. The power of such works is precisely 
their effect on the uninformed reader, their ability to provoke such a 
reader to construct a passing theory. A literary work created in such 
a situation is not simply a work to be read by those who know its 
world already; it is truly a site of learning and is often designed to 
be. This learning can take place on many different levels, often 
simultaneously: the lexical, the syntactic, the formal or generic, the 
cultural, the religious. 

I would like to give one, extremely brief example of this to help 
make my discussion more concrete. Let me quote a paragraph from 
an Ethiopian novel written in English, Sahle Sellassie's Warrior King: 

"It is a long story, Aberash. I am afraid you will be bored by it. 
Besides, my throat will crack open with dryness if I try to tell 
you all about him now." 

"Don't worry about my being bored, father of Gebreye. And 
I will bring you tella to drink so that your throat v/ill not crack 
up with dryness," she said, understanding what he wanted. She 
trotted away to the guada, to return instantly with a jar of the 
home-made beer and a wancha. She filled the utensil and handed 
it to her husband after tasting the drink herself as was the custom. 
(1974, 4) 

A reading of this passage provides a perfect example of Davidsonian 
radical interpretation at work for anyone unfamiliar with the Ethiopian 



Teaching Multicultural Literature 



43 



context of the novel. The paragraph is in English, and except for three 
words, all of the semantic elements of the paragraph are in recognizable 
English. We begin, therefore, in the spirit of interpretive charity, 
assuming equivalence between the meaning of the words here and 
the meaning we would assign to those words. Only three words do 
not seem to be in English, "tella," "guada," and "wancha," and we 
instantly infer two things about them. First, they are words in another 
language, presumably the Ethiopian language these characters are 
speaking, Amharic. (This is an historical novel, so we know they are 
not speaking English.) Second, these are in Ainharic because they 
have to be. Sellassie has used our language as much as he could — his 
use of words that our prior theory is not going to work for must have 
a reason. So we infer that the reason for the usage of words that are 
not translated is that they cannot be. 

But these three words are handled differently, and the difference is 
instructive. Telia gets translated, in a way, in the next sentence after 
its initial use: "She trotted away to the guada, to return instantly with 
a jar of the home-made beer and a wancha." The normal principles 
of English cohesion are functioning here, so we understand "home- 
made beer" as substituting for and translating tella. But what is a 
wancha? We are given a rough equivalent for that in the next phrase: 
"She filled the utensil." But we are never told what the guada she 
"trotted away to" is. Presumably the place where the tella and the 
wancha are kept. A kitchen? A pantry? A storage shed? We are not 
told. Does that mean we are at a loss? In a sense, yes; in a sense, no. 
Sellassie gives us three words in Amharic and handles each of them 
differently, giving us a precise translation of one, a ballpark translation 
of another, and no translation at all of the third. The passing theory 
we develop in this situation therefore works something like this: every 
time Sellassie frustrates the prior theory, he does so only so far as he 
must, Telia is close enough to beer that a translation is offered; wancha 
is named only by its function, which indicates that there is no precise 
English equivalent. It is not a cup or a mug or a glass, though these 
arc all utensils. So we know less about it than tella, but we know that 
we know less. We know even less about guada, as not even a function 
is named, though some of that function can be gleaned from the 
context. So by the end of the paragraph, our prior theory has been 
modified to include these new lexical items and some sense of how 
close and how far away they are from English-languaRc equivalents. 
But Sellassie builds this bridge between his world and ours only to 
kick it away once we are across. The terms homemade beer and utensil 
never appear again. On the very next page, we read; 



44 



Reed Way Dasenbrock 



Ato Mulato paused here to have his wancha refilled. He loved 
tella very much, so much so that he could empty a whole jar by 
himself at one sitting and still remain sober. 

"Go on. Go on." Aberash urged him, refilling his wancha. (5) 

What has happened here is, I think, quite significant, though on a 
small scale. Any reader attentive to the way English works has now 
enlarged his or her vocabulary and begun to learn something about 
the form of life instantiated in tht new vocabulary. You cannot read 
Warrior King without your prior theory undergoing modification and 
expanding by the end of the book. Drinking tella in a wancL^ .eems 
a familiar thing to do, even if you do not quite know what tella tastes 
like or what a wancha looks like. The reader has changed, has adapted, 
has learned, and this example of how individual words work could 
be replicated on a number of more complex levels. 

Now, do you need to know what a guada is to teach or vrite about 
this novel? No, I have just done it, and I still do not know what a 
guada is. The novel is written not for those who know about guadas, 
but for those with some desire to figure it out. When the book resists 
easy interpretation, it does so precisely so as to provoke change in the 
reader, to force a modification in his or her interpretive schema or 
prior theory. And this means that where a reader does not know what 
is going on, where a student may ask the teacher that embarrassing 
question "What is a guada," the answer "1 don't know" is a perfectly 
acceptable one. The full answer has to be "1 don't know, what do you 
think? Why aren't we told?" In other words, the teacher leads the 
class through the experience of constructing a passing theory; to do 
otherwise, to annotate the unannotated text would be to prevent the 
students from experiencing the meaning of the wwk." To reverse T S. 
Eliot, they would have had the meaning but missed the exf?€rience. 

As literature in English becomes an increasingly international phe- 
nomenon, and as we slowly realize that the best writers in English 
today come from all over the world — from Samoa and New Zealand, 
from India and Pakistan, from Somalia, Kenya, and Nigeria, from 
Guyana and Trinidad, and in this country from Native Americans, 
Asian Americans, and C'ucanos — if we loel we need to control the 
text, to be an authority, we are all going to throw up our hand? and 
refuse to face this inordinately rich and complex world. That would 
be a disservice to our students, ourselves, and these writers. As any 
tourist on a first trip abroad can testify, the cross-cultural communicative 
situation is a rich experience ev(?n — or perhaps especially — when it is 
most confusing. The only way to swim in this situation is to jump in 
or get pushed. The life buoy 1 would offer has two sides to it, a 



bij 



Teaching Multicultural Literature 



45 



practical and a theoretical side. The prachcal side is that these writers 
are themselves intimately familiar with the perils and confusions of 
cross-cultural communication, so you can trust them — the best of them 
anyway — to give you the assistance yoii need. The theoretical side is 
that, if Davidson is right, this is simply a more extreme version of 
what we do anyway. All interpersonal communication involves trans- 
lation and interpretation. We are never in complete command of the 
language produced by others, yet to live is to come to an understanding 
of others. Theories suggesting that we never manage to do so are both 
inaccurate and are likely to confirm us in the prison of our own narrow 
cultural horizons. 

Notes 

1. I have, in any case^ argued for this elsewhere (see my "English 
Department Geography" [1987] and "What to Teach When the Canon Closes 
Down" [1990]). In the present intellectual climate, I perhaps need to make it 
clear that in my view, admitting the claims of other cultures into the curriculum 
does not involve any critique of the Western heritage; see my "The Multicultural 
West" (1991). 

2. The term was coined by the Nigerian writer Chinua Achebe, in his 
essay "Colonialist Criticism" (1976, 3-24). 

3. Chinweizu's Toward the Decolonization of African Literature (1983) re- 
mains the fullest statement of this perspective in the study of African literature; 
Saakana's The Colonial Legacy in Caribbean Literature (1987) is an example of 
how Chinweizu's approach has influenced the study of other non-Western 
literatures in English. 

4. The terms "prior theory" and "passing theory" were advanced by 
Davidson in his recent "A Nice Derangement of Epitaphs" (1986). The term 
"interpretive charily" comes from Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation, which 
has an entire section on "Radical Interpretation" (1984, 123-79). 

5. For the first thorough look at what is involved in applying Davidson's 
work to literary texts, see my Literary Theory after Davidson (forthcoming). 

6. As I have argued in "Meaningfulness and Intelligibility in Multicultural 
Literature in English" (1987), this can be true even when the text is partially 
unintelligible. 

Works Cited 

Achebe, Chinua. 1976. Morning Yet on Creation Day: Essays. New York: Anchor, 
Chinwoi2u, Onwuchckv/a Jemic, and Madubuikc Ihechukwu. 1983. Toward 

the Decolonization of African Literature. Washington, DC: Howard University 

Press. 

Dascnbrock, Reed Way. 1987. "English Department Geography" ADE Bulletin 
86{Spring): 16-23. 



46 



Reed Way Dasenbrock 



. 1:^87. "Meaningfulness and Intelligibility in Multicultural Literature 

in English." PMLA 101: 1-12. 

. 1991. "The Multicultural West." Dissent 38(Fall): 550-55. 

1990. "What to Teach When the Canon Closes Down: Toward a 



New Essentialism." In Reorientations: Critical Theories and Pedagogies, edited 
by Bruce Henricksen and Thais E. Morgan, 63-76. Urbana: University of 
Illinois Press. 

ed. (Forthcoming). Literary Theory after Davidson. University Park: 



Pennsylvania State University Press. 
Davidson, Donald. 1986. "A Nice Derangement of Epitaphs." In Truth and 
Interpretation: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson, edited by 
Ernest LePore, 433-46. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 

. 1984. Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation. Oxford: Clarendon 

Pess. 

Saakana, Amon Saba. 1987. The Colonial Legacy in Caribbean Literature. 
Trenton: Africa World Press. 

Sellassie, Sahle. 1974. Warrior King. African Writers Series. London: Heine- 
mann. 



4 Translation as a Method 
for Cross-Cultural Teaching 



Anuradha Dingwaney 
Oberlin College 

Carol Maier 

Kent State University 

Third World cultures, peoples, and texts are "in." They have been 
declared "fashionable and grantable" by major cultural institutions, to 
adapt Guillermo Gomez-Pefia's remarks about the sudden attention 
being showered on Latinos (1989, 24). This includes academe, where 
more and more courses about Third World cultures are being tacked 
on to already existing curricula. Although we welcome this challenge 
to the canon, our experiences in teaching such courses have often 
proved disconcerting. In particular, the repeated appropriation of these 
cultures under the categories of the familiar (same) or the unfamiliar 
(differpnt) — which inevitably seems to characterize student/reader 
responses — has made us aware of the need for a pedagogy that would 
guide the teaching of cross-cultural texts and has led us to question 
our own work as mediators. 

The possibility that translation itself might offer a method for 
making students aware of the organizing principles at work in their 
readings of Third World texts, thereby enabling them to read the 
"other," resulted unexpectedly from a short story in English translation. 
After a presentation about Rosario Ferre's "Pico Rico Mandorico" that 
Carol Maier made to one of Anu Dingwaney's classes, a student asked 
if a basket of Puerto Rican fruit would really contain cherries. In fact, 
in her translation, Diana Velez had replaced several tropical fruits, 
whose names would most likely be unfamiliar to North American 
readers, with cherries, bananas, and passion fruit (1988, 68). The 
student^s question led to a discussion about the difficulties of translating 
culture-bound terms. It also led to the first of many conversations 
between the two of us about the possibility of merging Carol's theory 
and practice in translation with Anu's work on postcolonial theory 
and Third World writers. What gradually evolved was a concuptuali- 



47 



Anuradha Dingwaney and Carol Maier 



zation of translation as a cross-cultural activity in which the goal of 
immediacy or readability is tempered by a simultaneous willingness — 
even determination — to work in difference. Practicing within this 
definition, a translator does not strive to make possible a rush of 
identification with an "other" unencumbered by foreignness. Rather, 
the goal is a more complex verbal "transculturation" in which two 
languages are held within a single expression.^ 

Translation has long been considered a rather questionable tool for 
language acquisition. When one grants to the practice of translation, 
however, the broader task of mediation discussed by contemporary 
theorists, translation involves far more than looking for the closest 
lexical equivalent.^ Rather, it involves the creation of a complex tension.^ 
That is, ideally, translation makes familiar, and thereby accessible, 
what is confronted as alien, maintaining the familiar in the face of 
otherness without either sacrificing or appropriating difference. This 
means that the translator must have a foot in each of two worlds and 
be able to mediate self-consciously between them. It is our belief that 
cross-cultural reading based on this model of translation can give rise 
to a potentially disquieting but highly interactive situation by ensuring 
that the mediations in cross-cultural literary texts, including the me- 
diation of reading itself, will be recognized and scrutinized. 

In order to illustrate our model and its development, we have 
chosen as our primary text J . . . Rigoberta Menchii: An Indian Woman 
in Guatemala, This is an exemplary text for two principal reasons: (1) 
it is multiply mediated; (2) it is rapidly acquiring canonical status 
among scholars and students of minority experience, who do not 
necessarily attend to these multiple mediations. In the account that 
follows, we describe the process we underwent ar we read and reread 
Rigoberta MenchU, critically examining our initial assumptions and 
expectations to expose their fault lines. In class, we try to provoke our 
students to undertake a sinular (if not identical) process. 

When we decided to write about Rigoberta Menchii, our discussions 
revolved around the many textual layers of discourse that distance 
Menchu's testimony from her readers. We were, after all, reading Ann 
Wright's English translation of Me llamo Rigoberta MenchU: y asf me 
nacid la concienca, based on Elisabeth Burgos-Debray's transcription 
and reworking of Menchu's testimony. The testimony had been spoken 
in recently acquired Spanish and tape-recorded in a metropolitan 
setting, Paris, where Burgos-Debray lives. There were other mediations 
as well. Our own, for instance, were informed by years of interpreting 
literary texts— in Carol's case, by acts of interpretation she brings to 
bear on her translations — and by our more recent reading of critical 



Translation as a Method for Cross-Cultural Teaching 



49 



commentaries on transcription and reworking of life histories by 
ethnographers who seek to understand and render the experiences of 
non-Western cultures and peoples. Contemporary critical analyses of 
life histories insist that these histories are not transparencies through 
which we glimpse the "reality" of the cultures being described. Nor 
do these histories simply speak for themselves. Rather, "oral history 
depends for its existence on the intervention of an ethnographer who 
collects and presents a version of the stories gathered" (Patai 1988, 1- 
2). The ethnographer's acknowledged and unacknowledged assump- 
tions — social cultural, political — about the speaker and her culture are 
implicated in the rendering of the life history. Mediations, therefore, 
are very much at issue, in that readers, with their expectations and 
assumptions, interpret a life history, which is itself an ethnographer's 
interpretation of a speaker's oral testimony. And the speaker's testimony 
is an account constructed by an individual who has her own agendas 
and motives for telling the story, and therefore has a stake in what 
gets represented and how/ 

As we focused on the role of Burgos-Debray, shuttling back and 
forth between her "Introduction" and her textual rendition of Menchu's 
oral testimony, we were struck by both what she says and by what 
she either leaves unsaid or actively suppresses. In her "Introduction" 
Burgos-Debray explains how she became involved in the project, 
explicitly identifying her potential handicaps as an ethnographer. 
Because she had never studied Maya -Quiche culture, and never done 
fieldwork in Guatemala (1983, xix), she was worried at first about the 
quality of her relationship with Menchu — the anxieties and stresses 
that her lack of background might generate (xiv). As soon as they met, 
however, Burgos-Debray says, she "knew that [they] were going to 
get along together" (xiv). We felt, however, that Burgos-Debray glossed 
over her handicaps, not overcorrung them so much as displacing the a 
by appropriating Menchu's identity, her world, her cause, even her 
voice itself — an impression confirmed by the Spanish version, where 
Burgos-Debray is named as the author of Me Llarrw Rigoberta MencMi. 
Furthermore, a quick, not fully monitored reading of Rigoberta MenM 
allows the "I" of the "Introduction" to slide seamlessly into the "I" 
of Menchu's testimony, conflating, indeed conjoining, Burgos-Debray 's 
identity with Menchu's. (Here we might also recall Burgos-Debray's 
problematic assertion that "for the whole of that week, I lived in 
Rigob^rta's world" (xv|, when, in facL it is Menchu who lives for a 
week in Burgos-Debray's home in Paris. Who inhabits whose world, 
then, becomes an appropriate question lo ask.) 



50 



Anuradha Dingwaney and Carol Maier 



Our discomfort with Burgos-Debray's claims about her complete 
identification with Menchu ("I lived in Rigoberta's world"; "I became 
her instrument her double" [xv, xx]) undoubtedly arose from our 
experiences teaching and analyzing literary texts from the Third World, 
or non-European cultures, in universities in the United States, which 
is viewed as part of the First World. The sheer inequities in the material 
and discursive power that the First World wields over the Third 
necessarily affects First World readings of such texts. For this reason, 
it is important to disclose and scrutinize the prior understandings and 
ideological stances vis-a-vis the Third World that U.S. readers bring 
to bear upon their reading. Such disclosure and scrutiny will, of course, 
not guarantee an informed understanding, but they could clear the 
ground for it. More important, a revelation of the interpreter's ideo- 
logical investments, her "location" — political, intellectual, etc. — will 
make those investments explicit to other (subsequent) readers. We 
should add that contemporary criticism of life histories emphasizes 
that self-reflexivity is required of an ethnographer who edits and 
interprets these histories from {an)other culture. In such instances, as 
in teaching and writing about Third World texts, a great deal is at 
stake in terms of representations of and evaluations about (an)other 
culture. 

Burgos-Debray, as John Beverley notes, is a "Venezuelan social 
scientist, [who was] living in Paris at the time she met Menchu, with 
all that [that] implies about contradictions between metropolis [read 
"First World"] and periphery [read "Third World"], dominant and 
emergent social formations, and dominant and subaltern languages" 
(1989, 19-20). She actively fosters the impression of a single first 
person, however, by erasing all marks of her "intrusions" in and 
"refashioning" of Menchu's story: "I soon reached the decision to give 
the manuscript the form of a monologue: that was how it came back 
to me as I re-read it. I therefore decided to delete all my questions" 
(xx). Although Burgos-Debray explains the erasure of her "intrusions" 
as a gesture that allowed her to become Menchu's "instrument" — her 
"double" — we questioned whether, in fact, anyone (Burgos-Debray 
included) can simply abandon her identity and take on that of another 
On less charitably, we questioned whether this gesture did not violate 
Menchu's identity: in the chapter headings, for example, Menchu is 
referred to in the third person, and the epigraphs are attributed to 
her, as if she herself were not already speaking. 

None of thesL contradictions is given "voice" in Burgos-Debray'? 
"Introduction" or in the "refashioned" testimony that follows. The 
reader's awareness of them is nevertheless crucifil to an understanding 



b2 



Translation as a Method for Cross-Cultural Teaching 



51 



of Burgos-Debray's project. As readers, teachers, and "translators/' we 
felt it incumbent upon us to attend to Burgos-Debray's suppressions 
and evasions and to reconstitute the text according to its silences and 
invisibilities. 

Ironically, at first, our attempt to reconstitute Menchu's text by 
looking insistently for signs of mediation that Burgos-Debray might 
have suppressed had the peculiar (and undesired) effect of displacing 
Menchu's testimony: Burgos-Debray increasingly came to occupy the 
foreground of our interpretive concerns while Menchu's story receded 
into the background.^ At the same time, however, it was this realization 
that directed us toward the following question: What if Burgos-Debray 
had deliberately erased most signs of her mediation to let Menchu's 
testimony speak to its readers in all its immediacy and urgency? 
Menchu's testimony, as we began to recognize, is, after all, the testimony 
of a political activist. Indeed, that testimony itself is a form of activism 
("a manifesto on behalf of an ethnic group" is how Burgos-Debray 
characterizes it [xiii]) insofar as it seeks to engage the reader's sense 
of morality, justice, and compassion through its graphic account of the 
atrocities and dehumanization the Maya-Quiche suffer at the hands 
of a minority ladino population. "Words are her only weapons" (Burgos- 
Debray, xi) in making a distant, alien culture and a community's 
struggle for survival real to an audience that has not, in all likelihood, 
ever experienced the kind of repressions Menchu describes. Words 
matter. To call their referentiality into question, as our emphasis on 
Burgos-Debray's mediating presence tended to do, defuses their intense 
political charge and could even be considered the "irresponsible luxury" 
(Sommer 1988, 120) we should have been trying to avoid. 

This discomfiture with our initial interpretive move and its displace- 
ment of Menchu's testimony also provoked a complementary question: 
What if Menchu had collaborated with Burgos-Debray in producing 
this textual simulation of an unmediated narrative?^ By concentrating 
on Burgos-Debray's (lack of) mediation, our initial discussion had 
evaded, perhaps ignored, Menchu's active agency in crafting her ov/n 
narrative. Such a view failed to account for "the authority and creativity 
of the speaker weaving her own text" (Patai 1988, 8). Our assumption 
that Menchu had no agency also risked reproducing the classic colo- 
nizing gesture, identified by Edward W. Said, whereby representatives 
of a hegemonic (colonizing) culture invest themselves with the authority 
to speak about/ describe, and represent the colonized/subaltern subject 
(1979, 1985). 

How, wc askrd ourselves, do we ^o about accounting for Menchu's 
active role in the constiuction of her story? Where to begin? As an 



52 



Anuradha Dingxvaney and Carol Maier 



activist for her community and as a representative in Europe and the 
United States of the Guatemalan activist group, 31 January Popular 
Front it was only reasonable to suppose that Menchu had — and 
continues to have — a stake in telling her siory. For example, the fall 
1990 issue of Report on Guatemala notes Menchu's appearance at a 
recent conference where "she requested solidarity from North American 
friends in supporting the demands of popular organizations and of 
Guatemala's indigenous majority" (Gorin 1990, 14). Telling her story 
was, and is, a political task for her. To influence a diverse, international 
audience, that story had to be readily accessible, which meant that 
Menchu may well have had a far more active role in the construction 
of her story than Burgos-Debray's retelling of it first suggests. 

Once we had granted Menchu this accessibility as a strategy, the 
extended descriptions of her culture — its presiding deities, its rituals, 
family, and community life — could be read as marks of a deliberate 
effort to render an unfamiliar culture less alien to her readers in the 
West in order to enlist their support. Certainly a great deal of her 
extended descriptions about her culture are a part of her political 
program: "I'm an Indianist, not just an Indian," Menchu declares. "I 
defend everything to do with my ancestors." But this is not her sole 
motivation. As Burgos-Debray notes, "She talked to me not only 
because she wanted to tell us about her sufferings but also — or perhaps 
mainly — because she wanted us to hear about a culture of which she 
is extremely proud and which she wants to have recognized" (166; 
xx). Nevertheless, some of these descriptions also seem designed to 
accommodate Western notions about "primitive" peoples. 

Self -consciousness about her political task and about the self- 
representations she mobilizes are signaled at various moments in 
Menchu's testimony. We will mention only two examples. First, she 
reflects on her comn* unity's subversive uses of the Bible to underscore 
her people's more "moral" grasp of its precepts and teachings: 

We began studying (the Bible] more deeply and, well, we came 
to a conclusion. That being a Christian means thinking of our 
brothers around us, that everyone of our Indian race has the right 
to eat. (132) 

(F]or us the Bible is our main v;eapon. It has shown us the way. 
Perhaps those who call themselves Christians but who are really 
only Christians in theory, won't understand why we give the 
Bible the meaning we do. But that's because they haven't lived 
as we have. And also perhaps because they can't analyze it. (134) 

Second, Menchu accounts for her transgressive move to learn Spanish, 
despite her father's forbidding it because he felt it would take her 



64 



Translation as a Method for Cross-Cultural Teaching 



53 



away from the community, by spelling out its political implications: 
"They've always said, poor Indians, they can't speak, so many speak 
for them. That's why I decided to learn Spanish" (156). 

Those instances of reflection and the explicit reference to the use 
of language as a political strategy made clear to us the fundamental 
paradox that Menchii's testimony turns on, and of which she was 
certainly "conscious." On the one hand, to affect its readers with its 
full and urgent political force, the testimony must be, or seem to be, 
unmediated — a transparency that makes visible the brutalities and 
repressions it witnesses. On the other hand, such immediacy can so 
overwhelm readers that they identify with, indeed feel they become, 
Menchu. This "identification," of course, is problematic at best, dis- 
honest at worst. Menchu's reader is not Menchu. Protected and 
distanced from Menchu's "battlefield" — her severe material conditions 
and struggle for survival — the First World reader can only masquerade 
as a Third World oppressed, subaltern subject/ As Menchu insists: 
"It's not so much that the hungrier you've been, the purer your ideas 
must be, but you can only have a real consciousness if you've really 
lived this life" (223). Her challenge, then, is to enable a reader to 
identify with her cause, her political agenda, without assuming her 
identity, even though to identify with her cause may entail imagining 
oneself in her place. 

Menchu's testimony ensures this im-mediated response by deploying 
another paradox. Her testimony is replete v^th details about her 
culture, community, family, even the events that lead to her politici- 
zation and development into a leader for her people. At the same 
time, however, she insists that there are secrets she will not disclose, 
and she concludes her testimony by reminding us: "Nevertheless, I'm 
still keeping my Indian identity a secret. I'm still keeping secret what 
I think no-one should know. Not even anthropologists or intellectuals, 
no matter how many books they have, can find out all our secrets" 
(247). This maneuver compels readers to inhabit that space of uncer- 
tainty where they know that they do not know everything. Moreover, 
it compels readers to respect^ the "prior" text — Menchu's testimony — 
knowing all the time that, from their first encounter with it, the text 
has been interpreted (and transformed) in their consciousness — an act 
for which they bear responsibility. 

When we thought of Ann Wright's mediation in Rigoberta Mcnchd, 
our initial response was quite negative, much as it had been with 
Burgos- Debray. Wright had done a creditable job of rendering Menchu's 
Spanish into English, but she had just as clearly taken pains to repeat 
some of the gestures in the Spanish edition that we felt might lead to 



54 



Anuradha Dingwaney and Carol Maier 



a reader's unexamined compassion. Like Burgos-Debray, Wright wants 
her own words to be as much as possible like Menchii's. As she 
explains in her "Translator's Note/' she hopes that her own presence 
as mediator will go virtually unnoticed, and this goal of transparency 
has detennined her practice (Menchu 1984, viii-ix). She has followed 
Menchu's "spontaneous narrative" and "original phrasing/' even at 
times when Menchu's expression might seem awkward, and she has 
transcribed rather than translated many words from Quiche. Indeed, 
in large part, her "Translator's Note" reads like a translation of the 
Spanish "Introduccion" that it replaces. In that "Introduccion" (Burgos- 
Debray 1983, 7), which is omitted in the English (where the "Intro- 
duction" is in fact a translation of Burgos-Debray's "Prologo"), Burgos- 
Debray reiterates her detennination not to "betray" Menchu by altering 
the content of her narrative. 

What's more, as if to follow Burgos-Debray's example and insert 
herself unobtrusively into the same space Burgos-Debray occupies vis- 
a-vis Menchu — and therefore ensure for her reader "the impact" 
Menchu's words had on her — Wright draws no attention to specific 
strategies she might have used to prepare the English version. Nor 
does she speculate about the changes in Menchu's narrative that 
Burgos-Debray may have made when she translated Menchu's spoken 
words to written prose. This allows Wright to state, for example, and 
Vkdthout qualification, that "I have tried, as far as possible, to stay with 
Rigoberta's original phrasing" (Menchu 1984, viii).^ In addition, iron- 
ically, Burgos-Debray, not Wright, is pictured with Menchu on the 
back cover of the English edition of the book; Wright is not even 
mentioned. A translator, of course, can hardly be blamed for a 
publisher's failure to acknowledge her and her work. Wright's deter- 
mination to make herself as invisible as possible, however, in effect 
contributes to a second layer of mediation or, to use Richard Seiburth's 
term (1989, 239), "covering" of Menchu's text which, with respect to 
the reader in English, acts as a second distancing or even a second 
erasure. 

What is curious about this second erasure, however, as we discovered 
when we began to study Wright's version with a view to Burgos- 
Debray's Spanish, is that Wright does, in fact, give evidence that she 
translates not only Burgos-Debray's invisibility, but also Burgos-De- 
bray's editing of Menchu's tapes. This is to say that, contrary to what 
her "Translator's Note" might lead one to believe, Wright has appar- 
ently been guided as much by Burgos-Debray's mediating principle as 
by a "fidelity" to the words in her text: "I only hope that I have been 
able to do justice to the power of their mc^^sagc . . . and convey the 



Translation a$ a Method for Cross-Cultural Teaching 



55 



impact they had on me when I first read [Menchu's words]" (ix). As 
we studied Wright'^ own English words we found in them definite 
indications of will or agency. 

The substitution of Burgos-Debray's "Introduccion," for instance, is 
just one of several alterations that suggest Wright believed she could 
do more "justice" to the "power" of Menchu's testimony by making 
it accessible to the English-language reader. Other alterations include 
the "I" at the beginning of the English title, the absence of conciencia, 
and the use throughout of the word "Indian" rather than "Quiche." 
What's more, Wright has not reprinted either Burgos-Debray's ac- 
knowledgments or her dedication to Alaide Foppa. She has changed 
the epigraphs of several chapters, shortened many chapter titles, and 
omitted an appendix of documents about the Comite de Unidad 
Campesina (CUC). Finally, her use of ellipses is not consistent with 
the Spanish, and on several occasions she has Menchu speak to a 
second person, something that does not occur in the Spanish version. 
These last two alterations are especially important because they lead 
one to speculate about whether Wright believed her changes could 
restore some of the orality sacrificed in Burgos-Debray's initial tran- 
scription: "Something I want to tell you" (165), Menchu says in 
Wright's English, or "It's not so much the hungrier you've been" (233), 
or "I'd need a lot of time to tell you all about my people" (247). (The 
changes involved in the transcription of oral narratives are discussed 
in Patai 1988; Tedlock 1983; and Watson and Watson-Franke 1985.) 

As our discussion of Rigoberta Menchii demonstrates, our grasp of 
the "demands" Menchu's testimony makes on its readers was achieved 
through a circuitous route. We constantly interrogated our premises — 
repeatedly doubling back on our initial assumptions and expectations — 
at the same time that we tried to be alert to the various positions 
(Menchu's, Burgos-Debray's, Wright's) implicated in the crafting of 
Menchu's testimony. In this way, our work revolved around diverse 
mediations, including those involved in erasing the marks of mediation 
itself, the readings and retellings that intervene between the reader 
and the "realities" Menchu describes. 

Our assessment that an unmediated narrative is simulated in order 
to engage Menchu's reader is almost as important as insisting that the 
very fact of mediation can be extended, we believe, so as to formulate 
a theory of reading other cross-cultural Third Wbrld texts as well In 
these texts, as we have come to understand them, the sense of 
unmediatedness or immediacy is the means by which some form of 
identificalion is produced. Simultaneously, however, mediation assumes 
distance and difference between readers and the subjects-objects of 



56 



Anuradha Dingwaney and Carol Maier 



their reading. Reading, then, can be based on a similar, subtly dialectical 
interplay of identity (identification) and difference. The daxngers of 
mobilizing solely one or the other category are many. An uncritical 
assumption of identity is, as we have shown through Rigoberta hAenchd, 
a mode of appropriation. Similarly, identification is a function of 
recuperating the unfamiliar "other" in terms of the familiar; reading 
this way relies on the stereotypes one culture utilizes to understand, 
and domesticate, (an)other. An uncritical assumption of difference, 
which presumes that (an)other is never accessible, allows readers to 
abandon, indeed exonerates them from, the task of ever reading cross- 
cultural texts. Deployed solely, each category produces an impasse. 

Invoking the idea and activity of translation and attending to the 
specific strategies translators employ offer one way out of this impasse. 
As an activity, translation starts from the assumption that something 
of one language can be "borne across" or recovered in another. Although 
translation is often construed as an activity that simply copies or 
repeats a "prior" text, it is also, and more importantly, construed as 
one that interprets (and transforms) a "prior" text. It is, after all, an 
activity that presumes a translator, a subject who intervenes, mediates, 
between one language, and another. Thus, recent theorists emphasize 
not the "accuracy," or even the product, of translation, but rather the 
appropriateness of a translator's choices, the strategies used to render 
one language in terms of another, the inclusions and exclusions. 

When a cross-cultural work is seen as an author's translation of a 
culture, it becomes possible to read that text itself as a reading — a 
construction of social, political, cultural "realities" — by an individual 
who inserts herself and her work (and is embedded) in that culture 
in particular ways, for particular purposes. Such a view warns against 
easy judgments about how an individual or a work represents (or is 
representative of) a culture.^' Wlien readers see their reading as an 
activity involving translation, it becomes possible for them to scrutinize 
their own "locations" — the interpretive choices and strategies — which 
are implicated in their readings. At the same time, however, this 
emphasis on individual and individualized interpretation involved in 
translation should not lead to a domain of pure relativity, where every 
reader can only read in terms of personal experience. The text being 
translated resists and constrains the reader from this absolute appro- 
priation. While translation requires, according to James Boyd White, 
"an act of creation, a making of something new. . .the original text 
cannot be forgotten, for fidelity is always due to it. Indeed, it is upon 
the prior text that our right to speak at all depends. One has no 



Translation as a Method for Cross-Cultural Teaching 



57 



authority to disregard it and substitute for it texts of one's own 
composition" (1990, 246). 

In light of what we have said above, a desirable goal in teaching 
and reading cross-cultural texts as an exercise involving translation is 
to nudge students/readers to occupy that space or tension where they 
are "faithful" to the text at the same time as they acknowledge that 
their "fidelity" is itself refracted through their ideological formations 
as "subjects" in the First World. As Catherine Belsey notes in a different 
context, "It is here that we see the full force of Althusser's use of the 
term 'subject,' originally borrowed, as he says, from law. The subject 
is not only a grammatical subject, 'a center of initiatives, author of 
and responsible for its actions,' but also a subjected being who submits 
to the authority of the social formation represented in ideology as ^he 
Absolute Subject (God, the king, the boss, Man, conscience)" (1983, 
49). Being "faithful," then, entails constructing, in as informed a way 
as possible, the author's "purposes" — examining, that is, "the process 
of production — not the private experience of the individual author, 
hut the mode of production, the materials and their arrangement in 
the work" (Belsey 1985, 54). 

How migfet this function in class? More specifically, to return to our 
first thoughts about using informed translation as an antidote to 
translation practiced unawares, how might it function with respect to 
Rigoberia MetichU? 

Even students who have no knowledge of Spanish might be asked 
to look carefully at the book's front cover and consider it svith respect 
to the statements in Menchu's opening paragraph. They could be 
asked about the "I" at the beginning of the title, in the context of 
Menchu's assertion that "it's not only my life, it's aU.o the testimony 
of my people" (Menchii 1984, 1); about the use of the word "Indian," 
or the advertisement of a film "featuring" Menchu, They could be 
asked to find information about the publisher, about Burgos-Dcbray, 
or about similar testimonials in English and to discuss what they find 
in light of Menchu's narrative. The changes Wright made when she 
translated the title could be pointed out and discussed as well, and 
the difficulties of translating the work could be cxpLiined. 

For students whose Spanish allows them to work in both languages, 
a discussion of the cover and title could be followed by an examination 
of t^.rms in passages that present particular challenge:? to the translator 
Depending on the extent of their language skills, they could be asked 
to discuss, for example, the role of Conckncia in the Spanish and its 
appearar ^ in English as "consciousness" or "awareness," This type 
of exercise would no doubt be richer for students ^vho have some 



58 



Anuradha Dingwaney and Carol Ma\rr 



familiarity with Spanish (and should in fact suggest many similar 
activities fur those with the appropriate language skills). But even 
students unable to work in Sp.snish could he asked to examine the 
English text for e^amp! * of the experience Menchu points to as the 
one that guide-, her while she talks to Burgos-Drbray. Concicuciti 
implies "awaronr^,''," "waking up" in the nonse of seeing clearly — 
an "illumination" that, when its development is traced through pas- 
sages bt'letled in hpanitirt. leads Irom the raising of a young woman's 
consciousne,ss to a complex strategy for bringing to light certain secrets 
in order to pvcUect their integrity/'' Regardless of the language in which 
students carr)' out this exercise, they would confront not only the 
difficulties inherent in rendering Menchii's story in Hnglish, they would 
also need to consider the issue of translaticm with respect to this central 
exprriencr. What i^ more, once comiencia is plcued in the context of 
Menchu's ver\' delthorate and conscious decision to risk betrayirig her 
people in order to make outsiders aware their suffering, students 
should recognize that their own role within the narrative is one of 
potentinl intruder, for .vhom Menchu is ctmstantly mediating or 
translating from Quiche to Spanish {to English) not only words but 
also the very incidents of the story 

Although we did not think of MenchiVs narrative in this way until 
we had discussed it several times, the more times we read her reminder 
that "I'm still keeping my Indian identity secret" (Menchu 1984, 247), 
the more we considered her a translator in the v/idrst possible sense 
of the word. This means that we have come to view the marketing of 
her story, v^hethrr in Burgos-Debrtiy's I'ari^ apartment or on the 
English language cover, as ahsohitely consistent vith her decisit>n to 
learn Spanish and leave her village. "My name is Rigoberta Menchu, 
and hero's ht-w I woke up." Menehii might say in the English title 
that could be proposed to students as they were encouraged to think 
of huw she might sound if she v/ere able to cast her story in their 
idiom. What might she want from you, they could be asked, hov,* 
would she expect you to insert yourselves in her story? Hov/ do you 
think she might have envisioned you as she gave permission to Wright 
to make an English -language translation of her book? How well do 
you think Wright h^^^ mnde way for a reali^^ation of the "you" Menchu 
envisioned'!' 

And how Jo you think Wri\^hi envisioned you as she prepared that 
translation? students could be queried a^ the discus-r^ion returned, 
inevitably to the English-language version Why do you think <ihe 
placed a lirst -persem pront»un in the title, or made her other adaptations? 




Translation as a Method for Cross-Cultural Teflc/iin^ 



59 



Why, for example, is the second person addressed in Wright's version? 
Who is that "you" in Wright's text? 

None of those questions would be answered easily, and some might 
not be possible tu answer at all. By considering them, however, students 
would be enabled to see Wright, Burgos- Dcbray, Mcnchii, and them- 
solves engaged in a collaboration that r^^sulls not from passivity and 
transparency on the part of the "translators," but from assertivene^s 
and interchange. Ihey should also realize that to make Wright or 
BurgoS'Debray or Menchu visible is not to "criticize" but to acknowl- 
edge them. In the same way, it should be evident that a translator's 
visibility does not lessen the impact or immediacy of a story for its 
readers, but actually intensifies that immediacy by compounding an 
awareness of translation and bringing the act of mediation to light. 
"Im-mcdiation" results from the simultaneous distancing and partici 
palion that characterize translation directed by concicncia as both self- 
consciousness and conscience as ethical responsibility 



Notes 

1. We use "transculturaiion" thinking 0/ Perez Firmat's discussion of it 
with re5f>ect to "the Cuban condition"; "the word properly designates ihv 
termcntalion and turmoil that precedes s,y\\\\\i<\^" It is thus "a coinage (hat 
denotes Iransiiion. i^a'isage, procc^'/' (1989, 23). 

2. See, for exam|.)le, the work by Lefcvcre 1984; Venuli 19B6; and Whi^e 
1990; and the articles in Warren 19^9. 

3. Sro Wjrrcn's "celebralion of oth^^mcss" (^), or While's dr:>cripUon of 
the translator's identity "split irremediably In t^vo" (2 *^1), or Maier's "compact" 

4. Among the e?<iays and hook'; we hxiki d ar the follov/ing wore espenally 
useful. Crapan/ano (1984), Wat^ion and Wat'^on Franke (1985) Irank (1979), 
Geiger (1986), Palai (1988), and Tcdiock (1983) (VVf USO iho icnms "1^^ 
history" and "Ic'ilimony" interchangeably because Menchu employs I 
"genres" when she "lurn[s] her life story" (n\irgo5-Debray. xiv) into a testimoriio 
that bears witness to the "problem of repression. f>ovrrty. subalternity 
imprisonment, stn'.gt;lG for sumval" — all rxjH'rienccs thai characterize the 
tesiimoni'\ according, to Beverley |1989, 14). Sct\ hoivcver. Beverley s discussion 
0/ the distinction** betwern (titimonws and oral histories (13-14). ) 

A comparable dauber haunts the work of interpreters who wish to 
clearly signal their sclf-reflexivity wiJh r^'i^.artt lo iheir acts ot interpretation: 
nne of the effects i.if extensive self-reflection on one's "location" is thai it can 
displai e the ' real" subject of their inlcrpfotafi/in. In ex?reme rases, such self- 
reflexivily l>ecomP5 a mode of self-agi^randizcment whereby the Interpreter 
frtobtli/e^ a h(i^l nf p-er^niial dp?ail^ Vj V.< f p her>elf at the "t'cntrr" of an 
lnfrrjTr<«Mive "performance." In some in'iiance^, ^elf reflexivencss can he (and 



i 1 



60 



Anuradha Dingwaney and Carol Maier 



is) deployed not as a way of accounting for one's position, but as a way of 
explaining it away, a way of exempting oneself. 

6. This question, and the discussion that follows, arose simultaneously 
with the question that frames our discussion of Burgos-Debray's suppression 
of her presence in Menchu's testimony. We saw them as complementary 
questions. For purposes of clarity, however, we present them in a linear 
narrative. But, in a classroom fiilualiun, we v/ould encourage bolh questions 
to be asked, and discussion around Ihem to proceed simultaneously/ in order 
lu miniml/e the risk of one subjectivity being subsumed under the other. 

7. "We live down the street from what I consider to be the prettiest park," 
one of Carol's former students from a class on Central American politics and 
poetics wrote to her recently from a university town in the Pacific Northwest, 
evoking her reading of Rif^oberta Merichd: "It includes a big rose gsrden with 
300 different types of roses. There is a community garden where neighbors 
plant corn or beans or whatever side by side. Almost like Rigoberta Mench6's 
community." 

8. White also uses this word to refer to "a set of practice* by which we 
learn to live v/ith difference" (1990, 257). 

9. It is odd that Wright ?;hauld refer to Menchii s original." since there is 
no evidence that she had access lo the tajscs of Menchii's voice from which 
Durgos-Debriiy worked. 

10. Trinh T Minh ha analyzes a somewhat different move where ' differ- 
ence" is invoked to disempower some and empower others; "(L]et difference 
replace conflict, Difference as understood in many feminist and non-western 
contexts, difference as foreground in my hlmwork is not opposed to sameness, 
nor synonymous with separateness. Difference, in other words, does not 
necessarily give rise to separatism. . . . Many of hold on to the concept of 
difference not as a tool of creativity to question multiple forms of repression 
and dunuiuince, but as a tool uf segregation, to exert pov/er on the basis of 
racial and sexual e^fiencrs. The apartheid type of difference" 74). 

11. Here, it mi,p,ht he useful lo consider the reception of Salman Rushdie 
and h\s two work^, about India and Paki^^tan, Midnight'^ Childnrrt and Shafrc, 
in the West, where ihey have been read as representative of the ' realities" 
of the 9ubctM>linent, Clarke Blaise, for example, drscribr^ii Mtdnij;^h(\ Children 
a5 ' a continent finding its voice" (see Dingv/anny. 1992). Tht? same could be 
said of Ri\^{dh*rti:i KUnchd. th« blurb ».»n the back tuver packages the lKK»k a', 
"one of the few complete e^^pre^sions of Indiav\ self-knowledge since the 
Spanish conquest." 

12. In Spanish, where CL';it*iP«cru is "born." and bir?h is commonly expressed 
as a "brinv nt: to light" (dtir a I'tV. this strategy is formulated in the language 
Itself as well . ror^ceplually 



Works Cllfd 

f5rl5cy, Catherine. 1985. ' Constructing the Subjr*.{. Dccr»ns!rucling the 'le\t,' 
In lemifiitl CMfki^^j and S.ujl Lha^yc eSit'd b\ ludilh .Nrvvfnn ^nd 
DeK»rati Kusenielt, 43 -64. Uvw ^ork Mrlhuen 



Tratislalion as a Method for Cross-Cullural Teaching 



61 



Beverley, John. 1989. "The Margin at the Center: On Testimoiiio" (Testimonial 

Nfanative). Modern Fiction Studies 35(Spring): 11-28. 
Burgos-Debray, Elisabeth, 1983. Mc Llama Rigoberta Menchd: y as\ me naci6 la 

concicnca. Barcelona: Argos Vegara. 
Crapanzano, Vhi »nt. 1984. "Life lliblorics: A Heviou* Essay." American 

Anthropologist 86 (December): 953-60. 
Dingwaney, Anuradha. 1992. "Author(i/)ing Mulnight'^ Childrcti nnd Shame: 

Salman Rushdie's Constructing of Authority." In Reivorlding: Essays on ihe 

\\'rilefs of Ihr Indian Diaspora, edned by HmmaniJ*^! NeKon We^ipori, CT: 

Greenwood Press. 

Frank, Gelya. 1979. "f inding the Common Donominalor; A Phenumenological 

Critique of the Life Hifitory Method." /i/Zu'S 7(Spring): 68-94. 
Geiger, Susan N. J. 1986. "Women's Life Histories. Method and Content." 

Signs ll(VVinter): 334-51. 
G6mcz reAa, GuiHermo. 1989. "The Multicultural Paradigm: An Open Letter 

lu the N<*lional Arts Community." High Performance. Fall: lR-27. 
Corin, Joe, 19W. "Nrtvvork News" Report on Guatemala 2(3); 14 J5, 
I.efevere, Andre. 1084. "Translations and Other Ways in Which One Literature 

Refracts Another." Symposium 38(Summer) 127- 42. 
Maier, CaroL 1989. "Notes After Words: Looking Forward Retrospectively at 

Tran^ilalinn and (Mi^j^irjit aral Luso Brazilicin) Jemlnist Criticism" in Cul- 

tural and lli^^U-irical Grounding for Hispantc and Luyo-Brazilian frm]ni''>i 

Criticism, edited by Hernin V^idal, 625-'53. Minneapolis: Institute for the 

Study of Ideologies and J.lleralure, 
Nfenchfi, Kigoberta. 1984. ! . . . Ri^^obertii Mcnchd: An Indian \'ioman in Cua- 

trmala, edited by Elisabeth Durgos-Debray; translaled by Ann Wright. 

London: New Left \ersu. 
Minh-ha. Trinh T. 1988. "Nof Ynu/Jike You: Post colonial Women and the 

Interlocking Questions of Identity and Difference" In^Jiptwrts 3-4 IWVL 
Parai. Daphne, ed. and Irani,. 1988. Wraixluw WV-mr/i S;»r:2i ' Kiontemporayy Life 

Stories (Collection uf Inte!vie»v*iV New Brunswick. NJ: Rutger5 University 

Press 

Pfre/ I irmat. Gustavo. 19Sf^ The Citb.tn Civv.litit^n TransliUion and Identity in 

M^^iern i^ubun literature. Cambridge: Cambridge University PreAs. 
Said. Ldward W. W^l i nicntalism. New York* Vintage BiKjk^ 

— . 1985. "In the Shadow of the West," Vicdge: The lnpert:ilism vf 

Kci usentation, The Representation of Imperialism 7-8 (Winter-Spring). 4- 
12. 

Seiburth, Richard. Vm. "The Guest: Second Thoughts vu TranUaling Krild- 
erlin." In Ihr Art of Transhtiun Vt iif^ ff'^m the Held, edited by Rosanna 
Warren, 23V-43. Boston, Northeas'ern Uni^er'i'ily Pre?>. 

Sommer, Doris. 1^'88. *' Nnj ]u^\ 3 Personal Slury*; Wuiiit'n'b I'estmonic^ and 
(he Phnal "-^^W In lifr 'Unrr Thr:ririn<^ VV 'm-*')'^ *^f/r J f*n'r,j;iiiv rdifrd bv 
Bflla hiod/Vi and Cf^l.:?te Schenck. 107-30. Ithaca. NY C'nnpll University 

frdlrifk. Dennis. P/H'V Ihr Sp.^en Vicrd and the V/.r^ cf InUrpretali.n 
Phllaflrlphia UniverMJy of Pennnylvania Prc-^ 



62 



Anuradha Dingwaney and Carol Maier 



V^lez, Diana, ed. and trans. 1988. Reclaiming Medusa: Short Stories by Con- 
temporary Puerto Ricati Women. San Francisco: Soinstcrs/Aunt Luie, 

Venutt Lawrence. 1986. "The Translator's Invisibility." Crilicism 28(Spriny): 
179-212. 

Warren, Rosanna/ ed. 1989, The Art of Translation: Voices from the Field. Boston: 

Northeastern University Press. 
Watson, Liwrcncc C, and Maria -barbara Walson-rranke. 1985. Interpreting 

Life Historiey. An Anthropological Inquiry New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers 

University Pre^s. 

White, James Boyd. 1990. Justice as Translation: An Essay in Cultural and l^gal 
Criticism. Chicago and London: Chicago University Press. 



II Contexts 



Kenneth Burke defines "scene" the "backgrdund of the act, the 
situation in which it rKTCurred" (1^62, xv). He explains that "scene/' 
like other terms in lu«^ pentAd, are generative and can be uhed taUv^, 
for example as scene-act or scene-agent. More recently, critics have 
explored further eomplications in terms su<'^ as "scene/' "context/' 
and "ailture" Gloria An/aldua, in borderlands, defines the new mestizo, 
the woman, like herself, who lives on the borders between cultures, 
languages, genres, and sexual identities. An^aldua moves us beyond 
an esscntialist conception of culture, genfler, race, and language. 
Similarly in "Linguistic Utopias/' Mary Louise Pratt argues for a 
linguistics of contact, which acknowledges that cultures are not intact, 
homogenous groups, but are, instead, heterogeneous and changing- 

The six es?ays in this section focus on vafious contexts atKl on how 
these contexts inform an undcr^^tandinr, of students, texts, and theories 
of leeching and learning. The authors implicitly define "context" in 
different ways, luit each understands contexts as changing. 

*Ihe first three essays examine broad cultural conk^xts. Judith Scot- 
Smith Girgus, a middle-school teacher and Cecelia Tichi, a university 
teacher, collaborate to explain that a "gener.i'.iun of siuderit*; has grown 
up in the culture of television and live in, with, and through i( " They 
then argue that features of television can be u^ed effectively iii teaching. 
Nfary Savage presents three views from the elementary school context 
through her interviews v.ith four teachers frt)rn the Br(?nx, each of 
whom discussrs how her own cultural backgrcnindinform^ her teaching 
of s^Jdenls from many ntlu^r i.ullure'; Nnrma AlarctVi lake^ a broad 
hi'^t^^rical per'.prctive Ui anal we changing dehnlti<>n^ of Thicana 
and "Chicann" and the rei^ulling political and ( etr^onal coni-L |uenco . 

The next three aulhorr. turn to academic conlex?*^ wifhni larger 
cultural coTite^l- Kegiriald Martifi y^he*^ a hrirf hi-t(«ry t>f iul'yja- 
^ioniit ' anfl "separatist" literature bffure exploring jiroMnu^ m cuiv 



64 



Contexts 



temporary literary theorists' treatment of both kinds of literature. 
Robert S, Burton arguus that "no matter what our background, vvc 
share uith authors the experience of 'fragmentation on a global scale/ " 
He warns that behind the interest in "multiculturalism" lies "a habit 
of 'otherinp/ or 'differcntiatinp' that threatens to contain, rather than 
open up, the field of cultural and cross-ctiltural studies/' And H VV 
Matalene focuses an his experiences in teaching "The Secret Life of 
Waller Mitly" tu student** at Shanxi Univt-rsily, Chitia, lu t yplore huvv 
texts, theories, readers, and teachers are culture-bound. 



Works Cited 

An/aldfhi. Gloria, \W7. Bordvrtimih/lM l-rontrrn- The Nvu* McstiZQ. San Fran- 
cisco: Spinsiers/Aiml IxWc 

Burke, Krnncth. 1962. A Grarrimar vf Motives. Hrrkricy: L'nivcrsity of California 
Press 

Pralt, Mary Louise. K>87. "Linyur.tir UK'pi*i^i/' Ihe I ith;ui':'tiLj of lVri/i»K;' 
Ari^umentf^ BeHveen Un^uiuks and iuerature, edited by Nigel fabb et al., 
4H 66 Manchester: Manrhr^ter University I'rj'ss 



I 



5 Teaching in the Television 
Culture 



Judith Sco^Smi^h Girgus 

Horpath Hall School, Nashville, Tennessee 

Cecelia Tichi 
Vanderbill University 

I was born ir\ a house with the teU'vision alv;ays on. 

—The Talking Meads, "l ove for Sale/ 1986 

TV is the park where wc went every after schuol. 

— Fieldl Stanley, college fresl\niaii, WO 

These sLtterneiits, one d s(»n{; lyric, \hv uHier ii studentVi in-class 
commenf, probably strike dread in Ihe hearts uf teachers of Hnglish. 
Committed h) the wnlten word, many of us are repelled by the thought 
of ^Judents' habitats filled nonstop with the siren simp of television 
and its ima^t'S ConmiiMrd, mort^over. to values of the natural world 
and particularly appreciative of the idea of the park as a desi^,ned 
recreational space, we may feel horrified by the student's ea^.y as 
stimprion thai TV andd possibly be ronMderrd equivalent ti* outdoor 
aihvily. lhal (ho screen could be livnonymous with- -even displai - 
the park. We might wish In reconunend to tlie student two powerful 
anti-televi!iion polemics. Mdiie Wlnn'N The P/u^ t^^^^H (1^77), em- 
pliasi/jng the narcohr qiidlity of TV. and Neil l'()>lmim's Amusin\^ 
Oursclvi'r^ tv Dcaih (1S^8:'). which ar^;ue? that television "has made 
entertainment the natural format for the presenlatiun of all experience" 
(87). 

Perhap:- Betsy Byars, a writer of children's books, prc»vide? the 
apparently ( templary. cautionary anti TV tale in The I V Kid (1987). 
whifh ifratiirc% eleven year-old Lennie, child of a «iinp;le parent family. 
Livin^^; with hi'> mother in a motel ^he owob and I'j^vt rates, tie is shown 
to b*: ItMiely, bored, failing r^cicntc and inmter^ed in ?elpvi5ion. 
especiwlvy j^ame ^how; in v4ii':h he is thr fascinated copbUiner A-S the 
novel open^, he i*"- hn-^inr, dnwo a tf nundt-J by hi-^ mother (t)at 

\\i3 honu*w(irk mu^? b»' done: 



66 



Judith Scot-Smith Girgus and Cecelia Tichi 



"Aren't you through yet?" Lennie's mother called. "You've got to 
do your homework, romember?" . . . 

Lennie walked on to the office, As he went inside, he paused 
in front of the TV. 

A game show was on, and there were five new cars lined up 
on a revolving stage. The winning contestant got to pick one of 
the cars, and if it started, he got to keep it. Only one of the cars 
was wired to start. 

"Il's the Grand Anr^," f^onnii- said invMntly, Ho f^It he had a 
special instinct for picking the right box or door or car on shows 
like this. "I know it's the Grand Am/' 

"Lonnte, arc you watching television?" his mother called from 
the utility room. 

"I'm looking for a pencil," he called back. 

"Well, there arc plenty of pencils on the desk." 

"Where? Oh, yeah, 1 see one now." 

Lennie was hoping to stall until he could see if it realty was 
the Grand Am as he suspected. 

The contestant wanted lo try for the Catalina. "No, the Grand 
Am, the Grand Am!" I.ennie murmured beneath his breath. He 
found the stub of a pencil • a the desk, . . . 

"Lennie, I meant what \ said about no televisioFi," his mom 
called. 

"I know you did." 

"No television at all until those grades pick up." 
"i know." 

A commercial came on. "Doc-tor Pep per, so mis-under- 

StOOOCKXxJ." 

Hero wf see Lunnie resist his mother's directives, immersed as he is 
in the seductive TV ganrie show. Ultimately, a crii.is a rattlcj^nako bite 
that threatens Lennie's life — brings renewed, intimate contact vvith his 
mother and with the policeman who rescues him. Watching TV from 
h»s hospital bed, Lennie has u TV epiphany, realizing "the petfpl':' who 
made television commercials didn't know anything alnnjt life. ... It 
seenu'd to him suddenly that every I V p>erson he had ever sevn wasn't 
real. . . . Lennie thought, his own family — just him and his mom — 
was a hundred times realer than the Bradys or the Waltons or the 
Cleavers or any other TV fa.-'iily you could name" (108-9), This is the 
revelation thai rescues Lennie from the corruptive fantasies of television 
and brings him back into the real world. Within moments he switches 
off "Lot's Make a Deal" and bejijins v,ork on hi'ii science report. 

liyars's concluding scenario niij'.ht j^ladden ^iny leacherS heart, and 
instruct/ns in Fn^'Jish may naturally assent to its themes, since we are 
heir Ici a decades-Iuii^j Uisto* y of iiigrained anti -TV hostility. The ndtnre 
of print— our culture, a:; leacher^^ commitlrd to the wriltrn wrrd— 
has defined its resistance lo the technology of television t^s a war 



Teaching in the Television Culture 



67 



waged for the survival of the mind. In 1951, the newspaper critic 
Harriet Van Home complained that "now in the third year of the 
Television Age, . , , our people are becoming less literate by the min- 
ute. . . . Chances arc that the grandchild of the Television Age won't 
know how to read this" (quoted in "Dark (Screen) Future/' Time, 
1951). In 1962, Ashley Montagu referred to "the sterile puerilities 
which find so congenial a home in the television world" In the name 
of "good taste/' he called for an abatement of ith "noisome vulgarity" 
(1962, 132). 

Imagery of narcotic addiction has similarly threaded its way through 
public discourse on television. "Some people . . , ignore TV because 
they are afraid of getting hooked/' wrote a Time magazine journalist 
in 1968. "What is to be done with parents who are themselves television 
addicts?" asked a writer in 1964. Television could "become the worst 
cultural opiate in history buy and corrupt all talent, and completely 
degrade the sensibility of the country/' another critic had written in 
the early 1950s {Time 1968, 98; Shayon 1964; IVilHngham, 117). 

Even the most recent chilr- rearing guidance books reinforce the 
binary division between reading and television, "f^arents should show 
their children that reading is both enjoyable and useful. They shouldn't 
spend all their time in front of the TV . . . Are you addicted to soap 
operas? Do you look forward to Friday nights so you can space out?" 
(Cutright 1989, 100, 11^). "VVbuld [your daughter] insist on watching 
right up to bedtime if her father was waiting to read the next installment 
of their bedtime story? ' (Leach 1986, 676). "Think about your child's 
study habits. . . . Does he do his homev/urk in front of the TV?" 
(Cutright 1989, 75, 129-30). 

The vehemence of this rhetoric is clearly indicative of a battle for 
the mind itself. Essentially two realms—television and print—have 
been cast iu the adversarial relationship!; of puerility vs. maturity, low 
culture vs. high culture, entertainment v?. intellectual engagement, 
frivolity vs. seriousness, contamination v>. purity, robotry vb. critical 
imagination, sickness vs. health. These are the battle lines that have 
continued, uncontested, for nearly forty years. The way the argun\ent 
has been cast suggests that the resolution of the conflict is possible 
solely through one's maturate »n. The child held captive by the powerful, 
popular medium will ultimately renounce TV and embrace the int^^l- 
lectual imaginative complexity of the printed text. As one analyst 
observer. "We expect children to like television precisely because they 
are ea*iily amused and do not know any better, but we also expei I 
them to grow out of it" (Atfallah 1984, 225). 



68 



Judith Scot-Smith Girgus and Cecelia Tichi 



At this point, many contemporary instructors in English may protest 
that for edurational purposes we use TV regularly in the classroom, 
perhaps showing videos of canonical fiction like The Scarlet letter or 
the BBC Shakespeare, or major historical moments such as special 
presidential addresses and feats from NASA, including the unforeseen 
horror of Challenger But aren't teachers who do so stigmatized by 
colleagues? Doesn't the sight of an instructor wheeling the monitor 
and VCR cart down the hall elicit the contemptuous thought, "Easy 
day, pacing yourself out?" In the back of one's mind, one might even 
think, "bribing the students/' or "pandering." Doesn't the teacher with 
the video equipment run the gauntlet? Perhaps it is not surprising, 
therefore, that so much current work in media literacy is really a thinly 
disguised effort on the part of teachers — in the guise of "analyzing" 
TV "accurately" — to wean students from what they appreciate — TV — 
to make them dislike it and in the hope that the students will then 
embrace the print-culture traditions the teacher considers valuable. 

The fact, nevertheless, is that a generation of students has grown 
up in the culture of television and live in, with, and through it. Life- 
threatening snake bites to the contrary, they will experience TV as an 
integral and important part of their autobiographies. It can even be 
argued that, in the 1990s, TV is an actual environment. To call TV by 
its slang names of "box" or "lube" is to downsize it to a mere j ,eometric 
solid, relegated to a minor place in one's personal or cultural space. 
But "environment" makes television that space itself, an encompassing 
surrounding, be it park or habitat. Whether sve like it or not, the fact 
is that fnr students of all levels TV is a natural and integral part of 
life. Given these facts, we need to begin to ask, what is the IV 
environment really like? What traits define it? What characteristics can 
we expect to find in our students as a result of their TV-era conscious- 
ness? And how can we work ti'ith these traits productively and 
energetically in the classrooms? 

We may begin with the issue of TV in the household at a historical 
moment in which parents are in the work force full time, and when 
family units themselves assume diverse forms. The household may be 
comfortable precisely because the "television [is] always on." This Is 
to say that the rhythms of TV may set a regulari;ring pace, that the 
sounds of TV are today's natural, comforting sounds of the household, 
replacing the rattle of pats and pans. Yd nowhere in the child-rearing 
literature is this point acknowledged. Instead, the characterislir fone 
ii; one of admonition and reproach, "l?e sure thai you and yuur child 
don't automatically turn on TV when yu get home and leave it on 
until bedtime, so that it is hackKtound nui^e in your home" (Cutright 



Teaching in the Television Culture 



69 



1989, 114-15). "The set is never swtched, or left, on 'to see v/hat's 
on' or because 'I'm bored' or as background 'company' " (Leach 1989, 
677). 

Is all this true? It is helpful to hear what students themselves have 
to say. A college freshman of 1990-91 recalls, "I can remember as a 
preschooler wailing for Gumby and Haiveytoous to corne on at my 
grandmother's house while she made me a grits-and-eggs breakfast." 
Another remarks, "Much of what I remember from TV when I was 
little was spent sharing the blanket with Robin and John, my older 
brother and sister/' Still another: "I only watched shows that gave me 
a feeling of belonging. For example, I was able to live vicariously 
through Marsha Brady ("The Brady Bunch"] and experience the family's 
adventures since I, too, was the oldest girl in my family." One student 
recalls watching holiday-season TV specials with her father "as we 
curled ourselves in sleeping bags on a cold winter night." 

These statements show the assimilation of TV into the viewer's 
emotional life and point to the likelihood that, within the culture of 
television, the viewer's cognitive processes themselves are undergoing 
change. In fact, it is evident that the contemporary viewer enacts a 
cognitive process identified by Raymond Williams in the mid- 19705. 
In Television: Technology and Cultural Tom, Williams cautioned that 
analysts of television were misguidedly, anachronistically operating 
like drama or film critics or book reviewers, approaching individual 
programs as "a discrete event or a succession of discrete events" (1975, 
88). Williams, a British Marxist social analyst with particular interests 
in the cultural institution-^ of print, had been a BBC television rcvicv/er 
between 1968 and 1972. and he became convinced that the fonns of 
broadcasting in ^he TV age were altering perceptual processes. Prioi 
to broadcasting, William"=i cibserved, "The essential items were dis- 
crete. . . . People took a book or a pamphlet or a newspaper, went out 
to a play or a concert or a meeting or a match, with a single predominant 
expectation or attitude" (88). The fundamental expectation was of a 
discrete program or entity. 

But increasingly, Williams found, in the era of television broad- 
casting, the discrete program yielded to a structure far more fluid: 
"There has b(»en a significant shift from the concept of sequence as 
programming to the concept of sequence as floiv." He goes on: "There 

a quality of flow which our received vocabulary of discrete response 
cind description cannot easily acktiowlrdgc" (91) Conceding lhat 
vestigial elements of discrete programs remain in^irl in the timed units 
of a "show/' he argurd nf>netheless that the intervals betvvcen the^e 
units have disap^fivued. In American brtijdcasl television, th».^ dver- 



70 



Judith Scot-Smith Cirgus and Cecelia Tichi 



hsements are incorporated inlo the v^hole, so that the segments, ads, 
trailers, previews, announcements, and so forth b<^come "the real flow, 
the real 'broadcasting' " (90). Williams calls all this "a new kind of 
communicaHon phenomenon" that demands recognition (91). 

We can get an idea of how this "new kind of communication 
phenomenon" works by revisiting that opening scene from The TV 
Kid, in which readers participate in Lennie's transit to and from the 
television world of the game show to that of his mother's demands. 
We enter Lennie's consciousness directly, moving with him in the 
halfhearted search for a pencil and then back again, and yet again, to 
the game show world. We cross and recross to alternative loci. 
Psychologically, the individual enters the television world, then crosses 
back for interaction with someone else in the immediate environment, 
and then recrosses to enter the television world again, this time an 
entirely different world as the program alternates with the commercial. 

This alternation defines the so-called viewer as a figure continuously 
moving, a sojourner, a figure in transit between different TV worlds. 
The alternation works in several ways. First, each single channel 
alternates program and commercial sequences, constantly moving the 
viewer out of one and into the other (e.g., from a game show to a 
Doctor Pepper commercial). Ostensible, undivided attention to one 
channel is really a sojourning in ond out of diverse worlds. 

As v/e see, moreover, in the fictional representation of The TV Kid, 
the viewer is also pulled away from absorption in TV back into the 
sunounding habitat. The search for a pencil, the need to respond to 
a parent, forces Lennie to cross and recross a cognitive threshold from 
the habitat to the TV worlds and back again. "I know it's the Grand 
Am. ... I'm looking for a pencil. ... the Grand Am, the Grand Am!" 
As viewer, one may prefer the TV world, but it is not possible to stay 
there. Others in fhe habitat claim attention. To meet various sensory 
demands, the individual must constantly move, adjust, accommodate, 
engage, withdraw to move again, and so on. And of course, since the 
mid-1960s, the remote channel changer has made possible a viewer's 
participation in multiple TV worlds. To flip around the channels, 
themselves multiplied by the spread of multistation cable television 
systems, has become a common viewer experience and given new 
emphasis to televisual "flow." 

And there is an acHvism in telcconscious flo- tl> it, until now, has 
been concealed by the doctrine of TV's narcotic effect. Back in 1954, 
the speaker of a humorous, anecdotal magazine essay recorded that 
children wore simultaneously involved in two, or even three, activities 



1.2 



Teaching in the Television Culture 



71 



while watching TV, that the electronic baby-sitter by no means mcj- 
HOpolized their attention: 

The children began lo play jacks, read the comics, fighl, and flip 
baseball cards while watching. This still kc ^t them roughly an 
the site ot the television set but hardly immobilized. (VVhitbrcad 
and Cadden 1954, 82) 

These very children, we have bren told, had previously sat in silent 
absorption before the likes of "Howdy Doody" and "Super Circus." 
Yet now they have taken up other activities — conducted simultaneously. 
Only very recently has the concept of mediated communication entered 
the design of <;tudie5 on TV watching, as communications experts 
acknowledge that decades of experiments, so carefully designed tc* be 
"scientific/' in fact drastically change, erase, or alter the conditions of 
the actual television environment. A 1971 study involving tvventy 
families' household TV usage found viewers "engaged in a host of 
activities while the set was on, reading a newspaper or magazine, 
talking, sleeping, staring out a window/' all phenomena "that regularly 
occur in natural environments yet are suppressed by researchers" 
(Anderson 1988, 204). 

Another psychological study, involving children cis subjects, con- 
cludes that they constitute "the lively audience" — the data corroborate 
the findings from both the twenty American households and the 
anecdotal observations of the mother whose children fought, flipped 
baseball cards, and played jacks while watching television (sec* Palmer 
1986). This study finds that, while watching TV, young children play 
with pets, look after brothers and sisters, play board games, make and 
build things, play with toys, jump and dance, read, do homework, 
fight and talk (148-51). 'The TV babies really can do their homework, 
watch TV, talk on the phone and listen 'io the radio all at the same 
time/' argues a guest coluninist in a 1900 New York iimes editorial. 
"It's as if information from each source finds its way to a different 
cluster of thoughts" (PiUman 1990). This columnist, significantly, writes 
under a Times rubric called "Voices of the New Generation/' positioning 
himself as one bred to be a "TV Baby." (Teachers take note: this younj', 
man took to the written word to make his point.) 

If the culture of TV is that of teleconsciousness, then certain 
impilications must be faced. First, the texts that represent individuals 
and groups in a setting in which a television ^ec is turned on reveal 
a new pluralistic state of consciousness in which engagement in the 
on-screen realm proceeds simultiineously with engagement in diverse 
jclivilie'^ in the surrounding habitat. Att*»Ption shifts to add fr^ni the 



72 



Judith Scot-Smith Girgus and Cecelia Tichi 



television, including it, but not excluding other activities. In tliis 
funnulation, thuught itself change?i, becoming multivalent. The em 
powerment of the individual becomes a function of the ability to 
engage in this multicentered thinking. The individual is coRnitively 
functioning in two or more places simultaneously, in affaires of the 
habitr>i -nr the elii*;sr(H>m— and in thnso of \]\v on scr^'en wiirld, 
assigning primary attention alternately to one or the other. 

Yet it would be inaccurate to rhnracteiize this kind of thought in 
pejorative terms. It is not a state of distraction or of attention divided, 
not an either/or state, but one of multiplicity as the mind turns 
simultaneously to several centers of attenlicai, constantly prioritizing 
and reprioritizing among tliem. The onscreen world may be compelling, 
even deeply absorbing, \ u[ nnly intermittently so as the mind reas ^igns 
itself new centers of attention. And this teleconscious state can be 
attributed to adults as well. The novelist Jill McCorkle describes the 
father of a teen in these terms: 

I called for my . . . father He wasslretchi d out on the *iofa watching 
fcKitbiiU, [hv volume of the set turned comjiletcly down so that 
he could hear his album of wildlife sounds. One minute he v;as 
at the bowl game, the next he was in a junglp with loud bird 
sounds, like chekaw chekaw. (1990, 84) 

Might we suggest that any number of teachers of Fngli^h might 
imagine themselves—ourselves— similarly engaged? Might we hint 
that there are cognitive practices in which we have engaged but failed 
to exanrdne? 

TV-age consciousness is additionally afferted by the remt^le channel 
charger a lifelong instrument of empowermirit for students, 'temp- 
tation to dismiss it as a technology abetting the shortening of the 
attention span misses the larger point, namtly, that the opportunity 
to move oneself to new centers of attention frees the individual to 
make choices, act on those choices, to feel a certain degree of autonomy. 
The individual with a lifelong sense of such decision-making abilitv 
has every expectation of carrying forward that personal power to the 
classroom. 

What, then, are the implications tyf all this for the classrooni 
envirorunent? First, it is important to recogni/.e that the TV-era student 
finds the fluidity of crossed and rccrossed mental foci of the habitat 
and the on-screen worlds to be mirrored in the cooperative learning 
situation. Just as the television watcher movf^s in and out of the on- 
screen world(^j) with a certain cognitive fluidity, so the stucltnt wdikin^ 
in a cooperative grc>up participates in a cognitive process that allows 



Teaching in the Televimn Culture 



7?i 



hex or him to move frcjm tine point ol focu^ to jnofht-r Therefore, 
the telecomciuus student expects to vvnrk < impiT.ilively rather thiii*' 
hieriirchically or aiitot lafirnlly. And the ide(t of cooperation in no wny 
(.unllicb with individtuil empowcnnent. Hie lclecun^ciouf:.1y emp/nv 
i.-n d student (*nters the rliK»''Toom with -i drmfuTdli*;. L'j^Lilittirian outlook 
The student expects to wc^rk in the way^ cunj^enial to his or her 
mulhceutt-rt il haliUs oi thuuyhl. I he nKr,t naturrtl pathv..*'^ \u h aunis^ 
in these temis are those v.hich are coopi'rali".'e in spirit and (operation 
I'unLiiouuiiy, Ihi^* telotuiu.ciou:^^ cooperation uoiks laterally in the 
diWiTQyom, meiining th.it (he learninj^ environment is maximally effec- 
tive whenever studejtl^ have thi opportunity to engage in self- 
motivated, self-directed work which they then share v/ilh other u lm 
in turn share their work witii them, Students are ompmvcrcd in the 
TV envinoiinenl, e.s/^.virilly in the a^*,e of the remote. Peer leatiun^ ur 
coaching ^^ituations are empowering; because tlu-y make students re- 
sponsible fnr iheir ov/ii learhinf; and involve the m in helping; (»ther:-, 
to U'cun. One wiy to formuldte this kind of work for the students lies 
in tlie teiin "inMant puhlishuif;." in which Wi^rk output is pr*' enti-d 
without delay and yet, as the term "pubHshing" indicatci-i, retains its 
formal tnid literate basir; 

Studcnlii in this kind of cta^sr<K>m environment assume major 
responsibilities for presentation of weak and for the claf^sroom agenda, 
deciding in peer consultalkms who will be responsible for what. 
Classroom time become*; student lime— students are in possession of 
their thoughts and their output. Ironically, at a cultural moment in 
which the term ' cfuich piotato" derides televisK'ii watchers for passivity, 
the fact is ttiat the real couch potatoe> are students in the lradition.il 
classroonv w*ho merely sit di)v;n and listen — passive recipients rather 
ttian active learnerP' 

Ihe instructor's lole riecessarily must shift in llie classroom uf 
teleconsciou'j students. Just as the student's role in this era chanjje; 
from receptivity to activity, from teacher-directed tasks to sell- and 
^roup initiated tasks, so loo must the teacher undertake a quite 
dehberate self-redefinition. This is not easy, for it retjuircs shedding 
some of our most cherished vicv.'s of ourselves as figures of central 
authority. In essence, the insiiuclor must rclinqui^-b the position of 
bi^lh ('enter and apex of the classroom, lor maximal effectiveness v/ith 
a classroom full of TV-era, telcconscinus students, the teacher must 
beccwe the facilitaiiin rather than Ihc direclor Ihe teacher becomes a 
fi^jure in'»vinf^ am(»ng group^i of students in a room where several 
activities are in proy^^ress smultanrpusly Ihi^ 'rather rni^-.h^ first work 
with a ^ruup of students gathered around a computer, fhen prourd 



74 



Judith ScotSnitth Gifi^w^ and Cecelia iichi 



to another f^roup busy with a rehenrsal, ihen mwv on to a third group 
who are reading. The sense ot mution or J'luidily ihe flow within 
Ihv eliisf»rtH*rn tind. in afUlilinn, l}w c^levatftl n(Mso Ifvrl lU'ccssjrily 
aLX( M.panying thi^; drcrnlraliyrd environment will yiPht* nt» pruhltMu 
for the '.turirnt*-.. A''^ individuals^ acciK^onn d \o Ihv tuli-vi iu.d flow, ,nid 
as participants in a lelccon^cious ment^hty, they will work effc/clively 
m i»ucli dh envirunntt^nt. expc'iu^i mg tlie M vwe noimitl VVtlh thf 
opportunity for coniputiT-assisted writiiig. mort^ovt r. they will find 
rompc»>ilion to be an iictivity ron<pnlihl^^ witli leleconbcioiis lliought. 
Students writing with word pr(»cessr)r:. can move mnlpnal around, 
shift, dt'lelei reenter, and try out new possibilities- " all of this akin to 
the ways in which they h:ive watrhfj TV with the remote, watching 
se>;nUMit^, tnovuig to ollierb, diid. with the VCR. zipping and /appins; 
and reversing lor desired re|>efiMf»n 

A word idxtut student gr(aip work is much in urder liere, for the 
United btate^ is a nation \'/hu^i' iridi\'idiiidi^,t tradiluots tend to inilU.>te 
against collaboration. The fronMer values of nudged individualism filter 
int(j the t Lissrooni in the ellwr, nf individutil effort. And while the 
student must be hekl responsible for his or her own learning (svith 
anxiety about plagiarism or cheating always liovermg at the edges of 
schoi»hiig), the impact i^f American ideology on education ean be 
foumi in an unwarranted degree of is^'lalion- isolation of the bnd 
not enc(iunleretl in the world of work, where tram effort i«> increa^iingly 
the norm. Ihis is to say that if the empowered student*** are thiv;n 
learning from one another, then it is imperativr that wr learn to set 
aside t>ur own biases and help students learn in groups, [ortunalely, 
an NCTt publication has addressed this issue; a tide of particular 
interest is /eius on Cvlhiborafivc b:itniin^ (I^HH), Other helpful texts 
include Hh/abeth G. Cohen, /)c>(\vumx Groupwork: Sfnifc^^jics tot the 
llftrn\^rfjenu^ Ct^^yroovi (l*^8f>^ Nancie At well, h\ tht* Middle: iVrifoJX- 
WcJi/iMy. and Lvunttn;^ wtlh /\(ie/f*5rrnrs (1987); and Lucy McCorrnick 
Calkins, /r^so/is from a Child: Un the icachiti^ iUid learning of Writinii 
(1983). 

As for the decentralized teacher roving from group to group, that 
figure may appear to be slighting ur even shirking pedagogical duties • 
until one reali/es that this teacher of the teleconscious age has -jhifted 
the burden of hi-, or her responsibilities to a preactivc role. The work 
of classr<H>m j^hnining becomes especially crucial for the decentralized 
leacb.er. Teacher-as-fdcililatur is a self-definition mandating substantial 
preactive behavior on the instnictor's part Yet it is precisely the 
preatlive behdviors thdit enable (me tt» be.nmf' the fanlitatnr r.ither 
than the more autocratic director. 



Teachmg^ m iht Teltvhion Culture 



75 



In this vein, the iritotid for iiclrninislrativr siipfrvi^ion must also 
ch.inye, for Iht* on-sile mtui^nn^nu^nt uf tri^ditionul In krUir^- 

pn'H'UlatiOii. cKr^.rnum ciiitlruL unci th<* tih- iM-iunus irrelcviint F^al 
nation of thr rirrrntT.ili/rd tfMrhrr'% fn^rfouruinar ivtjLiirex insU'cul an 

what h,is hvr:r\ planned and s? hfduled and v/hcil the objcrtivos of that 
planning art*. Ihen the i!a>5riK>fn vi>4t btxornes *»!■ iH*<»sM»n on wI>kIi 
the sufHTVisdr mcncs through \hr vari(»ijs studv ^ruiips. asstv^Mn^ vach 
according to Us own ^odls. 

The cltissroorn hour nuist id^u W rvi oni c ptiu^li/nl in the vta cif the 
U'k'cuiisciou^ studi^nt I hi' older idiM of th*.' hniMf forty or iifty inlnut*- 
pfritul must f'.ivf umv to a nt-u^ ^tructurt' m()st fffcr iivfly accomnui- 
di^^in^ thf n»*w»'r v.vn* r'rtUon oi ^\U(\^r\t^ enf^iprd in fluid and multi 
ccnti'frHt pnvc^^f'> t»f th'Hii^ht |u%t a - thr c MntMmf>i»T iry student ht4> 
i'Xj'i rii'iu ed M'^;nitnlcd Unw as normal and naturiil. no tiK' thr clii5*iftKifn 
!U'^-'aon iutn hv dv-Ay\\M*i\ to tjkf fducational iidvant.»^;f_' of i (t^'.oitioi* 
reliant on mnltipir crnlrrs v( attt-otion. with shorter ^pan^ of hl^rh 
inl*'n'aty focn«« I he dr( cntrah/'jd class j^vriml thus Ivnds i^ *'lf to 
sc^mentiilion, to subdivision int(» sovoral Ifatnin^ opjKjrtunilRS. Ihe 
mini hvs*ions advcK'titcd by Atucll and C\itkuis jrr [Mtlicularty oppttr- 
liine ht-re. It inu«.l hi- said t^^^ain that sUuh nl^ rt miiiu fully rcspjitsiblc 
for Iht'ir own learning in thi^ ?nodrl, but U ou^^lil to bi' pcMUlcd out 
as well that, when motivated and svU empc»\^'crt'd. ihvy are qnitr 
c.ipablr of i.u^>laini'd clfort. which i' readily tidaptr."ible to thr tun 
purio'l blniK (tffen f(»untl in iht- rniddli'-v^hool curriculum (And thi^ 
mrxlcl fKThaps amtinues into homi'uurk. (Jne seventh K^*^drr re(X)rted 
that Uiit t*s?dy, judv;r'd ^ iipvrb by ihv leaiht r, was drafted and redrafted 
lH.»tvvf'iMi inlf.'rvals nf favorite IV programs.) 

Tearher^i of literature havo a parlicuhir stake iti the kinds of rt adin^; 
thai sluchiiU do in the TV age. Ihc widespread lament tliat reading, 
has declined and. especially, that students resist the classics mu^t be 
taken very seriously Teachers, however, may tond to approach this 
issue in ^he Knarv adversarial model noted earUer, that of TV cs 
print. The crucial point to recogni/e is this; u s nol that students of 
the TV culture are no! as ' gLvxl/' but that they ate different. It is 
imiH^rlant, therefore, that teachers consider what ' 'nds of readinjrj fiml 
favor with students of *he IV ape, ^\vvn tlieir accuUurahon to on- 
screen visuahty ami action ju^t as it is important that v/e neither 
dismiss nor conde^'cend to students whom a^^sumc are television 
oriented and td^^refon not as sophisticated as those with primary 
allef^iance bj prmt. At the saliio time, it Is essential ((» understand 
which kinds of readmji^ meet with resistance and oulrlgid puzzlement 



76 



\>tv<m'\y b**i»uiM' they lit' uulsidi* stiiiii'nt^' epistcmir rxpcripncr in iho 
TV lulturtv 

Not surpri »iii^;ly, '.imh iifs of thr k-h'vi mmu t<^;i' ,\\v rt..t'(«livc tu U-aN 
rrplrlr v/ith dinlnpip arui phy^^icnl nnd t xtcrnni nction A vt-nth- 
yjMh' Hi't"U|>, for iuslani is t iilliijsirt^.ih ,«lly itMds i Kiplmt- dii MtUUirr's 
Rrhpr-ra, prrhnps hrrrui^.f of stnirturf^l nfhnitv with TV ^'^ap oprtt^. 
while rt ild^j) uf tulle^u )umuri anJ seniors similarly apprtn iatts Harriet 
Hri'thrr Stnwr'*; Undv lom'^ Cabin. pfr;sibly bi'Ciiu .v it^ scrne^ arc 
gruphicali) vLsual and iti, plal(s) jLliun ura-nlt'd-- h hali is Uj wy, 
KinijuiliMe with I V. 

It is, huwi'Vcr, \hv litoraUirc t'f Intefidr. f^syt hnlM^;iu!l ciirnplcxily 
\hi\l pii//l^'N tlu'-.c ^,mi<' utuTf nt'. Vrw< I Icniinf/Aay ^ A!<2m wu^I 
Ihe *^ti U ftnuul W luuwWit'^Wuy:^ \o tin* ^.t-wnfli ^;r«idern hri'.iii*^^' 
[av h».hrrmiin prriCngr^niM ^^n\y "{^W^ b* hi* h.uul-^" h«r tt\rct' dtivv. 
thill 1^, hi'Ctiir^.' iht'tL' Is iiisuffklfiit action flu- nj|ky,r iL^ss simlltirly 

"iiiithiny, happrn^i" until Hir ♦ oncludinR cli^iptfr 

J:a(h l:ii^;lr.h rr.ichrr (.in ddubtlf-*^ c^t^-nd ^ho^-'- dui!^.ifns, vshith 
are im[>orlcinl, but not sn rruit vvt* (.ui deplore the rcsisttince of ttKJav's 
studenls texts wt* Knew to hv proftuiiuh riUhn, on the (onlriiiy, to 
eutible m <o undirlake Cdixful preparation in advtince, knowing', that 
?itud*^nl^ wiil n^^ed particuld^ kinds of help and motivation I he de>!;ree 
to which the text lies idcntifiably oiit!,ide the TV tullure (e.y , ihe 
psychulo^jiial e;^pItyrdtions of ILiwfliorne) b the dL>;rce to vvliieh the 
teaiher must lu^Vv !b»' sludfut-, iit Ijv'i'i!'^ in letirninjr',, h^r in'.ttuu e by 
dlitribnting study questions and breaking the class into swaW f^joups 
thM rejHJft to one <inother both prior to iH-'^innm^ the novel and 
pr(Keedmy. thrtuj^^h e«irh eIa*vsriH.mi '^^e^siiui on it Ihe ^,rouj>s, perhap** 
throe or four, will bt buildii ^ bridges from thtir o.vt> exj>cfience 
the trxt. On^ ol them might be as?.l^;ned to toii^ider t^ ph»ll^^<»phKt^^ 
i'isue they will encounter in the reading, another to consi ler a topic 
based on their exjM'rrence but apy^hcablr to a character they are about 
to meet in the text, a third to ponder a hypothetical siluatiun paralleling 
one In Oie readiiij^. Mere a^ain. the teacher's preactive pLinninj^ is vital 
to the proups' sirces.s, and any teacher who has worked v;ith j^ruups 
in such a manner knt^ws that the planning is an intfTlecUial v/ro5tlinf; 
makh that take^ time. 

We must be aware, Iw, that tele-conscious sludenta have a different 
understanding; of literary form. Iheir expi^riencc of cognitive fluidity 
with multivalent center? of atte ntion make5 the oj^>cn forrii the natural 
one. They will not demand tlial narrative e^^hlbit a Ky^inniiiK -middle 
end 5tT\ict\Jrp and may inde^rd f)nd the traditional pattern of ascending 



li'jchin^^ in the 'lelevi^ion Culture 



77 



li'Vflv of conflict, climjx. and rt^^oluliim ch.uact^:*ri<»tic of literature* r»f 
iinulhtM rr»i, v\\v Uifferenl fri>in tht-ir own. Tlu-y v. ill rtppm:i,\tt' 
ltx»H'r, oj'».n I'udrd, <uul nuilliph I'hilli'd clr-i^'.n cli.ujct* n-.tit: at {In- 
IV era fiction^^ (and prrhap^ ^ thr narriilivr fluidity of VVilli^nn 
l'*iulkh«.'r and Jmn^ -' And tiih i aW. miuv tlu- V){i\] TV il .tif 

hrVT ^i'.pffjitcd ils nv;n fluidiiy in the open ^.tnjrtiire^ uf "M*A*S*H," 
' Hill biiev\ b:uc!i; and L A Law/' and oi rhe j>tkuM\> whc^ wt?t^Klv 
endings sKid^'nt^^ dn not prrrcivr to b*- conclusiun*^, Mnit* dn* f'asii 
cordhcl:^ dmong tliardcleri remain unresolved. (!' • IV (uliun slu 
df nK' own writing will, in turn., I'^chibil the^^c \\\\\\ ) 

I'lrMliV/ w(.' need tr» b*.* aware thai TV era writii=> an- already 
prndttciny a hlfTaturr* that dircilly references televiMcn, exploiting'. 
pr^ribilfMf^ of (he suet'Tt i(^vlf r»\') s on ret»d»'rs' l'amihr»nty 

widi U'^LUn proy'jam^ l)r»nald h.irthrlme'^. "And Now ht^ Hr.ir it 
for the i;d ^uitlivan Show" (1074) seerns lo read like a tran^.cript of 
thai variety hour, while T. Curafihe -^an Miivle'ri "1 leail i»f lj LhampiMu' 
(1^81) (»peratr> from the ^.anie prtmii^r of n-atlvr l.nniliarily in 
satiric repri.e of "I A^';^e' In l*lahtudr. (V^Hi) the novelist Irtv hilis 
present*^ a chapter structured r>n the seanruny, of the cable statinrii. 
\vbile In I he ^lort'^.writer (l^Kh) Pichard I'ord uses the TV screen as a 
way lo re\eal his characters' lliouKhl*^. I hf^^e are ju^f a frw As Uavid 
Fmter Wallace, another TV era writer, has ^a>d, "Mo^f ^;o(H^ htt» *n 
writei.^, even yo ones, arc inlelleduahi. . - . And television, ils 
advertising, and the pt^pular culture Ihey both reflect lune fundamen- 
tally altered what intrlirt lu.d > y/'^ to t^y^:irt{ as tht- pr^'prt obj(\.t5 (»f 
their eittc ntir>rr' (l^^HK. 3H 39) Th. . me<<ni that die tn^lit^h clasbruum 
of the immediate futorf will need l(» in.ofporate the liierature i»f the 
televi^*ion tulture 

Works Cited 

Andcr^ori, lnnie> A , anJ 'fimuihy I' Meyer K^H^. MeJtuUJ Cv^nmuntcJtion 
A '^i\'\a\ Action Pcr^pr:hvr Npwhury fVuk. bA^s- 

Altallah, Taul. l^f^i I he Unworthy Di^.i:our<;r. Situation Comedy in Tele- 
vision' In Inlerj^fftif)^ ielci'i>\:n Current R>:'i^iuJ\ Pcr^jh\tn'es editeJ bv 
WiUjril D. KotViJivJ Jr., j-iJ (irdLO VVatkin., i22-¥^ Heverlj CA 

Atv/rJI, Nancir. 19^7. hi ihc fAiJdIc VV'inn.y;. RrtiUfu. und Iramw^: r.Hh 

Adolf' <t'ut<. Po!t-im(>iith. Nil Ct^v ntt»n/t.ouk 
Uarthelmp. Donakl. 1^74. "And Nov/ l.c! ^ Hea? I' (or thr lid Sullivan Show" 

In Gwif/i/ Pir<i<ii^rs. MM lOH N{.'v/ Yur\^ larrar. b^r^iu- <ind (ntoio. 
B-jyle. I Cc'rj>;hc'%vjn I'^S.^ H?\3r: of a Cfunnpinri \\\ Ot-jf l^.fitirc I i:U 

edife 5 by L Rn^t Hil^, 4(r< -^^ New 'inrk Vikinir 



78 



Byif-i, B4r«!»y. 1976. Ihe i V KmI Ntw York: Viking i'te,>5. 

Calkins Lur V McCofjniok. K''83. fr- /if. fri^r/i f Chihl: On the Tf;iiHm^ at)d 

Iraminj^ vf YtrWin^^ \ nndnn: Hrlnrmann. 
Cohrn. r'.ll7,if>rih H 19flf>. De^iynin^ CifouiKn^rk: ^^frairt/irr. f.-.r thr llrtrri rrnr-^Wi 

C/i5<'^c;'rn New York; Teach^r^ CoU^'?;e f'ress 
CutriKhl Meliid^ J. I9h9. Vte tUt\ 'nti( PIA Uiyi to Purynti Ikw to Uft iht 

Br \t f itu*:at\ k f - You^ Child Npw ^ork: PniiMrfiay 
FIIK Trry. 1988. Platitudes. Nrw York' VirUaRe 

F(>cu^ OM OJftff'orrtlnr lecirfiin^ l^tRH \vif C(A\\h. Chair, and Th" Committee 
v\\ Cldft^^ioorn VrdiU^v. Urbana^ IL. NaUunal Cuuiait ot It'^chcr^ of Ln^Jish. 

Tunl, RUhAfd. H'^fi. //i-^ ^ff^nrtr.i'fiter New York: Vmtjgf 

I^ach, IVnelofvc. !*^8^i YourCffowin^ i hiU' I rum Babyhood through Adoteycente. 
Npw York. Kn(»f»f, 

MrCorklc. VPJV Ferrh beach. A Worrl. ChaprI Hill, NC: Alpnnqiiin. 
Mnnfji>;ii Ar.HIev, \^hi. ' fflrvj^iun mv\ tht' Nrw Invi^f f^f Nf ^n" In I /if 

fjX^ih i (rfMly ]7i^rr Wffr^ * ir/fi-fMun /uiitfy, I2=i'34 N«?w York; )ioU. 

Ruifhart .n\d VVm Mfiit. 
P*lin*rr, I'jilritia. 1986. the Ijfflv Muiin*mr ^ S/uJy ti/ C/fil*/r^« MroWrtJ //if IV 

•fi Sydrify, l.ondcirt ,ind BtJ^ion; AlltMi and Unwln. 
PiUmiin, Robrrt VV. 1991). 'We re Tidkm^j; thr Vium^ I iin^Uiigr to TV Hiibirs ' " 

the ^^tiL York 'f'imey. JaniMry 2\. A2'^ 
Postman, Nell, l9Hn Affw^h*,^ (Uir^rlm lo DtkitU Publu Ih^tvutje in Ihe *H^r 

of Show Buunes> hlvw Yi»rk: Viki ty^^ 
Shayon, KutH?rt I rui^ \^ib4 KvJvr IvlL-uirHJii Ktu»w5 Best." !>dnrMav Rri'ifir 

(becembH»f S). 42. 
/f^r. 1951. jtily :HI ' iMrk (scrrrn) iDturr/ /irrtf "^K; 
/imr 19i'.H, Nnvrmbrr 8. ' f he Vjdrnphobcr" 9H 

VV^ilUce. David U Af:T 19HH ' f Ictionil I uture^ ^nd ?be C i^n^pltuously inuriK " 
Hrvietr of Contetnponi'y T ictii'n Rf 3). 3fi -'i V 

Whitbrojdjanr. iind Vurui Caddop 19^4. The Kcal MiMiatc of TV." //ar/irr'? 

Maxtfxi/ir 2U9(OLlob€r) 
WdlUm^. Kivmnnd I9;s. ir/rt'i^rrn i:chnptc^:of and iuUinal form Nrv/ York: 

Schuiken. 

rVillinghjin. Catder. 19"»2. TelevUion (Ji.Hil in tht? Living Rwm/' ihe 

Americafi Mercury 74 (l ebrihuy) 114 
Winn, Marie. \^77. The Plug-hi Dru^^ New York: Viking 



6 Multicultural Teaching: 
It's an Inside Job 



Mary C Savage 

Consultant in Mtiltit hUumI Hiluoiliini 
N'civv Ydrk City 

i have wa^leJ An \\itfrih\>W unMniui ni i-wvt^^y \u ntV lift v^Ailir^^ 

TUxvr yk'.us ay,o, after workin^^ d"? a tiMcher jnd adminhtrAl(»r in a 
small liberal arts collrge in Ni'W Iti^UiuI for iiliuusl tvvtiuy year:^. I 
movt'd u> Nj*w York City to learn m^re about multituliurdl tduralicrt 
I wofkj'd in eU'tneniary sch(vok all (jvcr Ihc city and inlcrvi^nvccJ 
Irachers individually and in ^;fuupb tc learn how at leasl '^omo (if the 
j.H'ople leatinn); in multkuUural situations flunk abeut what they «ire 
doing. Given the fart that Ihr ^jnbal ecuMumy links Americans with 
the peoples the v/nrld, all tearher. (each in nuilficultural situations. 
Tetiching situations in New York C;!y, however are In^tli obvious and 
intense, Tcachinp here is almost always a matter of leaching people 
who are "different." One uut of every seven persons living hen? an 
immigrant: one out of Ihn-e children enleriuy; the publi* schools speaks 
a firbl lany;uage other than bngli^h. Only a lundl'ul of teacher^ teach 
in neighborhoods v^•here llu^v also live; most do not speak tlie fii^t 
language of the children they te-i.h; alniu;,t all leach children who 
come from economic chisses "different" from their own Most public 
school teachers orient their lives around middle class values, while 
most of their students c<3me from f>oor and working-class comrnunitie-. 
The bulk of this essay is composed of three interview, s with four 
leachci:? who work in Ihr Hnmx: Hilly Cunningham. Niimi Aron^on, 
Isabel Beaton, and Ida Rivera. Ihey think of their work not as teachin).; 
hleratnrr. but as teaching children. Ihey teach children who live in 
an often hostile multicultural world how U) make that world safer 
more jusr more lovin^^ I am learning thai this is an inside job. pA'en 
thuuy,h each teacher bfinyjs to bear on hur work professional beliefs 
and practices which are powerful and sophisticated, to a con~iiderable 

7<rf 



80 



degree^ the approaches \hvy have crafted for muUicultural educaliun 
rely on ihv fact thai they liAve been dblt^ ti> draw slrenglh from thtir 
(iwn citltin\tl htick^rnunJs, 

\j\\\y Cin\u\uy\Uiim and Mimi Arurr.im work in o ^ertion of the 
lUiiiiJ*; v/ith '.tudeul'* fmm b,i(.kmoUkid^ Vphii.li .ae iJicdunniuiridy bl^tik 
(Nev/ York, West Indies. Afric.i), latino (Puerto F^ico, nominicnn 
kepul»hc> I lond\ifasj, A^^n (Vietnamese, Laolitin), dnd Lurupean (Irish, 
htdian, Ukitiniau), Isal'el Heaton iind hU Rivera leach in a pro- 
kindergarten pnjjujuun serving', Ihiul^ I*ointy a section of the South 
Bronx Their stiidenl^ ctane from back};roiinds whiilt are priniarily 
Latino and they aIf>o teach a handful of students whose primary 
language i^ I^nglir.h I^.abel and Ida are more av/arc', hrnvever, (»f the 
challenge . earhinp: m a verv pr*->r cf»irfnuinily. 

The Cultural Hackground of T^acliers as a Source 
for MuUicultural Teaching 

Uilly Cunningham draws much of her Iheorv vf teaching from child- 
htKnl experiences as the daughter of a mother who worked in a 
mullicullural garment shop and as a student in a schwl where 
differences in ethnic of i^;in were honored, 't hese early experiences gave 
her an apf>etite for difference and an almost aesthetic delight in culture. 
She is deeply grounded in values she identifies as gospel, values which 
encourage hei fo u?;e wha5 she has to in^prove any situation Although 
Billy does not say so chrectly, 1 think her growing up as a black 
American in a strung, mulligenerational family grounds her vision 
Vr'ith a matler-of-factness which gives her energy and endurance. Mimi 
Aronson's impulse is lu do something helpful in complicated situations; 
vshe needs to be counted among those v/ho work to make a difference. 
1 think of Mimi's wurk as nxited in )ewish heritage, but she describes 
her approach as "universal" and is very suspiciv»us of multiculturalism. 
which she views as promoting stereotyping. In her view, her v/nrk is 
basefl on faith that people who can understand differences need nut 
fear them, nor do they need to take their fear out on any kind of 
scapegoat. Both Isabel Beaton and Ida Rivera draw on having grown 
up in extended families (Italian and Puerto Rican) which have expe- 
rienced being "minorities" in a dornmant culture They are in the 
midst of h arning how nut to C'lnsider themselves strangers in a strange 
land, but to find commun.il bUpport among the parents with whom 
tliey work. Ihey both drav. frtun Hieir Roman Catlejiic background a 
sense that the / should make a dilierence in llie wurld and tlial their 



Muldcudural Teaching: an /»f./de job 



81 



sympathy and loyaltic** ^hould bi' with those who suffer as a result 
of the way society is arranged. 

Theoretical Orlentalion 

^Uitttiulluful Ttaihinsifor a MutiUuKur^l World 

Arcfirdiny, to I\uilo I-riero (1981), lite-racy is the ability to read words 
so that we ran read the world around us in such a way that people 
become freer and live mure fully, ^n this sense, Iha cc^ntext for 
multicultural education is the fact that our world is so arranged thai 
we affect (and are affectetl by) pec^ple wh(> live all over the globe. The 
rationale far such education Ls babied on the th^'ory that each of us 
w*alks into an already existing arrangement of the physical world and 
the people in it. Each of us needs to act responsibly in the situation 
since, as sckjh as we enter it, the culture there becomes the culture 
which emerges from the situation as a result of our aclion in it, (For 
a view o( culture as emerging, see Cliffc^rd 1988.) leachers committed 
to liberating education also need to act in solidarity with those most 
harmed by the unjust system which at present sustains global arrange- 
ments (Gutierrez 1973). 

In my neighborhood, mullicultural education takes place in the 
followinjr^ physical aud cultural context. For the past nine months I 
have been living in Harlem's central valley, bounded on one side by 
llu* Harlem River and on the other by the rocky slupe of Momingside 
Heights and, beyond that, the Hudson Not too I'af to the north, the 
river^. converge in a spot called Spuyten Duyvil, after the boast of a 
drimken Dutchman that he would cross the convergence in spite of 
the devil who turned up storms there. All this nearby Wdl'jr is not 
unusual for New York. The city is couiposed of islands which contain 
sixty-five square miles of inland waterways. Abundance of water for 
drinking, inigation, power, and transport frames much of the history 
of New York state. In fact. Europeans were first drawn to the area by 
the alluringly wide expanse of the Hudson. 

The block I live on is a multicuhural sort of place: walking down 
the street I can hear French, Spanish, several African languages, West 
Indian patois, and English bearing the accents of the southern United 
States, BrtHiklyn, Harlem, not to mention the prr'-isely articulated 
linglish of my landlady, a nearing-eighty retired journalist, working 
com{>oser, and black woman who is a Republican to boot. The houses 
on the s^^ret, mostly brown^toiu'S v^i'.h a handful of small apartMient 
houses, are one sign that the block, like Harlem generally, mixes people 



82 



Mary C Savage 



who reflect different economic conditions and class-based values. Some 
of the brownstones h.ivc^ been refurbi^^hed to their or iudl splendor; 
others have been cut up into rooming houses; five have been boarded 
up entirely by the city or other absentee landlords; two of them, the 
"welfare" buildings, are used to house families and individuals on 
public assistance until the city finds therr^ more apprcipriate hoiisln^. 
One of the tvvo has no plumbing. Negotiating all these cultural 
differences and living in the middle of them is not a subject I learned 
much about in school. 

Across the street from me is the playground of the elementary 
school, set off by a fence and a low wall. Men whom my landlady 
calls "the bums" hang out on the wall, in front of which is a hydrant 
that is open most of the time. 'Ihe men silting on the wall use water 
from the hydrant to mix their drinks, neighbors from down the block 
come to wash thr^ir cars, people from the building "vithout plumbing 
us€ it to fill their water jugs and as a place to empty their slop buckets. 
One day a deranged woman took off all her clothes and washed most 
of them there before the police came to drive her off. 

The always-running water reminds me that for a Umg tirne New 
York has gone far afield to meet its needs for water and w r power 
As early ns 1748, Collect Pond, which supplied water for what is now 
dow^ntown, was so polluted that even hordes would not drink it. 
Currently, New York City is revit»wing contracts for hydroelectric power 
generated by the Canadian James River Project, which v/ill further 
devastate the traditional hunting and fishing grounds of the Crcc 
Indians, at the very least by concentrating levels of mercury which 
make fish poisonous. When Matthew Coon Come, the Cree chief, 
testified in Manhattan, he re minded New York officials that his "grand- 
fathers have always managed to leave thci? land as it had been" 
(Verhovek 19^1). This is not an option for those of us living on my 
block. Given the way our society is structured, we cannot sustain 
ourselves on tb ^ land where we live. We go far afield to meet our 
needs in ways that affect (and are affected by) the lands and lives of 
a great many people, most of whom we never meet. 

So when I re-envision teaching "English" in my neighborhood 
schcKil, I thitik not ju^t about how this "minority" school functions in 
a "dominant" educational system, not just about how to help children 
negotiate the cultural and class differences represented on the street, 
not just about how the culture in the neighborhood can enrich the 
wider culture. I also consider how all of us on the block, and in the 
wider society, can live wisely and well v/ithin the spider web that 



( 

1.^ ^ 



Multicultural Teaching: It's an Inside fob 



83 



connects us with people around th^ vvc^rld. And then 1 panic. Who 
v'ould know enough to be of some use m this situation? 

libcrafing Praxis 

The panic comes as a result of being overly determined by disciplinan/ 
ways of tliiiiking, VVhei\ my college colleagues and 1 were designing 
an interdisciplinary curriculum whose capstone was a problem-solving 
seminar, wc might have said thai the problems collocated around the 
hydrant involved geography, cultural studies, engineering, early child- 
hood education, history, etc. The "inside the English department" 
equivalent of this talk is an argument about what texts, interpretative 
paradi};ms, and interpretative communities \ve should posit for reading. 
Ihis kind of disciplined thinking can get out of hand if it is reinforced 
by ye<r 1 of graduate study and supported by professional organizations 
and structures which are relatively ignorant of local culture or have 
blind spots about the global context of local activities (including the 
way professional activities often drain off local energie^i). Disciplined 
knowledge gone avvry creates acadcmentia, that hardening of the heart 
and restriction of the imagination you get by degree.^., which; when it 
begins to cure itself, results in the aforementioned panic. (For a 
definition of academenlia, see Daly 1987. For a discussion of acade- 
mentia and college tnglish, see Savage 1989.) Fortunately, even at our 
most acadernented, my colleagues and I knew that situation^ as we 
found them in life were undisciplmizable and that the knoivlrdge 
emerged as we worked in — and as part of — the situations. This kind 
of knowledge — whether you call it liberating praxis, practical knov/1- 
edge, or mother wit — is central to multicultural teaching. 

l^ractital knowledge is what helped Isabel Beaton's immigrant Italian 
grandmother send her children to American schools for the first time. 
One day she just opened the door and told her son and daughter that 
the children walking by were going to school and they should follow 
them. They did, but the children went to a Catholic school ;vhrch 
would not let the new students enter. The next day she opened the 
door again and told her children to follow other children going in the 
other direction. They did. This school, the public school, accepted 
them and sent them to a classroom where a teacher yelled the word 
"crayon"^" all day long So began a long ai^d dialogical relationship 
with the dominant culture which, two generations later, was to inform 
Isabel BtMton's ability to teach in the South Bronx. 

The teachers 1 interviewed have in common a relatively high 
proportion of practical knowledge which I Fiiid challenging. As a 



( 

1 J 



84 



Mary C. Savage 



college teacher I was encouraged in habits of thought which placed 
texts and interpretation and paradigms for interpretation at the center 
of my inquiry, often at the expense of the students in front of me and 
certainly in place of the mother wit 1 brought with me from my own 
background. These teachers feel relatively freer to draw on the strength 
of their backgrounds and arc impelled to act with, and on behalf of, 
Iheir students. All four demonstrate a commitment to doing something 
conaete and helpful within the confines of the situation as it exists 
and a willingness to learn from others, including students. Under their 
influence I am trying to re-envit^ion teaching "English" as a way of 
reading a multicultural world with the graciousness and wisdom 
necessary for making it a better place in which to live. 

So I pcm this invitation along. I hope reading these interviews 
prompts you to touch again the strength that your background provides 
for the liberating practice you are fashioning in and from the multi- 
cultural situation in which you find yourself. 

What Fades Is What You're Not Around 

Wiletha (Billy) Cunningham is a fifth-grade teacher in the North Bronx. 
In 1988, she wrote a master's thesis called "Creating a Positive 
Educational Climate to Celebrate Diversity within Unity." 

lavage: Your curriculum f!evelops out of the kids and their conflicts — 
as if you are as concerned with how they act as much as with what 
they kn(iw, 

Cumtrigham: That seems to be a priority for me. More .han the 
disciplines — math and science and so on. Just because the world is so 
wild and wi^'re supposed to be preparing them to live out there. If 
we can send a few people out there who have their guidelines drawn 
clearly, maybe that will help. 

Actually — it sounds cliched — but I really don't think these kids see 
each other's differences. So it's not difficult to show them how well 
they get along and to say to them from time to time, "This will 
probably change as you get older." It's an interesting thing when you 
say that. When you say, "A time will come when you cling more to 
people who are like you than you do now. So try to remember what 
you're learning now. That there's no difference. Remember how much 
ynu enjoy playing with kids who are from different backgrounds/' 
And they say, "VVhy? Why is the time coming? Why is that? Why?" 
Because they don't see why it has to change. 



Multicultural Teaching: It's an Inside Job 



85 



My sense of it is that as you get older and you go to school and 
get jobs you come into a sense of your ovm group. Your sense of your 
own group develops and what you have in common with your own 
group increases as you get older. What fades is what you're not around. 
So you lose that sense. 

Also as you get up and up in the grades, high school begins to 
separate people, you know specializing in this and that. You see the 
African American students go one way and the groups really do split 
off from one another and by the time you're in college . . . 

And then at work you meet people from other cultures and you 
may even go to lunch with them but, as soon as you go back to the 
neighborhood, you're just with the people that you're like. New York 
neighborhoods are not diversified. Neighborhoods are really polarized, 
so that elementary school gives you the only real opportunity — and 
junior high — and high school too if you allow it, but you can get 
awfully clannish. 

My own background? My mother was a seamstress in the garment 
center. It was a union shop and they had every ethnic group I could 
imagine. And we went to visit people. They cooked for us — whether 
it was Carlota, who was Puerto Rican, or Millie and Rosie and Katie, 
who were Italian, and Iris, West Indian. Just on and on and on. 

I went to schools which were all integrated. I can remember Natalie 
from Estonia and other students. That's when I found out about Latvia 
and Estonia and Lithuania — in elementary school. We had twins from 
Jamaica. We had Asian students. The teacher discussed the countries 
with us and had the students tell us about where they had come from. 
It was such a nice natural flow It makes so much sense to me. 

I think New York has so much potential that goes completely 
untouched. We ignore it completely. And it was kind of serendipitous 
for me to do the thesis when I did it because we had the incident in 
Bensonhurst and this and that. And they were talking about what can 
we do about it. And I had been thinking what do about it for years 
and years. I know how to solve this problem. Teachers do. Right here 
in this school one of the teachers somehow contacted someone in 
Chinatown and the class visited Chinatown and then the teacher 
invited the Chinese students up here. We know how and we do it. 
But the Board of Ed has to be more active, like in setting visits up 
across the city. 

Savage: In the groups we've been in together I've seen you uplift the 
level of the discussion to something larger or more positive, often by 
sharing how comfortable you are in your heritage and family. I wonder 
how you learned how to do that. 



86 



Mary C Savage 



Cunningham: I'm not sure. In the Gospels — and that's part of why I'm 
open because there's that spiritual background in my family — in the 
Gospels, there is the parable of the talents. It was always a caution 
from my grandmother: "Don't bury your talents. If you want more, 
use what you've got," I would rather not say anything. But sometimes 
I can hear floundering or superficial stuff and I figure if I'm going to 
be here and participate, let's at least get it to where we're really 
touching on some important things. 

It's that I really love people. And I would really like to see a time 
come when we could look at. . . . You know when I look at Lithuanian 
and Ukranian Easter eggs, it is one of . , . it's just like ... I can get lost 
in those. And I would love to have celebrations that were not just 
around one ethnic group. It seems to me that there's so much power 
in people if we could ever get to the point of not being divided. 

I just think that that's what I try to do in a group. If I hear people 
not being able to get along, to me it's like — wait a minute, first we 
have to get along, then we can do whatever else the group has as its 
goal But if we're going to fight one another . . . 

In terms of my personality, I have to be careful that I don't 
misunderstand arguing. That's something I've learned from Karen 
Rosner. Just as I teach Sunday school, she teaches Saturday school at 
her synagogue. One day we were talking about the things we teach 
and she mentioned how they get their kids to question things. She 
brought a book they used. And I opened the book and one of the 
things it said right away was that they teach arguing. 

In my culture, to argue means to be disagreeable and impudent, 
but in the Jewrish culture, to argue means to present yourself well and 
to stand up for your point. What a cultural difference! And I could 
see if I had a child from a culture which said arguing was important, 
when I said something to him in class and he answered me back, I 
might mistake that for impudence because that's how I read the signals 
on account of how I've been raised. 

And so it's so clear to me that, if we can understand what's 
underneath the stuff that goes on, we don't have problems with < ach 
other; we just have different signals and different meanings. People 
are so important and there's so much good in people and I think we 
are missing it to look at things that are so divisive . . . 

People are terrific and the stuff that drives us apart is so obvious, 
if you really think about it. And that's why that's the title of the 
thesis: "Celebrating Diversity within Unity." That's the key I think it's 
the key to stopping obvious things like racism, but I think it's also the 
key to rebuilding cities. 



C, P 



Multicultural Teaching: It's an Inside job 



87 



This Whole Multicultural Thing Bothers Me 

Miriam (Mimi) Aronson, a teacher with twenty-seven years' experience, 
is at present a staff developer in reading and writing. Finding a way 
to represent Mimi's views about multicultural education was the most 
challenging task this essay presented. Because disciplinary thinking 
tends to devalue narrative and process, it is easy to miss the import 
of Mimi's thinking. Her talk and her teaching are almost all process. 
Thoughts emerge from experience and in dialogue and are rarely 
reified. 

Mimi's exchange v/ith Chieko Toyoshima, a student in a university 
language arts class, is illustrative, I think. Chieko, a special education 
teacher in her forties, grew up in a small seacoast town in Japan and 
eniigrated to the United States when she was a young woman. World 
War II affected her early schooling, at the very least by making books 
and paper scarce, but soon she became enamored of books and, in 
her first years in the United States, she found that reading philosophical 
works relieved the loneliness of not being able to speak English well. 
When Mimi introduced Writing Process as a teaching technique in the 
language arts class, she drew Chieko into an extended discussion of 
Solzhenitsyn's poem "Campfire and /\nts," which describes the frenzy 
of ants running in confusion back into the burning log from which 
they had just escaped. In her discussion, Mimi drew a picture of herself 
as a poor reader of poetry who, nevertheless, connected the poem 
with her own background — in this case with the horror her uncle 
experienced when Jewish prisoners ran back into flames ignited by 
Allied bombing just before Auschwitz was liberated. 

The open way Mimi shared her process and experience drew Chieko 
further into the poem and, in subsequent classes, could have led to 
ine kind of multicultural understanding which emerges as people 
discover the effect of global events like World War II on personal 
matters like family histories and habits of reading. Even in the course 
of the short exchange I quote below, other students were deeply 
touched as Mimi and Chieko used the poem to open up some of the 
frenzy Europeans and Japanese experienced in the war. Mimi's view 
that the key to education is sharing "universal" experiences across 
"differences" undergirds her ability to share herself and hold peda- 
gogical situations open until mutual understanding begins to emerge. 

Aronson: I discovered reading and writing processes fifteen years ago. 
They came into my heart and soul and changed me as a person. What 
I see when I go into buildings is teachers who are working very hard. 



88 



Mary C. Savage 



but not getting much. And kids who want to work hard, but don't 
know how. So now I am trying to teach people that they don't have 
to work so hard; that learning can be natural, can be open. 

Savage: How do you go about finding books a'^d methods to support 
your work with kids, especially with kids who come from a different 
background than you do? 

Aronson: Basically I bring pieces that I love, ones that make me want 
to write. What I bring to the kids has to resonate vnth me. If it's not 
going to get to me, I don't have time to give it to the kids. And they 
know that too now. They don't bring me things that don't resonate 
v^th them. It's just like going on line. You know: "We're going to go 
in size spaces — girls over here, boys over here." You say that enough — 
you're going to get two lines. You say enough — we're going to look 
at this writing and react to it and write from it and write about it and 
what did we think and did you do it and how come it looks like that 
and try this one now. By the time Christmas comes, they're really kind 
of good at it. 

But you have to realize each school is different; each room is 
different; communities are very different within buildings. It's really 
just like a home — if you give to kids a lot and nurture a lot, then kids 
give back and there is happiness and playfulness. If there is no 
nurturing and you don't give to your kids, then there is this deadening 
silence. 

Savage: There is so much in your approach to education that speaks 
to me of Jewish culture. But you don't identify that part of you as 
coming out of Jewish heritage. 

Aronson: It is my strongest trait. But I think it's a human trait, across 
the board. I mean I'm Jev^sh. I like being Jewish. I am comfortable 
with Jewish people. I like Jewish thinking. I like Jewish talk. But I 
don't think I act out of being Jewish. 

I didn't like stereotyping, ever. It bothers me when people believe 
in that. I think it bothers me because I come from .a race that was 
killed because of that categorizing. And it will come again unless I 
fight to make a difference. 

This whole multicultural business bothers me a lot. I think that the 
more we put out that differences are positive, the more we're fostering 
the hatred people have in them. People do hate and are frustrated 
and angry and upset. And rather than saying, "O.K. I didn't make 
this work, what can I do to change it or do it a different way," they 
say, "Who can I get? I'm not happy. It's probably the kid. I'll beat her 



iOJ 



Multicultural Teaching: Ws an Inside Job 



89 



up tonight." That's what people do. And the Jewish person is the best 
person to beat up. 

My uncle, who is an Auschwitz survivor, let me notice that the 
Holocaust comes again. It has come again and again in six thousand 
years. And I have to try to defuse as many people from it coming 
again . . . 

Savage: In terms of your school work, how do you see yourself as 
defusing hatred? 

Aronson: Helping teachers see they can be nice to kids. We need to 
start touching as v/ell as teaching and talking. The way I feel I'm part 
of the people who need to support the work of making a difference. 
I like helping people lean how to think so they don't have to be 
angry. I really believe, if people think, they don't have to be so angry 
and they can really figure things out. 

Minu Aronson gave a workshop to a reading and language arts 
course I taught at a New York college. I mentioned to her my concern 
that only a few students enjoyed writing. One was in the middle of 
a novel, but most wrote only for school. More enjoyed reading. A few 
had formed and reformed their lives around books. But most looked 
on reading as a chore. 

Mimi invited the students to respond in writing to various pieces 
of literature and music. As the students shared their writing in small 
groups, Mimi circulated — being amazed and puzzled in turn. Finally 
she asked Chieko Toyoshima to join her in front of the class so that 
they could discuss what they had written in response to Solzhenitsjm's 
piece "A Campfire and Ants." 

Toyoshima: I am not an experienced reader So when I read poems I 
don't get deep meanings, and that always bothers me. When I read 
this one I felt that this poem was very action packed. And I told Mimi 
I liked the poem: it was action packed and dramatic. But I didn't get 
the most important thing. The meaning. What I didn't get was the 
ants going into the fire. Since the poet is a political writer, there has 
to be some meaning in there. About the human condition. About what 
human beings do in the extreme. 

Aronson: I must tell you. I'm a terrible reader; I don't understand 
poems. So I have the same feelings, but I take another road. I don't 
care anymore. 

Toyoshima: You're getting old. 

Aronson: That's it. When I was young I kept trying, but now I know 
better. I raiess I should be able to do it. But now I just follow another 



90 



Mary C. Savage 



way to help my own writing and get to what is important to me. I 
respond personally to the poem first. And that frees me up to do my 
own poetry. Because if I believed in my own heart, for me, that I 
needed to know "the point" all the time I could never wnite. 
Toyoshima: Tell them already 
Aronson: I know. So I wrote about . . . 
Toyoshima: About your uncle. 

Aronson: My uncle shared a story. He's an Auschwitz survivor and he 
just started telling stories about that recently. The first one he told me 
was how the Americans bombed the camp indiscriminately setting off 
fires all over. The Jews had been rounded up into the room where 
they normally had roll call for the ovens. And many of them became 
so disturbed by the bombing they ran into the fires started by the 
bombing. This is part of what I wTOte: 

All the prisoners rushed into the large hall 
the hall used for roll call, 

the hall used to siphon off those numbers that would never 
return — 

the hall used to take away their possessions — 
rings, glasses, teeth, cut-thin hair. 

The hall now held what was left of several hundred of Auschwitz. 
Why bomb them? hit these still-barely-alive? 
Exploding bodies and fires igniting the hall. 
Bright, luring flames calling you, inviting you . . . 

Toyoshima: After Mimi told me that — I said, "Maybe the ants ran back 
in the fire because it was mass hysteria and they were enticed into 
the fire." This whole thing is about insanity; human nature, or whatever. 

Aronson: Maybs. I don't know. But I love to see that there are two of 
us and we come from different places and we come at something 
differently and yet we became friends tonight. And I like that. 

Everything Is Very Intertwined 

Isabel Beaton, a teacher, and Ida Rivera, a bilingual program assistant, 
work together in a pre-kindergarten class which had been supported 
by Project Giant Step, a New York City initiative to fund high-quality 
education for "at risk" four-year-olds. 

Savage: Isabel, how did you develop your interest in multicultural 
teaching? 

Beaton: I've always taught in situations where the children were black, 
Hispanic, Italian, like that. So I've always been careful to choose 



102 



Multicultural Teaching: It's an Inside fob 



91 



picture books where the children would see themselves or animals. It 
really helps that so many picture books have animals as character^ 
because then I don't have to be so careful about the overabundance 
of books with white, blond-haired, blue-eyed children. In the pictuie 
books that I read them, in the illustrations I use in the classroom, 
when I draw people, in the language that I use, I work to create a 
situation in which they can see themselves and hear themselves and 
be validated. 

I know how I felt — and feel — about always having a model that's 
not me put before me. I'm not tall; I'm not blond; I don't have long 
legs; 1 don't ha:ve narrow hips. When I was in fourth grade I tried to 
take ballet because the Board of Ed was havir\g this thing with enrichment 
and the ballet person said: "Wide hips and wide feet. You will breed 
well, but you will never be a ballerina." I was in fourth grade. 

When we're talking multicultural, school culture is one of the cultures 
the children have to be proficient in. The children have to learn school 
language; they have to learn school behaviors; they have to learn 
school politics; school economics; they have to learn all those parts of 
a school culture. 

It's sick. What I'm doing is helping pieserve the status quo — which 
bothers me. On the other hand, I don't want the kids to . . . I'm making 
them Italian. I'm teaching them how to work the system. 

Savage: Where does the radical edge of your thinking come from? 
Beaton: First of all from being Italian. And living in a situation in 
which I was in the minority. Then from having a father who lied and 
a mother who told the truth. And thinking about his need to not be 
truthful and her need to speak as she saw it. My father never, never 
admitted — could never admit — that we were discriminated against in 
any way. In order to live, he had to say the American things and he 
had to believe them — to the point that he couldn't comfort us in times 
when we were hurting. Living with the two, always being a little off 
balance, made me question. 

I think it helps very much that I work with four-year-olds. That's 
another culture too. The culture of the four. It keeps me very respectful 
because there is so much I don't understand. I so often don't understand 
them, and they have to figure out five or six different ways of telling 
me something. So who's patient? They are so proficient. Their language 
is not really Spanish, it's the language of four. And their language is 
not really English, it's the language of four. And I have to listen so 
closely. . . 

My Spanish is pretty good. I can get by. But once I had a little girl, 
Kathy, and she was crying, crying, crying, crying. I thought she v/anted 



92 



Mary C. Savage 



to go home; I thought she was homesick. I couldn't figure out what 
she wanted. All she kept saying was — "Quiero irme. Quiero irme" (I 
want to go). I tried everything. It's rare I can't comfort a child, but 
for fifteen minutes she just kept sobbing, "Quiero irme." And I thought: 
Oh God what is it. She wants to go home. She's sick. It's the first day 
of school; she's lonesome. I racked my brain until I said, Oh stupid — 
she means, "I've got to go! I've got to go!" "Al bano? Peepee, Kathy?" 
"Si, maestra." 

I think if we go the route of personal response, we'll figure it out — 
if we're careful. I get suspicious when people make it so complicated. 
The more difficult you make reading and writing, the more apprehen- 
sive I get. If the student's personal response to a book is completely 
off the wall as far as you are concerned, you validate it until you can 
figure out what's going on. He knows what he's talking about. You're 
the professional so that's your work. This is supposed to be challenging 
to you, teacher. Figure out what they're trying to say in their writing. 
And then to go with it. 

I can't tell my kids what I'm doing. They're too young for me to 
sit them down and say, "This is what I'm doing." But a college teacher 
could. You can be much more aboveboard with adults. Right? You can 
just say, "You have been underprepared. Somebody . . . Did you guys 
do your job? I don't know. Did somebody else not do their job? I don't 
know. But here we are." It's like my kids too. My little ones. They are 
the ones who are there. So they are the ones I have to teach. Who 
shows up are the kids that you teach. 

Savage: Isabel, when you first started to work here, it seemed to me 
you were much less comfortable with the parents. 

Beaton: Yes. I felt like a stranger in a strange land. I felt alien. I just 
didn't understand where people were coming from. In the beginning 
I was very angry with the parents because I felt that what they did 
was affecting their children so badly, the choices that they make. And 
then I became angry at the world, at society. But then I knew I couldn't 
be mad at society either and not eat myself up, so I had to talk myself 
through that. 

I decided to stop being angry and to be joyful at what was happening 
with the kids and that eased it. 

Savage: How did you think beyond your anger? 

Beaton: O.K. Christopher. His mother had four children — the two older, 
Christopher, and the baby. She is young; she is so young. She's an 
addict. And she support? her habit by prostitution. 



It/', 



Multicultural Teaching: It's an Inside Job 



93 



But she brought that kid every day. He was in school evevy day. I 
was angry for her — for being on crack/ for prostitution, but she brought 
the kid every day. I knew I couldn't greet her with my anger . . . 

The baby died from malnutrition. She let the baby die. She brought 
me the pictures of the baby's funeral. And my heart went out to her. 
I know it's her fault that that baby died. But she's grieving anyway. 

And after I started looking at the parents and saying . . . Options 
aren't options unless you know they're options. They don't know they 
have options; they just don't. Or in some people's lives crack is an 
option, I don't know. 

And if I didn't understand the culture. And it's not any other 
culture — black culture, Hispanic culture. It's just poverty culture; it's 
abused culture; it's being-kicked~everyday-of-your~life culture; it's not- 
getting-hugged-culture; it's . . , 

She had another baby. We had to celebrate that baby. We had to. 
And she knows we are still watching Christopher — even though he 
is in the next grade. 

Rivera: Christopher I see in the morning for breakfast so I know he 
eats. We made sure that that kid went home full and if there was 
anything left over we gave it to the mother to make sure she would 
feed them. 

And she's not alone It's not only this child. 

Beaton: Everything is very intertwined. And I think we just began to 
see that. We have to be very intertwined. We have to be intertwined 
with the mothers and intertwined with the kids. And I can't do that 
if I'm angry. And I got to liking these people. Some nutty people, but 
I love them so much. 

Rivera: And underneath all that nuttiness, there are really genuine, 
lovely people, 

Beaton: And I know — push comes to shove — they're there. They're 
gutsy, courageous. 

Rivera: They have to be — for the environment they're living in. If they 
weren't like that they would just be buried. 

My Cultural Background as a Source for Multicultural Teaching 

The largest lesson I learned from these interviews is that, to respond 
to the invitation to re-envision teaching "English," I need to refurbish 
parts of my ov/n cultural background that I gave up as I worked my 
way up the educational ladder My own personal inside job has to do 




94 



Mary C. Savage 



with healing a split 1 experience between the academic world and the 
world outside and overcoming the feeling that, in order to become a 
teacher, I had to change class loyalties from the working class to the 
middle class. 

As I look back at my education in English from the perspective of 
my experience of multicultural education in New York, 1 am struck by 
the fuct that schooling separated me from much of the richness and 
variety of the cultures around me. School drained the color from 
literature and from my imagination. I know this sounds inflated, but 
I was very serious about reading. Reading was a way to get beyond 
the confines of the world into which I had been born (an Irish Catholic 
family in a working-class community of a small industrial city). At the 
state college I attended, however, my English teachers, mostly youngish 
men, championed New Criticism and, it seems to me now, were 
obsessed by stories of other youngish men going through rites of 
passage. My education teachers, mostly women, drilled us in "profes- 
sionalism," which then seemed merely petty, but now feels like part 
of a larger system separating teachers from students. My graduate 
school classes, like most journals today, were awash with a single 
color — a polemic over literary theory— which I joined enthusiastically. 
Critical theory, especially feminism, taught me I had reproduced the 
assumptions of the dominant society in my own teaching — from the 
way I selected texts to the way I interacted with students. So I 
developed critical perspectives from which to reread my own education 
even as I worked on how to teach. I would probably still be doing 
this work, happily — since it was very good work, except for an epiphany 
that occurred one spring. 

I was looking for an apartment, reading the ads and frantically 
asking everyone I knew. Then one Sunday morning when I stepped 
into a grocery store to pick up the newspaper and a cup of coffee just 
after I finished my run, I looked down the street and saw hundreds 
of young college professors stepping into similar stores after their runs. 
I asked myself what new Sunday morning religion I had joined and 
realized that, if I kept going as I was going, I would live where the 
people I knew lived. As a result I would not know many working- 
class people like the ones with whom I had grown up and not know 
at all, in a personal, neighborly way, the "marginalized" people who 
are so central to all that talk m critical theory. I began to feel I wanted 
more people from different backgrounds in my life. I wanted my color 
back. So I moved to New York. 

Interviewing these teachers reminded me that getting my color back 
is not solely a question of where I live. It is an inside job. For me. 



Multicultural Teaching: It's an Inside Job 



95 



part of that job is healing a split I experienced between academic 
knowledge and "ordinary" knowledge. I left home for graduate school 
in Washington, D^C, at great cost. My stepn^cther, who was dying of 
cancer, felt very threatened, mostly because she suspected I was about 
to become loyal to a professional class. She refused to say good-bye 
and told me to take all my belongings with me. She ciied in January, 
just before my first grad school exams, a coincidence which left me 
feeling I had gained "advanced" study at the expense of my family. 
That spring, Martin Luther King, Jr., was assassinated and D.C. burst 
into flames and riot. I remember a black friend, a southern woman in 
her forties who had marched with King, saying she heard the news 
of the assassination when a young white man came into the student 
lounge saying, "Well, they finally got the bastard." 

A week later the city was calmer and I went back to my schoolwork. 
I remember reading Finnegan's Wake outdoors in the newly warm 
spring, cradled in the crotch of a tree on a university quad, while a 
National Guard jeep, complete with rear-mounted machine gun and 
gunner, circled every half -hour. Since then I have been trying to put 
the two experiences together — reading literature and dealing with a 
city on the brink of collapse. 

The question of multicultural literacy is a question of purpose. As 
Billy Cunningham says, "It's the key to stopping obvious things like 
racism, but I also think it's the key to rebuilding cities." Working here 
in the city is also helping me heal the separations which drained the 
color from my life. Here I am learning that rebuilding cities begins 
with getting my own color back. 

This is my story which I have related. If it be sweet, or if it be not 
sweet, take some elsewhere, and let the rest come back to me. 

Works Cited 

Clifford, James. 1988. The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-Century Ethnog- 
raphy, Literature, and Art. Cambridge: Harvard University. 

Daly, Mary. 1987. Webster's First New Intergalactic Wickdary of the English 
Language. Boston: Beacon, 

Friere, Paulo. 1981. Education for Critical Consciousness. New York: Continuum, 

Gutierrez, Gustavo. 1973. A Theology of Liberation: History, Politics, and 
Salvation. Maiyknoll, NY: Orbis. 

Savage, Mary C. 1989. "Writing as a Neighborly Act: An Antidote for 
AcademenUa." ADE Bulletin 92(Spring): 13-19. 

Verhovek, Sam Howe. 1991. "Cree Chief Asks New York to Drop Hydroelectric 
Plan." The New York Times, October 1, B4. 



1 / 



7 Chicana Feminism: In the Tracks 
of "the" Native Woman 



Norma Alarc6n 

University of California, Berkeley 

In 1992, as Spain prepares to celebrate the quincentenary of "the 
discovery," contemporary Chicanas have been deliberating on the force 
of significations of that event. It took almost four hundred years for 
the territory that today we call Mexico to acquire a cohesive national 
identity and sovereignty. Centuries passed before the majority of the 
inhabitants were able to call themselves Mexican citizens. As a result, 
on the Mexican side of the hyphen in the designation "Mexican- 
American," Chicanas rethink their involvement in Mexico's turbulent 
colonial and postcolonial history, while also reconsidering, on the 
American side, their involvement in the capitalist neocolortization of 
the population of Mexican descent in the United States (Barrera, 
Muftoz, and Omelas 1972). 

In the 1960s, armed with a post-Mexican-American critical con- 
sciousness, some people of Mexican descent in the United States 
recuperated, appropriated, and recodified the term Chicano to form a 
new political class (Acufia 1972; Munoz 1989). Initially, the new 
appellation left the entrenched middle-class intellectuals mute because 
it emerged from the oral usage in working-class communities* In effect, 
the new name measured the distance between the excluded and the 
few who had found a place for themselves in Anglo-America. The 
new Chicano political class began to work on the hyphen, eager to 
redefine the economic, racial, cultural, and political position of the 
people. The appropriation and recodification of the term Chicano from 
oral culture was a stroke of insight precisely because it unsettled all 
of the identities conferred by previous historical accounts. The appar- 
ently well-documented terrains of the dyad Mexico/United States were 
repositioned and reconfigured through the inclusion of the excluded 
in the very interiority of culture, knowledge, and the political economy. 
Thus, the demand for a Chicano/Chicana history became a call for 
the recovery and rearticulation of the record to include the stories of 

96 

Kid 



Chicana Feminism: In tht Tracks of "the'' Native Woman 



97 



the race and class relations of the silenced against whom the very 
notions of being Mexican or not-Mexican, being American or not- 
American, and being a citizen or not a citizen had been constructed. 
In brief, the call for the stor) of Chicanas and Chicanos has not turned 
out to be a "definitive" culture as some dreamed. Rather, the term 
itself, in body and mind, has become a critical site of political, 
ideological, and discursive struggle through which the notion of 
"definitiveness" and hegemonic tendencies are placed in question. 

Though the formation of the new political Chicano class was 
donrdnated by men, Chicana feminists have intervened from the 
beginning. The early Chicana intervention is seen in the serials and 
journals that mushroomed in tandem with the alternative press in the 
United States in the 1960s and 1970s. Unfortunately, much of that 
early work by Chicanas often goes unrecognized, indicative of the 
process of erasure and exclusion of racial ethnic women within a 
patriarchal cultural and political economy. In the 1980s, however, there 
has been a reemergence of Chicana v/riters and scholars who have 
not only repositioned the Chicano political class through a feminist 
register, but who have joined forces with an emergent women-of-color 
political class that has national and international implications (Mc* 
Laughlin 1990). 

In the United States the 1980s were, according to the Ronald Reagan 
administration, the decade of the "Hispanic" — a neoconservative move 
assisted by the U.S. Census Bureau (Gimenez 1989) and the mass 
media to homogenize all people of Latin American descent. This 
resulted in the occlusion of their heterogeneous histories of resistance 
to domination, in other words, their counterhistories to the more 
commonly disseminated histories of invasions and conquests. At the 
same lime, in the 19^50s, a more visible Chicana feminist intervention 
gave new life to a stalled Chicano Movement (Rojas 1989). In fact, in 
the United States, this rejuvenation through feminist intervention 
appears to be the case among most racial ethnic minority movements. 
By including feminist and gender analysis in the emergent political 
class, Chicanas reconfigured the meaning of cultural and political 
resistance and redefined the hyphen in the name Mexican-American 
(Anzaldua and Moraga 1981; Alarcon 1989, 1990). 

To date, most women writers and scholars of Mexican descent refuse 
to give up the term Chicana. Despite the social reaccommodation of 
many as "Hispanics" or "Mexican-Americans," it is the consideration 
of the excluded, as evoked by the name Chicana, that provides the 
position for multiple cultural critiques — between and within, inside 
and outside, centers and margins. Working-class and peasant women, 




Norma Alarcdn 



perhaps the "last colony," as a recent book announces (Mies, Bennholdt- 
Thonasen, and von Werlhof 1988), are most keenly aware of this. As 
a result, when many a writer of such a racialized cultural history 
explores her identity, a reflectory and refractory position is depicted. 
In the words of Gloria Anzaldua: 

She has this fear that she has no names that she has 

many names that she doesn't know her names 

She has this fear that she's an image that comes and 

goes clearing and darkening the fear that she's the dreamwork 
inside someone else's skull . . . She has this fear that if she digs 
into herself she won't find anyone that when she gets 

"there" she won't find her notches on the trees . . . She 

has this fear that she won't find the way back (1987, 43) 

The quest for a true self and identity, which was the initial desire of 
many writers involved in the Chicano Movement of the late 1960s 
and early 1970s, has given way to the realization that there is no fixed 
Chicano identity. "I," or "She" as observed by Anzaldua, is composed 
of multiple layers without necessarily yielding an uncontested "origin." 
In the words of Trinh T. Minh-ha, "Things may be said to be what 
they are, not exclusively in relation to what was and what will be 
(they should not solely be seen as clusters chained together by the 
temporal sequence of cause and effect), but also in relation to each 
other's immediate presences and to themselves as non/presences" 
(1989, 94). Thus, the name Chicana, in the present, is the narne of 
resistance that enables cultural and political points of departure and 
thinking through the multiple migrations and dislocations of women 
of "Mexican" descent. The name Chicana is not a name that women 
(or men) are bom to or with, as is often the case with "Mexican," but 
rather it is consciously and critically assumed and serves as a point of 
re-departure for dismantling historical conjunctures of crisis, confusion, 
political and ideological conflict, and contradictions of the simultaneous 
effects of having "no names," having "many names," not "know(ing) 
her names," and being someone else'^^ "dreamwork." However, digging 
into the historically despised dark (pnuto) body in strictly psychological 
terms may get her to the bare bones and marrow, but she may not 
"find the way back," to writing her embodied histories. 

The idea of plural historicized bodies is proposed with respect to 
the multiple racial constructions of the body since "the discovery." To 
name a few, indigenous (evoking the extant as well as extinct) tribes, 
criolla, morisca, loba, cambuja, barcina, coyota, samba, mulatta, china, 
and chola come to mind. The contemporary assumption of mestizaje 
(hybridism) in the Mexican nation-making process was intended to 



>• 



Chicana Feminism: In the Tracks of "the'' Native Woman 



99 



racially colligate a heterogeneous population that was not European. 
On the American side of the hyphen, mestizas are non-white, thus 
further reducing the cultural and historical experience of Chicanas. 
However, the mestiza concept is always already bursting its boundaries. 
While some have "forgotten" the mestiza genealogy, others claim an 
indigenous, black, or Asian one as well. In short, the body, certainly 
for the past five hundred years in the Americas, has been always 
already racialized. As tribal "ethnicities" are broken down by conquest 
and colonizations, bodies are often multiply racialized and dislocated 
as if they had no other contents. The effort to recontextualize the 
processes recovers, speaks for, or gives voice to women on the bottom 
of a historically hierarchical economic and political structure (Spivak 
1988). 

It is not coincidental that, as Chicana writers reconstruct the multiple 
names of the mestiza and Indian women, social scientists and historians 
find them in the segmented labor force or in the grip of armed 
struggles. In fact, most of these women have been (and continue to 
be) the surplus sources of cheap labor in the field, the canneries, the 
maquiladora border industries, and domestic service. 

The effort to pluralize the racialized body by redefining part of their 
experience through the reappropriation of "the Nadve Woman" on 
Chicana feminist terms marked one of the first assaults on male- 
centered cultural nationalism on the one hand (National Association 
for Chicano Studies 1989), and a patriarchal political economy on the 
other (Melville 1980; Mora and del Castillo 1980; Cordova et al. 1986; 
Ruiz and Tiano 1987; Zavella 1987). 

The Native Woman has many names also — Coatlicue, Cihuacoatl, 
Ixtacihuatl, among others. In fact, one has only to consult the dictionary 
of Mitologia Nahudtl for example, to discover many more that have 
not been invoked. There are those who long for the "lost origins," as 
well as those who feel a profound spiritual kinship with the "lost" — 
a spirituality whose resistant political implications must not be under- 
estimated, but refocused for feminist change (Allen 1988). But for 
many writers the point is not to recover a lost "utopia" or the "true" 
essence of our being. The most relevant point in the present is to 
understand how a pivotal indigenous portion of the mestiza past may 
represent a collective female experience as well as "the mark of the 
Beast" within us — the maligned and abused indigenous woman (An- 
zaldua 1987, 43). By invoking the "dark Beast" within and without, 
which many have forced us to deny, the cultural and psychic dismem- 
berment that is linked to imperialistic, racist, and sexist practices are 
brought into focus. These practices are not a thing of the past either. 



Norma Alarcdn 



One has only to recall the contemporary massacres of the Indian 
population in Guatemala, for example, or the continuous "democratic" 
interventionist tactics in Central and South America, which often result 
in the violent repression of the population. 

It is not surprising, then, that many Chicana writers explore their 
racial and sexual experience in poetry, narrative, essay, testimony, and 
autobiography through the evocation of indigenous figures. This is a 
strategy that Gloria Anzaldua uses and calls "La herencia de Coatli- 
c " — The Coatlicue State. The "state" is, paradoxically, an ongoing 

•cess, a continuous effort of consciousness to make "sense" of it all. 
Every step is a "travesia," a crossing, because "every time she makes 
'sense' of something, she has to 'cross over,' kicking a hole out of the 
old boundaries of the self and slipping under or over, dragging the 
old skin along, stumbling over it" (Anzaldua 1987, 48, 49). The 
contemporary subject-in- process is not just what Hegel would have 
us call the Aufhebung — that is, the effort to unify consciousness 
"provided by the simultaneous negation and retention of past forms 
of consciousness within a radical recomprehension of the totality" 
(Warren 1984, 37), as Anzaldiia's passage also suggests. The complex 
effort to unify, however tenuously, Chicanas' consciousness, which is 
too readily viewed as representing "postmodern fragmented identities," 
entails not only Hegel's Aufhebung with respect to Chicanas' immediate 
personal subjectivity as raced and sexed bodies, but also an under- 
standing of all past negations as communitarian subjects in a doubled 
relation to cultural re-collection, and re-membrance, and to our con- 
temporary presence and nonpresence in the sociopolitical and cultural 
milieu. All of which together enables both individual and group identity 
as oppressed racialized women. In order to achieve unification, the 
Chicana position, previously "empty" of meanings, emerges as one 
that ha- to "make sense" of it all from the bottom, through the 
recodification of the native woman. As such, the so-called postmodern 
decentered subject, a decentralization which implies diverse multiply 
constructed subjects and historical conjunctures, insofar as she desires 
liberation, must move towards provisional solidarities especially through 
social movements. In this fashion one may recognize the endless 
production of differences to destabilize group or collective identities 
on the one hand, and the need for group solidarities to overcome 
oppressions through an understanding of the mechanisms at work, on 
the other (McLaughlin 1990; Kauffman 1990). 

The strategic invocation and recodification of "the Native Woman" 
in the present has the effect of conjoining the historical repression of 
the "noncivilized" dark woman — which continues to operate through 



Chicana Feminism: In the Tracks of "the'* Native Woman 



101 



"regulative psychobiographies" of good and evil women such as that 
of Guadalupe, Malinche, Llorona, and many others — with the present 
moment of speech that counters such repressions (Spivak 1989, 2?7). 
It is worthwhile to remember that the historical founding moment of 
the construction of mestiza and mestizo subjectivity entails the rejection 
and denial of the dark Indian Mother as Indian, which has compelled 
women to often collude in silence against themselves and to actually 
deny the Indian position even as that position is visually stylized and 
represented in the making of the fatherland. Within these blatant 
contradictions the overvaluation of Europeanness is constantly at work. 
Thus, Mexico constructs its own ideological version of the notorious 
Anglo-American "melting pot," under the sign of mestizo and mestiza. 
The unmasking, however, becomes possible for Chicanas as they are 
put through the crisis of the Anglo-American experience where ("melt- 
ing pot") whiteness, not mestizaje, has been constructed as the Absolute 
Idea of Goodness and Value. In the Americas, then, "the Native 
Woman" as ultimate sign of the potential reproduction of barbarie 
(savagery) has served as the sign of consensus for most others, men 
and women. Women, under penalty of the double-bind charge of 
"betrayal" of the fatherland (in th>. future tense) and the mother 
tongues (in the past tense), are often compelled to acquiesce with the 
"civilizing" new order in male terms. Thus, for example, the "rights" 
of women in Nicaragua disappear vis-a-vis the "democratizing" forces 
of the United States, the Church's "civilizing-of-v/omen" project, and 
traditional sexisms notwithstanding Sandinista intentions (Molyne.ix 
1985). In this scenario, to speak at all, then, "the Native Woman" has 
to legitimize her position by becoming a "mother" in hegemonic 
patriarchal terms, which is often impossible to do unless she is 
"married" or racially "related" to the right men (Hurtado 1989). As a 
result, the contemporary challenge to the multiple negations and 
rejections of the native racialized woman in the Americas is like few 
others. 

For Chicanas, the consideration of the ideological constructions of 
the "noncivilized" dark woman brings into view a most sobering 
reference point: the overwhelming majority of the workers in maqui- 
ladoras, for example, are "mestizas" who have been forcefully subjected 
not only to the described processes, but to many others that await 
disentanglement. Many of those workers are "single," unprotected 
within a cultural order that has required the masculine protection of 
women to ensure their "decency," indeed to ensure that they are 
"civilized" in sexual and racial terms. In fact, as Spivak and others 
have suggested, "The new army of 'permanent casual' labor working 



102 



Norma Alarcdn 



below the minimum wage — [are] these women [who today] represent 
the international neo-colonial subject paradigmatically" (Spivak 1989/ 
223). These women (and some men) were subjected to the Hispanic 
New World "feudal mode of power/' which in Mexico gave way to 
the construction of mestizo nationalism, and were also subjected to 
an Anglo-American "feudal mode of power" in the isolation of migrant 
worker camps and exchange labor, which in the United States gave 
rise to Chicano cultural nationalism of the 1960s. In the 1990s these 
women now find themselves in effect separated in many instances 
from men who heretofore had joined forces in resistance. Though 
work in the fields continues to be done with kinship groupings, the 
"communal mode of power" under the sign of the cultural nationalist 
family may be bankrupt especially for female wage-workers. Although, 
of course, the attempt to bring men and women together under 
conservative notions of the "family" continues as well. In this instance 
"fannily" may be a misnaming in lieu of a search for a more apt name 
for communitarian solidarity. 

Whether it be as domestic servants, canners, or in the service 
industry in the United States, or as electronic assemblers along the 
U.S. /Mexican border, these "new" women-subjects find themselves 
bombarded and subjected to multiple cross-cultural and contradictory 
ideologies. There exists a maze of discourses through which the "I" 
as a racial and gendered self is hard put to emerge and runs the risk 
of being thought of as "irrational" or "deluded," as these women 
attempt to articulate their oppression and exploitation. In the face of 
Anglo-European literacy and capitalist industrialization, wiilch inter- 
pellates them as individuals, for example, and the "communal mode 
of power" (as mode of de-feudalization) (Spivak 1989, 224), which 
interpellates them as "Mothers" (the bedrock of the "ideal family" at 
the center of the nation-making process, despite discontinuous modes 
of its construction), the figure and referent of Chicanas today are 
positioned as conflictively as Lyotard's "differend." She is the descen- 
dant of native women who are continuously transformed into mestizas, 
Mexicans, emigres to Anglo-America, "Chicanas," Latinas, Hispanics — 
there are as many names as there are namers. 

Lyotard defines a differend as "a case of conflict, between (at least) 
two parties, that cannot be equitably resolved for lack of a rule of 
judgment applicable to both arguments. One side's legitimacy does 
not imply the other's lack of legitimacy" (Lyotard 1987, xi). In appro- 
priating the concept as a metonym for both the figure and referent of 
the Chicana, for example, it is important to note that, though it enables 
us to locate and articulate sites of ideological and discursive conflict. 



Chicana Feminism: In the Tracks of ''the'' Native Woman 



103 



it cannot inform the actual Chicana /differend engaged in a living 
struggle as to how she can seize he- "I" or even her feminist "We" 
to change her circumstances without bringing into play the axes in 
which she finds herself in the present — culturally, politically, and 
economically. 

The call for theories elaborated based on the "flesh and blood" 
experiences of women of color in This Bridge Called My Back (Anzaldiia 
and Moraga 1983) may mean that the Chicana feminist project must 
interweave the following critiques and critical operations: (1) multiple 
cross-cultural analyses of the ideological constructions of raced "Chi- 
cana" subjects in relation to the differently positioned cultural con- 
structions of all men and some Anglo-European women; (2) negotiation 
of strategic political transitions from cultural constructions and con- 
testations to "social science" studies and referentially grounded "Chi- 
canas" in the political economy who live out their experiences in 
heterogeneous social and geographic positions. Though not all women 
of Mexican /Hispanic descent would call themselves Chicanas, I would 
argue that it is an important point of departure for critiques and critical 
operations (on the hyphen/bridge) that keep the excluded within any 
theory-making project. That is, in the Mexican-descent continuum of 
meanings, Chicana is still the name that brings into focus the inter- 
relatedness of class/race/gender and forges the link to actual subaltern 
native women in the U.S. /Mexico dyad. (3) In negotiating points 'one 
and two, how can we work with literary, testimonial, and pertinent 
ethnographic materials to enable "Chicanas" to grasp their "I" and 
"We" in order to make effective political interventions? This implies 
that we must select, in dialogue with women, from the range of 
cultural productions those materials that actually enable the emergence 
of I/We subjectivities (Castellano 1990). 

Given the extensive ideological sedimentation of the (Silent) Good 
Woman and the (Speech-producing) Bad Woman that enabled the 
formations of the cultural nationalist "communal modes of power," 
Chicana feminists have an enormous mandate to make "sense" of it 
all as Anzaldiia desires. It requires no less than the deconstruction of 
paternalistic "communal modes of power," which is politically perilous 
since often it appears to be the "only" model of empowerment that 
the oppressed have, although it has ceased to function for many 
women, as development and postindustrial social research indicates. 
Also, it requires the thematization and construction of new models of 
political agency for women of color who are always already positioned 
cross-culturally and within contradictory discourses. As we consider 
the diffusion of mass media archetypes and stereotypes of all women 



104 



Norma Alarcdn 



which continuously interpellates them into the patriarchal order ac- 
cording to their class, race (ethnicity), and gender, the "mandate" is 
(aoss-culturally) daunting. Yet, "agent-provocateurs" know that mass 
media and popular cultural production are always open to contestations 
and recodifications which can become sites of resistance (Castellano 
1990). 

Thus, the feminist Chicana, activist, writer, scholar, and intellectual 
has to, on the one hand, locate the point of theoretical and political 
consensus with other feminists (and "feminist" men) and, on the other, 
continue with projects that position her in paradoxical binds, for 
example by breaking out of ideological boundaries that subject her in 
culturally specific ways and not crossing over to cultural and political 
areas that subject her as "individual/autonomous/neutralized" laborer. 
Moreover, to reconstruct differently the raced and gendered "I's" and 
"We's" also calls for a rearticulation of the "You's" and "They's." 
Traversing the processes may well enable us to locate points of 
differences and identities in the present to forge the needed solidarities 
against repression and oppression. Or, as Lorde and Spivak would 
have it, locate the "idenlity-in-difference" of cultural and political 
struggle (1984. 1988). 

Acknowledgmients 

I would like to thank Gloria Anzald(ia, Rosa Linda Fregoso, Francine Masiello, 
and Margarita Melville for their reading and comments on this essay. Re- 
sponsibility for the final version is, of course, mine. 



Works Cited 

Acufla, Rodolfo. 1972. Occupied America: The Chicano's Struggle Toward Lib- 
eration. San Francisco: Canfield Press. 

Alarc6n, Norma. 1989. "Traddutora, Traditora: A Paradigmatic Figure of 
Chicana Feminism." Cultural Critique 13(Fall): 57-87. 

. 1990. "The Theoretical Subject(s) of This Bridge Called My Back and 

Anglo-American Feminism/' In Making Face, Making Soul — Haciendo Caras: 
Creative and Critical Perspectives by Yeomen of Color, edited by Gloria 
Anzaldiia, 356-69. San Francisco: Spinsters/ Aunt Lute. 

Allen, Paula Gunn. 1988. "Who Is Your Mother? Red Roots of White Feminism." 
In The Graywolf Annual Five: Multicultural Literacy, edited by Rick Simonson 
and Scott Walker, 13-27. Saint Paul: Graywclf Press. 

Anzaldiia, Gloria. 1987. Borderlands /La Frontera: The New Mestiza. San Fran- 
cisco: Spinsters/ Aunt Lute. 



Chicana Feminism: In the Tnxks of "the" Native Woman 



105 



Anzaldda, Gloria, and Cherrie Moraga, eds. 1983. This Bridge Called My Back: 
Writings by Radical Women of Color. New York: Kitchen Table, Women of 
Color Press. 

Barrera, Mario, Carlos Mufloz, and Charies Omelas. 1972. "The Barrio as an 
Internal Colony." In People and Politics in Urban Society, edited by Harlan 
Hahn, 465-98. Urban Affairs Annual Reviews, vol. 6. Los Angeles: Sage 
Publications. 

Castellano, Olivia. 1990. "Canto, locura y poesia: The Teacher as Agent- 
Provocateur." The Women's Review of Books 7(5): 18-20. 

Cordova, Teresa, et al. 1986. Chicana Voices: Intersections of Class, Race, and 
Gender Austin: Center for Mexican American Studies. 

Gim^nez, Martha. 1989. "The Political Construction of the Hispanic." In 
Estudios Chicanes and the Politics of Community, edited by Mary Romero 
and Cordelia Candelaria, 66-85. Austin: National Association for Chicano 
Studies. 

Hurtado, Aida. 1989. "Relating to Privilege: Seduction and Rejection in the 
Subordination of White Women and Women of Color." Signs: Journal of 
Women in Culture and Society 14(4): 833-55. 

Kauffman, L. A. 1990. "The Anti-Politics of Identity." Socialist Review 1: 67- 
80. 

Lorde, Audre. 1984. Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches. Trumansburg, NY: 
The Crossing Press. 

Lyotard, Jean-Francois, 1987. The Differend: Phrases in Dispute, translated by 
Georges Van Den Abbeele. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

McLaughlin, Andr^e Nicola. 1990. "Black Women, Identity, and the Quest for 
Humanhood and Wholeness: Wild Women in the Whirlwind." In Wild 
W men in the Whirlwind: Afra-Americm Culture and the Contemporary Literary 
Renaissance, edited by Joanne M. Braxton and Andree Nicola McLaughlin, 
147-80. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. 

Melville, Margarita B., ed. 1980. Twice a Minority: Mexican American Women. 

St. Louis, MO: C. V, Mosby. 
Mies, Maria, Veronika Bennholdt-Thomsen, and Claudia von Werlhof, eds. 

1988. Women: The Last Colony. London: Zed Books. 

Minh-ha, Trinh T., 1989. Woman /Native /Other: Writing Postcoloniality and 
Feminism. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 

Molyneux, Maxine. 1985. "Mobilization Without Emancipation: Women's 
Interests, the State, and Revolution in Nicaragua." Feminist Studies 11(2): 
227-54. 

Mora, Magdalena, and Adelaida R. Del Castillo, eds. 1980. Mexican Women 
in the United States: Struggles Past and Present. University of California, Los 
Angeles: Chicano Studies Research Center. 

Muftoz, Carlos. 1989. Youth, Identity, Power: The Chicano Generation. London: 
Verso. 

National AssociaHon for Chicano Studies. 1986. Chicana Voices: Intersections 
of Class, Race, and Gender, Editorial Committee, Teresa C6rdova, chair. 
Austin: Center for Mexican American Studies. 



106 



Norma Alarcdn 



Rojas, Guillermo. 1989. "Social Amnesia and Epistemology in Chicane Studies." 
In Estudios Chicanos and the Politics of Community, edited by Mary Romero 
and Cordelia Candelaria, 54-65. Austin: National Association for Chicano 
Studies. 

Ruiz, Vicki L., and Susan Tiano, eds. 1987. Women on the U.S.-Mexico Border: 

Responses to Change. Boston, MA: Allen and Unwin. 
Spivak, Gayatri C. 1988. "Can the Subaltern Speak?" In Marxism and the 

Interpretation of Culture, edited by Cary Nelson and Lawrence Grossberg, 

271-313. Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press. 
. 1989. "The Political Economy of Women as Seen by a Literary 

Critic." In Coming to Terms: Feminism, Theory, Politics, edited by Elizabeth 

Weed, 218-29. London: Routledge. 
Warren, Scott. 1984. The Emergence of Dialectical Theory: Philosophy and Political 

Inquiry. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Zavella, Patricia. 1987. Women's Work and Chicano Families: Cannery Workers 

of the Santa Clara Valley. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 



8 Current African American 
Literary Theory: Review 
and Projections 



Reginald Martin 
Memphis State University 



Several historically and pedagogically important events happened to 
literature written by blacks and the black-authored criticism of that 
literature in the 1960s. First during the 1960s, the "integrationist" 
litnrature from black authors of criticism and prose that predominated 
in the late 1940s and throughout the 1950s was both shouted down 
and effectively transformed by the proponents of "separatist" writing 
by black writers for a black readership. I think here especially of the 
many black literature professors and black commercial journalists who 
labored during the late 1940s, 1950s, and early 1960s to show how 
much Gwendolyn Brooks's Annie Allen (1949) was like T. S. Eliot's 
The Wasteland (1922) or labored to show how similar in content, 
structure, style, theme, and intent Ralph Ellison's Invisible Man (1952) 
was to James Joyce's Portrait of the Artist (1916). This kind of critical 
and comparative paradigm was completely disrupted by the black 
nationalist and literary separatists of the 1960s. 

The separatists argued that there had to be "uniquely black" ways 
of judging and "seeing" literature and that not a trace of this method 
could be effectively implemented in a system that compared writing 
by blacks to the writing of the very white "oppressors" the blacks 
were writing against. This separatist movement in the black criticism 
of black-authored texts was especially ironic in the late 1950s and 
early 1960s, as prominent black writers such as Lorraine Hansberry 
and James Baldwin argued for the "universality" of their own writings, 
as well as those of other blacks, while at the same time insisting on 
some uniquely black messages and indexes in their texts. But Hansberry 
and Baldwin saw no reason to eschew comparisons between their 
works and the works of a Lillian Hellman or a William Faulkner. 
Equally ironic, as black characters began to have pronunent parts in 
the works of white authors, such as Jean Genet's The Blacks: Or a 
Clown Show (1960), the portrayals (and there really were not that 



107 



108 



Reginald Martin 



many) became almost completely positive, in Genet's case even to the 
extent of making all the blacks completely good and all the whites 
completely bad. Nat Turner in William Styron's The Confessions of Nat 
Turner (1967), where the major black character is neither good nor 
bad because he is deranged, is a warped oddity in the history of 
publishing in this country. It has already earned its own book-length 
response in Black Writers Respond to William Styron's Nat Turner (1971). 

Be that as it may, at this pivotal time, certain black authors such as 
Hansberry (just before her untimely death) and Brooks (before her 
radical conversion at the Black Writers Conference in 1970 at Fisk 
University) continued to exact their craft as they saw fit, ignoring the 
swelling tide of separatist criticism, while others such as Ellison stopped 
their creative work altogether and concentrated on their prose works, 
and some black authors ceased publishing completely. After Black Fire 
(1968), edited by LeRoi Jones and Larry Neal, the forceful rhetoric 
and politically timely message of separatist criticism (and its many 
later offshoots) was to rule until Henry L. Gates's overwhelmingly 
influential discussion of the syncretic use of Euro-Anglo-based critical 
ideas, such as metatextuality, in his introduction to Black Literature and 
Literary Theory (1984). And for reasons known only to himself. Gates 
has now made a turn that in many ways would align him with some 
of the early separatists by insisting that signification is an original 
African-based crope in his most recent book. The Sign and the Signifying 
Monkey (1989). 

What we find now in the works of black and white critics of African 
American literary theory are solid proponents of both these schools 
of thought: those who argue convincingly that only critically identified 
black "vriindows" should be used to look at black-authored creative 
works (many feminist critics make the same argument for women's 
writings) and those who argue, agreeing with both Georges Poulet 
and Trudier Harris, that the battle by black academics has been to 
have more tools applied to black-authored texts, not fewer Proponents 
of this latter idea would argue (a) that if more critical tools are used, 
even though those tool? may be of European origin, then black- 
authored works stand a uetter chance of being examined, and thus 
read, taught, and, eventually, inserted into the canon; and (b) that not 
only is a syncretic approach to the criticism of black-authored texts 
more viable n gaining acceptance for those texts in Anglo academies, 
but also that such an approach to the literature rhetorically mirrors 
both the structure of the literature and that immensely syncretic group 
we (for the social moment) now call "African Americans." Thus, we 
understand the "unique cultural product" (literature) better as we also 



12'j 



Current African American Literary Theory 



109 



come to know the "unique" cultural group better. Such "in-group" 
knowledge shared by the exogamous mainstream the syncretists deem 
as important and "good." 

Conversely, the black literary separatists would agree with Henry 
Highland Gamett in his original 1843 "Address" that it "takes the 
slave to understand the problems of the slave" and the minute 
"outsiders" begin to judge the "deeds" (texts) of the slaves, they do 
so with cultural blinders and malice aforethought. Thus, it is especially 
important that the in-group share only among themselves and judge 
only themselves by their own indexes. T fbink, here especially, of the 
similar arguments in the early 1980s writings of Amiri Baraka in the 
pages of Black American Literature Forum (1982) and in Alice Walker's 
In Search of Our Mothers' Gardens (1983), which asserted a similar 
theme, admittedly with different subjects and intentions. The dangers 
in the arguments of both the syncretists and the separatists are 
important to note. 

If one fully takes the approach of the syncretists, one runs the 
usual, and by now historically tiresome, risk of overwhelming all 
"windows" and indexes that might be argued to be "uniquely black" 
by continually referring to (and deferring to) the gargantuan volume 
of Soviet", Euro-, and Anglo-American literary critical thought. In such 
practices there is the imminent danger of "uniquely black" indexes 
beer iing more and more amalgamated until there is no more (positive) 
Cuiierence. In plainer terms, what once may have been acknowledged 
to have been a black contribution to literature or literary theory may 
become simply a white, or an "American," contribution. (Analogously, 
think of Nancy Reagan in 1981 at a White House celebration of the 
arts expounding on Benny Goodman being one of the "founders" of 
jazz as Dizzy Gillespie rolled his eyes and gasped for breath in the 
background. Mrs. Reagan was merely responding to jazz as a unique 
"American" art form, but she was also forgetting to mention that jazz 
and its founders were also uniquely black.) The syncretists do not 
admit it, but such an occurrence would be acceptable to them, as at 
the root of all of their syncretic arguments lies the mainstream idea 
that there ought to be one vast canon of equally great texts based 
only on critically agreed upon merit. The syncretists believe that such 
a "matrix" canon would be better than the limiting "mainstream 
canon" with which we now work* 

The syncretists also believe that a matrix canon would be better 
than a plethora of "mini-canons" running wild and unrestrained in 
each academy and actually teaching students very Uttle about writing 
or the historical development of literature — one academy here for 



110 



Reginald Martin 



working-class, heterosexual white male authors of the 1930s, one here 
for rich, white, atheistic lesbian authors of the 1970s, one over there 
for late-1980s homosexual black male Catholic authors, and one located 
somewhere near Berkeley, California, for androgenous, Jewish -mulatto 
literature of the coming m:llennium. Finally, the syncretists believe 
also that a matrix canon its very syncretic nature would be infinitely 
more representative of black-authored texts and would assure the 
inclusion of these texts. Here the separatists would begin to laugh — 
loudly. 

Critically agreed upon merit, the separatists would argue, can come 
only from critics v^th power, power that will be more than likely 
derived from the cultural climate of the times. Exactly how will the 
black syncretists help to construct a "matrix canon" that is inclusive 
of black authors if these black critics are educationally and politically 
estranged from black culture and its unique cultural products such as 
black -authored texts? Further, exactly how do these syncretist critics 
propose to start their process in the cultural climate of the times 
(reexamine the original 1987 proposal for Stanford's core curriculum 
in literature) that denies the literary merit of most black-authored texts. 
You'll be lucky, the separatists will continue to shout, to find training 
in a graduate school that even includes any black-authored texts or 
criticism to begin to contemplate. And after that, with most of the 
mainstream critical faculties still promoting only the study of the 
"deeper structures" of a text, and black colleges falling into fiscal 
disarray all around you, you'll be lucky to get a job. 

Of course, something the separatists wiil not admit is that their 
assertions on cultural climate and the dearth of proper training and 
job opportunities would even more so apply to them and their "less 
acceptable" ideas. Further, they could never be brought to admit that 
their exclusive critical practices are just as bad or good as mainstream 
exclusionary critical practices. And as they continue to narrow their 
critical circle, they begin to speak only to themselves. The sentiment 
of Houston Baker's old poem resurfaces again and again in the 
background of both these schools' flailings: "No matter where you 
travel, you sHll be black" (1979). 

It seems to me that both of these schools have been effectively 
tempered by research outside the discipline of literary theory that they 
either do not know about or have effectively ignored. As a critic 
myself, I do acknowledge that the power of esoteric, specialized 
criticism (and critics) has become so enormous in the academies that 
literary theory can afford to ignore other disciplines, ignore even other 
specialized "schools" within the discipline of literary criticism. But 



Current African American Literary Theory 



111 



irrespective of the reasons why such a critical moment is a fact, the 
powerful body politic of what is specialized "theory" to"' ly (it can 
change again the minute a new generation of critics needs to make 
tenure) can and often does ignore other important ideas, even when 
the empirical and documented research of other disciplhies or other 
criHcs in the sphere of literary theory clearly make most of what we 
say, at best, trivial. We are often trivial because we ani both powerful 
and arrogant for the critical moment, and we forget the very impetus 
of Western criticism in the first place: to help someone understand 
something about a text or author better, in some readable and useful 
way. My impression from keeping up on many of our journals is that 
few critics would even recogruze my above paiaphrase from Horace's 
"The Art of Poetry." So caught-up are they in the latest "poststruc- 
turalist moment" from the Continent that, between their own multi- 
tudinous publications, they have time to read only tertiary and badly 
derivative critical works, never the primary. The primary text I mention 
below is only one example of a text extratextual to the body politic of 
literary theorj" whose findings should earn it a place in our critical 
canon, as it conclusively undermines most of what we believe about 
the "Western arts tradition"; there are many more such primary texts 
in strict linguistic areas, the sociology of knowledge area, and group 
psychology research areas. 

The very belief that anything Europe has offered in the study of 
literature is "new" and "uniquely European" (or white) is blasted into 
critical shards by the linguistic, textual, and archeological research 
published in 1987 by Martin Bernal in the first of his promised four- 
volume series. Black Athena: The Afro-Asiatic Roots of Classical Civili- 
zation, Volume I: The Fabrication of Greece, 1785-1985 (please note the 
ending year of the first volume). While Bemal does add new information 
and new paradigms to what black historians have been saying at least 
since John G. Jackson's Ethiopia and the Origins of Civilization (1939). 
the core of his thesis has been stated again and again by black 
historians and linguists such as Jackson. Chancellor Williams, Ivan 
Van Sertima, Asa Milliard, and, especially, George M. James, author 
of Stolen Legacy (1954): that the civilized ancient world was both in 
origin and development black, and that it was left to "ancient" Europe 
to co-opt (without reference or royalties) on a large scale the arts — 
including the literary arts — of the blacks. The publication of Black 
Athena makes a difference because, first, it strikes the critical and 
objective tone of the traditionally "objective historical" text. The 
evocation of such a text paradigm is of the utmost importance when 
one is not only trying to revise history, but is also trying to undo one 



1 -'^ 



112 



Reginald Martin 



of the stronger tenets of the sociology of knowledge which states that 
most traditional adherents to an idea would prefer not to have that 
idea disrupted by a "more true" idea.* Secondly because Bemal ^s not 
black, he will not have his research immediately silenced. The success 
of Bemal's first volume was so tremendously positive that his second 
volume. Volume 11: The Linguistic and Archeological Evidence (1991), is 
already under back order although it has not even been officially 
published. 

Coinciding and (1 believe) purposely dovetailing on the success of 
Black Athena is St. Clair Drake's Black Folk Here and There (1987-1990), 
which, astoundingly provides linguistic and archeological evidence 
that even Bemal missed. The revisionist, yet empirical and objective 
power of these two texts, and others like them from other disciplines, 
is why I earlier stated that the discipline of literary theory could greatly 
profit, and in fact increase its powers, if it would pay more attention 
to other disciplines and less attention to only its own echoes. Consider 
the true earth-shaking importance of Bemal's work to the current body 
of literary theories. 

Clearly, our critical ideas must be rethought in every genre of 
American literary theory if our Greek and Roman models are merely 
derivative. If the corpus of largely European-based criticism we nor- 
mally think of is, in fact, not white-based but black-based (remember, 
neither Parmenides nor Aristotle left Greece to study in Norway but 
in Egypt, reappearing later with their "i^iew" literary critical knowledge 
in mid-sixth and fourth centuries B.C.), then reactionary arguments 
about "unique black indexes" in response to "oppressive white indexes" 
seem not only moot, but self-contradictory. 

Nevertheless and obviously, various unique modes of literary expres- 
sion and various unique critical responses to those texts did historically 
arise in the United States. "Unique" African American literary critical 
themes are as valid for examination as are the "unique" Agrarian 
critics' ideas, and no one says that the Agrarians should not be studied 
simply because they were initially a small group of cultural conserv- 
atives who wanted to turn the study of literature into intrinsically 
what it is not: a scientific method. I find that the Agrarians' ideas are 
worthy of study if for no other reason than the fact that its later 
emanation, the New Criticism, still cuts such an enormous swath 
across the American critical landscape and our ideas of "valid" ways 
to judge a literary work of art. Similarly, the study of African American 
literary theory and its postulations on unique indexes may illuminate 
in unique ways. 



1 ^'k 



Current African American Literary Theory 



113 



Notes 

1. See Frank G. Martin, "The Egyptian Ethnicity Controversy and the 
Sociology of Knowledge/' Black Economics Review (1982): 35-40. In this 
fascinating study Martin conclusively shows that the inability of scholars and 
society in general to acknowledge the true ethnicity of the Egyptians is simply 
an act of intellectual and "in-group" defiance which coincides precisely with 
the major tenet of the sociology of knowledge school: that a new idea, no 
matter how valid or "proven," is unwelcome when its acknowledgment would 
disrupt the major beliefs of the in-group. 



Works Cited 

Baker, Houston. 1980. Black American Literature Forum 22(8): 23-29. 
Baraka, Amiri. 1982. "Afro- American Literature and Class Struggle." Black 

American Literature Forum 16(2): 21-35. 
Bemal, Martin. 1987. Black Athena: The Afro-Asiatic Roots of Classical Civili- 
zation. Vol. I: The Fabrication of Ancient Greece, 1785-1985. New Brunswick, 

NJ: Rutgers University Press. 
. 1991. Vol. 11: The Archaeological and Documentary Evidence. New 

Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. 
Brooks, Gwendoljm. 1949. Annie Allen: Poems. New York: Harper. 
Drake, St. Clair. 1987-1990. Black Folk Here and There: An Essay in History 

and Anthropology (vol. 1-2). Los Angeles: Center for Afro-American Studies, 

University of California. 
Eliot, T. S. 1966. "The Wasteland." In The Collected Poems of T. S. Eliot. New 

York: Viking. 

Ellison, Ralph. 1952. Invisible Man, New York: Random. 

Gamett, Henry Highland. 1970 [1843]. "An Address to the Slaves of the 

United States." In Afro-American Writing, edited by Amy Harrison, 79-85. 

New York: Garland. 
Gates, Henry Louis, ed. 1984. Black Literature and Literary Theory. New York: 

Methuen. 

. 1989. The Sign and the Signifying Monkey. New York: Doubleday. 

Genet, Jean. 1960. The Blacks: Or a Clown Show. New York: Grove. 
Horace. 1978. "The Art of Poetry." The Collected Works. New York: Bantam. 
Jackson, Darwin, ed. 1971. Black Writers Respond to William Styron's Nat Turner. 

New York: Bantam. 
Jackson, John G. 1939. Ethiopia and the Origin of Civilization. New York: 

Blyden Society. 

James, George M. 1954. Stolen Legacy. New York: Philosophical Library. 

Jones, LeRoi, and Larry Neal, eds. 1968. Black Fire: An Anthology of Afro- 
American Writing. New York: Morrow. 

Joyce, James. 1978 [1941]. Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. In The Portable 
fames Joyce, edited by Malcom Cowley. New York: Viking. 



n'5 



114 Reginald Martin 

Martin, Frank G. 1982. "The Egyptian Ethnicity Controversy and the Sociology 
of Knowledge." Black Economics Review 10(3): 35-40. Normal: Illinois State 
University Press. 

Styron, William. 1967. The Confessions of Nat Turner. New York: Random, 
NAL. 

Walker, Alice. 1983. In Search of Our Mothers* Gardens. San Diego* Harcourt. 



9 Talking Across Cultures 



Robert S. Burton 

California State University at Chico 



"Multiculturalism" became more than just a buzzword during the 
1989-90 academic year. While NCTE geared up to run its annual 
Summer Institute on the topic of "Cross-Cultural Criticism" (using for 
its subtitle the question "How Can I Teach Literature That I Don't 
Already Know?"), at least five major academic journals in the field of 
literature and cultural studies devoted special issues to multicultural 
literature {Moderrt Fiction Studies, Spring 1989, "Narratives of Colonial 
Resistance"; Performing Arts Journal Spring 1989, "The Multiculturalism 
Issue''; Ariel October 1989, "Post-Colonial Literature"; PMM, January 
1990, "African and African American Literature"; and College English, 
November 1990, "African- American Criticism"). Clearly the shared 
emphasis has done much to awaken English studies to the increasingly 
prized multicultural voices in circulation. At the same time, I want to 
suggest that what also lies behind this surge of interest is a habit of 
"othering" or "differentiating" that threatens to contain, rather than 
open up, the field of cultural and cross-cultural studies. In other words, 
both the question behind the Summer Institute and the intentions 
behind publishing special journal issues devoted to multicultural lit- 
erature highlight and emphasize the "otherness" and the apartness of 
this body of literature from the so-called mainstream tradition. No 
matter how noble or innocent this approach may be, it seems to be 
another version of what Edward Said calls "Orientalism": of stressing 
the exotic otherness of a culture and thereby separating it from your 
own (uncontaminated) body. As Said has argued, this approach sanc- 
tions value judgments about the inferiority of the "other" culture, 
culminating in "statements about the Oriental mentality, the inscrutable 
Oriental, the unreliable and degenerate Oriental, and so forth" (1984, 
223). 

Is it not better to recognize that we already know much about 
multicultural literature and the experiences that inform it? Of course. 



115 



116 



Robert S. Burton 



I do not mean that by living in Western society we automatically 
assimilate the multicultural voices and visions of writers such as Salman 
Rushdie, Bessie Head, or Alice Walker; nor do I wish to slip into easy, 
"we-are-the-world" type generalizations that the mass media fre- 
quently and willingly endorse; but I do insist that, no matter what our 
background, we share with these authors the experience of "fragmen- 
tation on a global scale." We live in a world that the cultural anthro- 
pologist James Clifford describes as "increasingly out of place" (1988, 
6), where one feels "a pervasive condition of off-centeredness in a 
world of distinct meaning systems" (9). It is difficult, indeed self- 
defeating, to think of oneself or one's society as pure or absolute 
anymore, Clifford argues, when the society around us is increasingly 
hybridized and intercultural. Perhaps, at a rather mundane level, 
peeking into a refrigerator or a closet or randomly scanning TV channels 
can bear Clifford's argument out, as it might indicate the stew of 
influences and backgrounds that circulate, seemingly naturally and 
unnoticed, in our everyday life. Indeed, as I write this essay, I am 
inevitably swamped by a feeling of "off-centeredness in a world of 
distinct meaning systems" on several levels: as an Englishman in 
California's Central Valley, immersed in a climate and a landscape 
unknown to me for the first twenty-five years of my life; as a teacher 
trying to be both polished performer and puzzled participant when 
teaching classes on Toni Morrison, Hanif Kureishi, Bharati Mukherjee, 
et al.; as an employee on a campus where red-brick buildings and 
gleaming classrooms stand over what was once the site of a Maidu 
Indian settlement, and so on. 

I am suggesting, then, that the multicultural voices currently being 
published to great acclaim are highly articulate and powerful versions 
of our own voices: displaced, fragmented, off-centered, yet attempting 
to attain wholeness and completeness. Jamaican-bom vrater Michelle 
Cliff speaks of her "struggle to get wholeness from fragmentation 
while working within fragmentation, producing work which may find 
its strength in its depiction of fragmentation" (1988, 60). And Salman 
Rushdie has said, in response to criticism from both Muslims and 
Westerners against The Satanic Vi^rses; "What is being expressed is a 
discomfort with a plural identity. And what I am saying to you — and 
saying in the novel — is that we have got to come to terms with this. 
We are increasingly becoming a world of migrants, made up of bits 
and fragments from here, there. We are here. And we have never 
really left anywhere we have been" (1989, 114). 

Our intentions, I think, as teachers and scholars should be, like 
Cliff's and Rushdie's, to acknowledge the "bits and fragments" of our 



1 ^ 



Talking Across Cultures 



117 



world experience and, like Clifford's, to celebrate "[a] modem 'eth- 
nography' of conjunctures, constantly moving between cultures" (1988, 
9). Perhaps instead of trying to give polished, critical assessments of 
Bessie Head, Salman Rushdie, or Alice Walker, we could appreciate 
and share the strategies used by them as they articulate their feelings 
of displacement and attempt to become whole through the process of 
writing. The ideal classroom situation, then, might be one where, 
instead of asking what makes Salman Rushdie or Bessie Head different 
from ourselves, we eagerly exami.ie and learn from the choices they 
made as they composed their polished yet plural and displaced selves. 
Admittedly, when I have tried to do this with Rushdie's Midnight's 
Children or Head's A Question of Power (in an upper-division course 
on multicultural literature), students initially seem to be puzzled and 
put off by Rushdie's excessive playfulness and Head's tortuous psy- 
chological probings. But instead of placating students with trite "back- 
ground" information about the Indian independence movem.ent or the 
status of women in Botswanan society, I prefer to have the students 
immerse themselves in this feeling of confusion and displacement and, 
like the authors, to articulate that experience with honesty either 
through their own creative writing or through a more formal exercise 
in expository writing. 

From this, a legitimate question follows: How can we, as teachers, 
hope to "empower" our students if we expose them to seemingly 
confusing ard despairing gestures such as these? Isn't it more pro- 
ductive and beneficial to the students, this line of inquiry goes, if we 
simply help them to become whole, giving them a sense of control or 
power over the texts that we bring into the classroom? Don't our 
students need to be empowered to buy self -confidently into the 
American dream and thereby attain heightened status, particularly 
with a good job? 

Although I am sympathetic to this line of argument, I am also 
deeply skeptical of the notion of "empowerment" as it has sometimes 
been applied to cross-cultural studies and the teaching of writing. 
First, it assumes that someone (normally the teacher) actively possesses 
a certain "power" that can then be transferred to a passive consumer 
(normally the student) who then becomes magically "empowered." 
Second, it assumes that having "power" is inherently a positive value. 
However, isn't it fairly obvious that people with power have potential 
to cause considerable damage to others? In his 1980 manifesto for 
empowerment. Writing with Power, Peter Elbow unashamedly admits, 
without a trace of irony, that by encouraging empowerment in the 
student writer's voice he is "[i]n effect . . . saying, 'Why don't you 



1 / J 



118 



Robert S. Burton 



shoot that gun you have? Oh yes, by the way I can't tell you how to 
aim it'" (1981, 310). Frankly I am not cheered by such a prospect, 
especially when Elbow goes on to suggest that, given the dangers 
involved, you should "practice shooting the gun off in safe places. 
First with no one around. Then with people you know and trust 
deeply Find people who are willing to be in the same room with you 
while you pull the trigger" (310). 

Perhaps the important question to ask when we talk of "empow- 
erment," then, is what are we empowering our students to do? If we 
are encouraging them to buy into the American dream, then I am 
nervously skeptical; if we are urging them to feel complacent and 
comfortable about their superiority over foreign cultures, then I remain 
skeptical; if we are asking them to experiment wantonly with loaded 
guns, then my skepticism turns to unambiguous opposition. 

As Robert Pattison argues in On Literacy (1982), a significant danger 
with current literacy programs is that they simply pass on the power 
of the status quo by teaching specialized, often bureaucratic, skills; 
this has very little to do with deepening the consciousness of students 
or cultivating what Alice Walker calls "an awareness and openness to 
mystery" (1983, 252). Worse, Pattison continues, "Established American 
literacy, with its emphasis on mechanical skills and its assertion of the 
limitations of language, thwarts man's desire to feel himself fully 
represented in words" (1982, 203). Perhaps by encouraging students 
to represent in words a deepening of consciousness and openness to 
mystery, we can stimulate an awareness of the fragmentation and 
displacement in their own lives and improve their ability to appreciate 
and articulate, as many multicultural writers already do, such frag- 
mentation. 

I trust I am not foolish enough to think, however, that I have at 
all times avoided wielding the loaded gun of "false empowerment" 
or refrained from ever giving my students the loaded gun. I have tried 
to use power responsibly; like most teachers, I am annoyed with 
myself when I talk too much in class or get drawn into giving easy 
definitions or making simplistic categorizations about works of litera- 
ture. In a multicultural literature class that I teach regularly, I have 
seen how student access to a false sense of power can potentially be 
dangerous when I ask for group presentations on a country and culture 
whose literature we are examining at the time. Early on in the semester 
I organize the class into small groups of three or four students and 
designate a particular culture to each group; then, on a prearranged 
day, each student in the group is responsible for giving short five-to 
seven-minute presentations on one of a variety of topics related to the 



Talking Across Cultures 



119 



readings and the culture (from a brief overview of mythological heroes 
in that culture to an appreciation of its religions or its architecture, 
and so forth). I originally established this assignment, believing it 
would give students a valuable opportunity to be responsible for 
another culture and thereby to re-present it, in all its popular and 
sophisticated manifestations, to the rest of the class. By becoming, in 
effect, ambassadors for that culture, they would compose their own 
narratives about it. Furthermore, because I do not evaluate these 
presentations (the rest of the class does), the presenters are not obliged 
to address their information exclusively to me. 

Even though presentations are often respectful and stimulating 
(music and food go down particularly well), sometimes a student or 
an entire group will resort to facile lectures on the culture by assuming 
a pose of authority and claiming control over it with a string of 
absolutes and generalizations about an author's life, a leader's politics, 
or a country's current state of affairs. I do not like this abuse of 
authority, but I do not denounce it when I see it happen in the 
classroom because I trust that the audience knows when a presenter 
is being overly reductive. Further, I think that the presenter knows 
when he or she has resorted to ethnocentric generalizations. Not until 
you stand in front of a classroom, with a full seven (or seventy!) 
minutes of time to occupy, do you reach into your storehouse of 
knowledge only to find, perhaps, empty cliches and simple platitudes 
which you try to cover up as smoothly as possible. We have all been 
in this situation, and if we are honest with ourselves, we have realized 
afterwards how ignorant and unprincipled we were. Criticizing students 
for such a presentation might arouse their fear and resistance, in effect 
consolidating their ignorance and possibly even moving them to further 
biases and prejudice. Instead, I do not comment on the presentations 
in the hopes that the presenters, and the class audience, will think 
through the merits and limitations of each talk. 

The danger, then, of asking students to become ambassadors for a 
culture was that it placed them in a position of considerable authority 
that was easily abused. I had wanted to make students "responsible" 
for a culture and even though most, I believe, used that responsibility 
sensibly (conaing to possess their author, leader, country, or national 
dish in a way that we all possess role models by pinning them on our 
walls, refrigerators, or office doors), the idea of reducing a given culture 
to the status of an exotic or estranged "other" was still tempting for 
several presenters. 

A similar, yet more reflexive, activity for a multicultural course is 
described by Greg Sarris in an essay from College English, "Storytelling 



1 ^ 



120 



Robert S. Burton 



in the Classroom: Crossing Vexed Chasms" (1990). In the first class 
meeting of his American Indian literature course, he recounts a story 
that had been passed down to him by his Pomo elders. During the 
next several class meetings, he then asks his students, in groups, to 
retell the story in their own words and to be self-conscious about their 
strategies for retelling. The purpose, he explains, is to let students "see 
how they are approaching the story and begin to explore unexamined 
assumptions by which they operate and which they use to frame the 
texts and experiences of another culture" (1990, 169). The larger plan 
behind Sarris's essay, and behind his teaching practice, is to get students 
to "talk across ... the spaces between their world and that of an 
American-Indian text" (171). 

Getting a student to talk back to a text, or across the spaces between 
the text and the reader, and encouraging the continual realignment of 
a student's framing devices as he or she negotiates the text are surely 
admirable activities for any literature class, but especially so for a 
multicultural literature class where, as I have argued, it is easy to make 
dangerous and distorting distinctions between "self" (the uncontam- 
inated reader) and "other" (the "foreign" text). I suspect that the 
predominant tendency in our classrooms is still to encourage students 
to contain and consume multicultural narratives in an uncritical and 
unselfconscious way. We like to think we are producing students who 
become "rational" and "enlightened" by this magical "empowerment." 

1 want to finish by briefly examining selected examples of multi- 
cultural literature where the authors themselves seem very conscious 
of ways by which their narratives continue to be appropriated and 
consumed by so-called enlightened and empowered Western readers. 
In several postcolonial novels a fairly standard type or character is 
often invoked who speaks on behalf of such enlightened literacy as a 
deliberate form of control and closure. 

This happens conspicuously in Chinua Achebe's Things Fall Apart 
(1959) where the novel "closes" with the British District Commissioner 
(responsible for the administration of Nigeria) surveying the tragic 
suicide of the African protagonist, Okonkwo, and planning in his own 
mind the book that he will write on the series of events that have led 
up to Okonkwo's death: 

The story of this man who had killed a messenger and hanged 
himself would make interesting reading One could almost write 
a whole chapter on him. Perhaps not a whole chapter but a 
reasonable paragraph, at any rate. There was so much else to 
include, and one must be firm in cutting out details. He had 
already chosen the title of the book, after much thought: The 
Pacification of the Primitive Tribes of the Lower Niger (1959, 191) 




Talking Across Cultures 



121 



The irony, of course, is fairly obvious: Arhebe's novel has been devoted 
to Okonkwo's complex and nonlinear story enriched by its embedded 
oral-based stories. The District Commissioner, who appears only on 
the periphery of this story, has nevertheless attempted to distill it into 
a single paragraph. Okonkwo's story is therefore pacified and controlled 
by the Commissioner's "power" — a combination of his skills with 
literacy (his ability to capture the series of "native" events with well- 
chosen words) and with the gun (the guardian and enforcer of "justice") 
that he brings to Africa. 

The further irony is that our history textbooks and our teaching 
methods may still accord with the District Commissioner's paradigm. 
Similarly, our mass media may still be in the paradigm presented in 
R, K. Narayan's The Guide (1958), where a similar episode "closes" 
the novel. A California TV personality called James J. Malone suddenly 
appears at the novel's end to interview the Indian protagonist, a swami 
whose Gandhi-like fast on behalf of rain in a drought-ridden Indian 
village has caused much concern and celebration across the continent 
and world. Like the District Commissioner in Achebe's novel, Malone 
looks for ways to reduce, through rational explanation, the swami's 
mysterious power over his followers; in asking questions such as "Can 
fasting abolish all wars and bring world peace?" he seems set on 
receiving a string of one-word answers that merely affirm his precon- 
ceptions. Malone's attempts to be an invisible presence in the Indian 
village as he asks these questions (he insists, "I won't disturb you ... I 
won't disturb you ... I wouldn't hurt your customs" [216-18]) seem 
merely to be further examples of "othering" and "differentiating" 
strategies. In fact, his presence is far from invisible: clumsily, he sets 
up his interviews, organizes the background lighting, and even asks 
for a stand-in once he realizes that the swami is too feeble-looking to 
have any appeal on TV 

I want to finish with one more postcolonial example: Nadine 
Gordimer's Burger's Daughter (1979). Gordimer, like Achebe and Na- 
rayan, closes her novel with the inclusion of a Western perspective 
towards her predominantly non-Western story. For most of the novel 
the reader identifies with Rosa Burger as she struggles to compose a 
whole and unified self amid the pieces and fragments of identities 
that impinge on her: as a daughter to a celebrated member of the 
Communist party in South Africa, as a lover of a free-floating and 
wealthy white liberal, as a nurse at Baragwanath Hospital, where she 
helps to treat the victims of the 1976 Soweto uprisings, and as an 
increasingly active opponent of the Pretorian government, which 
eventually has her imprisoned. The novel closes with her letter from 



X i> o 



122 



Robert S. Burton 



jail delivered to a family friend in the south of France: the letter, 
Gordimer writes, "bore the stamp of the Prisons Department in Pretoria 
but this aroused ro interest in the handsome postman who stopped 
in for a Pernod when he delivered the mail, because he could not 
read English and did not know where Pretoria was" (361). Furthermore, 
what finally prevents the letter's recipient, Madame Bagnelli, from 
fully understanding and appreciating the letter is that one of its crucial 
lines has been censored by the South African prison authorities. The 
novel's last sentence, ominously, reads: "Madame Bagnelli was never 
able to make it out" (361). 

My fear is that we are blinded by the same combination of 
ethnocentrism and ideological censorship so that we are not able to 
"make out" what is issuing from non-Western countries and that this 
inability, in turn, is deafening us to the multicultural voices amongst 
us. Surely, Achebe, Narayan, and Gordimer plead with us not to be 
like the French postman, the American j.-^mes J. Malone, or the English 
District Commissioner — not to look for eesy closure when looking at 
non-Western texts and cultures. "The foreigner is within me, hence 
we are all foreigners," declares Julia Kristeva (1991, 192). The point is 
that we must now find better ways to talk across the spaces between 
readers, texts, and cultures. We might find that we are not so much 
talking to "the other" as we are to parts of ourselves that have lain 
undiscovered and unarticulated. 

Works Cited 

Achebe, Chinua. 1959. Things Fall Apart. New York: Fawcett. 

Cliff, Michelle. 1988. "A Journey into Speech." In The Graywolf Annual Five: 
Multicultural Literacy, edited by Rick Simonson and Scott Walker, 57-62. 
Saint Paul: Graywolf Press. 

Clifford, James. 1988. The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth Century Ethnog- 
raphy, Literature, and Art. Harvard: Harvard University Press. 

Elbow, Peter. 1981. Writing with Power: Techniques for Mastering the Writing 
Process. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Gordimer, Nadine. 1979, Burger's Daughter. London: Penguin. 

Kristeva, Julia. 1991. Strangers to Ourselves, translated by Leon S. Roudiez. 
New York: Columbia University Press. 

Narayan, R. K. 1958. The Guide, London: Penguin. 

Pattison, Robert. 1982. On Literacy: The Politics of the Word from Homer to the 

Age of Rock, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Rushdie, Salman. 1989. Interview in Newsletter on Intellectual Freedom 38: 

106-14. 

Said, Edward. 1984. The World, the Text, and the Critic. London: Faber. 



Talking Across Cultures 123 

Sarris, Greg. 1990. "Story-telling in the Classroom: Crossing Vexed Chasms." 

College English 52: 169-84. 
Walker, Alice. 1983. In Search of Our Mothers' Gardens, New York: Harvest/ 

Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 



10 Walter Mitty in China: 
Teaching American Fiction 
in an Alien Culture 



H. W. Matalene 

University of South Carolina, Columbia 



Roland Barthes once remarked of narrative that it "is simply there like 
life itself . . . international, transhistorical, transcultural." Elaborating 
for Barthes, Hayden White goes on to say that "we have relatively 
[litUe] difficulty understanding a story coming from another culture, 
hov/ever exotic that culture may appear to us. [For] as Barthes says, 
'narrative ... is translatable without fundamental damage' in a way 
that a lyric poem or a philosophical discourse is not" (1981, 1-2). 

The error of Barthes's international, transcultural, translatable view 
of narrative has been apparent to Laura Bohannan (1966), John R 
Povey (1972), Bruce Pattison (1972), ]. R. Gladstone (1972), Albert H. 
Marckwardt (1978), Catherine Wallace (1986), Peter Strevens (1987), 
and many others, who, lacking the innocence of the celebrated Eu- 
ropean theoretician, have seen narrative from the perspective of the 
low-prestige ESL classroom. In the fall of 1982, having just begun 
teaching American fiction at Shanxi University in the People's Republic 
of China, I, too, learned how culture-bound narrative is. Peng jian, 
the leader of the third-year class, came up to me perplexed about the 
next assignment, which he and his classmates, with characteristic 
diligence, had already read. I quote him exactly: "We can translate the 
story," he said, never having heard of Barthes or White, "but we 
cannot understand it." And he asked, "Why did the author write the 
story?" At the question, I had a moment of icy terror. But 1 finally 
saw that Peng Jian could not imagine a set of cultural and historical 
circumstances to which the writing of such a story might be a possible 
response, and within which the behavior of the story's characters 
might make sense. Hence, to my own astonishment, I came to devote 
four classroom hours, a whole week, to presenting a classic American 
short story only 2,500 words long — "The Secret Life of Walter Mitty," 
by James Thurber. 



124 



miter Mitty in China 



125 



I had assigned the story, which might seem an unduly sexist and 
culturally chauvinistic choice, first, because it was one of the few I 
could assign, not having grasped before leaving South Carolina how 
hard it would be to find a decent collection of American fiction in a 
provincial Chinese university and then get copies of the chosen texts 
into the hands of three hundred students. But chiefly I assigned "The 
Secret Life of Walter Mitty" because the Four Modernizations were 
much in the air at Shanxi University in 1982. Thurber's story speaks 
directly to the pursuit of happiness and self-esteem through science 
and industrialization — the agonising project of self-transformation on 
which one of the world's proudest peasant civilizations has been bent 
ever since her military' humiliations at the hands of the British in 1842, 
and of their Japanese imitators in 1895. 

In asking me why Thurber had written "The Secret Life of Waher 
Mitty," Peng Jian had put his finger squarely on the chief problem that 
Chinese university students have with American fiction. For the best 
of them, translation only becomes a problem when authors, often in 
passages of dialogue, shift to colloquial idioms or change spellings to 
represent dialect. I made a point of glossing such matters as soon as 
we came upon them. But as Peng Jian knew, translating is not necessarily 
understanding. He was asking me to describe American culture as I 
know it: to tell the class all the things that no American critic of 
Thurber would ever dream of telling a roomful of American readers 
of "The Secret Life of Walter Mitty" Some of these nuggets of American 
criticism he might be able to find in the Shanxi University library, 
where, in 1982, the collection was still being recatalogued and reshelved 
in the wake of the Cultural Revolution. But Peng Jian knew that 
memorizing what American critics think the American laity need to 
know in order to grasp an American author still leaves a Chinese — 
even if fluent in English — far from knowing what that American author 
counts on readers to know if they are to respond as he or she might 
hope. In the terms that Reed Dasenbrock has borrowed in this volume 
from Donald Davidson, Peng Jian had encountered the inadequacy of 
his classmates' "prior theory" to the task of interpreting Thurber. The 
few for whom the "site of learning" was between them and Thurber's 
text felt their "interpretive charity" toward Thurber threatened. Their 
leader, Peng Jian, was asking me for additional information that might 
permit the construction of a "passing theory" powerful enough to 
both save their sense of themselves as charitable interpreters and to 
account for the merely translatable mysteries of Thurber's story. 

Those mysteries are instantly apparent. For instance, as 'The Secret 
Life of Walter Mitty" opens, Thurber plunges his readers i:ito one of 



126 



H. YJ. Matalene 



the now-famous daydreams of heroism that constitute the secret life 
of the little bourgeois named in the title. As he drives "on toward 
Waterbury/' Walter Mitty pushes the car "up to fifty-five" while he 
imagines that he is a navy commander flying a "huge . . . eight- 
engined . . . hydroplane" through a gathering storm (1945, 34). To me, 
this bit of setting k', instantly, but almost subliniinally, meaningful. 
When Thurber's story was written just before World War II, I was a 
child in New York City, sometimes spending weekends with school- 
mates whose families had country retreats in Connecticut, near places 
like Waterbury, which (in those days) was not yet fully tied-in to the 
great Megalopolis by parkways, turnpikes, and interstate highways. I 
can close my eyes and see what going fifty-five on Mitty's road to 
Waterbury was like. I imagine farms, hills, village storefronts and gas 
stations; autumn-tinted woods flashing by on either side of the winding, 
two-lane country road, divided by its solid and broken lines, that lay 
open before Mitty's rushing car Fifty-five, then, was not yet the tame, 
gas-saving speed limit that American drivers on the interstates have 
come to disdain since the OPEC petroleum crisis of 1973. It was too 
fast, as Mitty's terrifying wife rem nds him. Of her, more later. Right 
now, my point is that because I have led a relatively privileged, 
originally Northeastern, beginning-to-belong, American life, Thurber's 
mention of "Waterbury" places Mitty for me not only geographically, 
but socially and historically. He is a denizen of nascent suburbia — the 
very personification of "bourgeois." Hence, cued by the mention of 
"Waterbury," I begin to see why the story was written. 

But what could going "fifty-five" on the road to "Waterbury" mean 
to Peng Jian, who passed his childhood in China during the Great 
Proletarian Cultural Revolution? He is the son of one of my Shanxi 
colleagues, important enough, I am sure, to have been chauffeured 
about Taiyilan (the seat of the province's government and university) 
with his father, on special occasions, in one of the university's Shanghai 
sedans, he has probably never driven an automobile himself. Even 
if he guesses that "fifty-five," idiomatically, means "fifty-five miles per 
hour/' and even if he converts miles to kilometers so that he can 
visualize a speed almost twice that of a modem Chinese express train, 
the Waterbury road he imagines cannot help being very different from 
the one Thurber counted on '•^aders of the New Yorker to emasion in 
1940. I will be lucky, as a teacher, if Peng Jian's imagined road to 
Waterbury happens to pass a white. New England church he once 
saw on a postcard or in a paperback from the Cultural Attache at the 
U.S. Embassy in Beijing. More likely, Peng Jian's road will be lined 
with willows, through which (across fields hoed by a thousand hands) 



Walter Mitty in China 



127 



appear the rammed-earth walls of Shanxi villages. His road will be 
crowded with pedestrians, cyclists, occasional trucks and buses. There 
will be convoys of young men (faces turned from the blowing dust) 
straining against shoulder harnesses, pulling the winter's fuel into 
town. On his way to Waterbury, Peng Jian's Mitty will pass dozens of 
staring, turbaned peasants perched atop donkey carts heaped high 
with cabbages. To get through to town, his driver must sometimes pull 
way over to the left, leaning on the horn to intimidate the oncoming 
and warn those about to be run down. Fifty-five on Peng Jian's 
imagined road, as my teacher's imagination imagines it, would be 
positively genocidal. Mitty is enormously privileged to be on this road 
in an automobile at all. His ride could never be a chore of settled, 
middle-class life from which one might plausibly escape into day- 
dreams. Even for Walter Mitty, there would be real adventure on the 
road to Waterbury that Peng Jian might visualize as he reads — 
translating but not understanding. 

And what about the "huge . . . eight-engined . . . hydroplane" of 
the first daydream? In Mitty's day, Americans like Howard Hughes 
were, indeed, experimenting with prototypes of such flying juggernauts. 
But modem China has not yet entered Mitty's day. My family and I 
enjoyed but one domestic flight in China; but it was a moment much 
like many others for us, when the plane (a venerable Russian copy of 
the DC-3) finally wobbled to a stop, going "pocketa pocketa-pocketa" 
just like all the mystifying mechanical marvels in Walter Mitty's secret 
life, beside the one-room terminal building outside Taiyiian (a city of 
two and a half million people). But routine though our arrival may 
have been to us, it was something of a milestone in the life of the 
young colleague in English dispatched by the foreign language de- 
partment with a car and chauffeur to fetch us safely back within the 
walls of Shanxi University. He was a university graduate in his mid- 
twenties, yet never until that instant had he been face to face with a 
real airplane. He had, of course, seen many pictured airplanes; but it 
was clearly something else again for a child of Shanxi Pro\ince actually 
to be able to walk out on the tarmac and feel China's future fold him 
in beneath one of its competent, aluminum wings. Machines that go 
"pocketa-pocketa-pocketa," representing competencies alien to his own 
linguistically competent mind, embodied my young Chinese colleague's 
hopes for a richer life under the Four Modernizations. Such machines 
were not mysterious, alienating threats to his worth as a person, as 
they are to Mitty and to the many creatures of the American suburb, 
office, and library who have seen themselves in Mitty ever since 
Thurber put him on paper 



128 



H. W. Matalene 



My point has been, simply, that if (after translating it) Chinese 
students are to begin understanding American literature, they must 
have a great deal of help. I went to China expecting to have to find 
my way across a considerable cultural and ideological gulf. My teaching 
there benefited immeasurably from the six-week orientation to China's 
language, culture, and history which my family and I were given by 
our colleagues in Chinese studies at the University of South Carolina 
and by the Shanxi scholars then studying on the Columbia campus. 
But only when I got to China and actually began taking in her 
sensations, sometimes savoring and cherishing them, and sometimes 
(as the Chinese themselves do) struggling to scrub them off, hawk 
them up, and spit them out — only then did I begin to anticipate the 
kinds of things I would need to dwell upon to help Chinese students 
achieve "interpretive charity" with a selection of American short stories. 

In my Shanxi classes, what mattered about me was not whatever 
erudite "exam-knowledge" I possessed about the events, personalities, 
and 'isms of American literary history. What really mattered was the 
fact that I was the only person in the room with a knowledge not 
based entirely on Chinese television and The People's Daily of the 
differences between China and America. Most of my four hours on 
Mitty went into explaining differences of material culture, and attitudes 
toward material culture — making it clear that mental imagery and 
expectations picked up along t\ t road back tc Shanxi University from 
the Taiytian airport are simply not transferrable to Thurber's road to 
Waterbury. 

I tried also to anticipate and illuminate differences between an 
ability to respond to English mastered in a language classroom in 
China and an ability to respond to English picked up, from birth, in 
America's homes, streets, schools, workplaces, and public media of 
information and entertainment. For instance, I doubted very much that 
many of my students would be smiling inwardly, as I was, upon 
finishing Thurber's opening sentences: 

"We're going through!" The Commander's voice was like thin ice 
breaking. He wore his full-dress uniform, with the heavily braided 
white cap pulled down rakishly over one cold gray eye. "We can't 
make it, sir. It's spoiling for a hurricane, if you ask me." "I'm not 
asking you. Lieutenant Berg," said the Commander. (34) 

Having grown up on real American conversations and John Wayne 
movies, 1 can sense parody here right away. I can hear and see cliches 
of colloquial age and popular culture running amok. The more I 
think abou' ✓oice like thin ice breaking," the crazier it seems. Is 



Walter Mitty in China 



129 



the simile saying that the Commander and his crew are "on thin ice"? 
Or that the Commander's decision, at last, "breaks the ice"? Or that 
the decision was "like thin ice breaking" because it seemed to the 
crew to be committing them to a cold and watery grave? Or that, 
more literally, the Commander's voice really did have the sickening 
crackle of "thin ice breaking?" In my American ear two cliches and a 
variety of inept metaphors fight each other to a semantic draw here, 
leaving me without a clear meaning but alerting me that something 
funny is going on. This did not happen in ears that had heard only 
Chinese classroom English, stiff and formal, tending toward British 
pronunciations and usages. What, after all, is funny about the plight 
of an officer and his crew whose only remaining hope is to risk going 
"though the worst storm in twenty years of Navy flying" (34) before 
it becomes totally impossible? 

Then, there is the matter of the Commander's appearance. In the 
People's Liberation Army (PLA) of 1982, there were officers and 
enlisted personnel, but finer discriminations of rank were still frowned 
upon, and one had to look closely at all the red-staned caps and green 
fatigues with red collar tabs to see who was who. Officers were 
distinguished only by having four pockets on their jackets instead of 
two. By PLA standards, all Western military people are dreadful fops 
to begin with, and it was therefore necessary for me to explain, in a 
Shanxi classroom, the absurdity of a navy commander on duty in a 
crisis — not at a parade or a social gathering — who affects a "full-dress 
uniform" while blithely violating the regulations for wearing his cap. 
Thurber counts on his readers to know that general officers in the 
American military may be indulged in idiosyncratic wearings, and 
even in customized redesignings of the uniform, from the private's 
shirt in which Grant received Lee at Appomattox Courthouse to George 
Patton's riding habit and nickel-plated revolvers in Mitty's own epoch. 
But American readers will surely smile at a mere field-grade officer, 
like the navy commander of Mitty's first daydream, who takes the 
dress regulations so lightly. 

As for the "cold gray eye" over which Commander Mitty's heavily 
braided cap is raked, there is something funny about it too. The "cold 
gray eye" is a cliche in American English. But a gray eye of any 
temperature is a great rarity among the twenty-two million people of 
Shanxi Province. And then there is the old wheeze of "I'm not asking 
you, Lieutenant Berg." Can this be serious? Again, something funny 
is going on in Thurber's first sentences that a Chinese translator with 
no understanding of American life simply cannot "get." 



130 



H. W. Matalene 



And how about the names? Should I count on my Shanxi class to 
hear that there is something vaguely British or Irish about "Mitty" a 
name Thurber has coined, or to know that "Berg," a real name, sounds 
German or Jewish? China is, of course, bent on tolerating national 
minorities of her own, though the Han Chinese have historically been 
terrible racists, looking upon Europeans, for instance, as "long-nosed 
foreign devils." But (apart from the plight of American blacks, pitied 
in propaganda, but privately despised in China, just as they often are 
here) what can I expect my students to know about the relative prestige 
in American society of a national origin such as that suggested by the 
name "Berg"? 

Its name tells nothing about the social standing of a Chinese family 
of the dominant Han nationality. There are surprisingly few names 
for all the millions of Han families. They speak, for instance, of China's 
"Hundred Great Names," meaning the hundred-odd monosyllables 
that mark a family as belonging to the Han nation; and in asking the 
name of a stranger who is visibly a Han Chinese, they have always 
asked (since long before Communism), regardless of the stranger's 
visible social status, "What is your worthy surname?" Things are clearly 
different in America. To me, sensing what's in American names, at 
least for the frequently anti-Semitic Northeastern WASPs and their 
emulators to whom the New Yorker chiefly addresses its stories and 
advertisements, it is meaningful that Commander Mitty talks down to 
somebody named "Berg." 

And the names continue to be meaningful throughout Thurber's 
story. In the second daydream (34-35), where the world-famous 
surgeon Walter Mitty saves "the millionaire banker, Wellington 
McMillan, ... a close personal friend of Roosevelt," Mitty take? over 
in the operating room from two Waterbury doctors, and from two 
famous specialists, "Dr. Remington from New York and Mr. Pritchard- 
Mitford from London." I know that millionaire bankers seldom thought 
highly of Franklin Roosevelt, whom they were far more likely to regard 
as a class traitor. And I know, as my Shanxi students did not, that 
"Remington" is best-known in America as a brand name for small 
firearms and ammunition. To me, therefore, "Dr. Remington" suggests 
that Walter Mitty imagines this specialist, like a rifle, as having greater 
range, accuracy, and impact than either of the local sawbones, Renshaw 
and Benbow, possess. 

Furthermore, because I have lived in England and studied British 
culture, I can see Mitty's status-conscious, WASP imagination so 
transfixed with Things British as to look with contempt on Americans 
less accomplished in anglophilia than he takes pride in being himself. 



142 



Walter Mitty in China 



131 



For instance, he knows that British surgeons, unlike ordinary physicians, 
are called "Mister" — not "Doctor" And he can imagine himself one- 
up in anglophilia even on the great Remington, who is such a parochial 
Yankee dolt that he calls Pritchard-Mitford simply "Mitford" — thus 
failing to respect the snobbish, class implications of hyphenated English 
names, as most Americans noting this peculiarity also probably would. 
In fact, I have heard the English themselves joke about people with 
names like "Rice-Pudding." The names tip me off that Mitty's secret 
life is dorrdnated by the emulative, anglophile pop culture of his day, 
in which, for instance, the great male dancer was still the apparent 
WASP playboy, Fred Astaire, and no "ethnic" working-class dancer 
like a John Travolta or a Gregory Hines could yet expect to star in a 
film (though a "Bojangles" Robinson might do a cameo appearance 
in one). 

Along with America's fascination with machinery, the emulative 
anglophilia of American popular culture is Thurber's theme in "The 
Secret Life of Walter Mitty." It is no accident, therefore, that in the 
third daydream (36), when he escapes from American brand names 
like "Kleenex" and "Squibb's," Mitty's anglophilia arms him with the 
huge, obviously British. Webley-Vickers 50,80 automatic pistol. Mitty 
is now on trial for the murder of one "Gregory Fitzhurst," evidently 
a wronger of beautiful women, the prefix of whose name suggests to 
me, but not to the speaker of Chinese classroom English, that he is 
something of a bastard — or, to insult Fitzhurst with a rough Chinese 
equivalent of "bastard/' a "son of a turtle." 

As for Thurber's treatment of women, nothing much bothered my 
Chinese students. Mitty's shrewish wife was merely an amusing foreign 
aberration. Once, at a meeting of Shanxi University's English Club, 
American divorce rates became the topic, and my wife and 1 were 
amazed at a request that we entertain the gathering by improvising a 
skit representing a "typical" American marital quarrel. We declined, 
not entirely from shyness about our histrionic abilities. 

John E Povey's account of the response to Mrs. Rip van Winkle in 
his ESL class reminds me very much of my Shanxi students' response 
to Mrs. Walter Mitty: 

"If this story were told in your country, would it come out roughly 
the same in its characters and motivation?" [Povey] questioned. 
"No," said the Latin Americans, "Our women are satisfied with 
their position at home, and we have no stories of this henpecking." 
. . . There were several other responses from students in the same 
tone. "A Chinese wife is obedient to her husband. Wives in Taiwan 
don't take part in social activities at all." (1972, 190) 



132 



H. W. Matalene 



The same goes for mainland China as we experienced it in 1982. 
Wives did not attend the many official banquets to which my family 
and I were invited, and on our one officially arranged visit to a peasant 
household, the men sat down with us and our escorts and translators, 
while the women came and went between us and another building 
where they cooked some twenty dishes and ate what was left when 
we had finished. After all, Confucius said that "women and people 
of low birth are very hard to deal with. If you are friendly with thetn, 
they get out of hand, and if you keep your distance, they resent it" 
(1938, 216-217), 

Much of the best in recent Asian American literature has been 
written by women such as Maxine Hong Kingston, Betty Bao Lord, 
and Cathy Song about the subordination of women in Chinese culture, 
which Communism has not succeeded in legislating away. But the 
colonizing West cannot take credit for making Chinese women, at last, 
feel this subordination as pain. Its pathos has been a theme in China's 
own literature since The Book of Odes, long before Confucius; and with 
or urithout the pain, the subordination goes on. 

In the end, humiliated by his wife as usual, Thurber's hero enters 
his secret life for a last time: 

He put his shoulders back and his heels together. "To hell with 
the handkerchief," said Walter Mitty scornfully. He took one last 
drag on his cigarette and snapped it away. Then, with that faint, 
fleeting smile playing about his lips, he faced the firing squad; 
erect and motionless, proud and disdainful, Walter Mitty the 
Undefeated, inscrutable to the Ust. (37) 

In China, whether by the Guomindang or the Communists, political 
executions have been handled somewhat differently And I talked 
about this difference too. In this last resort of philosophical conviction, 
this ritual of sacrifice to sanctify ideology, the True Believers in China 
are thrust to their knees before another, who then blows their brains 
out from behind with a pistol. A bill may be sent to victims' families 
for the cost of the bullet. 

In 1982, the Cultural Revolution was over. The Gang of Four were 
gone. Mao Zedong was dead. For the time being the executions 
occasionally announced on the big bulletin board in downtown Taiyiian 
were of common criminals. Still, the so-called Ten Years of Chaos 
between 1966 and 1976 remained on everyone's mind at Shanxi 
University. Everyone told stories of persecution and martyrdom; every- 
one hoped that bygones were bygones, but when I was in Taiyiian no 
one was yet positive that Chi.ia's quest for Communism would not 
again turn to human sacrifice. 



Walter Mitty in China 



133 



That was before "June Fourth," as some of those students, now in 
the United States, refer to the Tienanmen massacre of 1989. In 1919, 
it had been "May Fourth," in 1925 "May Thirtieth," in 1935 "December 
Ninth," and we could go on at some length listing the bloody dates 
in China's long history of student activism against imperial, nationalist, 
and communist governments (Spence 1991, 117-23, 183-86; Snow 
1983, 100-105). I therefore want to close by reflecting upon the trouble 
my Shanxi students had not only with Mitty, but vAth stories by 
Sherwood Anderson, Conrad Aiken, and Ernest Hemingway in which 
the protagonists were rebellious young people. 

They wanted to know why these other stories were written, too. 
Essentially, they were acknowledging that they had grown up Chinese 
and that "interpretive charity" toward characters who were groudng 
up American was hard to develop. Despite their Marxist veneer, they 
came from Confucian, not Oedipal families. They grew up in a culture 
in which the old age of another is an automatic sign that deference 
is appropriate and that kind, paternal wisdom is to be expected in 
return. Reading Anderson, Aiken, and Hemingway, my Shanxi students 
had trouble conceiving that there was a culture in which unfocused 
disregard for well-meaning parents, teachers, and other authority 
figures might seem like "normal" adolescent behavior and need not 
be felt as criminal, insane, or simply inconceivable. 

It may easily be imagined that teaching in such a culture is an 
absolutely irresistible experience. Following their hearts' custom, a 
busload of students and colleagues came to the Taiyiian railroad station 
to see my wife and daughter and me off, pressing their palms against 
ours on the other side of the glass when we had boarded the train. I 
shall never forget it. 

But China's Confucian way of reading its generation gap has never 
been without problems. Long before Communism, as Jonathan Spence 
and many others have shown, China's changes of dynasty have been 
savage indeed; and the reading of Western literature during the p^st 
century has played a part in the Chinese Revolution (Spence 1981; 
1990, 302-303, 473, 570, 623), If one wishes to teach American 
literature to young people in China, then, one must remember how 
much closer to the "real world" the literary classroom is in China 
than it is here in the United States. Among other things, Mao Zedong 
was a poet and critic — a reader of translations of Mill, Montesquieu, 
Rousseau, and even Herbert Spencer (Spence 1990, 303). Literate 
China reads the art and criticism of the literary intelligentsia, wants 
to be told what it means, and alludes to classic literature constantly 
in public, political discourse. Literate America does not do this. Ronald 



134 



H. W. Matalene 



Reagan's speech writers trusted us to recognize the words of Clint 
Eastwood, but I am not holding my breath until I hear unidentified 
phrases from Gwendolyn Brooks or Michael Harper in an address by 
an American presidential candidate. 

Moreover, wanting to be told what a text means is not the same as 
wanting to discover — for oneself, and in dialogue with any other 
reader who cares to discuss the matter — the "passing theory" that 
seems to work best on this text at this sitting. In Reed Dasenbrock's 
terms, "the scene of learning" for Chinese students tends to be between 
them and "The Master" — not between them and the text of which 
their teacher is simply, for now, a better credentialed reader In the 
Confucian Analects, saying after saying and book after book, the scene 
of learning is between Confucius and his students — not between his 
students and the passages from history or The Book of Odes about 
which The Master speaks. And no matter how hard I trifed, some 
twenty-five hundred years after Confucius, I found it almost universally 
impossible to shift the scene of learning from the students' involvement 
with me to the students' involvement with the texts I assigned. 

In class, for instance, apropos of Hemingway's "Soldier's Home," I 
could not get anyone to do anything but praise the patriotism and 
valor of Harold Krebs, the protagonist. No one would talk about the 
fact that World War I has emptied Krebs of feeling and purpose. So I 
talked about it. And on my way back to the Foreign Experts' Building 
for lunch, I was accosted, one-on-one, by an agitated young PLA 
officer who wanted to know why American intellectuals hate soldiers. 
"I think it is a fine thing to be a soldier and defend one's country," 
he said. 

To be allowed to interpret literature in a culture where, for thousands 
of years, "passing theories" about classic texts have not only been 
produced and learned, but enforced and obeyed, is to be given a 
tremendous judicial responsibility. It is to be handed a potential power 
over life and death that few American English teachers can imagine 
and that no one in my acquaintance has ever knowingly sought by 
becoming an English teacher. 

In 1982, I was too naive to sense that I had that power — that I was 
teaching bright, friendly, patriotic young people new ideas for which 
to kill and be killed by Deng Xiaoping's soldiers, I should have known. 
But I had gone to China to see for myself if Communism was as bad 
as the American capitalist state and press had always claimed. Unaware 
that I was being recorded, I was merely surprised when an official of 
the provincial Bureau of Higher Education who had never been in my 
classroom complimented me on my teaching, some of which he had 



14b 



Walter Mitty in China 



135 



heard on tape. And I was merely amused when I heard from the 
campus grapevine that my students were being told in their required 
political meetings to "be polite to Professor Matalene, but beware the 
sugar-coated bullets of imperialist ideology that lie hidden in his 
readings and lectures." 

Until "June Fourth," I had wanted very much to go back to Shanxi 
and see how my old students were getting along under the Four 
Modernizations. But there was no sugar on the bullets of "June Fourth." 
And an old Shanxi friend now studying democracy in the United 
States — a rising young party member now in his thirties, who has 
been junketed all over the world wdth Taiwanese m.oney to meet with 
"June Fourth" leaders in exile — assures me that those who raised the 
Statue of Liberty in Tienanmen Square are all Chinese to the core: 
that if they want power, they must expect to take the paternalist role 
of The Master; that their loyalties are to persons rather than to 
institutions for the changing, interpretation, and enforcement of laws; 
and that there is not one genuinely democratic soul among them. 

There will no doubt be theoretically sophisticated readers of these 
pages who will accuse me of not having come to grips with my own 
cultural chauvinism. They will charge me with failure to privilege the 
Chinese "other," at least for the sake of argument and insight into 
myself. A few, innocent of history, may even feel that I have "bashed" 
the last, best hope that a whole new culture, peaceful, plentiful, and 
just, may yet be deduced, administratively, from the abstractions of 
Marxism. I would end with three reminders for such readers. First, 
large-scale cultural change is not a matter of academic play — of 
Derridean deconstruction's willing suspension of common sense. As 
Henry H. H. Remak has put it, speaking of the problems of Old Worid 
immigrants to the New World, "You have to remain something before 
and until you become something else" (1984, 77). Then, I would 
remind such readers that the most committed and dedicated "China- 
bashers" since 1949 have been the Chinese themselves and that the 
bashing has been of millions of bodies and not just of concepts and 
feelings. There is a "revolution," I think, inherent in capitalism's 
contradictions; its color, however, is not red, but green. The time must 
come when best-practice technology will have to be judged not by 
accountants, but by epidemiologists, ecologists, and engineers. And 
finally, I would recommend to my critics the shock of teaching fiction 
in China. I am betting that, after my accusers' return, we will renew, 
together, the favorite conversation of all the foreign experts I met 
theie: the conveisation about whether you think what has happened 
to you is even remotely like what I think has happened to me. 



147 



136 



H. W. Matalene 



Works Cited 

Bohannan, Laura. 1966. "Shakespeare in the Bush." Natural History 75( August- 
September): 28-33. 

Confucius. 1938. The Analects of Confucius, translated by Arthur Waley. New 

York: Vintage Books. 
Gladstone, J. R. 1972. "Language and Culture." In Teaching English as a Second 

language: A Book of Readings, 2nd ed., edited by Harold B. Allen and 

Russell N. Campbell, 192-95. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Marckwardt, Albert H. 1978. The Place of Literature in the Teaching of English 

as a Second or Foreign Language. An East-West Center Book. Honolulu: 

University Press of Hawaii. 
Pattison, Bruce. 1972. "The Literature Lesson." In Teaching English as a Second 

Language: A Book of Readings, 2nd ed., edited by Harold B. Allen and 

Russell N. Campbell, 195-98. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Povey, John F. 1972. "Literature in TESL Programs: The Language and the 

Culture." In Teaching English as a Second Language: A Book of Readings, 2nd 

ed., edited by Harold B. Allen and Russell N. Campbell, 185-91. New 

York: McGraw-Hill. 
Remak, Henry H. H. 1984. "European Romanticism and Contemporary 

American Counterculture." In Romanticism and Culture: A Tribute to Morse 

Peckham and a Bibliography of His Work, edited by H. W. iMatalene, 71-95. 

Columbia, SC: Camden House. 
Snow, Edgar. 1983. Edgar Snow's China: A Personal Account of the Chinese 

Revolution Compiled from the Writings of Edgar Snow. New York: Vintage. 
Spence, Jonathan D. 1981. The Gate of Heavenly Peace: The Chinese and Their 

Revolution, 1895-1980. New York: Viking Press. 

. 1990. The Search for Modem China. New York: Norton. 

Strevens, Peter. 1987. "Cultural Barriers to Language Learning." In Discourse 

Across Cultures: Strategies in World Englishes, edited by Larry E. Smith, 

169-78. New York: Prentice-Hall. 
Thurber, James. 1945. "The Secret Life of Walter Mitt>-" In The Thurber 

Carnival, 34-37. New York: Harper. 
Wallace, Catherine. 1986. Learning to Read in a Multicultural Society: The Social 

Context of Second Language Literaq/. Oxford: Pergamon InstitvUe of English. 
White, Hayden. 1981. "The Value of Narrativity in the Representation of 

Reality." In On Narrative, edited by W. J. T. Mitchell, 1-23. Chicago: 

University of Chicago Press. 



Ill Texts 



Teachers of literature once considered "the text" a stable artifact. They 
talked about it as an autonomous creation whose meaning could be 
decoded by careful explication. They also talked about certain indi- 
vidual texts as part of an approved arrangement, the canon, whose 
meaning contained the great tradition of Western thought. 

Recent critical debates have questioned the usefulness of such talk. 
Robert Scholes in Textual Power argues that instead of teaching auton- 
omous texts we need to teach textuality, the notion that "every poem, 
play and story is a text related to others, both verbal pre-texts and 
social subtexts, and all manner of post-texts including [our] own 
responses" (1985, 20). And Catharine Stimpson speaks for a growing 
number of teachers when she argues that the static, immobile canon 
must be reconstructed with new texts that reveal "a multiplicity of 
traditions carrying on together — sometimes harmoniously, sometimes 
not" (1988, 28). 

Although the seven essays in this section approach the issue from 
different perspectives, each asks us to rethink our understanding of 
texts. What texts should we teach? How should we teach them? And 
in what ways must we connect them to the larger matrix of culture? 

The ftrst three essays examine the value of contextual knowledge 
to an understanding of individual texts. Sandra Jamieson suggests that 
an author creates an interpretative community as "a model for her 
reader and for the actual community the writer appears to seek." She 
goes on to demonstrate how "ruptures" in three African American 
texts alert readers to expand their contextual knowledge. Chauncey A. 
Ridley explains how the knowledge of African mythology and African 
American folklore can help readers contextualize the apparently out- 
rageous violence in Toni Morrison's Beloved, Pancho Savery analyzes 
the history and politics of African American music, particularly bebop. 



137 



138 



Texts 



to reveal the cultural subtext at work in James Baldwin's "Sonny's 
Blues." 

The next three authors introduce us to new texts, encouraging us 
to see how their inclusion enriches our understanding of the cross- 
currents within our culture. David Leiwei Li asserts that the exclusive 
focus on Maxine Hong Kingston's The Woman Warrior as "the ultimate 
representative of Asian American creativity" disregards "the funda- 
mental relatedness of ethnic literary production." In his review of the 
poetry, fiction, and drama written by other contemporary Asian Amer- 
icans, he explores the recurring theme of "filiation and affiliation." 
Renny Christopher points out that the emerging canon of literature 
on the Vietnam war is almost exclusively "male . . , [and] Euro-Amer- 
ican." Because the war was a "shared historical experience," she argues 
that we need to balance our understanding by reading Vietnamese 
American texts. Suzanne Evertsen Lundquist examines the strategies 
Egyptian novelist Naguib Mahfouz uses to recreate and reinterpret 
Jewish, Christian, and Islamic sacred texts in his engaging narrative 
The Children of Gebelawi. 

The last author investigates the text of Native American writer 
Leslie Mamion Silko. Patricia Riley suggests that Silko's experiments 
with writing and storytelling revise our traditional understanding of 
the text. She traces the cultural history of "mixed bloods/' then turns 
to Ceremony to illustrate the tension between interpreter and informer 
in Silko's status as "storyteller." 

Works Cited 

Scholes, Robert. 1985. Textual Power: Literary Theory and the Teaching of 

English. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Stimpson, Catharine R. 1988. 'is There a Core in This Curriculum^" Change 

20(March-April): 26-31. 



Ji ly J 



11 Text, Context, and Teaching 
Literature by African 
American Women 



Sandra Jamieson 
Colgate University 



Deborah McDowell's call for a textual and contextual approach to 
literature by African American women precipitates a pedagogical 
dilemma for many teachers of cultural and cross-cultural literature: 
classes we once devoted simply to texts must now also teach their 
historical and cultural contexts, and finding a satisfactory balance is 
not easy. Traditional academic training would have us adopt the 
position of "informed interpreters," but, as Reed Way Dasenbrock 
observes in "Teaching Multicultural Literature" (Chapter 3, this vol- 
ume), such a strategy is neither pedagogically practical nor theoretically 
desirable in this case. If we place an overemphasis on context, we will 
render the text more radically "other" and thus less accessible as 
literature, leaving an opening for the sociological readings Robert 
Step to describes (1979). But if we reject the role of "expert," we leave 
our students with insufficient context, which will inevitably produce 
misreadings and prevent them from entering into the interprefive 
community of the text, encouraging them, instead, to ignore differences 
and understand these texts purely in relation to their own lives. The 
difficulty of creating a balance can seem overv\'helming. 

Dasenbrock argues that we do not need to look outside of the text 
for contextual knowledge. Instead, we must trust the writer to give us 
the assistance we need; however, this would seem to imply a unified 
"author" entirely in control of her text and a cultural context which 
permits her to be honest about her intentions and meanings. As Mary 
IPoovey shows in "Cultural Criticism" (Chapter 1, this volume), such 
assumptions limit the possibilities of cultural criticism. But the text can 
assist us if v/e modify Dasenbrock's advice with Poovey's insistence 
that we "ask how race, gender, class, and ethnicity work — how they 
produce and disrupt meanings" and explore the "trar:es this larger 
social formation produces on individual texts." A focus on both 



139 



140 



Sandra Jamieson 



explanation and disruption allows us to develop a method in which 
the text itself determines how much context we must teach. 

Novels by African American women writers frequently fail to 
provide the contextual assistance that Dasenbrock finds in African 
novels. And this failure frequently occurs at what turns out to be key 
moments in the text. Indeed, one could argue that key moments in 
these texts are almost always marked by the absence of the inf ormaiton 
or explanation readers would need to make sense of them. These 
ruptures seem to call for the application of contextual information, 
especially as prior to the ruptures the texts have taugh. z how to 
attend to their patterns and rhythms so that we will be sharply aware 
of the interruption and thus "hear" the call for context. Thomas 
Cassidy argues that Janie's story to Pheoby in Their Eyes Were Watching 
God serves to "create the very community [in EatonviUe] which the 
telling of the story assumes as a prerequisite" (1990, 2.')8). But I would 
expand this observation to apply to many texts by African American 
women, and it is precisely this ability to create the interpretive 
communities required by their texts through those texts themselves 
which allows them to teach us how to balance text and context. 

Many African American women's novels center upon a womart 
telling her story to a textual audience, usually to explain an event 
which can only be evaluated when its entire history is known and 
understood. As the woman tells her story, she teaches her listener how 
to understand it, and in so doing creates an interpretive community 
which is then a model for her reader and for the actual community 
the writer appears to seek. Approaching these texts as the fictional 
interpreter does — using the information provided by the text to help 
us understand it and expanding our contextual knowledge when we 
do not understand — renders the texts accessible to us and indicates 
what contextual knowledge is required. The moments when our 
interpretation fails occur when the text either suddenly ceases to 
explain an event or assertion or seems to overexplain it. Expanding 
our historical and cultural knov/ledge in response to these ruptures in 
the text will enable us to both understand them and explore what 
they reveal about tl.e communities and identities constructed in and 
by the text. Harriet Jacobs's Incidcfits in the Life of a Slave Girl: Written 
by Herself (1987), Zora Neale Hurston's Thetr Ein'S Were Wutchin;^ Cod 
(1978;, and Toni Morrison's The Bluest Ei/e (1972) provide excellent 
examples nf how such an interpretive and pedagogical strategy can 
be used to read and teach texls from a variety of hiblorical moments. 

The slaves who escaped t(» the North in the mid -nineteenth century 
faced the double task of creating identities for themselves as "free" 



Literature by African American Women 



141 



people and of creating con\munities within which to celebrate that 
freedom. Harriet Jacobs appears to have found her new home in the 
North considerably less free than she had imagined, and her "new" 
identity as active subject in control of her destiny much less accepted. 
Although she found patronage and support in the community of 
women abolitionists, her letters describing her "racial outrage/' "distrust 
and disillusionment" with Harriet Beecher Stowe and Cornelia Willis, 
and her general "lack of courage to meet the criticism and ridicule of 
educated people" reveal that she was not entirely at ease there (Yellin 
1985, 265-68). In Incidents, as William Andrews observes, she ad- 
dressed these lacks by creating both model characters with whom her 
white northern readers could identify, and failed discursive relation- 
ships which they could strive to avoid. These provide teachers of 
cultural and cross-cultural literature warnings about textual interpre- 
tation and lessons about how we should approach the text, 

Jacobs's direct address to her "reader" is her most obvious connective 
strategy. Her recitation of her preadolescent history is flat and seems 
to exist only to introduce her story; however, it reveals the differences 
between her two mistresses and their similar hypocrisy. The "reader" 
is clearly "recognized" as more humane than either mistress, and 
Jacobs establishes a conspiratorial relationship with "her" asserting 
that "could you have seen . . . could you have heard . . . could you 
have witnessed that scene as I saw it, you would exclaim, Slavery is 
damnable'' (1987, 23), Her constant repetition of the phrase "I know 
of a slave who . . ." strengthens this relationship as she shares the 
secrets of slavery with us. 

Constructed thus, the "reader" is assumed by the text to have the 
heart of an abolitionist. "She" too would entrust "her" baby to an 
escaped slave to thwart the slave catchers, as does the first Mrs. Bruce. 
"She" would also hide "Brent," even from an unsympathetic spouse, 
as does the southern "unfe of a slave holder" (in what is, ironically, 
the only functioning interracial community in the text). If the reader 
is male, he approaches her text as a "respectful friend" like the 
Reverend Jeremiah Durham, rather than with "idle curiosity" or 
"contempt" (Andrews 1986, 250). But with this emphasis on respect, 
the reader must beware that good intentions do not cau^'^ her to act 
"on the slave's behalf" but against the slave's wishes, as does the 
iiecond Mrs. Bruce in purchasing "Linda Brent" rather than allowing 
her to be hvr own agent of freedom. 

l\ is tWs issue of a^oncy which really forms the heart of Harriet 
Jacobs's story of "Linda Brent," and it is thus the issue which precipitates 
the major rupture in the text. The reader may be able (o join the 



142 



Sandra Jamieson 



abolitionist community and react with appropriate horror at the vic- 
timization of women by the slave system, but could she accept the 
ex-slave as a subject with free agency and listen to her story? Moreover, 
could she grant the ex-slave authority over her own story? (The power 
of this question is revealed by the fact that it was not fully answered 
within critical circles until Yellin's research in the 1980s.) 

After presenting herself as a helpless victim of Dr. Flint, Jacobs 
"switches the gend t network ' (Tate 1989, 109) and recounts her 
seduction of Mr. Sands, assuring us that "I knew what I did, and I 
did it with deliberate calculation" (54). This admission is accompanied 
by explanations of her lack of practical alternative, appeals to the 
reader to understand her situation, and many statements of regret. 
However, she also asserts that "the slave woman ought not to be 
judged by the same standards as others" (56), seeming to imply less 
regret than her protestations would have us believe. An indication of 
the significance of this event is Jacobs's excessive delay in relating it. 
After she describes Flint's whisperings, she is clearly preparing to tell 
us something; she speaks of her longing for someone to confide in 
and her inability to tell her grandmother who was "very strict on such 
subjects" (29) but, having built up to a fuller confession, she exclaims 
"my heart Is so full, and my pen is so weak" (30) and changes the 
subject. She then includes four chapters describing "incidents" of the 
victimization inherent in slavery before she can return to the confession 
she seemed ready to make at the end of chapter five. 

We can only understand the significance of her reticence, excessive 
apology, and interrupted narrative when we place this confession in 
its sociohistorical context. Thus, this is the moment in our classes when 
we need to provide additional information for our students. Claudia 
Tate stresses that it was "indeed radical, revolutionary autonomy for 
a woman to record [such an act of seduction] in a public document, 
irrespective of her social status" (1989, 109). Jacobs had cause to fear 
the reaction of her audience. Andrews explains that "women aboli- 
tionists tried to fire the moral indignation of their northern sisters by 
showing how the chattel principle had denied the slave-woman her 
rightful status in antebellum America's 'cult of True Womanhood"' 
However, their emphasis on "piety, purity, submissivencss and do- 
mesticity" led to their "reinforcement of those tenets" (1986, 241-42). 
These v/ere tenets that Jacobs challenged on several levels: by sedtjcing 
Sands, by appropriating Flint's Ictlcr-wriling strategy and effectively 
manipulating him, by leveling her gaze on the community from her 
hidden location and, finally, as possessor of the gaze, by revealing 



Literature by African American Women 



143 



these "secrets" and writing her own story in which she is active subject 
rather than passive, victimized object. 

If we look back to the rupture in the narrative between chapters 
five and ten with this knowledge, we begin to understand the centrality 
of Jacobs's confession. We also see a new significance in the failed 
confession scenes in those interim chapters. Andrews argues that from 
the "trembling awe and shame" causing her to conceal the truth from 
Aunt Marthy, Jacobs's female readers are warned of the impediments 
to a free discursive relationship when "all that stood between them, 
in effect, was the white female reader's moral pedestal" (250). The 
attempt to enlist the support of Mrs. Flint provides a second challenge 
to the reader. Will she 

allow herself to become a discrete, isolated entity dependent on 
men, for the sake of bearing male secrets with discretion? Or 
would she use her hard-won discernment and discretion to sep- 
arate herself from patriarchal control so as to cherish and foster 
the confidences that maintained the sub rosa women's community? 
(Andrews 1986. 256) 

To accept Jacobs's secret agency, the reader she imagined must unite 
with the women of the text against patriarchal structures. Today, the 
reader must understand how those structtires functioned in the 1860s 
before she or he can understand both the rebellion and the desperation 
inherent in Linda Brent's actions. 

At the end of Incidettts, Brent finally "muster[s] sufficient courage" 
to tell her story to her daughter. She says "my pent-up feelings had 
often longed to pour themselves out to someone I could trust" (189), 
just as later she would fearfully pour them out to us. The structure of 
her confession to Ellen appears to be exactly that of Incidents itself: 
"I recounted my early sufferings in slavery, and told her how nearly 
they had crushed me. I began to tell her how they had driven me 
into a great sin" (188), but Ellen interrupts, revealing that she already 
knows, and forgives her mother unconditionally. Brent says, "she 
hugged me closer as she spoke, and 1 thanked God that the knowledge 
I had so much dreaded to impart had not diminished [her] . . . affection" 
(189). Significantly, Ellen's interruption occurs at precisely the point 
that Jacobs interrupts her narrative in the text: at the moment when 
she would reveal Brent's great sin of agency. The embrace of under- 
standing between mother and child is the same embrace Jacobs desires 
from her readers once she has explained the whole story to us — but 
first we have to understand the context of her "great sin." 

Zora Neale Hurston adopted a similar strategy in Their Eyes Were 
Watching Cod, where the event that Janie must explain is also one in 



144 



Sandra ]amieson 



which she exercised agency. As Janie returns to Eatonville, the people 
sit "in judgment" of her on their porches (1978, 10), just as a few 
days earlier a jury had more formally sat in judgment. In both instances 
they "look into . . . [her] loving Tea Cake . . . [to] see whether it was 
done right or not" (17, 274), but remain distant, causing Janie to wish 
they would "come kiss and be kissed" so that she could "sit down 
and tell 'em things" (18). Pheoby, her "kissin'-friend," does come and 
she then becomes the "ideal audience, who . . . mirrors back to her 
friend a faith in her power of agency" (Pryse 1985, 12) allowing Janie 
to tell her story to Pheoby and the reader. As the two women are 
embraced by the "kissing young darkness," now also part of the 
community of listeners (Cassidy 1990, 213), we remember Ellen's 
embrace of Linda Brent. 

The mention of Tea Cake so long before we meet him indicates his 
importance in the story, and indeed, as Mary Helen Washington points 
out, from the moment when Tea Cake acknowledges the "privelege 
tuh tell yuh all about mahself" the story becomes his rather than 
Janie's (Washington 1987, 243). As we follow Janie through her life, 
we see an increase in agency from simply leaving her first husband, 
to publicly humiliating (and metaphorically killing) her second, and 
literally killing her third. However, her story justifies these first two 
actions while the third would seem, at least superficially, to have been 
unavoidable and undesirable — as the judge and jury concluded. 

In the Everglades, Janie learned to lell big stories" (Hurston 1978, 
200), and this skill saves her life when she must speak for herself in 
court. In telling her slory "she had to go way back to let them know 
how she and Tea Cake had been with one another. . . . She sat there 
and told and when she was through she hushed" (278). The story she 
tells to the court thus appears to be structured in exactly the same 
way as the story she tells Pheoby, preceded by "'tain't nothin' lak you 
might think. So 'tain't no use in me telling you somethin' unless Ah 
give you de understandin' to go 'long wid it" (19), and ending with 
a "finished silence" (28^3). 

This issue of understanding appears frequently in the narrative, 
especially during the time "on the muck," but it is misunderstanding 
that Janie fears more than death as she sits in the court room, and it 
is misunderstanding that caused the anger of both black communities. 
Janie is afraid that her listeners vnll conclude that "she didn't want 
Tea Cake and v/anted him dead" (279), and thus she tries to explain 
the context of her actions. 

Her story of life on the muck reveals the complexity of her situation 
and sugge^its why she feared being misunderstood, Indeed, this com- 



1 O U 



Literature by African American Women 



145 



plexity has produced fierce debate among contemporary scholars about 
how we should interpret Tea Cake's behavior (best summarized by 
Jennifer Jordan, 1988). If Tea Cake is "the bee to her blossom/' the 
realization of her childhood dream, he is also abusive and Janie's love 
is described as "self-crushing" (Hurston 1978, 192). Hurston tells us 
at the beginning that for women "the dream is the truth. Then they 
act and do things accordingly/' calling into question the "truth" of 
Janie's dream relationship with Tea Cake as does the sentence preceding 
it: "Women forget all those things they don't want to remember, and 
remember everything they don't want to forget" (9). Janie seems to 
forget the similarity between the deaths of Tea Cake and Joe: both 
could have been saved by early medical attention, both accuse Janie 
of maliciously causing their affliction, and both die in conflict with 
Janie as she regains control of her life. She also seems to forget the 
similarities between all three of her marriages: each husband ceases 
to ask her opinion and requires her to be submissive, each physically 
abuses her, and each effectively silences and objectifies her. What she 
remembers is the sense of community amongst the migrant workers 
in the Everglades. Although she stresses her satisfaction with her life, 
she turns her gaze on the violent, sexist, and "color struck" nature of 
the community, as well as the harsh Jim Crow laws and general racism 
outside of the muck. (Hurston already addressed these issues in "Color 
Struck: A Play Fire!!" [1926] and would return to them in "The 'Pet' 
Negro System" [1943], "Crazy for this Democracy" [1945], and other 
essays.) In these respects the muck community is not significantly 
different from Eatonville and, like it also, the inhabitants make the 
best of their situation by celebrating life, language, and each other 
We can only understand the tension between what Janie remembers 
and what she forgets when we turn our attention to the historical and 
cultural context of this novel. Thus, once again, the text has indicated 
where we need to pause and provide our students with additional 
information. 

Hurston's anthropological studies of African American folklore 
produced a wealth of "lying tales" and "big stories" and a love for 
the people ./hose stories these were, "in an era when many educated 
and cultured blacks prided themselves on removing all traces of their 
rural black origins, when a high-class 'Negro' virtue was not to 'act 
one's color'" (Washmgton 1982, 15). Thus her work was generally 
rejected by the community of African American writers which was 
focusing its attention on the "tragically colored" and, as Robert 
Hcmenway shows, missed the complexity of her arguments (1977, 
240-43). In addition, Paula Giddi igs (1985) shows that in its failure 



146 



Sandra }amieson 



to either romanticize or reject black folk culture. Their Eyes Were 
Watching God fell outside of the two main political positions within 
the larger black community at the time of its publication. Hurston did 
not join W. E. B. Du Bois in the call for some self-segregation which 
eventually led to his resignation from the NAACP (211), but neither 
did she accept "assimilationist" black leaders who she claimed had 
"quit the race via the [white person's] tea table" (Hemenway 1977, 
238). Her critique of the racism of northern liberals was generally 
suppressed, although few seemed to be ready to hear it anyway 
especially when it sounded like praise for the South (286-300). 
Giddings argues that most of the more than 400,000 African Americans 
who migrated north in the 1930s were ready to accept the doctrine 
of upward mobility that became so prominent in the 1940s and to 
reject their roots in the rural South. In this they were encouraged by 
white business interests seeking to "prop up Blacks so that they would 
be in a position to aid the economy by consuming its goods" (238). 
Thus, Hurston would have been justified in fearing that by killing Tea 
Cake, the representative of black culture and community, and returning 
to her position of economic security and status in Eatonville, Janie 
would seem to be asserting the values of the latter and rejecting the 
former. Indeed, this is exactly what both black communities in the 
text accuse her of, and each time Janie tells her story she tells it in 
response to this suspicion. 

Any such misunderstandings are resolved when we read Janie's 
story as Pheoby does. Following Pheoby's lead, the reader can grow 
"ten feet higher from jus' listenin' tuh" Janie (Hurston 1978, 284). But 
that reader is also encouraged to change things where they are unequal, 
participate fully, and learn from the story that "you got to go there 
tuh know there" (285). Janie has known Tea Cake's world, and "the 
kiss of his memory made pictures of love and light against the wall" 
(286). Those pictures are her dream, and this Tea Cake — the Tea Cake 
who was passionate, celebrated black culture, and invited Janie to join 
him in these things — is the one she wants to keep alive. Although she 
desired escape from the "mad dog" of Tea Cake's sexist rage and 
jealousy, she wants those judging the relationship to understand that 
it was only these patriarchal aspects that she wanted dead, not Tea 
Cake himself or the "folk" culture he represen'.ed. 

Tea Cake's attitudes about work and money differentiate him from 
Logan Killicks and Joe Stark (as Susan Willis (1987] and others point 
out); however, hi'^' appropriation of their patriarchal attitudes leads to 
his downfall. The similar destructiveness of the values and standards 



Literature by African American Women 



147 



of beauty determined by patriarchal white society concerns many 
African American women writers today. The communities portrayed 
by Toni Morrison are for the most part default communities which 
would not exist in a nonsexist, nonracist society. Their inhabitants are 
determined by the same patriarchal and "color struck" forces as 
Hurston's, but they are not saved by a folk tradition, and thus 
communal power assumes a negative character, as Barbara Christian 
(1985) has demonstrated. In many ways Morrison charts the results 
of the death of tho black culture Tea Cake represented. A discussion 
of the context described above will help our students understand the 
complexity and importance of this distinction. 

As Claudia narrates the story of Pecola's "unbeing" in The Bluest 
Eye, she adopts the tone of one reminiscing to another member of the 
community and we thus become a part of that community. As such, 
we have access to the clues the text provides to assist our understanding. 
We read the "Dick and Jane" primer she quotes from and recognize 
the power of its normative agenda and the subsequent alienation of 
those of its intended readers who are African American children. We 
stand outside with her and look at the disused storefront in which 
Pecola lived. Then we listen to the histories of Pauline and Cholly 
Breedlove as if this will explain away the rape. However, at the end 
Claudia tells us that we are part of the community that caused Pecola's 
descent into madness: we are all responsible. Thus we enter into an 
interpretive community with the narrator on another level, as we come 
to understand and share her guilt for the thing that must be explained. 

As readers we are no longer positioned as white abolitionist women 
conspiring with a narrator against the racist patriarchy, or as black or 
white women celebrating the victory of positive black communal 
values over negative patriarchal forces, in this case, we are positioned 
either as members of a small black or a larger white hegemonic 
community, both of which were established on the back of Pecola and 
precipitated her destruction. Not only are we implicated in her madness 
because of "all of our waste which we dumped on her and which she 
absorbed" (159), but we are also beneficiaries of that destniction. 
Claudia reminds us that 

we were so beautiful when we stood astride her ugliness. Her 
simplicity decorated us, her guilt sanctified us, her pain made us 
glow with health, her awkwardness made us think we had a 
sense of humor. . . . We honed our egos on her, padded our 
characters with her frailty, and yawned in the fantasy of our 
strength. (159) 



lb.-) 



148 



Sandra Jamieson 



The interpretive community that Pecol a /Morrison creates for us is 
thus one in which the members learn to understand the consequences 
of their lives and accept responsibility for their privileges. 

The event we must understand in order to fully realize our role in 
this is the particular moment of Pecola's loss of self. And as with the 
other works we have seen, that moment is indicated to us by its radical 
difference from the rest of the text in its refusal to explain itself. 
Although we have seen Pecola wishing herself invisible as her parents 
fight, the significant moment is when that invisibility is confirmed by 
an outsider — Mr. Yacobowsky. Our attention is drawn to this scene 
because it is the first of only two present-tense narratives in the novel 
(the second reveals Pecola talking to "herself" at the end). As Pecola 
walks to the store to buy candy, we glimpse her world and her 
negotiation of it. With her we feel the "promise and delicate security" 
of the coins in her shoe and see the "familiar and therefore loved 
images" of the yellow-headed dandelions. She appears to select her 
candies, "Mary Janes/' for their taste, which she lovingly imagines. 
However, after her experience with Yacobowsky, the store owner, we 
see that it is more complex than that: in response to his gaze, the 
candies become an image of what Pecola is not — what Yacobowsky 's 
inability to see her has indicated she should be. Thus, finally, "To eat 
the candy is somehow to eat the eyes, eat Mary Jane. Love Mary Jane. 
Be Mary Jane" (43). 

What Pecola sees reflected in the white man's eyes is "a vacuum 
where curiosity ought to lodge. And something more. The total absence 
of human recognition" (42). She sees the same lack of recognition in 
the eyes of many others: the children who tease her out of "contempt 
for their own blackness" (55); Maureen Peel, who taunts her with her 
own light skin (61); Geraldine, who calls her "nasty little black bitch" 
(75); and Mrs. Breedlove, who ignores her to tend to the white child 
(87). When someone does finally "see" her, it is Cholly, who notices 
that she looks "whipped" and, overcome by fnastration, rapes her 
The fact that she is not Mary jane overshadows all of her interactions 
and confirms her self-hatred. The fact that they are not Pecola allows 
the other characters to affirm themselves. These failures to "see" Pecola 
function like the failed confession scenes in Incidents, as a warning to 
black and white readers about the consequences of such blindness. 
But it is the interruption of the past-tense structure of the novel with 
this present-tense sequence which indicates a moment when we need 
to pause and try to explain what the text does not. Morrison/Claudia 
shows how the other characters came to hate themselves and believe 
themselves ugly as a result of sim.ilar racist blindness and cultural 



IGj 



Literature by African American Women 



149 



alienation, but the fact that the narrative of Pecola's experience is 
written in the present tense indicates that although this text is set in 
1941, we are dealing with more than simply one child's loss of self: 
the event is timeless and is still occurring. In order to understand this 
connection and its full significance, we must look at both the historical 
and the textual context of The Bluest Eye. 

The historical moment we occupy as we realize our place in the 
interpretive community of the text is the 1960s, and it would appear 
that the novel returns to 1941 to trace the beginning of attitudes 
Morrison perceived in her own time. The year 1941 obviously has 
multiple significances in U.S. history. It represented the end of an era 
as the nation hovered on the brink of a war which would bring 
profound changes to American culture, and at first we might feel the 
need to explain this in all of its complexity. However, it is more 
revealing to explore the selection of 1941 in a text vmtten in the late 
1960s in terms of Executive Order 8802, which prohibited employment 
discrimination in the "defense industry or Government because of 
race, creed, color, or national origin." This order was issued by President 
Roosevelt to prevent the July 1 march on Washington by hundreds of 
thousands of African Americans organized by A. Philip Randolph's 
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, Although it seemed to have 
significant ramifications, in fact it produced only superficial changes 
and did not prevent "widespread discrimination" (Franklin 1969, 578- 
80). It thus demonstrated that the problem of hegemonic racism could 
not be solved purely by "equal rights" legislation — a demonstration 
whose implications had still not been fully internalized in the 1960s 
but which the "Dick and Jane" extracts amply reveal. 

Giddings cites the onset of Worid War II as the moment when the 
psychological manipulation of race and gender reached new heights. 
The industrial expansion of the period created a need for new markets, 
and the increased employment of African Americans in industry 
produced a new pool of potential consumers, so, Giddings claims, "a 
formidable array of propaganda" was developed to revive the attitudes 
of the "cult of true womanhood" and "promote the accumulation of 
material goods." But first, "Blacks[' and] women's sense of self had to 
be whittled away before they could become postulants at the altar of 
the 'new religion'" (242). Thus Pauline Breedlove comes to hate herself 
as she watches the movies of the 1930s, and Pecola begins to desire 
the blue eyes of the Shirley Temple mug and the Mary jane candies. 
The positive possibilities of black culture and identity were skillfully 
destroyed and replaced by the materialist desires of the women from 
"Mobile. Aiken. From Newport News" (Morrison 1972, 67) who control 



150 



Sandra Jamieson 



the "dreadful funkiness of passion . . . nature . . . [and] human emo- 
tions" (68) and are unable to see beyond appearances. 

As we begin to understand how the ideology which established the 
white, middle-class, nuclear family as normative frames and determines 
our relations despite legislation promising to "end discrimination/' we 
can return to Pecola's desire to "be Mary Jane" (43). The fact that the 
scene is written in the present tense, like the quotes from the primer 
which frame and structure the text, indicates that our own failure of 
vision continues to create "Pecolas." Thus, the contextual knowledge 
which The Bluest Eye has prompted us to provide enables our students 
to trace the complex influences of education and consumerism on 
Pecola's identity formation and its continued impact in the present. 
By selecting Claudia to tell Pecola's story, Morrison provides a model 
reader who "reads" the consequences of a lack of community and 
self-love. And by positioning her readers as members of Claudia's 
community, she creates an interpretive community which both "sees" 
Pecola and recognizes its complicity in her destruction. However, this 
recognition can only occur when readers understand the specific 
sociohistorical context of the moment of Pecola's "unbeing." Thus, the 
text calls on us to provide that context. 

Interpreters, listeners, and narrative interruptions function similarly 
m other works by African American women. For example, in Gloria 
Naylor's Linden Hills (1986), we enter Willa's interpretive community 
to "read" the lives that her predecessors had inscribed on their bodies 
and their few personal possessions. The textual disjuncture between 
life on the hill and Willa's experience in the basement forces us outside 
the text to sociological studies of black communities modeled on white 
patriarchal society. Likewise, in Alice Walker's Temple of My Familiar 
(1989), the apparently unconnected characters suffer because they 
ignore their mothers and their past before we, and Suwelo, learn to 
listen to Miss Lissie. As the characters learn their racial and familial 
histories, the juxtaposition of their stories demands an exploration of 
the racial and interracial tensions marking the context of this novel. 

This complex relationship between the interpretive communities 
established by the texts and the contextual knowledge required to 
understand them can serve many functions as we teach literature by 
African American women. While we may wish that our students would 
come to literature with the requisite historical and cultural knowledge, 
their lack of it necessitates that we teach them to carefully attend to 
each text in order to discover what they must learn before they can 
interpret its tensions. Such a pedagogy allows us to integrate our 
teaching of text and context without removing our focus from the 



Literature by African American Women 



151 



literature. But perhaps a greater benefit is that it encourages the 
students to take a more interactive approach to reading and engaging 
in cultural studies because their own reading both reveals what they 
need to learn and provides a purpose for learning it. 

Works Cited 

Andrews, William L. 1986. To Tell A Free Story: The First Century of Afro- 
American Autobiography 1760-1865. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. 

Cassidy Thomas. 1990. "Desire and Representation in Twentieth Century 
American Realism." Ph.D. diss., SUNY Binghamton. 

Christian, Barbara. 1985. Black Feminist Criticism: Perspectives on Black Women 
Writers. New York: Pergamon. 

Franklin, John Hope. 1969. From Slavery to Freedom: A History of Negro 
Americans. New York: Vintage. 

Giddings, Paula. 1985. When arid Where I Enter: The Impact of Black Women 
on Race and Sex in America. New York: Bantam. 

Hemenway, Robert E. 1977. Zora Neale Hurston: A literary Biography. Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press. 

Hurston, Zora Neale. 1978. Their Eyes Were Watching God. Urbana: University 
of Illinois Press. 

. 1979. "The 'Pet' Negro System" and "Crazy for this Democracy" 

In / Love Myself When I Am Laughing . . . And Then Again When I Am Looking 
Mean and Impressive: A Zora Neale Hurston Reader, edited by Ahce Walker. 
Old Westbury, NY: Feminist. 

Jacobs, Harriet A. 1987 [1861]. Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl: Written by 
Herself. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 

Jordan, Jennifer. 1988. "Feminist Fantasies: Zora Neale Hurston's Their Eyes 
Were Watching God.'' Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature 7: 105-17. 

McDowell, Deborah. 1989. "Reading Family Matters." In Changing Our Own 
Words: Essays on Criticism, Theory, and Writing by Black Women, edited by 
Cheryl Wall, 75-97. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. 

Morrison, Toni. 1972. The Bluest Eye. New York: Pocket. 

Naylor, Gloria. 1986. Linden HilU. New York: Penguin. 

Pryse, Marjorie. 1985. "Zora Neale Hurston, Alice Walker, and the 'Ancient 
Power' of Black Women." In Conjuring: Black Womeft, Fiction, and Literary 
Tradition, edited by Marjorie Pryse and Hortense J. Spillers, 1-24. Bloom- 
ington: Indiana University Press. 

Stepto, Robert B. 1979. "Teaching Afro-American Literature: Survey of Tra- 
dition." In Afro-American Literature: The Reconstruction of Instruction, edited 
by Dexter Fisher and Robert B. Stepto, 8-24. New York: Modem Language 
Association. 

. 1979. From Behind the Veil: A Study of Afro-American Narrative, 

Urbana: University of Illinois Press. 
Tate, Claudia. 1989. "Allegories of Black Female Desire; or. Rereading Ninc- 

fccnth-Cenlury Sentimental Narratives of Black Female Authority." In 



Sandra Jamieson 



Changing Our Own Words: Essays on Criticism, Theory, and Writing by Black 
Women, edited by Cheryl Wall 98-126. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers 
University Press. 

Walker, Alice. 1989. The Temple of My Familiar. San Diego: Harcourt. 

Wall, Cheryl A., ed. 1989. Changing Our Own Words: Essays on Criticism, 

Theory, and Writing by Black Women. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University 

Press. 

Washington, Mary Helen. 1982. "Teaching Black-Eyed Susans: An Approach 
to the Study of Black Women Writers/' In All the Women Are White, All the 
Slacks Are Men, But Some of Us Are Brave: Black Women's Studies, edited by 
Gloria T. Hull, Patricia Bell Scott, and Barbara Smith, 208-17. Old Westbury, 
NY: Feminist. 

, ed. 1987, Invented Lives: Narratives of Black Women, 1860-1960. 

Garden City, NY: Doubleday. 

Willis, Susan. 1987. Specifying: Black V/omen Writing the American Experience. 

Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. 
Yellin, Jean Fagan. 1985. "Texts and Contexts of Harriet Jacobs' Incidents in 

the Life of a Slave Girl: Written by Herself" In The Slave's Narrative: Texts 

and Contexts, edited by Charles T. Davis and Henry Louis Gates, Jr., 262- 

82. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. 



12 Sethe's ''Big, Bad" Love 



Chauncey A. Ridley 

California State University Sacramento 



Part I 

Inspired by the historical account of Margaret Gamer, an escaped slave 
who attempted to kill her children rather than allov.' them to be 
returned to slavery, Morrison's Beloved imaginatively examines Gamer's 
infanticide as a form of uncompromising maternal love in conflict, 
certainly with white racists but, more emphatically, with the segregated 
community of black ex-slaves in Ohio. The vernacular basis of her 
conflict with the black community is the subject of this article. 

By vernacular expression, 1 mean those "arts native or peculiar to 
a particular country or locale," More specifically, I want to insist that 
verifiable traces of West African myth, religion, and aesthetic criteria 
that early slaves could hold in memory and transmit orally have 
survived in the oral traditions of expression that segregated black 
communities have developed in America, and these traces distinguish 
traditional African American vernacular expression from other Amer- 
ican traditions of expression. 

Morrison has stated that in Beloved she places the emphasis on the 
"minds of the slaves," African descendants who have bcrn socially 
segregated their entire lives and descended from parents who, for 
generations, have been segregated.' Therefore, since Morrison's body 
of work clearly attests to her dismissal of the condescending assumption 
that the trauma of captivity, economic deportation, and enslavement 
somehow reduced slaves to a tabula rasa, the black communily'r, 
predominant intellectual influences are Pan-African in Beloved. Spe- 
cifically, vernacular "badness" is a secular adaptation of an an^e^^ 
West African belief system according to which the community of e>;- 
slav_ in Ohio not only anticipate, quite accurately, ^ona- calamity 
about [o befall Sethe and all in close proximity lo her, but condemn 

153 



154 



Chauncey A. Ridley 



her infanticide, attempt to permanently expel her from their community; 
then finally, reintegrate her. 

1 am not suggesting that Beloved dues not expend a powerful and 
satisfying range ( humiia drtimn and emotion to even its most casual 
readers. I am siiggestinp, that levels of meaning specific to the Pan- 
African vernacular tradition are constitutive of the novel's complete 
artistic performance and available to those readers willing to research 
and contempiale the spet iIil l^an-Alrican vernacular resources of great 
African American literary texts Not even one's own tradition can be 
obtained without labor; therefore one leaching a truly multicultural 
course of study should not resent the need to bring to African American 
literature at least the equivalent scholarly effort one applies to eluci- 
dating the specific Western traditions informing u'orks such as The 
Orestcia. Beowulf, or "The Wasteland." Pan-African lore and authori 
tative analyses of its idiom, valuer, and aesthetics are availalii^ in mo5>t 
moderately sized collepe and university libraries, and ^he effort of 
researching them involves no more than \vhal is requin d of African 
American undergraduates who must become articulate in Western 
traditions before receiving their bachelor's degrees. 

Sethe's "bad" response to the rugitive Slave Law is the bloody 
outgrowth of her "big" love, a love more uncompromisingly committed, 
self-sufficient, and autonomous than any other represented in Beloved. 
When abandoned by the community of ex-slaves in Ohio and cornered 
by the ^lave hunters, Sethe defends her autonomy and self- sufficiency 
v/ith outrageous violence, the most salient feature of traditional tales 
of "badness" "Big love" is not an rxprcrision frequently found in oral 
folklore, but it is one form of a larger impulse toward the unci>mpro- 
mising individual aul(»ni>my mylhologi/ed in Pan-African religious 
secular \o\\\ an impulse that in all "bad" lore inevitably results in 
violence, 1 will explain Sethe's iinromprt^mi^ing "big" love before 
more fully clarifying the blwdy "b.idne^s" which, act(»rdinp In the 
vernacular lore, is one of the most typical and potentially disastrous 
results of uncompromising; black autonomy. 

Even before Sethe kills Beloved, the community finds her guilty of 
a form (if pride that prt.-edes disaster the uncompromising "pride" 
(Morrjsttn 1987, 171) of a "used to be slave woman" %vho resolves ti^ 
keep her children away from %vhat she "know(s) is terrible' (163) A 
slave'- outrageous claim io suih a 'big" luve trespassrs t»n the 
prerogative? of the slave ov/ninj; status quo ^vho, even to the point 
of breaking up slavu famiht'S, Irgjily uwn jrid Luntrol a 5jla\ l* s children. 
The lav allov/s ^^laves only to lo\'o "small, gras*^ blades, salamander^, 
spiders, v/(»odpeckers. . . . Anylhinv, bi>:>/,er wouldn't d(v A woman, a 



Srthe's "Big. Bad" Love 



155 



child, a brother — a bi^ lovi' (my emphasis) hke that would split (a 
slave} wide open." 'Loving small" connotes not only a slave's love 
turned to small things with no cash value for the master, but also for 
loving c\ spouse, child, or friend "just a little bit . » . so when they 
broke its back or shoved it in a croaker sack . . . you'd have a little 
love left over fur the next one" (45). Paul D knows that even his 
postbellum freedom is deficient until he gets to "a place where you 
could love anything you chose- -not lu need permissjon for dt-iire - 
well now, lhat was freedom" (162). Lacking that, slaves, even at Sweet 
Home ur in Ohio, must learn to love small temporarily, fatalistically, 
without commitment — or risk being "split wide open" by the legal 
violence of the slave system, 

Sethe has never learned to love "small." As a young girl she was 
owned by a master who fostered in his slaves the illusion of autonomy 
by encoura^^ih)^ them to initiate their cnvn solutions to problems 
encountered in their duties, to work one day a week off the plantation 
called Sweet Home foi personal wages, to use those wapes to buy 
th(Mr freedom, and to marr)- whom they choose. Sethe chooses her 
first husband, Halle, on Mie basis of his rapacity to love his mother 
"bip/' enough t(j buy her freedom with five years' v/orth of his Sundays. 

Halle's achievement stioms to attest to a relatively beniji^n system 
of slavery in which a slave earns human status through capitalistic 
initiative. Thus, Halle joins one of the central slave oral and literary 
traditions depieiuv; figures, such as Olaudiih nquiano, who by v,'urking 
extra, learning to read, and learning how to talculale their earnings 
eventually acquire enough money lu buy freed(^m. However, en\pha- 
sizing the difference between Halle and liquianu reveals that Morri^^on*s 
novel is a story of "big, bad" Iovl* and nut simply one uf individual 
capitalistic initiative. Halle and Setlie insist upon not only living but 
lovir\g as free, committed individuals. 

Ihc economics of slavery and the ide(,ilo^;y of racism so ri'^' ^chslv 
sever black love and family tie'» that nL>t even Lquiano's eft^ can 
overcome the "man in the middle" (Iic|uiano 1987, 2^); the slave trader 
whi» lunis Africans into propertv sleeps between fiquiano and his 
sister on their final night together, representing the slave system's 
reprosioion of black family ties. 

When Sethe and Halle marry and have three children their first 
tliree vears t^f marriage, the impu^sibility I'f Halle's wnrking enougl: 
iiUhdc'-y^ to frep them all begini, to expose the violence beneath the 
befugn surface (»f Sweet Hume. Tlie plantation's decline into difficult 
linancijl straits intz-n^^ifie- this threat, since selling th^' children would 
raise capital bo Halle and Sethe plan to C'Capr* Iheir "big Inve," their 



156 



Chauncey A. Ridley 



claim to a family unity that supercedes the slave ovsTier's legal economic 
interests, makes them outlaws. If slaves like Hquiano must be deter- 
mined and ingenious to live as free individuals, slaves must be outlaws 
lo love as free, committed individuals, a condition that will eventually 
demand "badness" of thrm. 

Propagated orally for centurio?. in traditional toasts, boasts epic 
verses, and narratives, mythologized "bad" men and women use 
uutrajjeous viulence tu defend uulrageuus claims to uncon^promising 
self-definition, autonumv, and beyond these, to status, power, and 
privileges. Thus, they directly affront slave institutions that assume 
legal power to determine the meaning and destiny of African descen- 
dants, and they meet the slave system's relentless violence with their 
own violence. 

First transcribed from John Little's 1857 oral slave narrative pub- 
lished in A Northr^idc View of slavery, "had nigger" was originally a 
term owners used for slaves who woul^^ not readily submit to slave 
discipline. Alan Dundes suggested that the slaves quickly rcnli/ed that 
what was bad for slavery was good for them, so they began to use 
"bad" subversively to mean gotnl (h'^undes 1^73, 581) In a legal 
context in which a slave's efforts to maintain the most basic forms of 
human autonomy and self-sufficiency — resisting rape, defending Uned 
ones, and collecting wages for labor — were usually punished as crimes, 
this vernacular Irony apparently allowed slaves tu praise defiant slaves 
while safely appearing tu acquiesce to the slave owner's condemnation 
of the defiar^ce. Lven more radically, this irony gives expression to the 
slaves' dismissal of the values represented by "good," "legal" and 
"moral" as received from "good, Cfiristian" slave owners. If "g^'od 
nigger" denoted a perfect slave, then "bad niggers" were likely to be 
regarded as far more dignified, although more d.ingerous. 

Within this hypocritical context, all slave'^ whj achieved any ?ort 
of moral consciousness net ded, either overtly or covertly, to seek and 
define mora! values for themselves. Mov;evcr, the slave who openly 
expressed such autonomy would be or\e prepared to confront the slave 
system's full legal violence, a violence implicit at ever)' level of s^jcial 
eont [ between whites and blacks and the \t\xv basis upon which 
slavery ' predicated and sustained. Therefore, to avoid outright 
confrontatu ; with this violence, a slave's conscious moral integrity 
had tf> remairt a subversive activity 

Ilt)wpver, "had" figures, althotigh not ahvays moral (and certriinly 
not always anu»ral). aie always confrontatioiidl. Thev reprefienl a 
moment at which black nvral autonomy can no lonK'^r remain ^ecret, 
when llie slave must »i/'.ike an ineil ihiifn. take htild of a destinv 



Selhe's ''Big, Bad" Love 



157 



has defined for herself, and confront the inevitable legal violence. 
"Bad" rnen and women do not trick, retreat, or accommodate. They 
meet violence with violence. Through them, segregated black com- 
munities vie riously lay "outrageous claim" to a destiny which is not 
a white person's burden but which is autonomously and self-sufficiently 
their own. 

In placing Sethe in the same category' as the likes of Stagolee or 
Willie George King^ 1 realize that I am laying aside some important 
moral distinctions. Many "bad" men and women are more viciouf; 
and exploitative than courageous and self-sufficient. Laying aside these 
distinchons allows the salient features common to the wider range of 
"bad" lore to emerge. 

All "bad" men and women are prepared to use violence to maintain 
uncomproiTiihlng control ovrr defining themselves and their desliniesj 
this autonomy presumes a slaiut^ from which slaves are legnily excluded. 
Remember that Sixo is killed for forgetting that "definitions b<?Ionged 
to the defincrs, not the defined" (Morrison 1987, 190). Slagolee is 
certainly asocial fur shooting the family man, Billy Lyons; lohn Henr>' 
certainly stcincls in the way of progress and profit in his fattU contest 
against (he machine. Yet slaves and free blacks in oral lore who "jump 
bad" in defense of loved ones against w*hitcs are no less criminals 
according to slave law. However sympathetic their motives, their specific 
crime is less important than the nH>re radical "crime" of African 
American autonomy and self-sufficiency in a context of slave and racist 
law. Black autonomy threatens the entire rtnicture of exploitalit»n, and 
generations of black ^inger,^ and storytellers have valoriiiJed "bad" men 
and women not because they are, by any consistent standard, moral, 
immoral, or amoral, but becausu they are personally capable of 
sensational violence to maintain their autonomy and self-sufficiency 
This valorization (k'cuts only at a distance, though, because the black 
communities depicted in the tales consistently abandiMi "I'ad" her(»is 
at precisely the clinuilic moment of confrontation brtween "bad" 
figures and the racist law. After their deaths, the communities im- 
mortalize thejc fi^;ures in ritual retellings of their exploits. Despite 
some similarities, this tradition is not to be confused with Euro- 
American outlaw traditions, including Knbin IIuikI or Billy the Kid 
Tradilii^nally a sacrificial theme which Morrison rewurt:s into a re- 
demptive one, "badness" is s}7f?cific in the *AHJid cjnditions of black 
Americans, and it is an adaptation of the sacred beliefs of West 
Africans, 

Allhough "bad" women apj^far v/ith Ic''^ frc;juency than 'bad ' 
men • suih as Kailrt/ad lJill» btJK'*l<'t\ Ji'hn Henry jt-an luomer's lorn 



158 



Chauncey A. Ridley 



Bum'ell Richard Wright's Bigger Thomas, and Claude Brown's "Man- 
child" — they occur \vith equal force and insistence. Among them are 
Lucy. Wilhe George King, numerous unnamed slave mothers of the 
oral tradition, Zora Ncale Hurslon'j. Big Sweet, Margaret Walker's 
Kissie Lee, Alice Walker's Sofia, and Morrison's Sula, Pilate Dead, and 
Scthc. Like their male counterparts, th^y represent r.ecular adapt.Uiuns 
of ancient West African sacred beliefs concerning the limits of a 
mortal's social and metaphysical autonomy Some of ihi^e West African 
beliefs are mythologized in the lore and ritual devoted to the sacrificial 
divinitV/ Sangu, the divine Afncan precursor to secular African Amer- 
ican "bad" women and men. 

The Sango myth is what John W. Roberts (1989), in Fww Trickster 
to Badmafi ignores when he insists thai "bad niggers" coiilcl not be 
regarded as heroic by a slave community composed of former West 
Africans. Acct>rding lo Roberts, nu;^t Wi'sl African societies shared a 
"deep structural" craving for "harmony and order/' a craving which 
was of practical use to their Ami rican dcrcendants for vvhoin "haimony 
and solidarity" provided protection against Jim Crow laws (Roberts 
203). Me contends that, since "bad" figuris placed status above their 
own welLheinpand that of their fellow sufferers," the slave coinmumtie*- 
must have "realized thai it v.\v. not in their best interests to promote 
such lu'havior as heroic ' (176). However, Westcott and Morton Williams 
are more inclusive and correct m pointuu; out that m(»sl West African 
cultures, strcuijgly pi^netrated with \oruba bi^hefs, als'j recogf>i/'.' that a 
"baLmced duali^.m that pf rmeites all Voniba religions and rosmolopcal 
assumptions . t)rdcr, for the ^ake of \cnewal and developmr'nt must 
be broken . Mankind, without the prornp'ingb of will (my emphasis] 
would cea^A' to strive and stiMt.ly and culture '/.luld stagnate" (Wc^tiott 
and Morton-Williarn^ 1^'62. 3?) This salutary willfulness would pre- 
dictably be embixlied in hertw'- whos'^ actions WL>uld illcgiUnuilelv 
disrupt tl ' es!f!blis\u^l s(h.ial ^nd dnine firder 

Iheir rommunitir^ and, consequently, the lore created around th.e 
herofs regard them ambivalently; thou>;h a community may be mo- 
mentarily ex\ularated by the disruption of an oppressive ord*jr. its 
concern very quickly nvtrts to the overriding neid f(>r harmnnv, 
solidarity, and self-pi'otei!iiig order, all of thi^ aspi-cl . oi ^iJCial stability 
thill ktibvrt'i mentions At this nuiment, the hert^ who-e sf.lf-k>;itimi/in^ 

pii'mptin^'.-^ L»f the uiir* ijn?t*»! be g'v.emed becfMiv.:-'^ an enemy nf 
'"[ntnMm?.\, di;d therefore j ^^Lnhcial Mctim. Mov.ever the Yoruba 
philubuplef' nf balanued duah^m pru. i Jt-^ tt>r a rituali/ otii m tjf tin » 
'^■aLrjfRe ^♦. herebv the ( (^mmunilv can '^'imultam cu-lv embra^'e th'^ 

pH»m|'tMi>; I'f tiie ill that Ky/ nerat* ! \\\r ritlfure vJu ii fhe mKI 



1 t » 



Sethe's "Big. Bad" Love 



159 



order had stagnated, Thus, in response to outside threats, the com- 
munity can reenact the ritual in hopes of appropriating the hero's 
salutary traits while containing within the ritual the potential for 
inturnal disruption that must accompany such traits. 

Dispersed throughout the Americas and the Caribbean by the VWsi 
African diaspora, this sacred fif;ure is known as Sango throughout 
West Africa; Shango in Trinidad, Grenada, and Sao Luiz; Xwingo in 
Recife, UeJem, and Kiu; and Changu in Cuba and Uahia. lie is one 
embodiment ()f the balancing spiritual and social antithesis to the 
"harmony" emphasized by Roberts. Born a mortal, Sango is obsessed 
with godlike autonomy and self-sufficiency As a young man, he usurps 
the throne from his older brother who was "too mild for the war-like 
spirit of the age and tamely suffered the encroachments nf provincial 
kings" (Lawal 1970, 15). As king, Sango njthlcssly defeats the invaders 
in a series of bloody wars whereby he unifies ll\e VvVsl African rily- 
states under his imperial rule. Not content with the gods' aid, hv hds 
usurped their power to achieve his ends, oi k^ing his magician \o sieiil 
one power by which the gods control human destiny, thu power to 
hurl "th' 'liderstcines (scjrnetimes identified as mrlrors and soinetini''-. 
as lightning bolts). In all \ersioiis of this Uirc, once the invaders have 
been routed, his subjects immediately turn their attention to community 
commerce, stability and soliclarity. yet Sango cannot rhai^ge \^ilh the 
times. He %tarls v/ars against his own generals, whose ptjwer and 
achievements tippcat to rival his own, Consequently, his subjecl^i 
abandon him wher^ divii\o forces exact retribution fcjr his crime c^F 
overreaching the stable social antl metaphysical stations to which he 
wa born. After his death. th<»ugh. he is deified bv the cunuiiunity 
which had s.icrifued him Thus. in "bail" lore ihv communitv can 
enact riliKd", whereby it hopes it» apprnj^nate his will, pmver. dhd 
resourcefulness while ec»ntaining hi^ internal dlsiuplivene'i^. 

Sangn U'lief^. which Vdloii/e a niurtal for Ulev'itimatelv usurping 
divine status, predisposed West Afriroirs in crealf tale** in praise of 
secular bad figures who usurp the secular statu- ' *" v^'hites by 
assuming their power of self definition and self-delcrminatii'tj Like 
Sango. "bad" figures are community hemes and sacrificial victims Al 
the moment that these heroes face their graves! danger'^ -the forces 
of racist law and cu^tnm their conununilK-. ab/r-Jnn them: fhen, 
oJt'.e (hey are dead and white violence h.i^ e\p nd"d iUr)f, rheir 
t^Mnniunilie^ nn tlu'le-^i/e ai^l inunortali/e Miem. CompTfcitive mv 
Ihologi'^ts nun d» We^fern p^irallels \\\ such figure- Ale»;!M>le* 
Blake s batan. or Tjo^'fl^f ''^ rau-ltjs Inr cljjniing aulont>nK>us confrt'l 
vi de >linv. v»hich (u err^si he^ their r» =. »'i\f d t>chd mv} pintwal 



160 



C/i..:«Mcey A. Ridley 



Status, not only do they endanger themselves, but the gods' retribution 
endangers all in close proximity to ihe willful malefactor. Ihorefor^^s 
Iheir communities must ritualistically sacrifice them. Yet, paradoxically 
they are also very special heroic archetypes, symbolizing their com- 
munities' sense of themselves as comprised of venturesome, resource- 
ful, fiercely independent people. 

Pari II 

As a lover, Sethe is Ihe "baddesl" fif»,ure in the novcL I'aul D, who 
accutely observes thai '*m(»re important than what Sethe had done 
[murder her child] was what she claimed/' tells her, "Your k)ve is too 
thick" (Mcjrri'.on I9B7. 164), Since it is legal and moral for slave 
owners lo separate slave fan^ilies and lovers ft>r ecouonuc reasons; 
since il is legal and morr*! lo steal a slave mother's milk; siip.e slave 
hunters ride up to Sethe and Baby's house, 124, "looking rifjiteous" 
for having god and la\v on their side, then a slave's "thick/' committed 
love is a dangerously outrageous claim 

In planning his family's esc'a[>e fron» slavtry, Halle becomes an 
outlaw, yet his "big" love doi'i not evulve irtto "bad" love because, 
at the inevitable moment of ct^nfi'ontalic n, he is unable lo meet 
violence with violence, beemg white nj-n milk his wife's breasts, he 
IS paraly/etl \vhen a desperate leap into "b.Hlness" is called fur. 
Maintaining his claim io "big love" deniaiuK a leap beyond subversion 
into outraged, oulra',;eous violence. Sethe's discovery of hh failure 
dtsgusts lier; her first impre: sic»n of his capacity te- ' love big' has been 
so irreVcK.ably reduced that she can no longer respect him. and her 
discnv,Ty of hi'> consequent tnadnts . registers as nothing more Ibcin 
another motional burtlen she must bear ak»ne. 

Alone, driving herselt v/i(h the rt^solution lo "gel her uwlk lo her 
children" 'nIu- e^-cafa-s Swei-l Home wliile in licunful labor with her 
child. Ik^loved. long before she hears oj Halle's fate, Sethe attain^ her 
Pvrrhic victorv over the nlave hurler'-i \n whom th^ Ohio community 
of ex-slaves has s.icrificed her liuiugh in awe of her e«.plojt.s the 
ccimmuni^y of ex ^-Kive-; te. ent "her outrage(iUs claims, her self -suffi- 
ciency ' (171). for they are guilty of ' K>vinv!; small." S^^mp f'aid, the 
Oluo cornnuin^tv's reprf~^enlahvf fMrned hi^ name v/hile still a slave 
v/uLii he allowt J lii. v.ifc bc^^Miie ^he cin..ubini. ul hi:; ma">?cr s 
son '-Mnur Stamp \!ul nut kill anyc^ni?" (l^^l), lie bear^ hi - name .i.- a 
pui'lic tonfe'.^.ii»n (tf hi^ disgrace. Stamp S|»ilrfnlftcr ^ fr«v,nrd Sethe 
i^ iinw^iftliv of hi" bt f^ r ipi 4lifi'^%, bnl env\, ruul <^ham'^ ^,i't tht* belter 
t'f biro 



Sethe's "Bi;j, Bad" Love 



161 



Not only envy but a very practical, realistic fear repels the black 
community. According to folk wisdom, "badness" intensifies white 
supremacist rivalry, sparking outbreaks of white vigilante violence 
which, subject to no legal restraint or redress, often escalate out of 
control victiini/Jng all blacks in the proximity of the malefactor. The 
research of Lawrence I e\'iiie, Eugene Cenovesc, and John W. Roberts 
documents the dynamics of such local pogroms. In (heir discussions 
of "bad* Jure, however, they address neitlier the practical sacrificial 
structure of thi^i lore nor the likelihood that this structure's correspt^nd- 
ence with Sango lore evinces that early slaves may have perceived 
the dynamics of this violence in terms of the ancient West African 
belief systems that intorrn secular "bad ' lore. Sango's story teaches 
that the power of the lightning bolts will destroy anyone close to the 
mortal who unlawfully wields it. In many versions, the ^ods redirect 
one of Sango's stolen thundeibtuncs, destroying Snngci's city and 
family Sethe claims a power to protect and rear her children, over- 
reaching the legal prescripti\)n that slaves "love small" Iler claim to 
tliis power threatens It) intensify white supremacist rivalr)' which, 
subject to no inshtutituial restraint or redress, threatens all who arc 
near her. so the black community ^iicrifices her to the sKu e hunters. 
To briefly summarize my findings up to thi^ point, before ,Sethe commits 
child mmder, her ''outrageous claims, her self-sufficiency" not only 
shante lh( black rommunity guilty of "loving sm^M," but they threaten 
tn dttraL't the lightning bo\\. , and so the community abandons both 
Baby and Selhe, sacrilinng her to white violence 

1 he community'^' re%eiUment againsl Seihe has b"'m building since 
the day she arrived at 124 learhing its climax after her mother in- 
law, Btibv -nigg.>. indulges her-.clf in a celebration t)f Sethe's and her 
chiidien's successful escape. Bahy'*-. celebraliun begins spontaneously 
when Stamp Paid honors the grandmother'-^ t^'^**' fortune by enduring 
scrape*., cuts, and insect bites t^) bring her some ne arly inaccessible 
wild blaekberru > that ' tasted like church" Stamp's effort recalls to 
hi^r the love and labor oi her ini*;sing son» llalle, who had bought her 
freed^n wifh five vears' wurtli t>f Sundtiy^ Kiting to the occasion, 
Haby become.? the catalyst for a miracle: this one pail of blackberries 
become' , a fea^t for mnely. lliis communal miracle cnmbined wifh 
'M'tbe s miracuhni^. escape place baby and h*;r familv, as always, "at 
the center i»f Thint;; jiii the cct;niiuHii!y|. . . . Giving advice; pa>;ing 
ine:^bag'.-, Jiealing the si:V:. hiding htgilivcs, losing. v<'nkiny; lt»viii>^, 
(*riMchin;.t. *^^inging, dancini.', and loving every boily like il was her job 
and b'T-. alf'n^' (1-^7; I he autonouiv aiid ^elt sufficiency f>f this family 



162 



Chauiicey A, Ridlei/ 



diminish the communit)' by comparison and infuse it with the hope 
but also the fear of the lightning bolts. 

Inevitably, the lightning bolt of slave law finds Baby's yard, driving 
Sethe to seek "safety in a handsaw/' in defense of her commitment 
to "kno;v \vhat is" and to protect her children from what she "know[s] 
is terrible." Sethe is never repentant; though she is gneved by the loss 
of her daughter, she never doubts that she was correct in her effort 
to murder her children lo protect them. Yet this shocking resourceful- 
ness intensifies the community's fear and resentment of Sethe, so they 
ostracize her, a development which, in terms of the Pan-African 
worldview embedded in "bad" lure, is not mysloiious, but quite 
practical. When white law fails to punish her, the woman whose 
uncompromising autonomy has made her the focal point of white 
violence returns to the heart of the black community Therefore, both 
socially and spiritually, her residence becomes an impure periphery 
that the sacrifice has failed to purify, an area infected with violence 
and tragedy as if by a communicable disease. Her return is also a 
moral impi^sition since her presence has become a constant reminder 
of a standard of love they never risked living up to. 

Upon Selhes return, Beloved, the only child Sethe succeeds in 
murdering, begins haunting 124, first as an invisible disruptive force, 
then embi^died as a woman the exact age that Beloved v*ould have 
been had she li' ed. Evinced bv Beloved's monopolization of all of 
Sethe's resources of love, food, and energy. Beloved'^ sole mcUivalion 
is tu feed on .Sethe's remorse and guilt. Beloved's appetite is so great 
that she grows fat while Sethe and Denver, Sethe's other daughter, 
starve; Beloved drives I*aul H away and isolates St'lhe fnnw Denver 
Yet Beloved is nut the only ghost haunting 124. Stamp Paid hears 
many Vi»icr.s hijuuling the house and retogni/es them as "the people 
of broken necks, o( fire-cui>^ ed blood and black giris who had lost 
their ribbons" (181). These are the ghosts of the entire hi-t(^ry of black 
love lies that slavery had hmken, bloodied, and cheapened. One 
viewing Sethe as a sacrificial victim, ntualislically expelled to the 
periplierv of a despernlely vulnerable community, has a basis for 
understanding why. on the novel's metaphysical dimension, Sethe 
becomes a woman haunted by ghr^=;ts. Such a congregation i»f ghosts 
sugK^'^'t^ I'liil. by condenuuiig her "big. bad" lov e a ♦ pride/' then 
isolatmg her. the black comniunity '^pinlutilly ab-.iilve , it »elf of shame- 
fulK' lovmg "small" Bui in d(nng tluy have burdened Sethe with 
their ov. n nagging guilt titui remorse arrompanvifig Iheir o'v n hiMone- 
of lost len t' She v/ill remain burdenid wUh tlie debilitalin>; ghn^ls of 



Sethe's ''Big, Bad" Love 



163 



this collective history until the black connmunity abrogates its moral 
ascendency and embraces Sethc's burden as their burden. 

In Morrison's revision of this sacrificial tradition, the redemption of 
sins comes full circle. When the community begins to fear the ghost 
devouring her more than they fear and resent Sethe, the women 
assemble in front of 124 to enact a ritual through which they again 
take up their rightful share of this grievous history. "Trembl[ing] like 
the baptized" (261), Selho has the accumulated burden of African 
American history lifted from her shoulders by the community's col- 
lective grace. The ghosts of history are nc^t exorcised out of existence, 
but the burden of them is redistributed. Although Sethe clearly retains 
some psychic damage as revealed by her attack upon Mr. Bodvvin, her 
reintegration into the community signals the redistribution of a col- 
lective burden she has borne alone, freeing her to give her "big, bad" 
love to, and to accept love from, the living. "Me? Me?" is her gratefully 
astonished response to Paul U s living embrace, now that the dead no 
longer clamor for her kisses. 

Notes 

1. A videotaped inlerview with Toni Morrison. Produced and directed by 
Alan Benson. An RM Arts Production, 1987. 



Works Cited 

Dicker, Houston A. 1984. Blues, Ideolo,^, and Afro-Amrriiati lUcniUirv. A 

Vernacular Theory. Chicago: The Unis'ersity of Chicago Press. 
Drew, Benjamin. 1968 (J856). A Niyrih^iidc Vic:v of Slavery. Hic Rcfuf^cc: Of the 

Narratives of Fugilivc Slaves in CumiJa. Related bu Themselves ivith an 

Accounl of Hisfory and Cnmiidon'^ of l}ie Colored Population of Upper Canada. 

New York: Negro Univcrriities Pros^. 
Dundeii, AKut, ed. 1973. Mother Wit from the Laus^hins^ Barrel Englewood 

Cliffs, NJ: Prenlice-IIall. 
nquiano, Olaudah. 1987. The Intereslinj^ Narrative of the life of OlaudAh 

Lijuiano. In The Classic Slave Narrativr<^, indited by Menry Lou\^ Gates Jr., 
Nov; York: New American Library. 
Gales, Henry Louis, Jr.. l^f^S. The Si;i;ttifuin^^ Monkey, Nev/ York: Oxford 

University Press. 

Uenuvese, Eugene. 1976. Rolf, fordan R dl Nru* "inrk: Vintage Books, 
lawal, liaba lundc. 197U. ' Yorubd Stifi>;n Sculpture in I lisJorica) FU'tro-;pect." 

Ph D di'-^s., fnJiana Uaiver^iity. 
Levine, Lawrenrr W 1^77. BlacK Culfurt and Black C'^t'^' i ui^ine^ '-: Afro-Ameritan 

TolK lhoii_^ht frt'Vi blavefy fo Trrrd^m. Nev/ Yurk' Oxford Un'Kor^ily Pre^^- 



) 



164 



Chauncey A. Ridley 



Morrison, Toni. 1987. Beloved. New York: New American Library. 

Roberts, John W. 1989. From Trickster to Badman: The Black Folk Hero in Slavery 

and } reedom, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Toomer, Jean. 1969. Cane. New York: Harper & Row. 

Westcotl, Joan, and Peter Morton-Williams. 1962. "The Symbolism and Ritual 
Context of the Yoruba Laba Shaitgo," The Journal of the Royal Anthropological 
Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 92: part 1 (January to June). 



13 Baldwin, Bebop, 
and "Sonny's Blues'' 



Pancho Saver)' 

University of Massachusetts-Boston 

Well before James Baldwin died in 1987, the literary critical establish- 
ment had made up its mind about him. Thus, there was hardly any 
surprise when Lee A. Daniels's front page Nciv York Times obituary 
lauded, "James Baldwin, Hloquent Essayist In Behalf of Civil Rights, 
Is Dead." Equally unsurprising was Mark Fecney's Bosion Globe "Ap- 
preciation" entitled "A Forceful Voice on the Issue of Race/' What 
James Baldwin had become was, to a large extent, black America's 
interpreter of black America to and for white America. As such, 
Baldwin was essentially mummified into the "Voice of the Civil Rights 
Movement," a historical relic of the 1950s through the 1970s. But even 
in this position, Baldwin was nut always on solid ground. In 1963, 
the same year Baldwin published The Fire Next Time, considered by 
many his quintessential work, Amiri Baraka called Baldwin, in "Brief 
Reflections on Two Hot Shots," the "joan of Arc of the cocktail parly" 
and chariijterized his work as "the cry, the spavined whine and plea" 
(later published m I960, 117), Three years later, Larry Neal would 
declare th:!t 'Baldwin has mi^'^ed the point bv a wide margin," because 
his "uncertainty over identity and his failure to utilize, to its fullest 
extent, (raditional aspects of Afro-American culture has tended to dull 
the intensity of his work" {later published in 1989a, 61), And although 
Baraka would change by the time uf Baldwin's death, calling him in 
"Jimmy!" "this glorious, elegant griot of our oppressed African-Amer- 
ican nation" (1989, 127) who "made us feel . . , that we could defend 
ourselves and define ourselves" (129), it still seems that Baldwin will 
go down in literary history primarily as the witness to and conscience 
of America's years of racial confrontation. But is this accurate? What 
of the eight bcx^ks of fiction Baldwin published? Not only do I want 
t(» su^yi^est that we need to reevaluate the fiction, but 1 want to do so 



166 



Pancho Savery 



by looking at Baldwin's most celebrated short story and suggest that, 
even here, there is more to be seen than has been previously, and that 
"Sonny's Blues" demonstrates a full use of "traditional aspects of 
Afro-American culture." 

In his 1937 Emersonial manifesto "Blueprint for Negro Writing," 
Richard Wright asserted the existence of "a culture of the Negro" 
whose main sources were "(1) the Negro church; and (2) the folklore 
of the Negro people" (39), Yor Wright, this folklore express>ed itself in 
"Blues, spirituals, and folk tales recounted from mcuth to mouth" 
Wright criticized writers for not making more use of the folk tradition 
in their work, because in folklore "the Negro achieved his most 
indigenous and complete expression" (1978, 40). Two years later, 
Saunders Redding published the first in-depth, full-length work of 
African American literary criticism. To Make a Poet Black (1987 [1939]). 
There, Redding, folknving up on Wright, read African American 
literature from the beginning to the end of the Harlem Renaissance, 
and found that only two writers had escaped the two traps he found 
continually lurking. These were the traps of writing from a "verj' 
practical desire to adjust himself to the American environment" (1987, 
3), and the trap of having to simultaneously write for two audiences 
in order to succeed. The two writers Redding found to be most 
successful. Sterling Brown and Zora Nealc Hurston, were successful 
because of their works' immersion in "folk material" (122). 

The most successful African American writers have continued to 
mine this vein, but the critics have often been behind. I would like to 
suggest that Baldwin is a case in point. Although there have been 
interesting analyses of "Sonny's Blues," none of them has gotten to 
the specificities of the rnusic and the wider cultural implications.^ 
Music is not simply the bridge the narrator crosses to get closer to 
Sonny, nor is it sufficient to point out that the music in the climactic 
scene is labeled as blues. What kind and form of these particular blues 
make all the difference. 

An interesting way to begin thinking about "Sonny's Blues" is to 
think about when the story is supposed to be taking place. We know 
from the acknowledgments that it was first published in the summer 
of 1957, but can we be more precise? Part of the story takes place 
during "the war/' but which one is it, Korea or World War 11, and does 
it mailer? 

Daldv/in tells us that Sonny's father "died suddenly, during a 
drunV.en weekend in the middle of the war, when Sonny was fifteen" 
(1966, 97). "(jjust after Daddy died" (97), Sonny's brother, whom we 
know is seven years older (9J). is "home on leave from the army" 



Baldwin, Bebop, and ''Sonny's Blues" 



167 



(97) and has his final conversation with his mother. In the passage, 
which begins with that wonderful evocation of the coming of the 
darkness on Sunday afternoon with the old and young together in 
the living room, "Mama" admonishes her older son to watch out for 
Sonny "and don't let him fall, no matter what it looks like is happening 
to him and no matter how evil you gets vs'ith him" (101). But the 
narrator tells us that he did not listen, got married; and ^vent back to 
war. The next time he comes home is on a special furkmgh" fur liib 
mother's funeral. The war is still going on. The narrator reminds 
Sonny that Sonny must "finish school," "And you only got another 
year" (106). The school that Sonny must finish is obviously high 
school. Thus, no more than a year or so has passed since the death 
of the father, who died "in ihe middle of the war." The United States 
was in World War II from December of 1941 until August of 1943 
"The middle of the war" would have been approximalely 1943, or 
1942 if you start from the beginning of the war in Europe. Thus, the 
crucial conversation between Sonny and his brother, in which Sonny 
first says he wants to be a jazz musician, takes place about 1944. If, 
on the other hand, the war being fought is the Korean War (June 1950 
to July 1953), the conversation takes place about 1952. 

When Sonny reveals to his brother that first he wants to be a 
musician, and then a jazz musician, and then not a jazz musicir^n like 
Louis Armstrong but one like Charlie Parker, the brother, after asking 
"Who's this Parker character," says, "I'll go out and buy all the cat's 
records right away, all right?" (104). From 1942 to 1944, there was a 
ban on recordings, at least in part due to a scarcity of materials because 
of the war. In 1944, Sonny's brother would not have been able to go 
out and buy new material by Bird (Parker) because there wa^^n't any. 
Bird's seminal recordings were made betv/een 1945 and 1948.'^ It is, 
thus, reasonable to conclude that the war is the Korean 

By 1952, Bird had already rev(>lutionized npisic. And so when 
Sonny's brother asks Sonny to name a musician he admires and Sonny 
says "Bird" and his brother says "Who?," Sonny is justified with his, 
"Bird! Charlie Parker! Don't they teach you nothing in the goddamn 
anny?" (103).^ Sonny's brother, at age twenty-four in 19''?, can 
certainly be expected to have heard of Bird. After all, he has heard of 
Louis Armstrong. 

But it is in Sonny's response to Armstrong that one of the keys to 
the story Her,. Sonny's brother admits that, to him, the term "jazz 
musician" is synonymous with "hanging around nightclubs, clowning 
around on bandstands," and is, thus, "beneath him, somehow" (103). 
When, from this perspective, jazz musicians die in a clasps 



168 



Pancho Savery 



with . . . 'good -time people'," his mentioning of Louis Armstrong needs 
to be looked at. 

From one perapeclive, Louis Armstrong is one of Ihe true titans of 
jazz.* On the other hand, lo many of Ihe Bebop vra, Armstrong was 
considered part of the old guard who needed to be swept out with 
fhf> ne\v musical revolution, and Armstrong himself was not positively 
disposed towards Bop. One turning point came in February o\ 1949 
when Armstrong wa^ chosen Kinj; of the Zulus for the Mardi Gra^ 
parade in New Orleans. To many, he seemed to be donning the rninstrel 
mask of acceptability to the larger white world, and this seemed 
confirmed when, the same week, he appeared on the cover of Time 
(February 21, 1949).' It would be "natural" that Sonny's brother, the 
future alRebra tea-her, would have heard of Armstrong, here the 
symbol of the old conservative, but not of Parker, not only the new 
and the revolutionary, but the "had been a revolutionary" for seven 
years. Sonny's response to Armstrong makes this clear: 

I suggested, helpfully: "You mea.i — like Louis Armstrong?" 
His face clo<»ed as though I'd stmck him. "No. I'm not talking 
about none of that old-time, down home crap." (103) 

But the differences between Armstrong and Parker represent some- 
thing much larper Throughout history, African Americans have been 
engaged in intramural debate about the nature of identity. Du Bois, of 
course, put it best when he defined "double-consciousness" in The 
Souls of Black Folk and concluded: 

One ever ff'ek his tvvonrss, — an American, a Negro: two souls, 
two thoughts, ?wo unreconciled fiUiving.; two warring Ideals in 
one dark body, who>e dogged strength *i!one keeps it from iHMng 
torn asunder, (1969, 45) 

Du Bois's battles with Booker T. Washington and later with Marcus 
Gar' ey are one of the major moments in African American history 
when this debate was articulated. But there have ako been many 
others; for example, Frederick Douglass and Martin Delany debatuig 
whether Africa or America was the place for blacks, and King and 
Malcolm on the issue of integration. But in order to look at African 
American culture fully, we cannot limit ourselves to the stxidy of 
politics and history. As numerous commentators have pointed out, 
music is the key to much of the African American dispute over this 
issue of culture; and, therefore, knowledge of it is essential. For example: 

The complexities of the collective Black experience' have always 
had their most valid And nioving expression In I3ldck mu?ic; music 



Baldwin. Behop, and "Son/iy's Blue^ 



169 



is the chief artifact created out of thai experience. (U'illums 1972, 

To roiioraU\ ihv key lo whurC' i\\c black people h!\vp to y^o is 
in the rrm^ic Our music hiis aKvayii been the most dominant 
manifestation of what we are Aral ieel. . . I he best of it has 
always o^ craltM.! jt the core of our livc^t, frvrring iisrlf iijKjn us as 
in a nMial. U ha^ ^'^Iwrjy*;. <;on.ehov/ rx:^prt'sonteJ th^- collective 
psyche- (Neal l9H<^b. 21- 22) 

I think it not fantastic to j^ay that only in mu?iic ha^i there been 
any significaftt Ne(;vD LCtnthbutinn to n lortrml American culture, 
(Oaiaka 1963. IW-M) 

The lei\nr is a rhythm inslrurnt^nt, and the be«:,l staJcmeni^i Ne^,roo> 
have made, of what fheir >oul is, have been on tenor sax(iph(M\e 
(Ornette Coleman, quoted in Spi-Ilman VJ70. 102) 

Th*Tr has neviT l>ec(k equivaU nt liuke Lllin>;ton (»r LtMiW 
A.mistrong in N'efjro vvrilit.^',, and evt-n the busi of contcmi.', rarv 
literature written hy Ne^^rtK"; lannol yet 1^/ corr.fjri'd fu the 
fantar.iir beauty of tlie mir^ic of Charlie Parkfr fDaraka, "Myth/' 
1966. 107) 

Houston B,'iker lui'j >;one a » itiv Hh su^',f;i -itinji'. that tliere u, l\ "blue:^ 
nvatnx" al the center uf African AmiTiCtm culturr-aiui that "a vernacular 
theory" uf AfrictU^ American litiTolnre tan be developed fr^rn Ihri 
idea 

What I cvn ar^uin^; ifi v;eneral is that mir^ic i% the rornerr»tone i)f 
African American culture; attd that, further, BelH*p was an al'Snlute 
key momi nt. in African American culture, bebop i5 as significant ai» 
th^' Harliun fienaissance, and Arin'-tnui^; and iMiker s roles r^omeu'luil 
R*>einMe Ih^.r ol VVa=^hinj'ton and Du Bois, and iHt Bois and Carvey 
Arm^^tron^;. Washin^;lon, and lJu Bois (to fMirvey) repre^enfe'd tlie 
k.no\vn, the old. and Ihe tradititmat v/hose accomplishments? were 
notetl but who were con:adircd r.umewhal passe by the yr'un^'A'r. mt^re 
radical Parker, Du Uoi.^ (to VVashm,r;ton). and Carvoy 

Musically, B' bop \\\v^ to a large extent a revolt a}r;ainst wm}* and 
the way African American music had been taken over, and diluted, 
by u'hJles. Perhaps no mure emblematic of this is tliat the aptly nam d 
Paul Whiteman and Benny Gf?odn"iat^ were dubbed respectively "Tiie 
Kjn^ uf jazz" and The Kinj; of Sv-in^;. ' As Gary Giddins succinctly 
puts it: 

Jazz in the Svan^; Lrd was • frt\^uently con^prfimi:;!' ! by chucklc- 
headeJ bandlca ders. mor.l of them whi.v, nvh^ diluted and un- 
dermined the lriumph«i of senou^ mu'>ician^ that a nev/ virluo-iiiH' 
was. esstM^.lial The modrmist^ brandi divd if lik'j a v-eapon I hry 
confronted i i d <ind mu k jI ( nrnphKcncy in a ^pint of arrc!^;ant 
r'^mAn'.iri'.m 7H) 



170 



Piincho Sjt't'ry 



Ortiz WiUon d(♦^. /il't-s iUv tui^iia! ri'vohitinn '\i nrijor rhiUlor»^;«' 
U> HurDpi-an slttncltuJs nf tiiusival oxcfllfiur* titul the brginninj^ of a 
r.or^'^.riciiis bl.uk ti(':»tlu*tii in niu-ru'' (1972. luciiiisi: ol Ui'Imjj/s 

wiuillfny,f It) \\\v FunififMH .it'^ithrtir rmph.if^^i^. on vibr<ilf» nil's entphii^jis 
jnoUuK'd iiur.il iUM w.is iM'.ily inii?»il»li\ iirui lluis apvi) U* mnmirr 
cidli/tilion nntl ro fiplvition Hv revnliin^; ^ipnin^? thi^ dirt'Clion Ihf' mu*.ic 
hrttt t^Kvii and rccldinun}; it "Alru Anu-ncan mu:iicians ^.iini'd a 
mt-a^iUrr of conUi^l (ivlt their pr(Hliu:t, a situation that had not exi^linl 
sihcf the expansion of tlie mu^ic industry m the Iwontujb" {lUb). 

AiUJlher aspect of lhe» I5(»p rt'damatinu wa^ a rnirv/ecl einpliasr. 
on Iht' blues. Although some people seem to think there i^ a dispute 
over tliii. is aie, it r» eh ar from h^*leninR l\lr^;e^'s fu -I si'.^inu a , a 
leader that "liilhe'^ l>(»niK>' ' ruut "\t»\vV fhe Tim^'" are bUie*. pit*een 
In hi*. autobio>;raphy. 1 >i//y (islle«;pie a^^nt^t. 

Hehiipjar:^ touldii'l dc-^^»r(»y the blue^ v. i!h<^ut Sfrroirlv K^jiirje^; 
thcmsehcri. Ihe uUnK'tu ja// iuusitian'> alwav^ remained very 
tie »f* t(» iho blue; mir-i 7iiar a^ a rbar.icN'riifit Hu' b«>^»p«»r 

lu tiiis we lcjuIcI atltl the lollowui^; I'nnn Haraka. 

Beluip ahn re rslablishcd bluer, as the mivA impctrtcuu Afri*- 
American lotm in Nty,r() luu i\t by Us a<ifnni=ihiiy,iv < ointemj^urarv 
U'^ialt'uu nl of the ba>k bluer inipuUe. The bnpper^i re!uru*^(^ ^> 
tills ba:?K f»jrni. reading against the all bu: f;!inin>'. aJvaiu ^'arMfu i.4l 
nu'Kxly had mtide inU» duriii^ the v,vin^ ltj (1*'^3. 1^'4) 

We ct'uld ali-u k)uk al Hebup ui leroi'^ of the nu»vt'mrnl fum 
chalooie li» the <.hrouiahe> from a nii»r» ringed v\n <»pe!i forru. a 
mo\ entent ui the JireLtiou oi a w;reatt r eniu t rn \\\\]\ suu^^are, the 
be^:iiuiiti>; uf |a// pujliiiudenubin that wciuld reaeli its /enuh in the 
\*.ork iJnivMte L.oicnuin. In Ihe I'ottu ^ of (a// ' A)av I lebh- 
eonchide^, Whereii'r dialona |a// atten^pls to po:>it mu^^ical lan);riiv7' 
as a wav of thuikin^ii; iibout thui/.s in tlie real world, LiuomatiLism 
bepns to fore^niund trrf>i rather than -!if'r-«a>e;e ' {l^^^H^ b2) 

What bect»nu-; eh-ar in most v>f the abuve \^ that fh^bt^p nnu -t be 
vii'wed friun two perspective-, the ^-ociopohtica! a^ w fit a-^ the n^U'aial 
h> (.jarv Giddins b worJ:>. The benjiid W.Tid Vu»r ^.rvereb/ altered fhf 
texture anti temp«» of Anu riean hte. lUid |a// rt MettevI lhc^: e L)ian,i;^'> 
with ^;reater aruttne . . bv f^ir Uian the ofhM artr" ( r'H7. /T) WIr ii 
Ih'bnp l-^eivin in the A men i a v,a^ in a similar pi'^it!».»n lo what 

it had been In the V^2V A e.ar had bi-en hwi^dU to free llw e.nrtd 
|a>;am) ft>r democraLV; and (mie a>;ain. Alri. an Afueritan - had par(u 
ipatcYl and had a-^ujutd that tiiis ' [t»\ ar j^artif ipatu^n v. titild re-aih 



BMu'in, Bd'ofh and ' S- nnv's Blues 



171 



in new rights and n»'V. U^wl, r»f rrsppcl VVhrn. uinv xxy^Mix. fhi^ did 
not #ipj'f',»r h) li.ippc niny, a nvw niilitaiu y vb-Vfli^pt d iu Afriiaii 
American (nminimily Ikl'np v,\Vj jMit c»l thi. uo^v ,i!!iMult' Du^ 
militanvy in llu* Afriutii Anu'fican v:(>rnnnnnHy that manifr-^iirvl iIm-II 

LkilliiinUy ri\HMclf>j brh<i[v ;va'» Ultimately if iridiri itly ri Kilt J la 

hy thr ri^imr f^vvu\\ tmts: thf music dt^fmpit'd lo r^'stjlvf d( U\f 
U'Vrt sVf'N' what ehi' nwliiaru v i c'rubattid in tJ^if surriu (P^HH. 

C)|' HMirsfv tlu*, fnarh' Helmp Jau^t'i^JUiJ and tlucatcrun^', ti» wlu» 
s.i^s it ti^ (<>f pM?f fUi*dlv .V) t(>'> niilihjn^" and |»«rliaps ih» 
AiiHT/fan Antl in rcspnu^r n> tlu^, ( ijlli'.-.p'r ulorl- . 

M^'.ht' VVr r/'fu ^(1 tH auf'[.f rair.<n. i'.', it m.i!' .M"- 
rxplfMt.^tion. nor would wf Ih^^ oul imfr#»Jni^*p humiirum liv« 
rtif-rr'lv fur ihr *^ iVr >'> il fhf'M' nM»hu;>; ui»p*urio5ii 

al'cut K l( Amrrira v/nijiJn'l In'M'T tt-^ (. oh^'^JMUtih an-.l r<* .|'^M ? 
lis ti:. n\f'i> uf* (t'lilJa't ^ivp J ^hir id'^'UR fhr Anu*nuui v.ti) AnJ 
ttu'v ipvlf" i^ 't 'j»\h ruMr ni» Ani> rii.ui t • cU priviAU' vi\t uut ai 

?l»n\'»r fT-prt •a nted h; HlIh-j^ . nut onlv tVU bv \\\v v hiU- v,(»rld. 

m.im^neatn e»r AiMtKi oilJurt' a^-*^'^ int.**-*. mi.ldtr l!.]-- "'iVp'/^."' • 

<i'»/N.i-i"K/Jfi.'/ir^f si»iM\J c! I'll .'p fell vv. d».\!f «»r ^ipfmIu'iI 
It did in whu.p Amrrua. ll*'63. ISI h2) 

nvj^u . it aHi' *.i)iinihed a r- bt'lUMii by (hr pi-nplt* \'/ht^ pl.ivtj ^he 
nniNic. bmau-i^ i! i-va"; Pi>! jiU^r. thv miKu' Ih.it! r»'l'fjllt j .v* if {hv 
rPUMc hail filU'n I'ut of Ihe '•vV.^* iVar c^rn rroft\ lIi^ i* ^iu^w/u J 
a r*'hrllinn ri ing cu! I't Jht' hui"-^*:-^ thrn^-rhr^ ^^n;.' that \\w 

In |i)dit t'Mln ^ hi 'ri-Ml ?.iMif» ^-ftm^ brother < P'/\ it h.r. niy: Sn.'.tid 



172 



Afru an Anient an coMunuriity 

VVIicn till* storv y\(\ ^ tip .- '. l iMl yywr i mmw tluh^. luivt* 

tlhiii^i'il Sniiny ha^. (Jnipprd niU of hiph "-.rhnnl, illpf;atly < lli^.h O m 
flu' V .Mu l I'll 'iln(»|H*tl f iH » I »• ri tMnh tl tn Aim m rntti mt^^ 

tM»in^;r(iisi(v AfliT S(uiny has bvviy rcliMscJ frf»m piiscm. hp irivites hi-, 
hrolhn Ui w,ilch hirn M ui in j )uint in ihv ViJKutr ' ( lV6i), 11 J). 

VVhiii U'lUiilly tli'.t iiST.i'ij uinrt-nnii^; this hiu\\ ^iviw r>i (hat iUv 
brolhiT <Mitt'rs Stmny s wtirkl, n-cfj^'ju/rs hf 1^. uittv ii visitor lo 
that uoj'M ti'hTti^\l lu tairi of Suriny tluil heo ^nnny i - rf ^|'^•r^■.l 
i\iv\ IfitHi Tp^P' f*ri»l i\\M hvr*' ^>r>nv'^ fni»* ffirnily. 

I svcv* nilr»^vlu( I'll U» nlf <hf'tn onsl On-y v.vxf M wry j'chti 
WW. V't- it V'.,v. (!» Mr rli.it f'»f Mut/j, I v^iis cfly Sorbin' hrit'.h( ( 
I If'f**, I Wt«-i 111 ^^ttiihv H wuil'l tM\\pt his kiiij^iUim Kt^rf, if 
vv,r. nn^ tnt'n n (|nr .timi th.it hh lem^ h«no roviil Mnt»-( | JIk] 

VVhrii llif mU'Mt' ^'Ciwiv y\i\y > \ * ih^tiH i-J, it is tisudlly dMMi- fillicr 
itb^trjitly. laiiML l! thi' biiiKjL' thiiC .lUuv.-. Sunnv ^inil hi* hruUn r tu 
bnnmf^ ri'iinitrtl cuul !>()nny 1** fnul Jkis tJt titilv or ^ unply in !t'rjii^ of 
iho bUu \i 1^ nf (our^*^ tohilly It'y.i^.iiui!^ tt» tli'.<u^s (lu* rniiMi in 
»-«thi'i of th< . Wtiy*- AHlt dll. n\n «Il lIp^-: film lion ii l^rirlf.i' bf tv, un 
^uiw»v t\\n\ hi- brotluT, and twicr we are reniindt'd in tfif ^anif pa>;L' 
lh<H 'wh.it tlitv wi'M.' j»l.ivin^ w»i^ thi» bluL^s.' and Now tht^c are 
^»onnv ^ bhir^" 

At the chmjcfic monifnl of ihv ntorv. vvhrn ^loniiy ItiMlK K I; 
roinforMbh" ftuil h*- hn^;Lf. filh,d Ih^' air v.ilh hh- ' (122). ht' is plavin^: 
' Am I HIiH' ' It I'* Ibe fir^f soiu o( Ou' Nt-ti^iu! srh afu-i .i lrn?ah\.t' 
pvitoriiun'-f' by Sonny in tht' fint ^^rt, Hnldv.m pn^'^on^' ?hf rni'mcnl 
of Irafv-ition brhvt'cn sets by sunply noting:. 1 Ihmi thoy hiu .hrd. tlirrr 
was sc.iKrrrJ applju'iie. and fhrn. vrithout an in^lant'"^ warniuv: ( tvo\v 
started mlu ^^omt'thuiR olse. it was almost ^ardonit il wa^ / hiuc ' 
(121) word "^-ardi'iiiL.' ^ei'm^ l»» mt*. is key hi^re. One of the 
tharacteristics uf fW^bi^p \\ taV;\nj.; an old standard iind makitij^: it new 
A^ Leonard hvdher explain^. 

In rri Mh( y n- i! hj- I ? r» ai? iei.r^a-.|ii/,lv i^orrnvn prat tier U-* 

a nf and aril old faionfe) ^nS hn\L\ a iww m^'!(^lv art'UnJ *?hu»^ 
thrrr is « opvrigh? i»n a ' hord ^^^^qUDncc. the mUMtuan isrnhtlcJ 
Iv u^*' !hj^ nu;lhi*tl to tf<!citp an ori/.iruil c -mipci^inKn fiP/l cop'/rt w-'h* 
it in hi'^' t*v.o eamr r^>;.ird!t "f v. h'.» '.'. r^^'le ^hc hr-! ♦jMinp.:- H'^.iur 
tiui! uspd thp ^^mp rhr'fd p U?prn f 1*^ ?*^-.^^) 



Baldwin. Urb:^IK anJ "5 '^u/y''; lUue^ 



\7} 



Tlitr.. ' hcivV. llwiTii" AKi^iii in liulKinii' l>»'<:orTnr^ l^irktT's 'I)unnt^ I t-t' *; 
"Ihint'y.uiVAfj Ro'^r" hf-tuitU' ' rapf If frriu tlu* /vj^plf/ , I Hut 
Rhvlhti)' brcomc: r^*^?< nly. Cnnfiriu..iluii'i.' nnd 'Tluiviii); i>m ti 
Hift ; "Huvv I li^'ji tilt Mocn h« ( ^ Mirtl I , i dnur 

\\mV |m Sft M!H4 s \V\tt\ TiPis ih» Worm' ; <itv.l lu-rnkri'' tnvom^ ^ 
"VVurfuin^; u Kih ,incl "Ko-Ku Hut 2( rs ahf vhnf.^' itrKh. 
nfb(»p III ItiKf t)it' ( ntnt' ' Mi,y' n.»t ^unjily <» (hfircl s(i)uriur. lificl pKiV 
it m tiji rnNrt^ly diffrmi! Wtir Ihuv. fc>r « aju l*, HirJ's tjLik'gu*^ i - 
will) vrrsicMis iif Unu^s lik^^ "Wliitv r iiri .iuli '*M<>w Hnat tf» 
(. ItiHti," l iisl f»l Sun ami UVst I'f the Mnon. ' ' A(>iil in Wnv^! 

mii^KtJin^ openly rrtlk'*:! (ff Uu» Avjujrr. lii^'fU', >. corriy (if^MsIt 
put /ufth l>v the !'i«m>M',Mr.iF« lh*<v (X.xAp (nv of r, jt-ftiM- [ • ly 

lidld'Aiit tJM' tif th<* v/nrtl ' s.ndi'!n( . lluiriofL-. 1% i[ lriif)y inttDili il 
iu tf'll Ih.il sumotliinv, (iuul is ^^»in^', vu tluin simply j-l'ivin^^ a 
sttiiuLuil tiiiit' of pljvui>; \h{ h\ui"> Am I Mine" Is r^jillv \hv kyi'f 

SdHR thkit by »l' «'lf WiidM?* f do inuih for imytiiio, hut v. hicli cukl 
ht'LoiTu; rich and miM?iin>;ful jlU r In^ini; lif.jlLtl jn llir rrui iblr nl' 
t4<'h)p. 

Ihi^ pi»ihl of all Uii . Uin?. thrMu>^li hi^ plxi'Mr^v ^ nry beccnnt'^ 
"piUC i>f fhe fjinilv i!>;c!H»' (I ■ I), hi*-, ftiinilv vvifh tht- nthtr musician': 
likowint'. SoiihV^ brotliiT jI^l bi^M>mp^ pari vi i\\v fa?riilv a^ain. IW-^ 
laiiiilv with Si^rmv. Rut in ImiIIi case-, Hjlihvin wmuN ii>. t.» virii\ tho 
idea nl f^^mily llimu^'.lt musical ami M'.ial n^vnluti^'u ff \\v\h'\* 
Nul'j ihi' brother *; Uin^ua^»j a> nny plays; 

Then lu' bcf,an to uiako \\ hi?, \\ v..!^ very bvaiUiful br:aur'j \\ 
hufficd an J it v. as. JU' li«np,4 i a bmeni I ^^Miaed in hear 
v>irh what burning v/r had yet (u makr it our?;, huvs we tv»uld 
ccdsr Iflinenhag FrrcJofn lurked around us aiid I understocd at 
la'^t. th^t he tould hflp Us b€ free if wouid listen, lha» hr 
would never free unht wc did. (122) 

lu Ou' mid to late* lw5f^, Ihc wvud fret'J.trii' is (dKiuusly a ' «iK,h!y 
clMr>;i:d onv Nni only dors i\ sptMk t'.> tlu- politico of Ihv Civil Ri^ht-. 
Mov'.'ment, it also point - forward fo tlie "Frf/e ja^:^' movement 
of the Uilp and l^^hOs, the uar^ic of (Vn^'Mi' '^objman rcci] 

Tavlor, Albvft Avlf^r tihd lirir Polj^hy. Baldwin > cona^pt of faindv 
thnrpft7ri\ a highly poliliral om', and oiiv lhal hiV ctdUiral iinpli* f u^n'i. 

Jn ''/^^ * A;/* t^'^o *'fdrp»n ff>n^tudo** about Ff^bop. 



l\vi*i lunffr^i^. (Pton - ir; terui-^ ol ,^r-.tht ucs aiul ♦ iiUn^ Mnictures a- 

*itiion. hiirthrr, imtike \hv ^uy^umvnt^ f^f fhf NAiV^l' hii rntr.lr 
uiu! his hip rthii weri' ruiJ Kuh-f-rt u> ihe kinJ r.iflnn,ih/ifi"(i 

In SiMUiv Hlui/ Bjlilwin iuak< > vk\ir lluit. lonlrtirv to numy 
npinif'ii li*- i. ui Lul lu.tior fi»tiu!t v.hUt; \\\^\ liiuv 

ul Afri> A«nkuivi>rt cultiirt'.' [In- inij'lu liIuhv/ an- ilciU' Not uiil^ dor* 

fifu ( liUunil tMnt»'A» *w uriliii^ in .ijui trurn ArtLt '.slivh Wf 
tiit\ rM'iv thin^'.-y ail' ih' H* to l>i.' at m tUxl (hmmI 

U'ltlijirr^ tif fd Johr^ P"itiy. Whilt- W illume (tr-rus^t T intr*K. sec . thr nv.i^u i.k^ 
in l3viUhvin jri htt^-jMl h^.urf {]^^72, \'\'') Kelly I'^' t ^onnv s 

t»n !h'» ^Miry, cuUialSv Our, nHnliun Dt'buj', (»niv in cr^.^ |Mrti>:fi!(h. an J 
iVj^ i) lonc^nlMU s mnrr on \hf* tmi'i'rMn: ?• ol Che hln» ^ 

*: li'T ri ilrsLiipVuM of Parkers hrs! sis^iort t*M;|»T r^crdf'il nn 

3. h'.tcr(";tir.glv. U.uak imlfH that fr.^nr \m\ ^\v^ti\ Bir.l anJ Pi/ in ')^" 

AlbtTttou. IV/H. 24\hvJ 

^. It M'rms lo mr thi^t thi^ charartcns-tu ,is.(iwty Bi'b i-; «;imil(.iF to 
Henry Lnui'"' G.ilc:? 5 theory of siy^nifvin^: jlthoii^'j) Iinntf rhe cmul 

lo Afriifin Anirric:in \'/nl'jrs ^ignihiO^ o}^ other. On thB is^ur, ^t^c lu'Jh 
Gales and (..tint ( 19^.M>). 



Works CUcd 

Albrrt'-.nn. Chn^ 1*'/'^ f • lo- /V^r/.^fri ^j^* Ak-'^viniJnj lim*'' life RfC^rJ?. 
[l^lrjv^m h-rnr-. />;/■ ^f'^^ r\^-' >'tI M)?: 



1 'I 



B^Uiu'in. llch^iK and "^''^^My'^ [Wu*:. 



1 73 



. 1^55 ' Sonrv, Mlu^^^ in Gi'Uiy f.» Mt'ri kht iVfJM, H6-122 NfW 

'inrk ni3i Prrss. 

nu,iV;» A!uiij l^Tf'T VAii^' iV.'/^l/' fw\7r.v AffiCh: ifi JV/iitr .Amrrfra Nrvr York- 

- if^f,/, "Hnrf flfriiun'. on Tv.'o Hot Shu!^ ' In \h me "ixial Is^-xu^. 

t'. /A^^Jiri prfMU/J^Ki.i /lUifv 22X 41 New licsrk. Murruw. 

, \W} ' Itrnrny! ' In \amc\ WMum ihc lt\^ai\/. rtliiotl by (Juiniy 
127 M Nt'w Vtirk. bimon und Sthu&tfr/ lot.R'h*»toru'. 
i iint, Williarzi V V^W. 'N('V'. iJiiiw tit<n^. in Afro Anu rit\in I lUM.uy Critit i'.m/ 
American i^Juarterlir ilt: ti57 63. 

Mf-h.ilf of Civil P.!j.»ht5> Is ' Ntw Yvtk Ittncy Al, 

1 HI Hoi-., W, L. n ]W) {]Un\] Uu* "^"ul'^' ^^f lAk. Kw; Yf.rk- ^Ay\w\ TsJAi 
fVvi^hor 1 romrd 1<*77 [194^^]. Inside fa::. l^e-bof'^. New York: l^a Capo 

ii-i'V.^'S', Nf.irk. \W7 t . mbff Kunc. H.ililv.m Du-^ A lufd'ful Voice en 

Mcitos, f [rnry I nlir;, Ir 19HH. //jt* S:>;>;i/v[mv Af. A ihi\>n^ of Afrc-Af^wrif iin 
itfcrafy Cri(i':i<,m Nrw Y<'rk. Dtlortl L'nivf-r^ity fVtSs 

Practice 2: 51-68. 

h»?!. [ rk- "Deiibli' V, iHnibU- linv> Brb<>j>'^ Politico of Stvlc' LiJl/fifi>:- 

MurrtU; Albert Sfp.»?i;iPK» fhr H.'wr.^ N(»v/ ^ork: M:Gra\v-I ill! 

NraK Ljrry. lM8'^v "Ttw nKuk VVrlt^T**^ Rolr III J^uir:. D.ikUvin/' In v;? 
a LibcriUci} future: B!,rjk Arh Mcvonc^ii Vtnhn^^-. cditCvl by Michat»l 
Schwrirt/. 57-f»l. New '^'ork; Thunder's Moulh. 

. 198-^b. "And Shine )m On. " In I'lVicVJs Lr/'rr.;frLJ Tufur^v 

L^lacK Arh ?A Vimen( Viniin^'. rdiuJ by Michael Schv/art/, 7-23. New 
^ork: I hundpr'r. Moulh Prc>«;. 

r^rkcr, Cluirlie. 1^76 Bird/ The ^ni'pv Recordm^^ (Mailer Takt:^) Savov, S|L 
2201. 

Krdding. j. Sjunders. IMwy in Mtiff a Pod tilad. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 

Univcnity Trr-' 

Kcitly, luhn M P'74. 'Sonny's Blues*: jjinfs F'cifdwin's Ima^o of Black 
r^iiuiiuniiy, In lAfn>'} Biildwin: A L dlrclicn of Critual fi'sjay?. rdi'ed by 
Krnrlh Kinnjniun, 13''- l6 Tn^jlfwood Cliff*^, N|: [YenliM'-Hdl! 

^hlr^ir. B^^n 1^71 P/.r^^ New York \\v\l. Km^haii. and Winston. 



BESTC0i''y/Sw".5l:ltf 



176 



Par\chi> Savery 



Sp^llman, A. B. 1970, Black Music: Four Lirr5 (Tour Lkys in the Bebop Business). 

New York; ScluKkt'M. 
VVjlion, OrJiz f.t. 1972 Mn^i:; lilack. Whtir b' blin' A SottMop^tCill SuiViy of ihv 

U^e and Misuse of Afro-Amt^rkan Mu\4l, Neiv Yurk Momnv. 
Williams, Martin. 1971, The J^iiz Traditiot:. New York; Ntpntor-NAl. 
Williams, Sherlcy Anne. 1972. Give Birth to Brightness: A I hematic Sludy in 

Ntii-Bhd: iifrrmure t\vw York ni^l. 

Wright, Richiird. 197f<. "Hlupprint for Negro Writing' In Richard W^ri^^hl Reader, 
edited by nirn Wright and Michel Fabrp, 36-^49. Now York: HarfKT k 
Row. 



14 Filiative and Affiliative 
Textualization in Chinese 
American Literature 



DtU'id U'iwvi Li 

University of Southern Caliiornia 



AllhouRh Chinese American literature ha^- f^.ainecl signifitant recogni- 
tion since Us re-emergence in the l^ile 1960s; critical output on thi:^ 
exfmnsiveb(xly of texl*^ has n(»t yet matched its intensity anil complexity. 
Ollentiines. tliere is a persistent ga/e on the canonical token, Maxine 
Hon^; Kinj;ston's Thv Wommi IV.jrr/er (1976) in tl'ii-i case, which is 
upheld as the ultimate representative of Asian American creativity. 
This narrow focus on a single ethnic work tends to have an ahistorical 
effect — it encourages the cult of a minority genius, it isolate^ thu value 
of the text, and it shows a disref;ard of the fundamental i elatedness 
of ethnic literary prcKluclion. While acknowledging the individuality 
of the imaginative act, here 1 try to locale rontemporaiy Chinese 
American work in its own tradition forindtion One aspect of thiFi 
formation is its dual moverncnt toward "filiation and affiliation." 
tdward Said argues that the failure of natural bii»logicL'' reprc^duction 
(filiation) in the modern era propels individuals to generate culturally 
compensatory orders (affiliation) that will reinbtate the lost sinse of 
an old system (1983, 16-20). VVliile concurring with Said's basic 
fonnulation, I am not abandoning the role of filiation, as Said probably 
would. Rather. I am intt^nt on etymologizing the word, to see "filiation," 
for instance, along with "filial piety." In the Chinese American literary 
context, "filiation" can be litcrallv defined as a line of descent and 
practically used as a narrative device to trace paternity and, as the 
texts have so emphatically embodied, maternity as well. It figures a 
diachronic movement toward the pt^ssible beginnings of nascent Chine^-e 
American families. Affiliation, on the other hand, indicates a synchronic 
movement when the multifarious quests fi^r the potential prigins n{ 
individual families connect and parallel to hnm an album cm 
extended Chinese American family. Thus, filiation and affiliation are 



177 



178 



David Leiwei Li 



not oppositional terms but complumcnlary ones; both are extensions 
of the same trope (jf "paronl-child" that apparently espouses a natural 
relationship only to s( rve the cultural interest (»f community construc- 
tion. Filiation and affiliation are the thematic and rhetorical sticilegie.s 
that lit' in the heart of the ChinuNe American intertexts that 1 am about 
to review. Together, they serve to animate memory, rekindle a sense 
uf cunimunal history, and estabhsh kinds ot a shared identity 

1 wish to begin this section with a poem fittingly called "The End 
of a Beginning." "The beginning is always difficult/' Marilyn Chin 
writes, "The immigrant worked his knuckles to the bone / only to die 
under the wheels of the railroad . . . And 1, / the beginning of an end. 
the end of a begioiiing, / sit here, drink unfermented green tea, / 
ixrawl thebe paltry lines for you [Grandfather]" (19B7, 3). The dcscrip 
lion captures (he apparent contr/>l belwt.^en the hand that svc>rked its 
knuckles to the bone to construct the transcontinental railroad and the 
hand that scrawled these paltry lines to cc»mnti'morate tlie event. The 
heroic gesture of the grandfather and the humble reverence of his 
granddaughter seem, lunvever, to merge hand in hand. The grandfather 
buried under the rail of oblivitm springs to life on his "one-hundredth 
birthday," resurrected under the pen o( the granddaufb^^r (3). The 
beginning and the end lose their demarcating functions; their place 
is a revivified continuity that matters. Consciously pursuing the line 
of descent, the poem re-marks the presence of the rail, restores a 
historic foundation, and repairs the broken links bctv/ecn the past and 
present. U provides, as Chin genuinely believes, "The Parent Nfode" 
for the group of her poems and, 1 believe, for the sheaf of other 
Chinese American verse as well. 

The parent node is a filial image aimed at creating a sense of 
cohesive kinship Someluiies, it i^ invoked to counter the crevice caused 
by language, as in Mei-mei Bc^rssenbrugge ^ "Chronicle": 

Grandt'athor talked to me, taiighl me. 

At two months, my mother tells me, 

I rould .iff for flowers, 

slab my small hand upwards to moon. 

Even todny I gel proud 

v/hcn 1 remember 

this all took place in Chinese. (1^82, 41) 

Other limes, the parent nc»de conjures up the desire of identification, 
as in Nellie Wongs "Dreams in llarriscMi Railroad Park"; 

1 turn and teuth my mother's eye^. 
They are wel 
and I dream 



Chitv'ne American Literature 



and I • I ream 
of orwbroidennR 
new skin, (1977. 18) 

btill olliur Wmvs ihe parent noiir expresses intimacy, enhanced by the 
Kriuv.'lLai>j;e of il-i imminent Icv.s, ,is The Ynunfyst Danf^^hfer" nf Calhy 
Song recalls; 

It spcms it has always 

been like this: fhe twi^ cif us 

m this sunless roam, 

the splashing of the bathwater 



She knt>ws I am not to be tnr^teil. 

even now planning my escape. 

As I toasr to her health 

with the tea she has poured, 

a thousand cranes curtain the window, 

fly up in a sudden broeze. (1983, 6) 

Or, later in her life when the d luphler artist comes U? rest al her 
mother's feet, to hear "the ticking uf the china clock, another heartbeat," 

ll has taken me all those years 

to reali/e that this is w hat I must do 

to recogni/e my life. 

When I stretch a canvas 

lo paint the cltjuds, 

it is your spirte that declares itself: 

arching, 

your arms stemming out hke Cender shoots 
to hang sheets in the sky (48) 

Whether it is ot yh\% at rest, balhinj;. or reminiscing, the imagistic 
field of the poems we read is invariably partic'jiari/ed: "When 1 think 
of Hav/aii, / I do not fancy myself lolling under palm trees, / a 
backdrop of verdant cliffs, caressed by a balmy breeze"; Wing Tek 
Lum opens our eyes, "instead 1 give thanks for classmates and our 
family ^ravt's, / this unique universe that we have called home." 
Admittedly inspired by Frank Chin, Lum tiptly names the poem "Luc il 
Sensibilihes," suj^^estmg a unique universe of homespun rhymes in 
which liviny; friends and dead spirits co-inhabit ihe poetic self (1987, 
67). Here, the parent nude signifies a most local Chinese American 
space where the intersubjective relationships betiveen generations die 
manifested. For Lum, lookiMg al "A Picture of Mv Mother's Family" 
becomes a moment of mten'.e self scrutiny (24-25); grave sv,erping is 
"Soinelh^ng Our Family Ma^ AUvay > Done" (^T-3f>); and above all 
"The Poet Imagine!^ His Grandfather's Tlineghts on the Day He Died/' 



180 



David Leiwei Li 



reaching into the recesses of an ancestral memor)', made integral and 
intact through poetic ideation, "still one in my mind" (37). 

The parent node is a rhetorical mode of search for a vision of one's 
own. The overriding concern, as Marilyn Chin has it, is, "How can 
v/e remake ourselves in l\is [great grandfather's) image?" (1987, 29). 
Elsewhere, she has attempted an answer: "I laugh at the sun; 1 take 
in air; / I whistle in sleep, let cicadas within / murmur their filial 
rapture / my father's dream is my dream" (68). Projecting fatherhood 
and carrying on parcnfeal dispiration arc filial acts of respect and rejoicing, 
a moment of reciprocal togethernivss as rendered in Alan Lau's "a 
father's wishes— the birlhday letter" (1980): 

it's hard for me 
to K\\k to you 

lislen to ihe sound of my voice 
pay no attention 
to the words 

thfjy are only ivagon^i in the wind 

instead hear the creek 

of the wheels pleading for oil 

it is my young pain 

with your old pain 

moaning the boatman s blues 

together 

Togetherness is hyperbolized in Lau's two-part poem "the sun eaten, 
the son born" when we are first told that the father "exposed jaw*s / 
in a yawn wide enough / to eat the sun / turned yellow / as if he 
had swallowed / fields of light/' then, "his head" turned into "a bulb 
/ illuminating characters / 1 cannot read . . they dance luminous 
rhythms / in my unshaped head / not knowing their meaning" The 
second pari recorded a happening years later when "father's head is 
with me still": 

walking thru the gate 

I sport a similar shape 

with my wool hat on 

winter reflection 

the shadow on the temple wall 

shows only a black circle of light 

against the moon 

a monk's head 

with no dfs 

to get in the way 

In a radiant display vf symbolic reiriLarnalitui. L^u's formerly "u^ 
shaped head" takes "a similar shape" as his father*s, luminous, cosmic. 



Chinese American literature 



181 



and determinate, emitting "a black circle of light / against the moon" 
like the birth of a star — "the sun eaten, the son born." The poem 
adroitly shapes a quotidian reproductive metaphor into a fresh gen- 
erative impulse, couching familial descent in metaphysical succession, 
thus catapulting the reader into a new consciousness. 

If the figure of filiation is deployed in Chinese American poetry in 
its most local geography and its most terse form, it is far more 
elaborated in its affiliated genre, the prose works, which, given the 
advantage of narrative duration, are often able to extend the journey 
back to the future. Laurence Yep's novel Dragonwings (1975) is such 
an example. Intrigued by a newspaper account of Fung Joe Guey, a 
Chinese American who flew a biplane over Oakland for about twenty 
minutes before a mishap on September 22, 1909, Yep decided to trace 
the story. A heap of questions ensued. "Did he ever build that new 
biplane?" Yep contemplated to himself, "I do not know. Nor do I know 
why he built that first biplane. I do not even know where he came 
from or whether he had a wife and a family" (247). However, Yep is 
deterred by neither the scarcity of information nor the obscurity of 
origin: 

Of the hundreds of thousands of Chinese who flocked to these 
shores we know next to nothing. They remain a dull, faceless 
mass: statistic fodder to be fed to the sociologists, or lifeless 
abstraction to be manipulated by historians. And yet these Chinese 
were human beings — with fears and hopes, joys and sorrows like 
the rest of us. In the advetitures of the various members of the 
Company of the Peach Orchard Vow, I have tried to make some of 
these dry historical facts become living experiences. (247; my em- 
phasis) 

The attempt to humanize the faceless mass is strikingly carried out in 
the name of the Peach Orchard Vow, an allusion instantly revealing 
Yep's conscious alliance with an extant Chinese American tradition. A 
famous episode from the fifteenth century Chinese folk epic, Romance 
of the Three Kingdoms, the Peach Garden Oath relates the sworn 
brotherhood of three Shu Han heroes who vowed to a faithful 
comradeship that ends only with death. Such a brotherhood was later 
emulated, particularly by the secret societies of Canton that mush- 
roomed in the nineteenth century against the Manchu Empire (Liu 
1966, 202). Guan Gong, or Kwan Kung, one of the three sworn 
brothers, was ennobled and deified in Cantonese folklore to have 
become, in Frank Chin's words, "the god of war to soldiers ... the 
god of literature to fighters who soldier with words, and the god 
patron protector of actors" (Chin 1981, xxvi). 



182 



David Leiwei Li 



Yep's move is meaningful because of his deliberate affiliation with 
a historical-literary model of alliance rooted in Chinese American 
practice, which is, interestingly enough, an attempt of making kinship, 
an act of affiliation that naturalizes social bonds for a common cause. 
More meaningful than this declared intention is the manner in which 
Yep executes it. Dragonwings becomes for him at once an occasion to 
understand the space between selves and an occasion to make Fung 
Joe Guey, the pilot, and Laurence Yep, the writer, take off together. To 
achieve this. Yep has chosen to become the narrator. Moon Shadow, 
the son of his adopted father, Fung Joe Guey, who has now become the 
fictive Windrider. Yep's nanative positioning combines both the tropes 
of filiation and affiliation. In the creative portrayal of a father-son 
bond. Yep has acted out the symbolic potentials of a communal identity. 
The father's fairy tale account of Dragon King's naming of him as 
Windrider, the "softskin" human embodiment of a former dragon 
physician whose dream it is to be "reborn again as a dragon," fires 
Moon Shadow's imagination to such an extent that he sees himself 
practically as a part of his father's journey back to heaven (34-47). 
"All about me," Moon Shadow tells us, "I had Father's dream taking 
visible form — first in the pictures . . . then in the models . . . and finally 
in the skeleton of the flying machine itself" (210). All the while, the 
reader sees a filial relationship taking shape: Windrider and Moon 
Shadow have together "learned about being a father and a son" (55). 
The lesson of Dragonwings transcends flight; as Father said toward the 
end, "Dragons have immense families too. It would be nice to live 
long enough to see my great-grandchildren. And it may be that my 
final test is to raise a brood of superior women and men" (242). 
Windrider's regenerative wish has certainly come true in the fictive 
field of dreams — in imagining an ancestor Yep has imagined a form 
of life, transferring the legitimacy of filiation to affiliation while bringing 
about a superior brood of men and women whose imaginative reading 
of the book will make them the proud progeny of the dragon. 

Though apparently pursuing the theme of filiation, Yep's affiliative 
textualization suggests a reverse order of progenitoring. The true 
originator of the line of descent is not the father/grandfather, or 
mother/grandmother, but rather the author himself/herself. The use 
of a titular ancestor becomes a strategy of authenticating the ethnic 
self in significant traditions. Shawn VVong's 1979 novel, Homebase, 
stands out as yet another example of this family romance. The book 
catches its audience from its opening epigraph that reads: "AILAN- 
THUS altissima {A, glandulosa). Tree-of-Heaven. Deciduous tree. All 
Zones. Native of China. Planted a century ago in California's gold 



Chinese American Literature 



183 



country." The metaphoric implication of the tree's origin and trans- 
plantation appears irresistible when the description continues, "Often 
condemned as a weed tree because it suckers profusely, but it must 
be praised for its ability to create beauty and shade under adverse 
conditions — drought, hot winds, and every type of difficult soil." 
Botanic classification transfers to biological filiation and sociological 
affiliation. Shawn V\fong has recovered the tenacity of the Chinese 
American spirit in his imaged tree, surviving the American grain. 

The tree is the novel's central organic trope, its most essential form, 
and its most basic narrative intelligence. In its endowed human spirit, 
the tree embodies an ancestral dream, as the protagonist Rainsford 
Chan makes explicit: 

I will remember how my father showed me the stump of a once 
giant redwood tree, showed me its rings of growth. Like a blind 
man, he made me run my fingers over each year grain to feel the 
year of my great-grandfather's birth, my grandfather's birth, his 
own birth, and my birth. Out of all this I will see dreams, see 
myself fixed in place on the land. (23) 

Indeed, the tree becomes the "homebase" that spawns Rainsford's life 
stories: 

And it was here that I told all the stories of four generations of my 
own life. Out of this pure day where I rose up at sunrise to meet 
my grandfather's life here, where I felt the presence of his heart 
agamst the walls, heard it as noise in the night. . . . And out of 
so much responsibility to create the whole vision of my life in 
America, of our lives in America, their death gave me my own 
clear voice, gave me the heart speaking, but it was not my own 
heart to use. (57-58; my emphasis) 

Vibrating with the tone of Aiiieeeee! that laments the racist suppression 
vyf "seven generations of Asian-American voices" (xvi), Shawn Wong, 
a coeditor of the anthology, realizes the "responsibility" of his mission, 
for it is the writer who will recuperate historic personages and create 
an intergenerational voice of Chinese America — the lives of the rail- 
roader in the Sierra Nevada Mountains and of the detained immigrant 
on Angel Island now breathe through the pages. "Wong's voice is the 
orphan's wishing himself into family," novelist Diana Chang sharply 
observes, "the orphan's loving the gone in order to hold onto their 
presence, remembering his heritage to stave off his own dying through 
their passing away" (1981, 137). 

An orphan's devotion naturally turns into forms of emphathetic 
perception. At times the son becomes the mother, who has "shaped 
the style of my [Rainsford's] manhood in accordance with her own 



184 



David Leiwei Li 



competitive and ambitious self" (Wong 1979, 47, 38). Other times he 
is his own father or grandfather: hiking with "my patronizing blond- 
haired, whining, pouting bride of fifteen, known to me as 'The Body'," 
Rainsford feels that he is "making up for those restless years, the 
lonely years of my grandfathers" (78, 76). Here, Wong's manner of 
speech is akin to his fellow writer Frank Chin's. One thinks of such 
a story as "The Eat and Run Midnight People" in The Chinaman Pacific 
& Frisco R. R. Co. (1988), which also bends on the same invocation of 
the grandfather. Like Rainsford who juxtaposes historical memory with 
day-to-day reverie, the narrative "I" of Chin chants, "Ride with me. 
Grandfather" when atop a homy white nun (23). While the theme of 
racial and sexual revenge has its uneasy nuances, such fictional acts 
of filial empathy serve not only as the grandson's compensation for 
the grandfather's lack, but also as poignant reminders of a history of 
Chinese exclusion and antimiscegenation laws whose impact are yet 
to be reckoned with. "The Body," as Rainsford remarks, "is America. 
She tells me things about me that I am not" (78). Nevertheless, in his 
resolute production of his progenitor, Rainsford has produced the self 
who is, let me make a similar affiliative shift, the child who is the 
father of man. 

Part II 

If Yep and Wong are keen on the narrative recalling of a family, an 
extended family that may embrace a Chinese American humanity, 
they are certainly not alone in their endeavor. Maxine Hong Kingston's 
1980 book could be regarded as a sibling product, a sister's voice and 
a daughter's song commingling in the filial rapture of the time. China 
Men affiliates itself with the almost consensual quest for a cohesive 
Chinese American kinship by both establishing empowering origins 
and subverting hegemonic discursive formations. Though sharing the 
desire with Yep, Wong, and the tribe of poets discussed earlier to 
reconstitute an indigenous history, Kingston seems more interested in 
textual mediation, revision, and transformation. For her, China Men is 
"claiming America" in her Chinese American way. Following the 
example of William Carlos Williams's precursor text. In the American 
Grain (1956), which challenged, in Myra Jehlen's v/ords, "the American 
teleology . . . that continues to animate the discovery story" by asserting 
the Icelandic legends (1986, 25), Kingston has seized upon the same 
dominant mythology of entelechy as a point of her departure by 
unfolding in her family saga more than a century of Chinese American 
experience. 



Chinese American Literature 



185 



Kingston's affiliation with China Men signifies a linguistic difference 
in naming. One recalls that Frank Chin's self -referential term has been 
consistently "Chinaman" from the 1970s "Chickencoop" to the 1980s 
"Pacific." Chin has traced the term to a time before it was even 
tarnished by racial slurs, and in his parodic essay "Chinaman's Chance" 
(1982) we hear him claim the name with pride; 

[W]e all feel "Chinaman" comes more naturally into the rhythm 
of the talk we're talking, especially if we are sucking and booming 
a railroad pace, reminiscent of an ancient back-breaking track- 
laying race, and our words want to wheel belly shine and shine 
with a high iron. 

Let others be embarrassed by the little "Chinaman's" they 
have to abort and sv^allow down dead unspoken before they're 
heard. I'm talking in tribute to the Chinamans who took off their 
hats one Utah noon and looked west back over the six miles of 
track they'd laid since sunrise, and sighed, while further west, 
the Sierra they'd crossed, thundering applause they heard in their 
nerves. 

"Chinaman" is what we called ourselves, John. And "China- 
man" is what we answered to when called, John. "John" is what 
a Chinaman called a white. "Hey, John!" we said, the first to 
speak off the boat, as if we'd come home, and we had. We came 
with a vision and put it into words, first step on the American 
continent, home to Gum San, California Gold Mountain, to get 
rich in the mines. "Me longtime Califom'," we said. (167-69; my 
emphasis) 

Chin has embraced the name with a celebration of its honorific 
intonations, cleansing its image from historical pollution. For him, 
"The Chinamans" are his forefathers who "carved the Sierras into 
their Plymouth Rock" and a name engraved in the mind of their filial 
descendants (170). 

Tacitly responding to Chin and others' restorational champion of 
"Chinaman," Kingston writes in American Heritage: 

In the early days of Chinese American history, men called them- 
selves "Chinamen" ... the term distinguished them from the 
"Chinese" who remained citizens of China, and showed they 
were not recognized as Americans. Later, of course, it became an 
insult. Young Chinese Americans today are reclaiming the word 
because of its political and historical precision, and are demanding 
that it be said with dignity and not for name-calling. (1978, 37) 

However, if Chin has chosen to reimburse the currency of "Chinaman," 
Kingston takes a different shot at the term. She is more inclined to 
refute the authoritative oppression with which "Chinaman" seems to 
have be?n connoted. As Williams's In the American Grain opens with 



186 



David Leiwei Li 



a proclamation, "It has been my wish to draw from every source one 
thing, the strange phosphorus of the life, nameless under an old 
misappellation" (1956, v), so Kingston begins her program of discov- 
ering America with a rectification of the name. Chiita Men is Kingston's 
choice register, not Chinamen whose pejorative meaning predominates 
its usage, but China Men — a literal English translation of Chinese 
characters, meaning Chinese — who are also makers of American 
history. 

Similar to Shawn Wong, who establishes his homebase by fondling 
the each year grain of the family tree, Kingston structures her work 
by kinship titles so that all characters are relatives, all stories are 
related, and all China Men are in the family Unlike The YJoman Yfarrior, 
whose naming strategy delineates the differences in an intergenera- 
tional matrilineal order, China Men uses generic designations like great 
grandfather, grandfather, father, uncle, and brother to punctuate con- 
tinuation in patrilineal descent. "I thought that all of us see them as 
ancestors . . . mythic characters of a past golden age," Kingston explains, 
"it was all right to call them 'great grandfather' because they become 
the great grandfather of us all. Also they become the great grandfathers 
of our country in the sense of claiming America" (Islas 1983, 15). 
Thus, "The Great Grandfather of the Sandalwood Mountains" treks 
to Hawaii, hacking its jungles and harvesting sugarcane (Kingston 
1980, 81-116); "The Grandfather of the Sierra Nevada Mountains" 
hammers against the granite, leaving a network of steel trails as the 
evidence of his presence (121-49); "The Father from China" (5-71) 
in his turn is "The American Father" (235-55), resolute in "The Making 
of More Americans" (163-221); and finally, "The Brother in Vietnam" 
brings us back to the present, refreshing our sense of a continual self 
(261-305). In this way, kinship titles provide China Men with the 
organizing code of the Chinese American epic experience. Kingston's 
use of the generational rhetoric of descent constitutes an alternative 
American historiography in a Chinese American point of view. Frank 
Chin's revulsion against the presumption that "yellow writers would 
tell their yellow literary time by a white clock" (1977, 42) and his 
fictional exercise of a different temporality in a story like "Railroad 
Standard Time" now find themselves together wdth Kingston's work 
in a congeneric enterprise of recovering their celebratory past.' The 
footprints of China Men across the North American continent also 
offer an alternative sociogeography in which Chinese Americans are 
to be re- viewed. Kingston's China Men are not confined in Chinatowns; 
they are both transoceanic and transcontinental, shuttling across spaces 
like the Monkey somersaulting in clouds. Kingston's mapping of their 



Chinese American Literature 



187 



physical traces is in company with Shawn Wong, whose narrator 
Rainsford "see legends" while murmuring "the names of stations and 
towns like prayers, as if they belonged to me" (1979, 112). 

Part HI 

The concluding vignette of China Men, "On Listening," shows Kings- 
ton's authorial postulations of her agency in the recovery of the familial 
storyline. In a manner strikingly similar to Kenneth Burke's fable of 
history as conversation in the parlor, Kingston orchestrates a party of 
disparate voices in which the motif of the myth of discovery recurs 
(Burke 1973, 110-11). A Filipino scholar states that the Chinese looked 
for the Gold Mountain in the Philippines while a young Chinese 
American interrupts him to say that a Chinese monk did indeed go 
to Mexico with Cortez. He is then disputed by someone else who 
claims that "some cowboys saw mandarins floating over California in 
a hot-air balloon, which came all the way from China." Kingston, the 
narrator, does not clearly "hear everything" said, and upon her request, 
the Filipino scholar promises "to write it down" for her At this point, 
Kingston punctures her narrative by addressing both the audience at 
the party and at large: "Good. Now I could watch the young men 
who listen" (308-9). 

To me, the anecdote not only unravels the nature of history as 
competitive stories, but more importantly it highlights the "twisted 
design," to use a phrase from The Woman Warrior, of Kingston's narrative 
plot. If Walt Whitman says to his audience that "you shall listen to 
all sides and filter them for yourself," he is asking them to actively 
participate in the song of democracy (26). If Ralph Ellison poses his 
rhetorical question in the last line of Invisible Man, "Who knows but 
on the lower frequencies, 1 speak for you?" he is appealing to his 
readers' imaginative identification (1972, 439). When Kingston says 
that "I could watch the young men who listen," she is investing her 
hope of revisioning a historical past and envisioning a prospective 
future in the new generations of her story community A story is 
simply not a good one, the narrator turned onlooker seems to say, if 
it is unable to spawn its followers and regenerate its own follow-ups. 
Like Brave Orchid, the champion talker who talks Kingston into 
existence, the daughter storyteller is now wishing her genealogy t'' 
emerge. 

David Henry Hwang hears the invitation to chorus, and he comes 
along wdth his own answering music. In a note to FOB and Other 



188 



David leiwei Li 



Plays, his virgin play, first staged in 1979 at Stanford University, where 
he was a student, and then awarded an Obie in 1980 after Joseph 
Papp's Off Broadway production, the young playwright attributes his 
source of inspiration to the two "parental figures," as they were, of 
contemporary Chinese American literature: 

The roots of FOB are thoroughly American. The play began when 
a sketch I was writing about a limousine trip through Westwood, 
California, was invaded by two figures from American literature. 
Fa Mu Lan, the girl who takes her father's place in battle, from 
Maxine Hong Kingston's The Woman WarrioK and Gwan Gung, 
the god of fighters and writers, from Frank Chin's Gee, Pop! (3) 

With this note, Hwang both declares the professed origin of his play 
and joins the inner literary circle of "us" in a family of ethnic solidarity. 
Such a gesture is also evident in his choice of a collective pronoun, 
the characteristic and charismatic "we" in the introduction to his 
anthology Broken Promises (1983), which he dedicates to the "Asian 
American theater people across this nation ... as an offering" (xiii). It 
is small wonder that such an offering is graciously acknowledged by 
Maxine Hong Kingston in her foreword to that volume, later reproduced 
for Hwang's recent edition of FOB and Other Plays. Watching the 
young men who not only listen to but also renew her story, Kingston 
is exuberant that "our private Chinese lives and secret language can 
be communally understood. . . . Here is a community. We are proud to 
the bones" (Hwang 1990, vii). 

FOB is a filial assertion of family membership, but more importantly 
it consciously affiliates itself with a recovered Chinese American 
tradition. Structurally, the play continues in the direction of Kingston's 
mixing of reality and fantasy in The Woman Warrior and Chin's dramatic 
shifts through limbo and ghetto in The Chickencoop Chinaman. The- 
matically, it confirms its predecessors' value in tapping the Chinese 
American mythic past as a potential avenue of freedom from the state 
of loss and alienation. Generically, it works in the vein of American 
immigrant literature, but subverts it by a refusal to embrace the 
assimilationist affirmation of the melting pot. 

The prologue of the play directs the audience instantly to the center 
of Hwang's dramatic conflict: FOB vs. ABC. Dale, the native American- 
bom Chinese (ABC) has this unflattering picture of his "sworn enem[y]," 

"F-O-B. Fresh Off the Boat Clumsy ugly greasy FOB. Loud, stupid, 

four-eyed FOB" (1990, 6). Grace, Dale's cousin and a naturalized 
Chinese American, seems far more tolerant of Steve, the son of a rich 
Hong Kong businessman and the FOB of the play. When the play 
evolves, the characters' -^nse of America and their sense of self in 



2jl) 



Chinese American Literature 



189 



relation to it come into focus. Grace recalls her troubled adolescence 
when she bleached her hair and hung out at the beach in order to 
appear colorless and get along, and she is happy that she has outgrown 
that phase (30-31). Steve, however, is still unsure of his footing and 
tries to cover up his awkwardness with his chauffeur and limousine 
(22-23). Dale, the self-made-ethniC'tumed-normal is basking in his 
own success and eager to initiate Steve into his own mode of being: 

[Dale'*Lparents are] yellow ghosts and they've tried to cage me 
up wilmXIhinese-ness when all the time we were in America. 
(Pause)^^, I've had to work real hard — real hard — to be myself. 
To not be a Chinese, a yellow^ a slant, a gook. To be just a human 
being, like everyone else, GPau:e) I've paid my dues. And that's 
why I am much better now. I'm making it, you know? I'm making 
it in America. (32) 

Coming to America, you're gonna jump the boat. You're gonna 
decide you like us . . . you can't hold out — you're no different. 
You won't even know it's coming before it has you. Before you're 
trying real hard to be jut.: like the rest of us — go dinner, go movie, 
go motel, bang-bang. And when you/ father writes you that do- 
it-yourself acupuncture sales are down, you'll throw that letter in 
the basket and burn it in your brain. And you'll write that you're 
gonna live in Monterey Park a few years before going back 
home — and you'll get your green card — and you'll build up a 
nice little stockbroker's business and have a few American kids 
before your dad realizes what's happened and dies, his hopes 
reduced to a few chattering teeth and a pack of pornographic 
playing cards. (26) 

The scene of professing the uninitiated, like the one above between 
Dale and Steve, is not new in Chinese American literature. Fred's 
lecture of China MaMa in The Year of the Dragon is one, and Kingston's 
graphic representation of the girl who tortures her silent classmate in 
order to make her talk is ancuier. What appears common among these 
scenes is not so much lending of a helping hand from the insider of 
a host society, but a rejected wanna-be's display of cultural know- 
how to the newcomer, or the less assimilated. The ostentation and 
condescension, most of the time inseparable from one another, are 
manifestations of the American-bom Chinese's painstakingly acquired 
sameness with the dominant race and culture. The bildungsroman of 
Dale, at least from the way he presents and preaches to Steve, seems 
to be a theatrical shorthand for playwright Hwang to demonstrate the 
syndrome, in his own words, of "self-loathing." He continues, "Dale 
loathes the 'Fresh-Off-the-Boat' Steve precisely because the latter 
represents all the identifications Dale has spent a lifetime attempting 
to avoid" (xi). Knowing Hwang's affiliation with the Asian American 



190 



David Leiwei Li 



theater movement in the 1970s and his proclaimed connection with 
Chin, one will have no trouble seeing FOB as a dramatic extension of 
one of the overriding thematic concerns of Aiiieeeee! (1983), which, 
we recall, associates almost all aspects of Asian American literary and 
cultural history with the cancer, in a slightly different wording, of 
"self-contempt." 

Part of Hwang's theatrical prescription to this phenomenal malady 
seems to be setting Steve up as a possible model for his doppelgSnger 
Dale so that the latter would become whole again by integrating with 
the former, his abnegated other. This works in the scene when Grace 
suggests that the three of them "play Group Story," or more aptly 
group therapy (42). Dale starts off as the bear of the story but soon 
quits his part. Steve and Grace square off as Gwan Gung and Fa Mu 
Lan in a series of exchanges in which Mu Lan wants to avenge herself 
on Gwan Gung's mindless slaughter of her family for sport. The 
anachronistic meeting of the mythic heroes conversing in a form close 
to Christian liturgy would become all too baffling for this reader if it 
were not for Steve's occasional monologue to link Gwan Gung with 
successive generations of Chinese immigrants, fighting their way into 
the United States. I am not so troubled by Hwang's antiheroic treatment 
of Gwan Gung in the exposition of his foolhardiness as 1 am by his 
haphazard use of folklore. Kingston notes in her foreword that Hwang 
"draws from Chinese mythology and asks what good those myths do 
us in America" (viii). Steve's revisionist impersonation of Gwan Gung 
coupled with his own romantic naivete somehow makes me wonder 
about his connection with his folk god either in terms of the classic 
text or in the immigrant folk tradition. He appears less determined 
and less warriorlike than the historic personage that he is supposedly 
emulating. Therefore, when Steven and Grace finally join hands, 
suggesting perhaps that the former has awakened the latter's repressed 
memory of her cultural heritage, such a symbolic union in the name 
of the warriors seems to lack the sense of purpose one has encountered 
in Kingston's and Chin's re-creations of mythr.. Because of Hwang's 
ambivalence at the surrealistic level, the ultimate persuasiveness of 
FOB at the level of reality appears diminished. 

Even if encouraged by the power of myth in the destiny of Steve 
and Grace, the audience will not fail to see that Dale is thrown off 
the boat, so to speak. The myth of Gwan Gung has done little good 
for Dale, who remains almost unchanged and untouched by the end 
of the play, "alone in the back room," once more cursing, "Clumsy, 
ugly, greasy FOB" (50), FOB and ABC seem to go their separate ways, 
with an unusual twist, though, that the immigrant is not only granted 



Chinese American Literature 



191 



entrance into America, but is also positioned as the hero. Hwang thus 
reverses the role of theater as an instrument of Americanizing the 
newcomer into denouncing their affiliation with the place of their 
origin, and proposes a necessary maintenance of a home culture in a 
host society. FOB thus compounds the theme of assimilation as opposed 
to acculturation, chronicling its new meaning for the present genera- 
tions. 

Hwang's second work. The Dance and the Railroad (in FOB 1981), 
features two nineteenth century railroaders at the site of the construc- 
tion camp. Against the backdrop of the workers' strike for better wages 
and working hours is a celebration of their creative urge, the deter- 
mination to flex their muscles for operatic performance rather than 
being forced into service by "the white man" (64). The play also bears 
family resemblances to Kingston's and Chin's works. The railroad 
workers' demand, "Eight hours a day good for white man, all the 
same good for Chinaman" (65), is literally lifted out of the pages of 
"The Grandfather of the Sierra Nevada Mountains" chapter of Kings- 
ton's China Men (1980, 139). Hwang clearly joins Kingston's efforts to 
dismiss the myth of Chinese labor as inherently cheap and compliant. 
Meanwhile, he also takes up the line of the Lone Ranger in Chin's 
Chickencoop Chinaman, charging the "Chinamans with no songs, no 
jokes, no toasts, and no thanks" (1981, 37), by presenting the ritual 
and rhythm of Cantonese opera in the limelight. 

In an even pithier form than FOB, The Dance and the Railroad 
quickly draws the audience into a similar master-pupil relation between 
Lone, the railroad old-timer/seasoned opera player, and Ma, the recent 
immigrant laborer/anxious student of opera. Though the structural 
pattern takes after the first play, the communication between the 
characters in the present work is more genuine and more nurturing. 
In their performing sessions. Lone and Ma help each other to shape 
a vision and revive a tradition so that the invocation of Gwan Gung 
is not an end in itself but a jumping board, as Ma sees it, to "immortalize 
my story" and to honor the victory of the strikers (78). Under the 
watching eyes of Gwan Gung, Lone and Ma measure their steps and 
shift their poses: water-crossing dance, labor dance, and battle dance 
succeed one another with dazzling intensity. With gangs banging, arias 
flowing, sticks twirling. Lone and Ma at once express an idiosyncratic 
cultural form and enact the spirit of Gwan Gung in the imnnigrants' 
undaunted passage to America and their subsequent forcing of the 
mountains and forcing of "the white devil to act civilized" (82). 

With Family Devotions (in FOB 1981, 87-146), Hwang completes his 
Chinese American trilogy with a vibrant code. Returning from his 



203 



192 



David Leiwei Li 



excursion to the collective consciousness about the transcontinental 
railroad, Hwang probes into the more personal mythologies of his 
own family. The play rings an autobiographical note when he recon- 
structs his multigenerational saga from China to the Philippines and 
then to America. But "the lanai/sunroom and the tennis court of a 
home in Bel Air, California" definitely indicate an affluent contemporary 
setting (91). When the play opens, Ama and Popo, the eldest generation 
Ci the family are waiting for their long-separated brother Di-gou to 
join them from China. Popo's daughter Hannah and son-in-law Robert 
are off to the airport while Ama's daughter Joanne and her husband 
Wilbur are home barbecuing chicken. Their seventeen-year-old Jenny 
is with her cousin Chester, a violinist who has just taken a job in the 
Boston Symphony and attempts to skip the family gathering. Ama 
and Popo are engaged in a heated chit-chat, first comparing their nisei 
(second generation Japanese American) son-in-law Wilbur to the 
Japanese in the World War II documentary who "always kill and laugh, 
kill and laugh" (97), and then drifting to Di-gou, who is made to work 
in the rice fields of China, where "all the people wear wires in their 
heads [which] force them to work all day and sing Communist song" 
(95). Finally, a revelation comes that Ama and Popo are to kick the 
communist demon out of their backslid brother by soliciting his 
testimony of their aunt See-goh-poh, the evangelist who is the "first 
in the family to become Christian [and made] this family chosen by 
God" half a century ago in China (102-3). 

After Di-gou's arrival, Ama lights up her "neon cross" and com- 
mands, "We begin! Family Devotions!" (125). Popo begins her "Special 
Testimony" by reminiscing about the stormy boat trip from China to 
the Philippines and confirming it as God's plan (129). Everyone 
applauds. Jenny expresses her love for the family and everyone 
applauds (130). Wilbur reports his being voted "Mr. Congeniality" in 
his social club, but is pushed off the podium by Robert, who looks 
like a middle-aged version of Dale in FOB (131). Deciding to show 
his relative "American ways" (118), Robert relishes his celebrity status 
resulting from a kidnap incident by calling ii his "American Dream. 
From rags to kidnap victim" (136). Soon the testimonies fall into 
shambles, everyone is disputing everyone else except Di-gou, who has 
by now become his sisters' most convenient diversion away from "this 
small family disagreement" (137). Failing to extract Di-gou's testimony 
of God's mercy, Ama and Popo decide to punish his body and save 
his soul. With the help of their daughters, they tie him to the table 
and begin scourging him with an electric cord, when Di-gou "suddenly 
breaks out of his bonds" and "grabs Chester," who just rushes in to 



9' 



Chinese American Literature 



193 



his rescue. Miraculously; Di-gou "begins speaking in tongues!" and 
Chester "begins interpreting [his] babbling" (138-41). The story of 
See-goh-poh is, however, not about a missionary who marries God 
and converts hundreds of villagers, as Ama and Popo so believed, but 
about a woman who goes on an evangelical tour to give birth to her 
illegitimate child in order to avoid her family's condemnation. Faith 
and facts collide when the sisters and their brother start comparing 
notes on the biographical details of their aunt, See-goh-poh, until the 
weight of truth seems too much for Ama and Popo to bear. Both of 
them collapse dead, turning into "two inert forms" (141-45). 

Hwang's black comedy of enors eventually jars the initially tranquil 
surface of the play not just to unsettle his audience's perspective, but 
to reorganize it through a glass darkly. The family is so enmeshed in 
its mythologies that not even a Christian vision is able to unify it. 
"Brainwash," a recurrent word in different contexts of the play, gives 
us perhaps an insight into the blindness of the characters' impnsonment 
in the various ideologies of religious fundamentalism. Communism, 
and the American dream. Can there be a family devotion that does 
not lead to fragmentation but integration? Beneath his expose of the 
absurd in the main plot lies Hwang's pondering of such a question. 
Chester, whose circumstances of life are similar to Dale's in FOB, has 
originally no interest in meeting his granduncle Di-gou. When they 
do meet, however, they become the only people in the play who are 
really communicating: 

DI-GOU: There are faces back further than you can see. Faces 
long before the white missionaries arrived in China. Here. (He 
holds CHESTER'S violin so that its back is facing CHESTER, and uses 
it like a mirror) Look here. At your face. Study your face and you 
will see — the shape of your face is the shape of faces back many 
generations — across an ocean, in another soil. You must become 
one with your family before you can hope to live away from it. 
(123) 

Di-gou's rhetoric of filiation barely appeals to Chester, because for him 
"See-goh'poh's face is the only one that has any meaning 
here.. . .There's nothing for me" (123). Besides, holding the violin 
back to mirror Di-gou, Chester foresees change, "Before you know it, 
you'll be praying and speaking in tongues" (124). Yet, wh^n the play 
reaches its climax, neither does Di-gou kneel before the neon cross 
nor does Chester reject the faces. Transformations indeed occur, 
however. The deaths of his sisters completely alters Di-gou's plan to 
bring them bark to China; instead, he realizes that "no one leaves 
America" and wishes to "drive an American car down an American 



21/ J 



194 



David Leiwei Li 



freeway" (145). After Di-gou exits the stage and before the curtain 
falls, ' (a single spotlight [falls] on CHESTER'S face, standing where DI- 
GOU stood at the beginning of the play) (The shape of CHESTER'S face 
begins to change)'' (146). 

It is difficult to imagine Chester's face by reading the script alone, 
but Chester's taking of Di-gou's place seems to warrant a reading that 
the grandnephew may resemble his granduncle. Thus, in his theatrical 
signification, Hwang is using biological affinity as a vehicle to convey 
a newly found cultural affiliation, for indeed Di-gou and Chester are 
rebels of different generations but of the same kind against their family 
religion. The antinomians appear to have united, casting a ray of hope 
for continuity in an otherwise totally disintegrated family. Hwang 
obviously wants more than the repudiation of failing familial my- 
thologies and wishes to salvage something meaningful for an alternative 
family tradition. In Family Devotions as in FOB and The Dance and the 
Railroad, Hwang has made the possibilities of connecting an immigrant 
culture his special province. The kind of renewed kinsman contact we 
have seen in his theater, between Di-gou and Chester or between 
Steven and Grace, is always invigorating. Although the qi^est for the 
common experiential denominator cannot eradicate discord, Hwang 
seems convinced in his trilogy that the self-conscious affiliation of 
native-bom and immigrant Chinese Americans can enable the birth 
of a meaningful community. 

Part IV 

Hwang's thematic treatment of the family, however, bears some 
resemblance to Frank Chin's in that both playwrights express doubts 
about the effectiveness of the Chinese American family as a sustainable 
social form. The Year of the Dragon ends with the actual death of the 
patriarch. Pa, the hinted departure of Ma and the rest from Chinatown, 
and the stranded Fred, the main character who alone will or will not 
survive the shambles left by his n t of kin. Family Devotions has a 
similar conclusion: the violent deaths of Ama and Popo, the feeling 
of utter loss and disorientation of Robert and Wilbur, and the flight 
of Chester from the mess add up to suggest sterility of the family. 
Hwang is, however, more optimistic than Chin because he injects hope 
into his work by suggesting kinsman contact outside the immediate 
family as a promising alternative. One wonders if the existing Chinese 
American familial order ails beyond treatment. Kingston's The Woman 
Warrior suggests otherwise. It expounds disruption of the family which 



Chinese American Literature 



195 



embeds it within a Chinese box nanative that signifies its regenerative 
impulse. A more rosy outlook of this familial renewal can be found 
in Amy Tan's bestselling novel. The Joy Luck Club, which centers on a 
similar mother-daughter plot. 

It is "[t]o my mother / and the memory of her mother" that Tan 
dedicates The Joy Luck Club, "You asked me once / what I would 
remember. / This, and much more." The dedication seems to have 
recapitulated one of the major themes of the book, the fictional act of 
re-membering by both recalling the past and by recreating a sense of 
membership in a forever tenuous formation of human community. Tan 
writes in her opening vignette: 

Now the woman was old. And she had a daughter who grew up 
speaking only English and swallowing more Coca-Cola than 
sorrow. For a long time now the woman had wanted to give her 
daughter the single swan feather and tell her, "This feather may 
look worthless, but it comes from afar and carries with it all my 
good intentions." And she waited, year after year, for the day she 
could tell her daughter this in perfect American English. (1989, 
17) 

The mother-daughter bonding hinges not so much on emotive links 
as it does on linguistic ones. On the one hand, the passage points to 
the difficulty of communication in an immigrant household where 
parental Chinese is not the mother tongue of the children and where 
the familial past of the elder generation is not automatically handed 
down to their American-bom children. "In me/' acknowledges the 
daughter narrator, "they see their own daughters, just as ignorant, just 
as unmindful of the truths and hopes they have brought to Amer- 
ica. . . . They see daughters who will bear grandchildren bom without 
any connecting hope passed from generation to generation" (41). On 
the other hand, the quotation from the opening vignette exemplifies 
the daughter's mindful attempt to continue the family aspiration. Her 
"perfect American English" is not an exclusionary language that 
separates her from her mother, but an inclusive language that brings 
them together. A bilingual reader may particularly appreciate the Pacific 
double-cross of Tan's English. The punning of "Coca-Cola" (which 
when translated in standard Chinese means "Tasty and Happy") with 
"sorrow" and the rendition of a Chinese idiom as "This feather may 
look worthless, but it comes from afar and carries with it all my good 
intentions" exhibits the enriching capacity of bilingual exchange.^ The 
Joy Luck Club itself can be read as such an exchange both at the 
private, familial level of mother and daughter and at the level of the 



196 



David Leiioei Li 



public sphere where ethnic characters of the book willingly converse 
with readers of the mainstream culture. 

The Joy Luck Club is organized into four "sections" (my word instead 
of "chapters" because of the latter's suggestion of sequence) and each 
section contains four stories. All sixteen stories are told by a narrative 
"I" who is differentiated each time by her name and the title preceding 
the story. With the exception of the first and last stories — where Jing- 
Mei Woo substitutes her mother Suyuan Woo's narrative voice as she 
does in replacing her mother's place at the mah jong table — the first 
:ection of the book reads like the autobiographical narratives of the 
four mothers, the next two depict the journeys of the four daughters, 
and the last one returns to the mothers. For me, the temptation to 
find out whose daughter it is that I am reading begins with section 
two, an irresistible temptation that nudges me until the last section, 
when I realize to my surprise I have to discover whose mother it is 
that I am reading just for a change. The readers of the book, including 
the aforementioned reviewers, may experience the same, and I am 
told by many that they helplessly resort to the table of The Joy Luck 
Club, as I did myself. Maxine Hong Kingston, for example, was 
impressed by the book but troubled by the compulsion to go back to 
the table while other less assiduous readers may simply stop making 
distinctions among characters.^ 

Although The Joy Luck Club originated as a group of stories and 
still retains traces of short fiction, to dismiss the book on grounds of 
its insrfficient command of novelistic form or its lack of mastery of 
the individual voices actually prevents the possibility of reading it as 
something novel. To read The Joy Luck Club as a novel, one has to 
understand the rhetorical device that has driven readers. To me, the 
structure of the book at once deconstructs the notion of novel as a 
personal heroic enterprise motivated by economic individualism and 
reco nstructs it as a communal enterprise. 

Cixicial to this interpretation are the table of contents, which I will 
call table one, and the table of The Joy Luck Club, whicn I will refer 
to as table two. Table one has a familiar look: when sections of the 
novel are introduced and interspliced with vignettes. The Joy Luck Club 
at least in its visual format takes after Kingston's China Men. However, 
Tan's work is different from Kingston's in two significant ways. While 
China Men delineates a patrilineal order. The Joy Luck Club foliovvs a 
matrilineal one. While China Men pursues the line of descent. The Joy 
Luck Club does not. How can a novel with a mother-daughter plot 
eschew descent? My answer to this question is that it apparv»ntly does 
not, but in effect redefines descent as such. The assertion needs some 



Chinese American Literature 



197 



further clarification. Table one is arranged in the fashion that follows: 
the stories by Jing-Mei Woo, An-Mei Hsu, Undo Jong, and Ying-Ying 
St. Clair form the first section; the stories by their daughters Waverly 
Jong, Lena St. Clair, Rose Hsu Jordan, Jing-Mei Woo, and Lena St. 
Clair, Waverly Jong, Rose Hsu Jordan, and Jing-Mei Woo form the next 
two sections; and the stories by An-Mei Hsu, Ying-Ying St. Clair, 
Lindo Jong, and Jing-Mei Woo conclude the last section. Despite the 
ostensible mother-daughter division, there is no conceivable order that 
facilitates the reader's quest of family lineage, 

Table two does something that seemingly contradicts my foregoing 
argument: 

The Mothers The Daughters 

Suyuan Woo Jing-Mei "June" Woo 

An-Mei Hsu Rose Hsu Jordan 

Lindo Jong Waverly Jong 

Ying-Ying St. Clair Lena St. Clair 

This table certainly has a semblance to the kind of family tree 
format of the nineteenth century ' ealistic tradition, but the analogy 
stops there. Instead of a hierarchical genealogy. Tan's is a horizontal 
one. Instead of tracing the progenitor of a family. Tan groups four 
families unrelated by blood under the seal of the club, signifying a 
formal sharing of communal identity. If the readers are unsatisfied 
with table one because it fails to deliver their query of who is vho, 
they will remain discontent with table two for the same reason — Amy 
Tan, in my view, has played a tricky narrative game of hide-and-seek 
only to question our (the readers') taken-for-granted sense of individ- 
uality and community. The mothers "who spent a lifetime comparing 
their children" and the daughters who rivaled one another like siblings 
indicate not so much a desire for difference as a range of closeness 
among the members of the club (37). The Joy Luck Club is a sworn 
sisterhood — not quite unlike the sworn brotherhood in The Three 
Kingdoms — through which the mothers of "unspeakable tragedies they 
had left behind in China and hopes they couldn't begin to express in 
their fragile English [in 'Bible study class' and 'choir practice']" con- 
sciously pledge their alliance for mutual well-being (20). The daughters' 
relation to each other seems to have been a reproduction of their 
mothers'. "All of us are like stairs, one step after another, going up 
and down, but all going the same way," An-Mei Hsu remarks (215). 
Though sounding a bit fatalistic, this could be Tan's self-referential 
comment on her novel: the destinies of mother-daughter are filiated 



198 



David Leiivei Li 



as the course of life among mothers and daughters are affiliated. When 
the money from the mah jong table is not for an individual's gain but 
for the interest of the club, and when the aunties saved money for 
June Woo to fulfill her mother's wish to find her lost daughters in 
China, one begins to understand the transgenerational and transfamilial 
tenacity of a community (39). 

The tables with which Tan begins her novel are therefore ploys that 
may give illusory satisfaction to those of us who are prone to identify 
the individual heroines of the book, while they serve others as a moral 
about enabling communions. In a decade of greed when American 
individualism takes the shape of predatory egoism, the narrative 
structure of Amy Tan's novel may be suggesting an alternative of a 
fructifying collectivity — so ancient and so Oriental by nature that it 
probably never fails to appeal — where shared purpose and endeavor 
constitute the kernel of human experience. The blurring of voices and 
indistinguishable qualities of the characters therefore help to create a 
narrative sense of personal and social dependency not as symptoms 
of immaturity as male-centered Western psychology will diagnose it, 
but as signs of healthy human relationships. In this way, The Joy Luck 
Club has materialized in fictional form a way of Chinese American 
life not precisely filial or familial, but certainly related to it. 

The abundant poetic, dramatic, and novelistic gestures of family 
devotion, be it biological or cultural, demonstrate some consensual 
movement toward the end of Chinese American literary reconstruction. 
The filiative tribute to ancestors and the affiliative effort at community 
building interact to claim both historical anchorage and present legit- 
imacy for the ethnic entity. What appear at first glance as separate 
textual maneuvers have, in fact, constituted a nourishing dialogue, 
ensuring the continuity and contemporaneity of Chinese American 
expression. 

Notes 

1. "Railroad Standard Time" is collected in The Chinaman Pacific & Frisco 
R.R. Co. (1-7). 

2. A more literal translation of Tan's quoted idiom would be, "Sending a 
goose feather from a thousand li [measure of length about half a kilometer] 
afar: the gift is light but the affection is heavy." 

3. Conversation with Kingston, March 28, 1989, at the University of Texas, 
Austin. 



210 



Chinese American Literature 



199 



Works Cited 

Berssenbrugge, Mei-Mei. 1982. Summits Move with the Tide. Greenfield Center, 
NY: Greenfield Review. 

Burke, Kenneth. 1973. The Philosophy of Literary Form: Studies in Symbolic 
Action. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Chang, Diana. 1981. "Homebase" (review). Amerasia Journal 8(1): 136-39. 

Chin, Frank, Jeffery Paul Chan, Lawson Fusao Inada, and Shawn Wong, eds. 
1983. Aiiieeeee! An Anthology of Asian-American Writers. Washington: How- 
ard University Press. 

Chin, Frank. 1982. "Chinaman's Chance." WCH Way i: 167-81. 

. 1977. "Letter to Y'Bird." Y'Bird Magazine 1(1): 42-45. 

. 1981. The Chickencoop Chit^aman; and, The Year of the Dragon: Two 

Plays. Seattle: University of Washington Press. 

. 1988. The Chinaman Pacific & Frisco R.R. Co, Minneapolis: Coffee 

House. 

Chin, Marilyn. 1987. Dwarf Bamboo. Greenfield Center, NY: Greenfield Review. 
Ellison, Ralph. 1972. Invisible Man, New York: Vintage. 
Hwang, David Henry. 1983. Broken Promises: Four Plays. New York: Avon. 
. 1990. FOB and Other Plays: With a Foreword by Maxine Hong Kingston. 

New York: New American Library. 
Islas, Arturo. 1983. "Maxine Hong Kingston." In Women Writers of the West 

Coast: Speaking of Their Lives and Careers, edited by Marilyn Yalom, 11- 

19. Santa Barbara: Capra. 
Jehlen, Myra. 1986. American Incarnation: The Inilividual the Nation, and the 

Continent. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Kingston, Maxine Hong. 1980. China Men. New York: Ballantine. 
. 1982. "Cultural Mis-readings by American Reviewers." In Asian 

and American Writers in Dialogue: New Cultural Identities, edited by Guy 

Amirthanayagam, 55-65. London: Macmillan. 
. 1978. "San Francisco's Chinatown: A View of the Other Side of 

Arnold Genthe's Camera." American Heritage Dec: 35-47. 
. 1976. The Woman Warrior: Memoirs of a Girlhood among Ghosts. New 

York: Vintage Books. 
Lau, Alan Chong. 1980. Songs for Jadina. Greenfield Center, NY: Greenfield 

Review. 

Liu, Wu-Chi. 1966. An Introduction to Chinese Literature. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press. 

Lum, Wing Tek. 1987. Expounding the Doubtful Points. Honolulu: Bamboo 
Ridge. 

Said, Edward W. 1983. The World, the Text, and the Critic. Cambridge, MA: 

Harvard University Press. 
Song, Cathy. 1983. Picture Bride. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
Tan, Amy. 1989. The Joy Luck Club. New York: Putnam's. 
Whitman, Walt. 1959. Complete Poetry and Selected Prose, edited by James E. 

Miller. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 



200 



David Leiwei Li 



Williams, William Carlos. 1956. In the American Grain. New York: New 
Directions. 

Wong, Nellie. 1977. Dreams in Harrison Railroad Park. Berkeley; Kelsey Street. 
Wong, Shawn. 1979. Homebase. New York: I. Reed Books. 
Yep, Laurence. 1975. Dragonwings. New York: Harper and Row. 



15 The Unheard: Vietnamese 
Voices in the Literature 
Curriculum 



Renny Christopher 

University of California, Santa Cruz 

I could never understand Americans. First they came to Viet Nam, 
they killed my family injured my neck with a grenade. . . . After 
what they did, they tried desperately to save my life, all the way 
from Viet Nam to San Francisco. Today I'm an American, too. 
Does that make me crazy? 

— Than Pham 

Learning ... is, to no small extent, whether in elementary school 
or the university, learning to be stupid. 

— Jules Henry 

Of the seven thousand or so books published in the United States 
dealing with the Vietnam war, fewer than a dozen are by Vietnamese 
American authors. Of those Vietnamese American books that have 
been published, very few are read in college classes dealing with the 
war (or with Asian American studies, or with anything else), because 
they are not readily available, because they are not "literature," because 
they do not "fit in." We can, in fact, watch the canon-formation process 
at work in the area of Vietnam war literature. If we look at what is 
being taught in college classes, at what is being written about in 
literature journals, we can see that the emerging canon is almost 
exclusively male, almost exclusively Euro-American, and, with the 
exception of Ron Kovic's Born on the Fourth of July, exclusively middle- 
class. There are works by women, by people of color, by working- 
class writers out there, but they are being ignored. Prominent among 
those being ignored are the works of Vietnamese Americans. 

Vietnamese American literature is an emerging literature that is both 
similar to and different from other immigrant literatures, and vitally 
important in the ongoing efforts of the United States to understand 
its role in the war, and the impact of the war on American culture. 
Furthermore, Vietnamese American studerits from the population of 
almost one million refugees now ir\ this country are present in our 
classrooms. 



201 



Renny Christopher 



What can be gained by reading Tran Van Dinh's novel Blue Oregon, 
White Tiger (1982, published by a small press, and largely unread 
although it was reviewed by The New York Times when it came out), 
by reading Truong Nhu Tang's A Vietcong Memoir (1985), by reading 
Le Ly Hayslip's When Heaven and Earth Changed Places (1989)? What 
is the point of multicultural education, anyway? 

What can be gained are insights into the nature of both Vietnam 
and the United States. What can be gained is an understanding of the 
full parameters of the war, the full costs, as well as insight into the 
newest U.S. immigrant group — a group that has already begun to 
make a major impact in American life. Vu-Duc Vuong ran for the 
Board of Supervisors in San Francisco in 1990, the first Vietnamese 
American candidate for a U.S. public office; Vietnamese fishermen are 
challenging discriminatory and selectively enforced U.S. fishing laws; 
and the Vietnamese American community is waging its own political 
conflicts, especially over the issue of normalization of relations with 
the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, over which several Vietnamese 
Americans, including writer Doan Van Toai and columnist Triet Le, 
have been killed or wounded. 

Myra Jehlen has proposed a solution to cultural studies' problem 
of universal^^v versus radical otherness. Her proposal suggests that 
neither universality nor radical otherness explains contemporary reality. 
As she says, "If difference ever existed, it is long lost," In other words, 
shared particular, historical experience is what overcomes otherness. 
Jehlen's term for this is "communality" (1990, lecture. University of 
California, Santa Cruz). Because colonizers and colonized (her example 
is the Spanish conquest of the Aztecs) are both present in the colonizing 
experience, they share that reality. Even if the two peoples come at 
the experience from different, unshared, realities, the shared historical 
experience is a place to begin talking. 

This communality is precisely what the Vietnamese American works 
assert. Their goal is to explain that shared history to a U.S. audience 
from the side of the Vietnamese. So far, the U.S. audience has not 
really been listening. Even Hayslip, whose book is selling well, seems 
to be misread. The U.S. audience seems to be rejecting the possibility 
of communality. Or, rather, the U.S. audience, for the most part, doesn't 
even seem to recognize the possibility of communality, a possibility 
spread out richly in all the Vietnamese American works about the war. 

Hayslip, in a prologue to her narrative, addresses both U.S. veterans 
of the war and civilians who did not go to the war, with a message 
not just of reconciliation but, more importantly, of the need to mutually 
learn from the experience of the war and to move forward together: 



Vietnamese Voices in the Literature Curriculum 



The least you [veterans) did — the least any of us did— was our 
duty. For that we must be proud. The most that any of us did — 
or saw — was another face of desriny or luck or god. Children and 
soldiers have always known it to be terrible. If you have not yet 
found peace at the end of your war, I hope you will find it here. 
We have important new roles to play. . . . 

If you are a person who knows the Vietnam war, or any war, 

only by stories and pictures, this book is written for you too The 

special gift of that suffering, I have learned, is how to be strong 
while we are weak, how to be brave when we are afraid, how to 
be wise in the midst of confusion, and how to let go of that which 
we can no longer hold. In this way, anger can teach forgiveness, 
hate can teach us love, and war can teach us peace. (1989, xv) 

The "here" that Hayslip refers to is her book. Her book is not intended 
to be just "literature"; it, like the organization she founded, the East 
Meets West Foundation, is intended as activism. She seeks, through 
the foundation and the book, to change U.S. thinking about the war. 

Hayslip's final sentence, with its reconciliation of opposites, might 
be dismissed as just so much "Oriental mysticism" by readers seeking 
to reject her message of communality. However, the whole of her 
narrative goes on to support the assertions she makes in that sentence, 
that there are positive values to be learned from the horrifying 
experiences of war. 

Tran Van Dinh, in his novel Blue Dragon, White Tiger, goes even 
further than Hayslip in his demand for recognition of communality. 
He asserts that the destinies of the United States and Vietnam are 
interlinked, and his novel is designed to foster recognition of that 
linked destiny in U.S. readers. 

Dinh stresses not only the interlinked present and future of the two 
nations and two peoples, but of their interlinked past as well, a past 
not recognized by a Western-centered world view. The main character 
of the novel, Minh, a professor who returns to Vietnam in 1967 after 
teaching in the United States for several years, plans to lecture to his 
students at the University of Hue on 

such concepts as "life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness"; the 
influences of Confucianism on French philosophers like Voltaire, 
Montesquieu, and Diderot, who in turn had influence on American 
revolutionaries like Thomas Jefferson; and the role of Thomas 
Paine in the 1776 revolution. (1983, 124) 

Dinh is thus asserting that the communality between the two nations 
stretches far back into both their pasts — that East and West have long 
influenced each other, and that the direction of influence has not 
flowed one way. Dinh, by tracing a line of thought from Confucianism 



204 



Remiy Christopher 



through the French philosophers to Jefferson, author of the Annerican 
Declaration of Independence, is also pointing to the next step in the 
hnkage. In 1945 Ho Chi Minh modeled the Vietnamese declaration of 
independence on the American Declaration, and on the writings of 
the French Revolution; 

"All men are created equal. They are endowed by their Creator 
with certain inalienable Rights; among these are Life, Liberty and 
the pursuit of Happiness," 

This immortal statement appeared in the Declaration of Inde- 
pendence of the United States of America in 1776. In a broader 
sense, it means: All the peoples on the earth are equal from birth, 
all the peoples have a right to live and to be happy and free. 

The Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen, made 
at the time of the French Revolution, in 1791, also states: "All 
men are bom free and vAth equal rights, and must always remain 
free and have equal rights." 

These are undeniable truths. (1973, 53) 

Students in my American studies class on the Vietnam war in American 
popular culture are always astonished to discover that this is the 
Vietnamese declaration of independence, but it is an excellent point 
at which to begin talking about communality and shared ground. 

Truong Nhu Tang, in A Vietcong Memoir, makes the same demand 
of his U.S. readers that the other two authors do. (Tang is not 
Vietnamese American; he lives in Paris. His book, however, was written 
in English and aimed at a U.S. audience, so I am considering him 
along with Hayslip and Dinh, both Vietnamese Americans.) Tang 
writes in his foreword: 

[I]t is only through understanding the Vietnamese who fought on 
the other side that Americans will have anything like a complete 
portrait of a war upon which they have been reflecting so deeply — 
the only war they have ever lost. (1985, xiv) 

Despite the growing number of works available by or about the 
Vietnamese, the U.S. public and teachers of literature have not taken 
note of the message so eloquently stated by these authors. 

How can we teach these works that lie so far outside the discourse 
that we are familiar with? Actually, none of them is difficult, because 
the books do the work themselves. Designed by their authors to 
communicate with American audiences, they go far more than halfway 
in building the bridges. As Reed Way Dasenbrock writes in chapter 3 
of this volume, "You can trust them . ♦ . to give you the assistance you 
need." 



Vietnam'^se Voices in the Literature Curriculum 



205 



Blue Dragon, White Tiger is the story of Minh; a Vietnamese professor 
of politics who has been living and teaching in the United States for 
several years when the story opens. He returns to Vietnam in 1967, 
joins the National Liberation Front (NLF), becomes part of the nego- 
tiating team in Paris, serves under the new regime after liberation, 
then ultimately defects back to the United States. One review said of 
the novel, 

Unlike many of the popular war novels, wherein the action is 
fast and the world is black and white, Iran Van Dinh's work 
leaves much room for reflection while telling his story against the 
background of the war, and, what is more important, within the 
texture of Vietnamese culture. It is a story that challenges the 
intellect and the imagination. (Crown 1985, 160) 

More, the novel actually blends American and Vietnamese storytelling 
conventions. While it uses plot, character, dialogue, and the other 
traditional elements of American fiction, it also uses elements of fate 
and symbolism from the Vietnamese tradition. Monocultural American 
readers might mistake the workings of fate in the novel for contrived 
coincidence; to do so is to miss part of the point. Events in the novel 
(especially the appearances of three women: the American Jennifer 
and the Vietnamese Xuan and Thai) occur because Minh's fate requires 
that they appear to teach him particular lessons. 

' /inh's quest throughout the novel is to fit Marxist doctrine into 
Vietnamese culture. His friend, Loc, explains to Minh: 

Marxism, a humanist philosophy basically, is made up essentially 
of two interrelated foundations that we Vietnamese have discov- 
ered and lived with for thousands of years. These are Tinh, feeling, 
and Ly, reason. At the present time, our Tinh is grounded in our 
culture and our Ly is rooted in our just struggle for independence, 
freedom, and socialism. Ly helps us clarify our Tinh and devise 
appropriate strategies and tactics for the revolution. Tinh, in turn, 
humanizes our Ly and transforms our strategies into understand- 
able, popular, workable programs of action. Tinh and Ly form the 
unbroken circle in which our national communication operates. 
(96) 

Ultimately, though, Minh is unable to reconcile the postliberation 
Vietnamese state with his ideal of Vietnamese culture, and he returns 
to the United States, where he will hold "the spirit of the historic 
Vietnam" in his heart (334). It is Minh's ironic destiny that he will be 
able to be "truly Vietnamese" only if he lives in exile in the West. 
Minh thus embodies the experience of biculturality. 

The entire novel is driven by Minh's political quest. The actions of 
the characters in the novel are motivated by their political understand- 



206 



Renny Christopher 



ings. This is a foreign concept to most American readers, who, for the 
most part, do not see humans as being motivated by politics. 1 would 
argue that, indeed, w<: are motivated by politics (and not just in such 
obvious examples as the civil rights movement, the antiwar movement, 
or the protest of the cl -^mg of the Green Giant cannery in Watsonville, 
California). Our understandings of the world — the goals v/e strive for, 
our belief in "upward mobility," in individualism, in "fairness," in the 
quest for economic power — all arise from our politics. But we are 
taught to see these phenomena as "natural," rather than as a political 
ideology. Therefore, Blue Dragon, White Tiger, even while it works to 
underline many basic similarities between Vietnamese and Americans, 
may seem very foreign to some American readers. But it can also begin 
a thinking process which might lead students to throw off some of 
their parochialism. 

Tang's memoir describes the effects of colonialism on bright, young, 
upper-class Vietnamese like himself. He also shows us the intricacies 
of politics in pootcolonial Vietnam. His story is of interest to American 
audiences because it reveals how differently he went about negotiating 
the course of his life from the way so many young American men 
went about making their decisions about what their participation in 
the war would be. For example, the stories that Tim O'Brien, in If J 
Die in a Combat Zone, and William Broyles, in Brothers in Arms, tell 
about how they decided what to do about their military service differ 
enormously from Tang's presentation of his developing politics. Broyles, 
already in the marines, decides to desert on the eve of being shipped 
to Vietnam: 

And so an idea began to build in my mind. I would do what 
[Siegfried] Sassoon had done. I would refuse to go. A Marine 
lieutenant refusing to board the plane to Vietnam because he was 
against the war — it would be a great gesture. Unlike my going to 
Vietnam, which was a moral gesture that would most likely go 
unnoticed and which could leave me dead, this gesture would 
definitely be noticed — and I would live. (1986, 74) 

Talked out of it by a friend, Broyles changes his mind: 

Jan was right about one thing. I did compose that statement to 
conceal a simple fact: I was afraid. Worse, I had tried to conceal 
my fear behind morality and principle. If I were going to take a 
stand against the war, I should have done it long before. (76) 

O'Brien was drafted after graduating from college. After considering 
the alternatives of evading or being inducted, he decides to submit to 
the draft. He writes: 



2.: 



Vietnamese Voices in the Literature Curriculum 



207 



It was an intellectual and physical stand-off, and I did not have 
the energy to see it to an end. I did not want to be a soldier, not 
even an observer to war. But neither did I want to upset a . fculiar 
balance between the order I knew, the people I knew, and my 
own private world. It was not just that I valued that order. I also 
feared its opposite — inevitable chaos, censure, embarrassment, the 
end of everything that had happened in my life, the end of it all. 
(1973, 31) 

The point to note about O'Brien and Broyles is that their explanations 
are focused on the self. Their experiences are described in terms that 
place the personal at the center of the discussion — both of their own 
inner discussions in deciding what to do and in their recounting of 
those discussions to us, their readers. 

Tang's decision processes are very different — focused more on his 
place within his family and society, on political and historical move- 
ments. He talks of his "initiation into the mysteries of colonialism" 
(1985, 5) and of how his "heart had embraced the patriotic fire, and 
my soul was winging its way toward the empyrean of national 
liberation" (22). I ^m not suggesting that either cultural style is better 
than the other — what I am suggesting is that American readers are 
much more used to the kind of personalism represented by Broyles 
and O'Brien than the style represented by Tang. 

Truong Nhu Tang, the son of a wealthy Saigon family, became 
politically active while he was a university student in Paris. He returned 
to Vietnam and helped found the NLF. He worked undercover in 
Saigon for several years, was arrested and tortured, then released in 
a secret exchange of prisoners. He joined the Provisional Revolutionary 
Government (PRC) as Minister of Justice and lived at PRC headquarters 
in the jungle near the Cambodian border, enduring American B-52 
bombing attacks, for several more years before being transfen'ed to 
Hanoi as a liaison. After the liberation he became disillusioned over 
the northern. Communist domination of the new unified government 
(despite his activities with the NLF and PRC, he was not a Party 
member). He became a boat person and ultimately settled in Paris. 

The project of Tang's A Vietcon^ Memoir (1985) is to educate its 
readers. It presents itself as a historical work, equipped with maps, 
index, glossary of names, and an appendix containing several docu- 
ments of the NLF. The book also contains many pictures which seem 
to act as authentication. Many of the pictures show Tang with other 
prominent revolutionary figures. 

This is not a personal narrative in the usual Western sense. Although 
it does narrate Tang's life story, the focus is not primarily on Tang's 



2r:, 



208 



Renny Christopher 



personal life, but on his participation in revolutionary politics. Political 
maneuvering and historic events always take center stage. For example, 
during the years that Tang lives at PRG headquarters in the jungle, 
he is separated from his family. There is no mention of any attempts 
to communicate with them, no mention of missing them. When he 
returns to Saigon after the liberation, he discovers that his wife has 
divorced him and left the country, and that one of his children is 
living in France, the other in the United States. But even this personal 
information is offered more as an illustration of the disruption that 
returning cadres found in Saigon than as part of a detailed personal 
account. Tang has five brothers, all of whom were on the other side — 
two as ARVN (Army of the Republic of Vietnam) officers, one as a 
government official, two in business. Despite this rift in his family, he 
mentions them only once, in the context of reunion after the liberation. 

Tang is a transnational cosmopolite at the same time that he is a 
Vietnamese nationalist. This is shown clearly in his description of his 
meeting with Ho Chi Minh in Paris in 1945. Ho's appeal is familial: 
"Almost immediately I found myself thinking of my grandfather" (12), 
but at the same time world-historical: "I sat next to him, already 
infusing this remarkable person . . . with the schoolboy reverence I 
had felt toward the personal heroes adopted from my reading of 
history: Gandhi, Sun Yat-sen, and especially Abraham Lincoln" (12). 

Hearing Ho Chi Minh compared to Abraham Lincoln might be a 
shocking thing for many American readers. Yet it seems perfectly 
natural to Tang, who, as a young student, has not yet discovered the 
hypocrisy of the West, and who will always be able to contain paradoxes 
because of the transnational cultural influences of his upbringing.^ 
Because he has not yet discovered the hypocrisy of the colonial West, 
he is able to say that "already in love with French culture, I was now 
utterly fascinated by the spirit and vitality of French political 
life. . . . Meanwhile, I decided to join the movement for Vietnamese 
independence that was beginning to percolate in the Paris streets and 
debating halls" (19) and see no contradiction there. Rather, he makes 
an international synthesis, writing that "I began to envision a radical 
westernization of Vietnam along the lines of Japan's miraculous 
industrialization of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centu- 
ries. . . . [Vietnam could) adopt the best from the world's political and 
economic cultures: the American approach to economics, the German 
scientific spirit, the French fervor for democracy" (20). 

Like Tran Van Dinh, Tang is interested in the ways in which 
Vietnamese culture can absorb and transform Marxism (another West- 
em invention). He describes the early formation of the NLF and its 



^ ^ u 



Vietnamese Voices in the Literature Curriculum 



209 



division of its membership into "cells": "This cell structure is sometimes 
thought of as a communist innovation, but for the Vietnamese, with 
their long history of secret societies, it is practically second nature" 
(70). But like Tran Van Dinh, he ultimately believes he has been 
betrayed by the Marxist revolution. 

There are many similarities between Tang and Tran Van Dinh. They 
are from a similar class background, although Tang is much wealthier. 
They both joined the NLF and left in disillusionment after 1975. They 
both continue to respect and admire the person of Ho Chi Minh and 
to believe that his writings are true and correct, while his followers 
have led Vietnam into a government that betrays the revolution that 
Ho led. Both take a cosmopolitan, internationalist view of both culture 
and politics. Tang and Dinh are a type of exile intellectual like many 
others produced by the second half of the twentieth century. The First 
World would do well to learn the lessons that those like Tang and 
Dinh are trying to teach. 

Even when the U.S. reading public does adopt a Vietnamese 
American work as its own, as seems to be the case with Le Ly Hayslip's 
When Heaven and Earth Changed Places (1989) — which has been widely 
reviewed in the press, distributed by the Quality Paperback Book Club, 
and taught in college courses — there are attempts to shape that work 
into a denatured, apolitical human-interest story with no implications 
for present or future public policy. 

David Shipler's front-page review in The New York Times Book 
Review (1989), titled "A Child's Tour of Duty," praises Hayslip's book 
for managing "so gracefully to transcend politics, keeping her hu- 
maneness as the focus." He goes on to quote a passage from the book 
in which Hayslip describes playing war games as a child: 

When I played a Republican [a South Vietnamese soldier] I always 
imagined that the laughing face at the end of my stick-rifle was 
my brother Bon Nghe, who had gone to Hanoi and who might 
one day come back to fight around Ky La. . . . When I played a 
Viet Cong, I could think only of my sister Ba in Danang, who, 
being married to a policeman, locked her door every night out of 
fear of "those terrorists." (1) 

Shipler is emptying this passage of any political content by declaring 
that the book "transcends politics" and by focusing on her "humane- 
ness." But it is precisely Hayslip's inability to negotiate the political 
mine field created by the civil war in her nation that creates the 
problems she must overcome. Further, Shipler emphasizes the part of 
the book that covers Hayslip's childhood, barely mentioning the later 
parts of the book. 



210 



Renny Christopher 



But the most touching and illuminating sections of the book are 
those set in her lovingly described home village, for there is 
nothing more anguishing to read than portrayals of a war through 
a child's eyes. 

Of course Shipler is correct about the anguish of war through a child's 
eyes, but by focusing on Hayslip's childhood, he displays the usual 
attitude of paternalism that Americans take toward Third World 
peoples. It seems that still, despite all the discussions of the last twenty 
years, Euro-Americans, unlike their Vietnamese American compatriots, 
are unable to stand toe to toe with adult others and deal with them 
as equals who share a complicated history. 

There are two other major works that are worth consideration in 
any project involving the teaching of Vietnamese literature. Both are 
oral histories: David Chanoff and Doan Van Toai's Portrait of the Enemy, 
and James Freeman's Hearts of Sorrow. 

Chanoff and Toai's Portrait of the Enemy presents the stories of 
several former members of the NLF. This book is a problematic oral 
history because, rather than presenting each person's story in its 
entirety, it breaks the stories into several pieces and slots them into 
thematically organized sections. By breaking up the personal stories 
so that the voices support the themes, it thwarts the move toward 
communality and disguises the personal and particular. 

The book must also be read in the context of a political awareness 
that recognizes that these speakers all began as North Vietnamese 
Communists or South Vietnamese National Liberation Front members. 
They then defected after the war was won, for a variety of reasons, 
including the mistreatment of NLF leaders after the victory because 
of longstanding Vietnamese sectional rivalries. But in a country where, 
even during the war, few Americans knew the difference between the 
North Vietnamese Army and the VC (Vietcong), let alone anything of 
Vietnamese internal politics, history, and customs, such an understand- 
ing will probably be rare. 

However, teaching these books can sometimes result in transfor- 
mative experiences for teacher and students alike. In a core first-year 
humanities course called Social Change in the Third World, I have 
seen students' attitudes almost completely transformed by reading 
Hayslip's autobiography In class discussions after reading the book 
(and after a lecture given by Hayslip herself), students expressed new 
attitudes. Several students who had remained entrenched in ignorance 
about the Third World and Third World cultures and peoples for much 
of the quarter came to class after reading When Heaven and Earth 
Changed Places with a feeling of having had the scales lifted from 



r. 




Vietnamese Voices in the literature Curriculum 



211 



their eyes. Many students indicated that their picture of the war in 
Vietnam was now very different from the one they had entered the 
class with — largely forxned by movies, TV, and high school history 
texts. 

In an upper division course about the representation of the war in 
American popular culture, a similar transformation took place in some 
students' attitudes. Despite extended discussions about the racism 
against Vietnamese that informs most of the other works students read 
and viewed in this class, several students failed to "see" where the 
Euro-American texts were racist. These students remained locked in 
the framework of the dominant American discourse. After reading 
Hayslip's narrative toward the end of the course, most of the students 
who previously failed to "see" could then "see" quite clearly. Again, 
reading the Vietnamese refugee point of view became a transformative 
experience for these students in the context of discussions of the war. 

I believe that these texts possess enormous power to educate — not 
only about an important period in U.S. history, but also about another 
culture, their perceptions of the war, and their perceptions about their 
adopted country. I hope this literature will gain a wider audience. 

In the v/ords of Le Ly Hayslip: 

I can only say what I myself have learned: that life's purpose is 
to grow. We have time in abundance — an eternity, in fact — to 
repeat our mistakes. We only need to correct them once, however — 
to learn our lesson and hear the song of enlightenment — to break 
the chain of vengeance forever. (366) 

Notes 

1. The comparison of Ho and Lincoln is actually not an uncommon one 
among Vietnamese. Thu Huong, one of the women who broadcast as "Hanoi 
Hannah," said recently in an interview with Don North in Indochina Newsletter 
(1990), "I have always compared our traditions of liberty, like those of 
Abraham Lincoln and Ho Chi Minh." 

Works Cited 

Broyles, William. 1986. Brothers in Arms, New York: Avon. 

Crown, Bonnie R. 1985. "Review of Blue Dragon, White Tiger by Tran Van 

Dinh." World Literature Today 59(1): 160. 
Hayslip, Le Ly with Jay Wurts. 1989. When Heaven and Earth Changed Places: 

A Vietnamese YJoman's Journey from War to Peace, New York: Penguin. 
Ho Chi Minh. 1973. Selected Writings. Hanoi: Foreign Languages Publishing 

House. 



212 Renny Christopher 

Jehlea Myra. 1990. "Why Did the European Cross the Ocean? Or, Montaigne's 
Dilemma." Invited public lecture at the University of California/ Santa 
Cruz, October 16. 

Kovic, Ron. 1976. Bom on the Fourth of July. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
North, Don. 1990. "The Voice from the Past: The Search for Hanoi Hannah." 

Indochina Newsletter 63, 1-8. 
O'Brien, Tim. 1973. /// Die in a Combat Zone. New York: Dell. 
Shipler, David K. 1989, June 25. "A Child's Tour of Duty." Review of When 

Heaven and Earth Changed Places, by Le Ly Hayslip. New York Times Book 

Review, 1. 

Tran Van Dinh. 1983. Blue Dragon, Vlhite Tiger: A Tet Story. Philadelphia: 
TriAm Press. 

Truong, Nhu Tang, with David Chanoff and Doan Van Toai. 1985. i4 Vietcong 
Memoir. New York: Vintage. 



16 Narrative Theory 
in Naguib Mahfouz's 
The Children of Gebelawi 



Suzanne Evertsen Lundquis*. 
Brigham Young University 

Each culture has a special pan- 
human contribution for all our 
thinking, remembering species. 

— Victor Turner 

Amidst the profusion of varied critical approaches to literature existing 
in the West, using the words "narrative theory" in the title of an essay 
about a novel from the Middle East is fraught with possible expecta- 
tions. In current academic settings, it might seem appropriate to filter 
Naguib Mahfouz's novel through the narrative theories of Mikhail 
Bakhtin, Roland Barthes, Claude Bremond, Jacques Derrida, Algirdas 
Julien Greimas, Wolfgang Iser, and Shlomith Rimmon-Kenan. And yet, 
Mahfouz h**5 a narrative theory of his own upon which The Children 
of Gebelawi is predicated. Theory, from the Greek theamai, means "I 
behold." Mahfouz, much in the fashion of a cultural anthropologist, 
has observed how stories function within cultural contexts; and he 
dramatizes, through telling a story, how storytelling is the way humans 
communicate the complexity of human existence. 

Perhaps central to cross-cultural concerns is the assertion that the 
receiving culture allows the giving one to define or explain how stories 
appear to work within their own cultural contexts. If, for example, we 
go looking for proof of our own theories, we will surely find evidence 
that they work in foreign settings and can thus assume that our 
categories are universal. And yet, beginning with or imposing some 
kind of similarity often obscures difference and therefore diminishes 
cross-cultural contributions. It is not that Western notions of story do 
not apply: it is the pattern or method of application that makes the 
difference. 

To transcend the boundaries of our own view of literary criticism, 
we can use a simple process. First, we can explore the assertions being 
made by the author from the Other culture. Next, we can explore 



213 



214 



Suzanne Evertsen Lundquist 



fundamental similarities and differences between Western constructs 
and those of the Other In this regard, it is safe to say that Mahfouz's 
approach to narrative is different from most contemporary Western 
approaches and more like Native American approaches or those of 
novelists like Reynolds Price. For example, Kenneth Lincoln, in dis- 
cussing the Native American conception of storytelling, maintains that 
"the Indian storyteller weaves a narrative less as a point of view, 
detached on the crosshairs of art, more as a human presence, attended 
by an audience taking part in the story. It is not a question of the 
'rhetoric of fiction,' in Western terms for the novel, but of historical 
witness to human events" (1983, 223). It is within such parameters 
that Mahfouz works. And finally, we can consider what the Other 
(Mahfouz) has to offer the West. 

In The Children ofGebelawi, Mahfouz asserts that audience reactions 
to the sacred narratives-core culture stories — of Jews, Christians, and 
Muslims — advance the greatest hope for overcoming existing social 
unrest while paradoxically creating the very boundaries that are at the 
heart of cross-cultural strife. The usefulness of Mahfouz's novel in 
teaching cross-cultural awareness might be found in this very assertion: 
that sacred stories construct social realities, create cultviral boundaries, 
and can — through revision, re-creation, and reenactment — offer hope 
for more healing human experiences. 

In The Children of Gebelawi, Mahfouz allegorically discusses the 
history of humankind from Adam to the present. The general appeal 
of this and other of Mahfouz's works is so great that twenty foreign 
language editions have been published, with another twenty being 
negotiated for publication (Luxner 1989, 16).' Originally published 
serially in Al-Ahrcm, a Cairo newspaper, during 1959, The Children of 
Gebelawi was not published in novel form until 1967 and even then 
in an abridged version. In fact, the book was banned in most Arab 
nations until after Mahfouz won the Nobel Prize in 1988. Although 
publishers in Lebanon finally did publish an Arabic version of the 
text, the first complete edition of The Children of Gebelawi appeared 
in English in 1981. In this novel, Mahfouz is critical of political and 
religious leadership. He is also very liberal with his interpretation of 
traditional sacred narratives. In fact, while showing how cultures 
remember, retell, or reenact these stories, he revises and reinterprets 
them. 

In The Children of Gebelawi, Mahfouz traces the Jewish, Christian, 
and Islamic traditions back to the story of Gebelawi and his sons and 
grandsons — Adham (Adam), Gebel (Moses), Rifaa (Christ), Kassem 
(Mohammed), and Arafa (a name, according to Roger Allen, that comes 



(J ^ i) 



Narrative Theory in The Children of Gebelawi 



215 



from the verb meaning "knowledge" and, by implication, "scientia" 
[1990, 255]). Following the "Prologue," the major chapters of the novel 
are "Adham," "Gebel," "Rifaa," "Kassem," and "Arafa" Translated, 
Gebelawi means "Mountain Dweller." With all the biblical allusions 
surrounding mountains, Gebelawi can be understood as the father of 
the covenant; he is the covenant maker, the father of the book, the 
beginner of stories. And his message is: When true holiness is set free 
in the world and shared through sacred narrative, it is possible that 
peace might exist and that cruelty and humiliation might cease. 
However, during the novel, the "ten conditions'' of the covenant 
remain vague and ambiguous except through the interpretations given 
them by Gebel, Rifaa, and Kassem. Gebelawi keeps a copy of the "ten 
conditions" in a secret book locked in a vault in his bedroom. For 
most of the descendants of Gebelawi, the "ten conditions" are the 
provisions of a will that simply outline the correct division of property. 
Arafa, however, believes that the book contains the secrets to Gebe- 
lavd's power or magic; indeed, Arafa is willing to risk his life to know 
"the ten conditions of the endowment" (312). 

The setting of the entire novel is Gebelawi Alley, a district in Cairo. 
The general condition in the alley is one of poverty, bigotry, and 
oppression. For literary critic Jareer Abu-Haidar, this novel is "essen- 
tially a parable of authority and power, not only in Egypt (its author's 
country), but everywhere in the Arab world, or rather in the Middle 
East" (1985, 119). Abu-Haidar further claims that this novel is the 
story of an "endless struggle for power, a perpetual Armageddon, in 
which nothing seems to avail except Machiavellian machinations in 
their most sinister and primeval aspects" (119). Indeed, once Gebelawi 
casts Adham and Omayma out of the estate, most of their posterity 
live in hovels. The streets of the alley are described as being "crowded 
and noisy, with barefoot children, almost naked, playing in every 
corner, filling the air with their squeals and covering the ground with 
their filth. The doorways [are] surrounded by women, chopping jute 
leaves, peeling onions, lighting charcoal, gossiping and joking, cursing 
and swearing" (Mahfouz 1981, 73). Fights break out often amid the 
meowing of cats, the growling of dogs, and the running of rats and 
mice about the yards. Men spend their idle time in cafes smoking 
hashish, listening to storytellers, or discussing the injustice of the 
trustees of the estate, who claim to represent Gebelawi and his wishes, 
but only bully the people into submission while extorting funds from 
the estate. 

However, two activities break the constancy of this human condition: 
the sharing of stories in the cafes and the rise of prophets who act 



216 



Suzanne Evertsen Lundquist 



upon the stories in an attempt to bring salvation to those living in a 
rubbish heap. While history might indeed be a chronicle of intimidation, 
humiliation, greed, and murder among peoples and nations, historians 
of Greek, Hebrew, and Christian history suggest another dimension. 
Historian Amaldo Momigliano concludes that "history is to the Greeks 
and consequently to the Romans an operation against Time the all- 
destroying in order to save the memory of events worth being 
remembered" (1966, 15). For Jews, and later for Christians, says 
Momigliano, history is the story of "a privileged line of events 
represented and signified [by the] continuous intervention of God in 
the world he [has] created" (19). The added dimension included by 
Christians to the concept of time and history is the notion of continual 
rebirth and renewal (21). Certainly Muslim historians share similar 
ideas about events surrounding the revelations given to Mohammed. 
And, significantly it is also the duty of Jews, Christians, and Muslims 
to remember the past. The Children of Gebelawi shows a people who 
rely on their prophets to periodize their history. Essentially, all other 
events constitute chaos or nonhistory. 

In light of Momigliano's discussion of the type of story we term 
history, Mahfouz's "Prologue" to The Children of Gebelawi provides a 
fuller context: 

This is the story of our alley, or these are its stories. I myself have 
lived only through the most recent events, but I have written 
down everything as it is told by our many professional storytellers 
who learnt them in the caf^s or from their fathers. 

The tales are told on a thousand and one occasions. Whenever 
people are wronged or injured they point to the Big House at the 
top of the alley, where it meets the desert, and say sadly: "There 
is our ancestor's house. We are all his children and we all have 
a right to his estate; why should we be hungry and wretched?" 
Then they tell the stories of the great heroes of our alley: Adham 
and Gebel, Rifaa and Kassem. (1981, 1) 

The themes in this novel are numerous and powerful in their 
implications and treatment. However, it is in the very assertion that 
storytelling can have a positive role in the creation, maintenance, and 
re-creation of cultural and individual identity that Mahfouz offers an 
alternative to the hungry and wretched condition of common, collective, 
or communal beings. 

American novelist Reynolds Price also attempted a retelling of 
sacred narratives in his work A Palpable God. Price's introductory essay 
to A Palpable God contains his discovery about the impact of sacred 
stories on human history. Price's ideas (or theories) about narrative 



Narrative Theon/ in The Children of Gebelawi 



217 



are similar to Mahfouz's treatment of stoiytelling and, therefore, 
provide a clear access to Mahfouz's itiore Active account. Price claims 
that "a need to tell and hear stories is essential to the species Homo 
Sapiens — second in necessity apparently after nourishment and before 
love and shelter. Millions survive without love or home, almost none 
in silence" (1985, 3). And indeed, when the children of Gebelawi lose 
faith in the stories, the novel ends. The last character, Arafa, reflects, 
"When would the alley stop retelling stories?" (Mahfouz 1981, 295). 
And in the same passage, Arafa also asks, "What had the alley gained 
from these stories?" (295). The entire novel is an answer to both 
questions. 

But it is a particular kind of story through which the children of 
Gebelawi are nourished. Says Price, "We crave nothing less than 
perfect story; and while we chatter or listen all our lives in a din of 
craving — jokes, anecdotes, novels, dreams, films, plays, songs, half the 
words of our days — we are satisfied only by the one short tale we 
feel to be true: History is the will of a just god who knows us" (14). 
Gebelawi is the God-figure in Mahfouz's novel — the just grandfather 
who knows his children. He rejects racism, selfishness, and disobe- 
dience; he also reveals his will to his children in times of need. In the 
"Adham" section of the novel, for example, Gebelawi tells his sons, 
"It will be best for someone else to manage. the estate instead of me." 
Instead of choosing the birthright son, Idris, Gebelawi chooses Adham 
to manage the estate under his supervision. The other brothers are 
shocked and enraged. Screams Idris, "I and my brothers are sons of 
a fine lady, an aristocrat, but this fellow is the son of a black maid." 
Idris continues to roar, "He's the youngest of us, too; give me one 
reason why you should prefer him to me. Is this the age of servants 
and slaves?" (6). Gebelawi answers with calm and reason, "Adham 
knows the tenants and most of their names. He also knows how to 
write and do sums" (7). 

This answer is not acceptable to Idris, His further raging causes 
him to be the first man to be cast out of the estate never to return. 
Idris, outside the estate, behaves horribly. He become" a drunk and a 
womanizer, brash and unseemly. However, on one of Adham's trips 
into the alley he is approached by a seemingly repentant Idris, who 
begs Adham to have mercy on him. He wants Adham to find out if 
he has been cut out of his father's will, Says Idris, "He will certainly 
have written it into the book which contains everything about the 
estate." This book, however, "is in a secret chamber in father's 
bedroom" (23). This book contains "the ten conditions" — conditions 
that Idris wants Adham to secure by stealing into his father's chambers 




218 



Suzanne Evertsen Lundquist 



and sneaking a look at the contents of the book. With encouragement 
from his wife Omayma, Adham tries to obtain the secrets of the book 
through stealth. He is caught by his father and also exiled from the 
gardens and estate. Both Idris and Adham are thrust into the desert 
to find their way in life. However, Adham's only dream is to return 
to the estate through obtaining the forgiveness of Gebelawi. After a 
long and harsh life, Adham finally receives Gebelawi's forgiveness; 
this is the revelatory moment in the Adham section. "Have you 
forgiven me?" Adham asks the huge person whose image seems to 
fill the doorway of his hut. The ansv/er, "after a pause: 'Yes"' (71). 
This metaphor of the human condition — exile and return — fills sacred 
narratives. In fact, from the story of the Fall to narratives about Jesus 
Christ, the history and theology of Jews, Muslims, and Christians pivot 
around this idea. 

As Mahfouz's narrative continues, Omayma and Adham have "gone 
hardly any distance from the house whtn a drunken laugh [rings] out. 
They [look] in that direction, and there th^^y [see] Idris, in front of the 
hut he had built of tins and sticks" (31). This is the real Idris, the 
incarnation of evil (31). Indeed, in Arabic, tne Devil's name is "iblis." 
And, as Mattityahu Peled tells us, in the Koran, Satan steals into 
Heaven to look at the secrets of the book (1983, 188). 

In focusing on Mahfouz's narrative theory, it seems important to 
note that only two written texts are mentioned in The Children of 
Gebelawi. The implied narrator mentions the first text when he reports 
that he has "written down everything as it is told by our many 
professional storytellers who learnt them in the cafes or from their 
fathers" (1). The second book, and the one upon which all other 
stories depend, is Gebelawi's "fat book," the one that includes "every- 
thing about us" (23). No Old Testament, New Testament, or Koran 
are generated out of the lives of Gebel, Rifaa, and Kassem. Mahfouz 
suggests that there is really only one book: Gebelawi's. 

Mahfouz, however, does not create a dichotomy between oral and 
print traditions. Philosophically, Mahfouz's novel is not grounded upon 
a bipolar scheme. And, therefore, Gretchen Ronnow's theory about 
the literacy-illiteracy or print-orality dichotomy in this novel is not 
defensible. Certainly, as Ronnow so capably points out. Western writers 
like John Oxenham and Wfeilter Ong have invented oppositional or 
polar existences for those living in literate societies as opposed to oral 
cultures. From Western intellectual sources, Ronnow concludes that 
"an oral culture tends to be over-communal, non-individualistic, and 
authoritarian" as well as violent, while a literate culture "isolates the 
individual from the group, mutes and minimizes interpersonal com- 



Narrative Theory in The Children of Gebelawi 



219 



munication, and encourages individual thinking as the preferred route 
to truth" (1984, 95). As the words used to describe oral cultures 
accumulate, however, it is easy to see the privileged status given to 
print societies. Oral cultures are described as being "authoritarian," 
"communal," "dependent," "performance oriented" (relying on for- 
mulaic modes of expression), "unoriginal," and "reductive." Heroes, 
for example, are reduced to types (92-97). 

The oral versus written interpretation of Mahfouz's novel simply 
does not work. Gebelawi's book of secrets — with implied fixed meaning 
and human destiny — remains out of reach; the contents of the book 
are never certain. However, belief in revealed words that transcend 
the sayings of professional storytellers as well as the written parameters 
of books suggest or speak of a mythic notion of orality. Rather than 
being static, formulaic, and reductive, orality in Mahfouz's novel is 
dynamic, active, and revolutionary. That is, the new stories — the stories 
of a just father who knows and cares about his children — offer the 
possibility of renewal. 

There are also many layers of textual interplay in this novel. The 
most essential level of interplay, however, comes from reliance on the 
readers' knowing traditional sacred narratives. The storytelling, the 
revelations, written texts, and the reader's knowledge of the texts from 
which Mahfouz creates his fictions work together. This work simply 
plays off of the traditional stories, challenging, interpreting, and 
rendering them powerful for audiences from the Jewish, Christian, 
and Islamic traditions. And because Mahfouz renders these tales in a 
fiction, with assertions and implications not literally from the Torah, 
Old Testament, Koran, or Gospels, he implies things about the content 
of these texts that make readers ask: What about race? What about a 
black Adham being rejected by his fair brother Idris? If there is one 
father, how did the idea of a privileged lineage evolve? How many 
sacred texts suggest a premortal reality? What are the ramifications of 
the temptation to know the secrets of God and his ten conditions? 
How do individuals and cultural leaders use sacred narratives — to 
relieve or cause human suffering and humiliation? Is there revealed 
truth? Are some texts, some narratives, more significant to cultural 
identity than others? In a postmodern era, such as ours, that either 
rejects or criticizes metaphysical discourse on social and political 
grounds, is Mahfouz suggesting a rereading of sacred texts that will 
give us a more healing context from which to examine world affairs? 
And what about this desire to return to the estate? The number of 
deaths caused by contention over who should inherit the land of Israel, 



220 



Suzanne Evertsen lundquist 



for example, is overwhelming. And don't these "holy ' wars pivot 
around interpretations of sacred narratives? 

While such questions have generally been examined by philosophers, 
historians, or theologians, contemporary thinkers suggest that modem 
novelists best explore the contingent nature of the issues such questions 
pose. Walter R. Fisher, for example, suggests that Western intellectual 
systems have presumed argumentative discourse superior to other 
forms. No matter how strongly proponents of this view argue, however, 
their presumptions ignore the fact that all logic is situated — or based — 
in narrative. That is, all logic "will always be a story, an interpretation 
of some aspect of the world that is historically and culturally grounded 
and shaped by human personality" (1987, 49). Fisher's "logos/mythos" 
conception of human reason, his narrative rationality, has broad 
implications for literary critics, ethnographers, and philosophers. Fisher 
further contends that "human communication in all of its forms is 
imbued with mythos — ideas that cannot be verified or proved in any 
absolute way" (19). 

Mahfouz's novel is also founded on these premises; the contingent 
nature of stories told about revelations given to Mahfouz's central 
characters is fundamental to the narrativity of Mahfouz. Each story, 
each episode, is full of ambiguity, an ambiguity that both challenges 
the metaphysical presumptions of Jews, Muslims, and Christians as 
well as suggests the mythic nature of logical and theological propo- 
sitions. In the Gebel section, for example, Gebel (Moses) goes to the 
desert to work through the tensions existing between the two people 
he is — one of them loyal to his mother who raised him (the wealthy 
leaders of the estate), the other one concerned with the trials of his 
people (the poor commoners). Before he is fully conscious about what 
is happening, he almost bumps into "a huge person," Says Gebel, "At 
first I thought it was one of the chiefs, but he seemed unlike anyone 
from our alley, or any human being at all, tall and broad like a 
mountain. I was filled with terror and tried to retreat, but a strange 
voice said 'Stop Gebel'" (114). After the figure announces, "Don't be 
afraid; I am your grandfather, Gebelavvi," and Gebel responds that he 
"never dreamt of meeting [Gebelawi] in this life," Gebel strains to see 
the face of the figure speaking to him. "You will not be able to see 
my face while it is dark" (114-15). Gebelawi, then, remains hidden 
in ways that create narrative ambiguity. The same holds true with the 
experiences of Rifaa and Kassem with Gebelawi. 

Mahfouz does not privilege the descriptions of reality offered by 
any single character. On the contrary, he demonstrates the unique 
contribution of each central character to the children of Gebelawi. He 



Narrative Theory in The Children of Gebelawi 



221 



also exposes the ironic way that these same children have divided up 
their inheritance (by establishing quarters) to the detriment of all the 
children — follc^ .-s of Gebel (Moses), Rifaa (Christ), and Kassem 
(Mohammed) alike. Gebelawi, rather than being a supreme judge who 
authorizes only one description of reality or a father who cares only 
for people in one quarter of the alley, is a figure who intervenes when 
his children need to reestablish true human community and dissolve 
arbitrary boundaries. 

Mahfouz also does not privilege traditional interpretations of good 
and evil characters. In exposing the contingent nature of events of 
major consequence, Mahfouz generally does not create characters that 
are fully good or bad. For example, in the story paralleling the Abel 
and Cain episode, Mahfouz exposes the problems of favoritism a?;r 
envy in family relationships. Hammam (Abel) is invited back to Liv 
estate, Kadri (Cain) is not. In a jealous moment, Kadri strikes a fatal 
blow to his brother's head. But Mahfouz does not portray Kadri as 
being evil — he is rash and envious. And it is envy, according to Ann 
and Barry Ulanov, that creates the greatest wounds of all — ''Envy, that 
great distance maker, that connection destroyer" (Ulanov 1983, 10). It 
is envy that separates Cain from Abel, Esau from Jacob, and Joseph 
from his brothers. And the sibling rivalry between Ishmael and Isaac 
persists down to the present day. Mahfouz clearly sees the distance 
caused by this envy and is sympathetic to both the envied and the 
enviers. For example, he says of the Cain figure Kadri, after he killed 
his brother: 

He threw himself down exhausted, feeling all force had gone out 
of him. He wanted to cry, but the tears would not come. He 
thought: "Death has defeated me." He had not invited it, nor 
intended it, but it had come as it pleased. If he could have turned 
into a goat he would gladly have disappeared amongst the flock. 
If he could have become a grain of sand he would gladly have 
been buried in the ground. "I can't claim any strength, for I can't 
give back the life I have taken. That sight will never leave my 
memory. What I buried was neither living nor lifeless, but some- 
thing else that my hand has made." (61) 

This story is echoed throughout the book whenever a murder takes 
place: when Gebel (Moses) kills a fellow Gebelite, for example (84), 
and at the end of the novel when Arafa (323), while sneaking into 
Gebelawi's estate, inadvertently kills Gebelawi (symbolically equating 
the rise of science with the death of God). The story of brother killing 
brother is retold in different settings and circumstances, but it is the 
same story. The causes are always envy, inequality, cruelt); greed, or 



222 



Suzanne Evertsen Lundquist 



ignorance. And the question that this type of story always implies is, 
"Am I my brother's keeper?" To this question, the central characters 
always answer in the affirmative. In his Nobel Prize lecture, Mahfouz 
gives a "Yes" to this question: 

In this decisive moment in the history of civilization . . . the human 
mind now assumes the task of eliminating all causes of destruction 
and annihilation. And just as scientists exert themselves to cleanse 
the environment of industrial pollution, intellectuals ought to exert 
themselves to cleanse humanity of moral pollution. It is both our 
right and our duty to demand of the great leaders in the civilized 
countries, as well as of their economists, to effect a real leap that 
would place them in the focus of the age. . . . Today the greatness 
of a civilized leader ought to be measured by the universality of 
his vision and his sense of responsibility toward all humankind. 
The developed world and the third world are but one family; 
each human being bears responsibility toward it to the degree 
that he has obtained knowledge, wisdom and civilization. I would 
not be exceeding the limits of my duty if I told (the leaders] in 
the name of the Third World: Be not spectators to our miser- 
ies. ... We have had enough of words. Now is the time for action. 
(1989, 16) 

Mahfouz makes several other assertions about storytelling similar 
to those Price articulates in his introduction to A Palpable Cod. Says 
Price, story is "the chief means by which we became, and stay, human" 
(1985, 14). Price also claims 

there is a clear fact that narrative, like the other basic needs of 
the species, supports the literal survival of man by providing him 
with numerous forms of nurture— the simple companionship of 
the narrative transaction, the union of the teller and the told; the 
narrator's opportunity for exercise of personal skill in telling and 
its ensuing rewards; the audience's exercise of attention, imagi- 
nation, powers of deduction; the spiritual support which both 
parties receive from stories affirming our importance and protection 
in ^ perilous world; the transmission to younger listeners of vital 
k; vledge, worldly and unworldly; the narcotic effect of narrative 
on pain and boredom; and perhaps most importantly, the chance 
that in the very attempt at narrative transaction something new 
will surface or be levealed, some sudden floater from the dark 
unconscious, some message from a god which can only arrive or 
be told as a tale. (26) 

And finally, there is the insurance that it is story that brings order into 
an otherwise chaotic world. 

In the sections dealing with Gebel, Rifaa, and Kassem, all of the 
above assertions hold true. In Gebel's time, for example, the cafe is 
narrow but runs "back a long way to the storyteller's bench at the far 



Narrative Theory in The Children of Gebelawi 



223 



end, under a painting of Adham on his death bed looking at Gebelawi 
who stood at the door of the hut. ... All eyes [are] on the storyteller 
and the men [nod] their heads at the beauty of the telling or the 
goodness of the moral" (Mahfouz 1981, 75). When Gebel is exiled 
from the home of his adoptive parents, he gives "a parting look at 
the garden and the garden house and [remembers] the tragedy of 
Adham which was recited to the music of the fiddle every evening" 
(95). He remembers the "ten conditions" and is drawn to his people, 
wants their happiness and their ability to share equally in the inher- 
itance from the estate because of his understanding of the tmthfulness 
contained in the stories he has heard throughout his life. 

Price's assertion that "in the very attempt at narrative transaction 
[we hope that] something new will surface or be revealed . . . some 
message from a god which can only arrive or be told as a tale" holds 
particularly true in The Children of Gebelawi, Gebel, Rifaa, and Kassem 
each hear and relate the story of their own meeting with Gebelawi. 
No other humans in the book meet him. Indeed, life is so miserable 
that many characters feel that Gebelawi has forgotten them. But at 
moments of particular chaos, Gebelawi comes or sends a messenger 
to each of these men. And something new can then be told, retold, 
and through the retelling, the alley is renewed and once again receives 
"the spiritual support" from the stories which affirm the people's 
"importance and protection in a perilous world" (Price 1985, 26). For 
example, in the desert, Gebelawi comes to Gebel during the night and 
says, "Don't be afraid; I am your grandfather, Gebelawi" (Mahfouz 
1981, 114). And when Gebel is retelling the event to his friends, he 
explains to them that Gebelawi told him: "You, Gebel, are a man who 
is much relied on, yet you have left your comfortable life out of 
indignation at the way your people are oppressed. But your people 
are my people, and they have rights in my estate which they must 
take. Their honor must be defended, and their life must be 
good. . . . Success will go with you" (115). From this visit, Gebel and 
his followers gain the strength to overcome the chiefs in the alley and 
gain equality for their fellows. This peace and equality exist until the 
people in the alley are "plagued with forgetfulness" (136). 

And Rifaa, the Christ-figure in the novel, is told by a blind storyteller 
(as he feels Rifaa's face with his hands) that his features are much 
like Gebelav/i's (141). Rifaa walks like a bridegroom and is found to 
be constantly nurtured by the storytellers in the alley. The text explains 
that "the storyteller carried on the story to an attentive audience. Rifaa 
followed him eagerly; this was a true reciter and these were the real 
stories" (145). These "real stories" transform Rifaa, give him the desire 



224 



Suzanne Evertsen Lundquist 



to create happiness in the hearts of the people in the alley by 
encouraging them not to make their happiness dependent on the estate 
but rather on purifying their hearts. During Rifaa's encounter with 
Gebelawi, he is told: "How wrong it is for a young man to ask his 
old grandfather to act; the beloved son is the one who acts." Rifaa 
then asks, "What device can I who am weak use against those chiefs?" 
Gebelawi replies, "The true weakling is the fool who does not know 
his inner strength, and I do not like fools" (160). From this hour on, 
Rifaa knows what is wanted of him. As a result, he begins to share 
his story and thereby to retell, to re-create, the story of the alley This 
narrative re-creation both reinterprets former stories as well as suggests 
narrative probabilities. 

The idea of "narrative probability," as Fisher uses the phrase, means 
"what constitutes a coherent story" as well as "narrative fidelity, 
whether or not the stories [that a people from a particular culture 
experience] ring true with the stories they know to be true in their 
lives" (1987, 5). Certainly Rifaa's story enjoys this kind of narrative 
probability. The people in the alley know that Gebelawi also revealed 
his will to Gebel in a similar desert setting to that reported by Rifaa. 
Certain patterns of behavior remain constant over time. Rifaa, for 
example, (1) heard the old stories, (2) from the old stories he feels 
called to do something about the poor conditions of his people, (3) 
Gebelawi reveals his will to Tifaa in a deser^- setting, and (4) he returns 
to the people and tries to make a difference in their lives. This pattern 
is followed by Gebel and later by Kassem. Because the pattern is 
constant, many from the culture believe the stories are probable. 

However, I would add to Fisher's notion of "narrative probability" 
the dimension a physicist might imply while using the term "proba- 
bility" — to suggest that, under certain circumstances, future events 
might break with old patterns. T. S. Eliot expressed a similar idea in 
"Little Gidding": 

History may be servitude. 
History may be freedom. See, now they vanish. 
The faces and places, with the self which, as it could, loved them. 
To become renewed, transfigured, in another pattern. 

(1952, 142) 

Three statements made by Rifaa demonstrate these elements of 
Mahfou7/s narrative theory. Full of confidence, Rifaa draws on the old 
stories to narrate his re-vision. 

Adh. • Dnged for a pure life of happiness. Gebel did so too, and 
he ^ /vanted the estate as a way to that life; but he got the 



^ t. ■ K) 



Narrative Theory in The Children of Gebelawi 



225 



idea that it wouldn't be possible for anyone unless the estate was 
shared out equally so that each man received his due and enjoyed 
the use of it, released from toil and free to live the happy life. 
But the estate is such a petty thing; it is possible to attain true 
life without it and anyone who wants to can. It's in our power 
to be rich from this very hour. (1981, 160) 

The probability of narrating new stories, then, comes out of the 
narrative moment when something new is revealed. 

The something new revealed through Rifaa is the fact that humans 
are "better and finer when [they] conquer vanity" (172). It is not 
where people live or what portion of the estate they are able to acquire 
and maintain that makes them the children of Gebelawi — it is an 
inward purity. Says Rifaa: 

The Gebelites [Jews] are not the best people in our alley; the best 
are those who do most good. I used to make the same mistake 
as you, and paid attention only to the Gebelites. But the people 
who deserve happiness are those who seek it sincerely. Look at 
the way the poor accept me and are cured of evil spirits. (172) 

Rifaa chooses four of his patients to be his friends and brothers* 
Through Rifaa's curing spirit, each disciple is transformed — one from 
being "a layabout and ... an incurable opium eater"; another from 
being "a hardened bully and . . . pimp." They help him heal the poor 
and weak — to free them from "evil spirits and from hatred and greed 
and malice" (173). Old stories have been changed; people have new 
narrative possibilities through individual transformation. 

Rifaa also explains, through a reinterpretation of the Gebel narrative, 
what portions of the old stories have become distorted: 

Ever since the story has been told that Gebelawi asked Gebel to 
make the houses of his quarter magnificent like the Big House, 
people have had their eyes fixed on Gebelawi's magnificence. 
They have forgotten his other virtues. That's why Gebel was 
unable to change people by merely winning their rights in the 
estate, so when he died the strong took over and the weak became 
full of hatred and misery came back. But I'm opening the gates 
of happiness without any estate or power (173) 

However, it is because Rifaa attempts a reinterpretation of the stories 
that he is finally killed. There is danger in suggesting narrative 
probability. During Rifaa's trial, for example, he is accused of many 
crimes — of leaving his quarter to work among those in other quarters, 
of despising the people of power and importance, of claiming to know 
what Gebelawi wants for his people. In response to the accusation 
that people say Rifaa repeats only what he has "heard from Gebelawi 



2r f -t 



226 



Suzanne Evertsen Lundquist 



himself/' Rifaa answers, "That's how I understand his words to Adham 
and Gebel." His accuser shouts back: "His words to Gebel don't bear 
interpretation" (181). Still another angrier leader asserts, "No one can 
speak in the name of Gebelawi except the Trustee of his estate and 
his heir" (182). Another element of narrative probability, then, is the 
question of authority. Who are the keepers of the stories? Who are the 
official interpreters? — the theologian, the historian, the literary critic, 
the philosopher, or relatives? 

Rifaa's reform movement gains more success after his death than 
during his life. Despite the fact that Rifaa's followers try to maintain 
the belief that Rifaa's mission was to "heal the sick and that he 
despised importance and power," the Rifaaites are, ironically, "recog- 
nized as a new quarter, with the same rights and privileges as Gebel's 
quarter" (Vr//. The continual creation of boundaries hedging people 
in is also one of the plagues in Gebelawi Alley And then, once again, 
the people in the alley divide themselves into Gebelites and Rifaaites 
and slip into forgetfulness. 

The story of Kassem (Mohammed) is also powerful. It is through 
him that the people in the alley come to realize that Gebelawi is the 
ancestor v / us all. It is through the stories told to Kassem that he 
discovers Gebelawi's will and learns how the people can live up to 
the "ten conditions" contained in Gebelawi's book. It is Kindil, 
Gebelawi's servant, who reveals the will of Gebelawi to Kassem (227). 
This time, Gebelawi — who knows "everything and is aware of every 
event, big or small" — informs Kassem "that all the people of the alley 
are equally his children, that the estate is equally their inheritance, 
that chiefs are an evil that must end and that the alley must become 
an extension of the Big House" (228). Kassem is also told that he must 
bring this condition about. As he goes about interpreting this message, 
however, the implications for Islam become revolutionary. For example, 
Kassem says, "If God grants me victory, I shan't stop women from 
sharing the income of the estate" (234). As might be expected, resistance 
to this idea is great. And yet Kassem explains, "Our ancestor told me 
through his servant that the estate belongs to everyone. Half the 
people are women; it is amazing that the alley doesn't respect them; 
but it shall respect them on the day that it knows the meaning of 
justice and mercy" (234). Kassem's revision of the old stories, his 
revision of the "ten conditions," is collective. His task was to "achieve 
the honor that Gebel gave to his people, and the love that Rifaa called 
for; more than that, the happiness that Adham dreamed of" (235). 
Through force and love, the alley once again comes to know peace. 
But, in the end, the people are once more plagued with forgetfulness. 



2'. 



Narrative Theory in The Children of Gebelawi 



227 



"Arafa," the final chapter of the novel, begins: 

No one who contemplates us now will believe those tales. Who 
were Gebel and Rifaa and Kassem? Where are the achievements 
that are talked of in the cafes? The eye sees only an alley sunk 
in darkness and storytellers singing of dreams. How have things 
come to such a pass? (287) 

This section focuses on a character whose life is compelled by curiosity, 
the desire to solve problems through magic (science), and by revenge. 
In his compulsion to prove Gebelawi's continued existence and to 
read, for himself, the actual contents of the book which contains the 
"ten conditions," Arafa sneaks into the estate and, by accident, causes 
the death of Gebelawi. The irony and ambiguity contained in the 
events surrounding the death of Gebelavrl are powerful. On the one 
hand, Arafa wants to become a good enough magician that he will 
be "able to restore Gebelawd to life, Gebelawi whom it had been easier 
to kill than to see" (323). And on the other hand, Arafa also feels 
that "a word from our ancestor used to cause the best of his children 
to act for him until death. His death is more powerful than his words; 
it makes it necessary for the good son to do everything, to take his 
place, to be him" (323). The death of God, the rise of magic, and the 
power of the trustee's cudgels dominate this chapter. Men also fight 
over who can own the best products of the magic. Rumors fill the 
hashish dens and people live in a "terrible atmosphere of fear and 
hatred and intimidation" (355). But once again, whenever the people 
suffered injustice, they said, "Oppression must cease as night yields 
to day. We shall see the end of tyranny and the dawn of muracles" 
(355). This, the last sentence of the novel, can be read as full of satire. 
Humankind continues to be ruled by the trustees and to live in a state 
of forgetfulness. 

Adham, Gebel, Rifaa, Kassem, and the characters that make their 
lives worth remembering and retelling are the cultural heroes of the 
Jews, Christians, and Muslims. And, says Mahfouz, their memory 
"remains, and is worth more than flocks and flocks of sheep and 
goats" (206). These men — Adham, Gebel, Rifaa, and Kassem (and the 
stories about them) — are the world's share of goodness. Their message? 
Equality, righteousness, and brotherhood, and our common love and 
dependence on Gebelawi, the father of the book. And their stories are 
what we have to move us to a full life shared with those who are not 
of our race, kindred, tongue, or people. It would seem that Mahfouz 
is suggesting, in this novel, that these stories must be read collectively. 
They represent the contributions of the Jews (who number 18,169,340 



228 



Suzanne Evertsen Lundquist 



or 0.3 percent of the world's population), the Christians (who number 
1,669,520,440 or 32.9 percent of the world's population), and Muslims 
(who number 880,552,210 or 17.4 percent of the world's population) 
{The World Almanac 1990, 611). 

Literary critic Abu-Haidar claims that Mahfouz's Children ofGebelawi 
is not just another Arabic novel, but "an important event" whose 
message is for "the powers that be, not only in Egypt and other Arab 
countries, but everywhere in the world" (1985, 119). Perhaps '\he 
powers that be" should be the group credited with being plagvied with 
forgetfulness. Of this kind of forgetfulness, African writer Chinua 
Achebe tells us, "A fool alone will / contest the precedence of ancestors 
and gods; the wise wisely sing them grandiloquent lullabies / knowing 
they are children / those omnipotent deities" (1977, 46). To remember 
and know the old stories, then — the stories of the ancestors whose 
lives gave us moments of true peace and vision — and even to celebrate 
those narratives with "grandiloquent lullabies" is to understand that 
the old narratives create new narrative probabilities. The ancestors 
become the children in this regard. And, finally, this discussion of 
narrative theory affirms Mircea Eliade's contention that "the [modem] 
novel continue[s the] mythological narrative, though on a different 
plane and in pursuit of different ends" (1963, 190). Certainly the 
mythos of this novel transcends traditional mythological boundaries; 
it becomes a call to stop quartering the alley, the land of inheritance. 
It is also a call to v/orship true goodness and not power or science. If 
Mahfouz's critics are correct, if Mahfouz has accomplished what critics 
believe he has, then his narrative is well worth our consideration. 
After all, the English words "story" and "narrative" come to us 
through "Greek, Latin, and French from two Proto-Indo-European 
roots — weid and gno, seeing and knowing," explains Price (1985, 14). 
Perhaps Mahfouz's implied narrative theory has just such purposes: 
that we might see, know, remember, and change. 

Notes 

1. Mahfouz has written thirty-eight novels and twelve volumes of short 
stories; twenty-six of his narratives have been made into films. His topics 
range from the Pharonic period of human history to more recent Islamic and 
global concerns. 

Works Cited 

Abu-Haidar, Jareer. 1985. "Awlad Haratina by Majib Mahfuz: An Event in 
the Arab World." Journal of Arabic Literature 16: 119-31. 



Narrative Theory in The Children of Gebelawi 229 

Achebe, Chinua. 1977. Beware Soul Brother, London: Heinemann. 

Allen, Roger. 1990. "Najib Mahfuz: 1988." In Nobel Laureates in Literature, 

edited by Rado Pribic, 251-57. New York: Garland. 
Eliade, Mircea. 1963. Myth and Reality. New York: Harper. 
Eliot, T. S. 1952. "Little Gidding." In The Complete Poems and Plays: ISOS- 

1950, 142. New York: Harcourt. 
Fisher, Walter R. 1987. Human Communication as Narration: Toward a Philosophy 

of Reason, Value, and Action. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press. 
Lincc'n, Kenneth. 1983. Native American Renaissance. Berkeley: University of 

Ca ifomia Press. 

Luxner, Larry. 1989. "A Nobel for the Arab Nation/' Aramco World 40(2): 14- 
16. 

Mahfouz, Naguib. 1981. The Children of Gebelawi, translated by Philip Stewart. 
London: Heinemann. 

. 1989. "Nobel Prize Lecture." Aramco World 40(2): 16. 

Momigliano, Amaldo. 1966. "Tin\e in Ancient Historiography." In History and 
the Concept of Time. Beiheft 6 History and Theory, 1-23. Middletown, CT: 
Wesleyan University Press. 

Peled, Mattityahu. 1983. Religion, My Own: The Literary Works of Najib Mahfuz. 
New Brunswick: Transaction Books. 

Price, Reynolds. 1985. A Palpable God. San Francisco: North Point Press. 

Ronnow, Gretchen. 1984. "The Oral vs. the Written: A Dialectic of Worldviews" 
in Najib Mahfouz's The Children of Our Alley. Al-Arabiyya: Journal of the 
American Association of Teachers of Arabic 17(1): 87-118. 

Ulanov, Ann and Barry. 1983. Cinderella and Her Sisters. Philadelphia: West- 
minster Press. 

The World Almanac and Book of Facts: 1990. 1990. "Estimated Religious 
Population of the World, 1988," 611. New York: Pharos Books. 




17 The Mixed Blood Writer as 
Interpreter and Mythmaker 



Patricia Riley 

University of California, Berkeley 



Don't offend 
the fullbloods, 
don't offend 
the whites, 
stand there in 
the middle 
of the god- 
damned road 
and get hit. 

— Gogisgi/Carroll Arnett 
"Song of the Breed" 

As I sit staring at the face of one of technology's latest gods, my hands 
on a keyboard that functions as its messenger, I find myself "standin' 
in the middle of the road" with the rest of my brothers and sisters. 
Therefore, before leaping headlong into a discussion of the mixed 
blood writer and the peculiar problematics involved in this occupation 
that so many of us have found ourselves in, I feel compelled to talk 
about how mixed bloods came into existence and how they have been 
perceived by others and by themselves, since I believe this will shed 
considerable light on the subject at hand. 

There was a time in so-called Early American History when inter- 
marriage between whites and Indians was advocated as a means of 
achieving a "bloodless" conquest, one that could be arrived at not by 
the spilling of blood, but by the mixing of it. Thomas Jefferson expressed 
these sentiments in 1803: 

In truth, the ultimate point of rest and happiness for them is to 
let our settlement and theirs meet and blend together, to intermix, 
and to become one people . . . and it will be better to promote 
than retard it. (Bieder 1980, 19) 



"Song of the Breed" is reprinted here by permission of Carroll Amett. 
230 



The Mixed Blood Writer as Mythmaker 



231 



Missionaries seeking to convert and civilize Indians also held a 
similar stance, believing the mixed blood was more malleable and 
would "espouse the interests of civilization and Christianity" (Bieder 
1980, 19). A common observation of the time was that mixed bloods 
were "the first to take on 'white ways': to start farming and acquire 
an education/' as well as serve the quite useful purpose of interpreting 
(19-20). In the 1830s, Alexis de Tocqueville held that "the half-blood 
forms the natural link between civilization and barbarism" (20). The 
idea of the mixed blood as a bridge between cultures may have had 
its roots in this period. 

However, by the middle of the 1800s these beliefs began to 
deteriorate as reports came in that the mixed blood had failed to live 
up to white expectations. Mixed bloods quickly became marked as 
"faulty stock." Since they often chose tribal life over a white one, 
"Like the Indian, the mixed-blood was viewed as headed for extinction" 
(Bieder, 27). More than one hundred years later, we continue to 
disappoint the white man. We continue to live, to acquire education 
and link our lives to that of our tribes, and we continue to define 
ourselves in spite of a society that would do that defining for us. 

There is no definition for mixed blood according to Webster's Ency- 
clopedic Version of the New Lexicon Dictionary: however, the definition 
of the pejorative term half-breed reads as follows: "n. someone of 
mixed breeding, esp. of mixed white and American Indian parentage" 
(434). While this clinical definition may satisfy the question of the 
genetic "what," it gives no real insight of any substance. 

In the Lakota language, the word used to describe a mixed blood 
is iyeska; however, its meaning does not end there. According to Orval 
Looking Horse, keeper of the sacred Pipe of the Lakota people, the 
term iyeska embodies the concept of one who not only interprets 
between the red and white worlds, but between the world of spirits 
and of human beings as well.' I believe the fullness of this definition 
places the mixed blood firmly within spiritual and mythic traditions 
and is the most descriptive of the way the mixed blood writer 
approaches the writing of literature. It is also a definition which enables 
one to begin to understand the predicament and complexity of the 
mixed blood writer as a producer of contemporary Native American 
literature. 

In the introduction io That's What She Said, mixed blood Cherokee 
writer Rayna Green describes the contemporary Native American 
author as someone who walks "a new Trail of Tears," one that was 
blazed by the government policy of relocation: 



232 



Patricia Riley 



They go to the towns for jobs or to follow their husbands and 
families. They go to school someplace and they never go home 
again permanently, or the city becomes home. Sometimes they 
get to go back to the Rez. Maybe it's someplace they never were 
before, and that new experience becomes part of the searching. 
They can be looking for something Indians call "Indianness" — 
what sociologists call "identity." . . . Because most of them — with 
few exceptions — are "breeds," "mixed-bloods," not reserve-raised, 
they aren't "traditional," whatever that might mean now. Some 
might say that writing is just their role. That's what breeds do. 
They stand in the middle and interpret for everyone else, and 
maybe that's so. That's what they are. But "identity" is never 
simply a matter of genetic make-up or natural birthright. Perhaps 
once, long ago, it was both. But not now. For people out on the 
edge, out on the road, identity is a matter of will ... a face to be 
shaped in a ceremonial act. (1984, 7) 

While Green focuses on the idea of the mixed blood as interpreter, 
she also brings up the notion of the quest for identity. Underlying this 
quest is a sense of alienation which drives the seeker and permeates 
much of Native American literature today. In The Sacred Hoop: Re- 
covering the Feminine in American Indian Traditions, Paula Gunn Allen 
discusses this preoccupation with alienation in Native American lit- 
erature and offers insight into the experiences which often shape mixed 
blood consciousness, while pointing out that acculturated fullbloods 
can also qualify for a kind of mixed status: 

What is the experience that creates this sense of alienation? The 
breed (whether by parentage or acculturation to non-Indian so- 
ciety) is an Indian who is not an Indian. That is, breeds are a bit 
of both worlds, and the consciousness of this makes them seem 
alien to traditional Indians while making them feel alien among 
whites. Breeds commonly feel alien to themselves above all. (1986, 
129) 

Allen also mentions the fact that the urriters of contemporary Native 
American literature are predominantly mixed bloods of one description 
or another and adds that "exactly what this means in terms of writers' 
rendering of personal experience is necessarily a central concern of 
American Indian literary criticism" (129). Unfortunately, the import of 
Allen's observation, as it relates to the complexity and construction of 
contemporary Native American literature, cannot be fully discussed 
here. However, a more limited inquiry is possible by examining some 
of the ways in which Leslie Silko's mixed blood status affected the 
way her novel Ceremony was constructed. 

If Silko has inherited the mixed blood's historical role of interpreter, 
she has also inherited a mixed bag full of weighty problems and thorny 



The Mixed Blood Writer as Mythmaker 



233 



questions that must of necessity be wrestled with. After a work has 
been completed, the first problem generally encountered by any writer 
is getting it published. This can be particularly problematic for a writer 
of Native American literature. 

The American public has not a few preconceived notions about 
Indians, and they would generally prefer not to have these images 
disrupted. If the disruption were too severe, would the American 
public read the books? Most likely not. America knows how it likes 
its Indians, preferably on film or on the pages of books looking savagely 
exotic, nobly hovering on the brink of extinction or extinct by the last 
page. The American public dotes on such dramatic endings as the one 
non-Indian novelist, Marilyn Harris, gave to her "Oh, so sympathetic 
novel" written in 1974, Hatter Fox. 

Harris's novel is a variation of the "vanishing American" theme 
that has been repeated over and over in American literature and is a 
favorite with the reading public. Hatter Fox is a poor, alienated, Navajo 
Indian princess, abused by white and Indian alike. She winds up in 
an insane asylum and is eventually rescued from the horrors of this 
snake pit by a good white doctor who works for the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs and decides it is his sole mission in life to civilize and make a 
proper American out of her. Of course, he fails because Hatter is too 
much of a "childlike" Indian to ever learn to be a responsible citizen. 
She is subsequently killed off by not looking where she is going and 
stepping into the street in front of a tourist bus. The novel ends on 
these overly dramatic, tragic notes: 

I should have been content to let her be what she was. But there 
was no room in the world for what she was. And now there is 
less room for me. 

I hear from our bench the chiming of bells for matins coming 
furiously from the cathedral. Thr hour before dawn. The last hour 
of the condemned. How many more are waiting for death? . . . 

Now is my night upon me. I still wait for her. But she doesn't 
come. It is the silence that frightens me. 

1 miss her. . . I miss her. . . 

I miss hc-r . . . (273) 

Harris's interpretation of Native American experience is the stuff 
American dreams are made of and, unfortunately, it is what many 
major publishing houses are generally in the market for. The reader 
can have a good time feeling bad over the fate of the American Indian, 
have a good cry, turn over, go to sleep, and forget it. After all, "there 
[is] no room in the world for what [we are]" (273). 

In light of this Western penchant for the "vanishing American," 
what is the tribal writer to do? How does one present an accurate 




234 



Patricia Riley 



portrayal of Native American people, one that does not stink of noble 
savagery on the brink of doom, and still manage to get into print at 
the same time? 

To begin to uncover some of the answers to the dilemma of 
publishing, we need to look at audience. Who will read these novels? 
Certainly publishers assume the audience will primarily be a non- 
Indian one and that assumption may well be true. However, within 
the last ten to fifteen years there has been an increase in Native 
American readers as Indian-written novels and anthologies find their 
way into classrooms at the secondary and college levels. In spite of 
this increase in tribal readership, the question of audience remains a 
valid one, since the number of tribal readers alone is not sufficient 
incentive for the novels to become published by major publishing 
houses. The answer to the difficult question of audience is that Silko 
has written and continues to write for both. However, it is important 
to note that the audience she writes most directly to is a tribal one, 
while the audience she writes for, in terms cf numbers of book sales, 
is not. The operative word here is "to." The problem that Silko faces 
lies within this inherited role of interpreter, which requires that she 
translate tribal realities for a large audience whose culture is distinctly 
different from that of the tribal audience with whom the author is 
most concerned. 

Situated between worlds, the mixed blood writer faces a difficult 
task. Clearly, Silko stands in the middle of that road which Arnett 
speaks so bluntly about in his poem (1983, 14). If the non-Indian 
audience is going to read the novel, it must somehow f^ppeal to non- 
Indian tastes, and that taste has been established, but for the novel 
to hold up under the scrutiny of Native American readers, it must 
maintain cultural integrity at the same time. What Silko has done in 
the face of this perplexity is to take the trickster's path. She wrote a 
novel which is partly Western and partly tribal and which, as Paula 
Gunn Allen says, may appear to almost give America what it v/ants: 

[A]s a result of following western literary imperatives, most writers 
of Indian novels create mixed blood or half-breed protagonists, 
treating the theme of cultural conflict by incorporating it into the 
psychological and social being of the characters. (1986, 81) 

However, an important factor to keep in iriind is that Silko has 
created a written work which has been fueled by oral traditions and, 
like the old stories, ihis new work is coded or written in layers. Such 
layered writing works to subvert aspects of the text which may appear 
at first glance to be stereotypical, while opening it up on another level 



The Mixed Blood Writer as Mythmaker 



235 



to a deef>er and different understanding by Native American readers. 
Hence, the appeal to a number of audiences on a number of different 
levels. This is certainly the case in Ceremony. 

On the surface. Ceremony uses the popular Western themes of 
alienation and cultural strife, aspects that are, according to Allen, 
embedded in the consciousness of the breed (1986, 129), as well as 
the consciousness of the dominant culture. The idea of an alienated 
hero at odds with the worid appeals to the American reading public 
because it is also such a completely American theme. American 
literature abounds with stories about alienation. However, the alien- 
ation found in Ceremony is alienation with a twist, and the twist is a 
distinctly tribal one which works at deflecting the text from Western 
stereotypes, while turning it towards a more tribal mode of perception. 

Silko, as mixed blood trickster writer, created a hero who is in 
opposition to the usual Western protagonist. Euro-American cultural 
demands for individuality in the extreme dictate that the protagonist 
must leave home in order to experience full self-realization. Tayo, 
Silko's tr'bal protagonist, must do the opposite. Haunted by his 
experiences in World War II and alienated by his "half-breed" status 
in a tribal society thai places a great deal of value on "pure" bloodlines, 
the road to healing lies in Tayo's ability to find his way back to his 
community and his traditions. Silko's literary resolution to Tayo's 
estrangement accurately reflects the consciousness of her Laguna 
people. 

in Recovering the Word, William Bevis describes this need to return 
to community as "homing in": 

In marked contrast, most Native American novels are not "eccen- 
tric," centrifugal, diverging, expanding, but "incentric/' centripetal, 
converging, contracting. The hero comes home. "Contracting" has 
negative overtones to us, "expanding" a positive ring. These are 
cultural choices we are considering. In Native American novels, 
coming home, staying put, contracting, even what we call "re- 
gressing" to a place, a past where one has been before, is not 
only the primary story, it is a primary mode of knowledge and a 
primary good. (1987, 582) 

In contemporary Native American novels, the most common way 
for the protagonist to "come home" is through a return to spirituality 
and the ritual tradition. Certainly the use of the ritual tradition within 
Ceremony rep**esents far more than some idea of accommodating 
Western publishing tastes for the exotic Indian. According to Allen, it 
functions as an important counlerdevice that works against the nov- 
elist's acquiescence to the theme of alienation: 



236 



Patricia Riley 



But at least since the publication of Cogewea, the Half-Blood ... in 
1927, this acquiescence to western publishing tastes is offset by 
a counterdevice. The protagonists are also participants in a ritual 
tradition, symbolizing the essential unity of a human being's 
psyche in spite of conflict. This developme*\t implies integration 
in the midst of conflict, fragmentation, and destruction and pro- 
vides literary shapings of the process of natavistic renewal, a 
process that characterizes American Indian public life in the last 
quarter of the twentieth century. (1986, 82) 

Allen also notes that the focus Native American novelists have 
chosen is counter to that of the Western protest novel whK». concerns 
itself with the oppressor, rather than the oppressed (82). 

Unlike Hatter Fox, which portrays a solitary Indian awash in an 
urban sea of whiteness that ultimately spells her doom. Ceremony takes 
place in a tribal world, peopled with tribal characters. Though the 
white man's handiwork is seen and discussed, ho is largely absent 
from the novel. The white doctor from the veterans' hospital makes 
only a brief appearance in Ceremony. As she focuses on the oppressed 
rather than the oppressoi, Silko defuses the Western notion of the 
''vanishing American." Though there are dead Indians at the novel's 
close, there are still a good number of Indians left alive and kicking. 

By limiting the white characters' time in the novel, Silko articulates 
the reality that Native American people have largely opted to direct 
their attention to their own traditions and customs and, as Allen points 
out, "ignore the white man as much as possible" (1986, 82). 

Lakota historian Vine Deloria, Jr., bears this out in We Talk, You 
Listen: 

In many areas whites arc regarded as a temporary asp^ect of tribal 
life and there is unshakcable belief that the tribe will survive the 
domination of the white man and once again rule the continent. 
(1970. 13) 

This belief is illustrated by Silko's creation of the "vvitchcry" story 
in Ceremony, When Tayo meets the old mixed blood medicine man, 
Betonie, he is told that the wWle man is not the "demi-god" he thinks 
he is, and neither d^es he possess the power the world has attributed 
to him. According to Betonie, white people can be managed because 
Indians created them: 

But white people are only t()uls that the witchery mnnipulatcs: 
and I tell yoii, we can deal with white people, with their machines 
and their beliefs. We can because we invented while people; It 
was Indian witchery that made while people in the Hrst place. 
(1978, 139) 



The Mixed Blood Writer as Mythmaker 



237 



Is Silko's invention of the "witchery" and her use and interpretation 
of tribal beliefs accommodationist? Has her translation perhaps made 
the white folks feel more comfortable? I think not. Silko's idea that 
Indians created white people in no way absolves the white man from 
historical responsibility in the genocide of Native American people. 
Throughout the novel, Silko has attached responsibility for what evil 
has occurred through the white man to the white man, and she has 
attached what has occurred through the Native American to the Native 
American, but the blame has been firmly affixed to that force which 
is truly responsible for man's inhumanity to man. She has moved 
beyond blaming all white people for what some chose and continue 
to choose to do, and has opted instead to focus on the greater issue 
at hand, the resistance of the "witchery" which drives human beings 
to destroy one another. Silko makes this clear in an interview with 
Jane B. Katz in This Song Remembers: 

In the novel, I've tried to go beyond any specific kind of Laguna 
witchery or Navajo witchery, and to begin to see witchery as a 
metaphor for the destroyers, to the counterforce, that force which 
counters vitality and birth. The counterforce is destruction and 
death. I tried to get away from talking about good and evil, and 
to return to an old, old, old way of looking at the world that I 
think is ^'alid— the idea of balance, that the world was created 
with these opposing forces. 

I try to take it beyond any particuJar culture or continent, 
because that's such a bullshit thing — it's all Whitey's fault. That's 
too simplistic, mindless. In fact Tayo is warned that they try to 
encourage people to focus on certain people or groups to blame 
them for everything. Another name for the counterforce is "the 
manipulators," those who create nothing, merely take what is 
around. (1980, 193) 

Silko uses the story of the "witchery" to point out that how this 
counterforce came into existence is not the most important thing. What 
must be acknowledged is the fact that it does exist and that it will 
manipulate anyone who allows it to do so. The real importance lies 
in accepting the fact that the "witchery" itself is inextricably a part of 
our human existence and that it cannot be destroyed. However, one 
can choose not to participate in it, as Tayo did. One can refuse to be 
manipulated by it and in doing this live a life that is balanced and 
complete, rather than suffer the fragmentation and chaos experienced 
by the characters of Hariey, Leroy, Pinkie, and Emo. 

Lost in the throes of desire for life as they have been told to want 
it, they exist in a shadowland, tach stumbles through his personal 
darkness, feeding on beer und twisted memories of wartime mutilations 



24, j 



238 



Patricia Riley 



and liaisons with uniform-enamored blondes who do not want them 
anymore. Tayo, in contrast, recognizes the "witchery" for what it is 
and moves increasingly away from the material world and into the 
sacred. 

However, could it be said that even as Silko enabled the character 
of Tayo to overcome the "witchery," she became tangled in it herself? 
To more traditional Native Americans, the exposure of the ritual 
tradition constitutes a violation of the sacred. Silko's novel could 
possibly be considered the most problematic in this area, because she 
chose to incorporate a sacred Laguna clan story into the narrative 
itself, unlike James Welch, who disguises the sacred so thoroughly in 
his novels that only an "insider" can recognize what is going on 
mythologically. 

In what way should we view Silko's actions? Has she mistaken her 
role as interpreter for that of ethnographic informer? Since the entire 
novel rests on and incorporates myth, old and new, I began to explore 
the possibility of some sort of mythological explanation for her actions. 
(For clarification, I would like to add that I do not equate explanation 
with justification in any way.) In order to do this, I turned to my own 
mythic traditions for insight. 

I began to see not only Silko, but many mixed blood poets and 
writers as analogous or metaphorically related to the mythic Cherokee 
Wild Boy or Orphan, who insisted that he was also the son of First 
Man and First Woman, and brother to their original offspring, in spite 
of the fact that he had been produced through the mixing of blood 
and water and not in the ordinary way. This mythic mixed blood, if 
you will, spent his life in the pursuit of hidden knowledge and often 
disclosed secrets.^ 

According to Charles Hudson in The Southeastern Indians, the Wild 
Boy-Orphan is the result of mixing categories and is therefore 

anomalous in two ways: in his strange birth and in his peculiar 
relationship to his brother. One of the most important fea- 
tures ... is that he came from the water, and water is associated 
with disorder, innovation, and fertility; thus Wild Boy was always 
breaking rules and doing new things. (1987, 148-49) 

There are several aspects of the Orphan's story and Hudson's 
analysis that deserve exploration. The relationship between the Orphan 
and the contemporary fact of the existence of the mixed blood is 
extremely interesting. Like the Orphan, the "breed" is a product of 
mixed blood, blood that has been thinned or watered down, so to 
speak. It is also true that the outside blood that led to the creation of 



The Mixed Blood Writer as Mythmaker 



239 



the mixed blood came through or across the water. The association of 
the mythic mixed blood and the "real world" mixed blood with water 
is strong. And it is certainly true that many times the mixed blood 
feels like an orphan and is often treated that way as well. All of the 
mixed blood characters in Ceremony are orphans of one sort or another 
or in some way associated with abandonment. Silko herself lived on 
the edges of Laguna society and felt this keenly. It is important to 
mention that she lived near the river and attached special significance 
to that fact: 

Look where all the Marmon houses are here by the river, down 
below the village. I always thought there was something symbolic 
about that — we're on the fringe of things. The river's just a short 
walk from here, and I was always attracted to it as a kid. I knew 
it was a small river, and I didn't make any great demands on it. 
It was a great place to go and play in the mud and splash around. 
There are willows and tamarack, and there are always stories. 
You just hear them. I guess from the beginning there was the 
idea that the river was kind of a special place where all sorts of 
things could go on. (Silko 1980, 189) 

Perhaps by taking the clan story, Silko was guilty of bad judgment, 
but she has certainly followed the Wild Boy's lead. Like her mythic 
predecessor, she created some chaos, broke the rules by exposing what 
had once been hidden, and gave birth to something new and innovative. 
She sees herself directly connected to the stories told by the Lagunas 
about mixed bloods and the "wild, roguish things they did" (189). As 
a mixed blood, Silko believes she has more latitude, more possibilities 
for expression than a fullblood writer like Simon Ortiz, whom she 
sees as possibly constricted by his family's ties to community religious 
life (190). 

Though Silko constructs the majority of the novel around the bones 
of Laguna mythology, one may conclude from her remarks that she 
did not draw on Laguna or Navajo mythology to illustrate the concept 
of the "witchery" in the novel. The invention of the story of the 
"witchery" and the casting of Tayo, who, according to Allen, is a 
traditional Keres mythological character (1990, 383), as a mixed blood 
in a mixed blood story is not so much an act of accommodation to 
the exotic tastes of a non- Indian audience, as it is an attempt to move 
towards the creation of a new, mixed blood mythology which dem- 
onstrates one way for mixed blo(^ds to become whole within the 
conflict they are born into. 

If one examines the novel carefully with an eye to the mythic 
dimension, one can see that Silko is doing something very important. 



240 



Patricia Riley 



At the novers center is the idea that what is needed is a new ceremony. 
By calling for this, she is functioning as what comparative mythologist 
Joseph Campbell called "the secondary hero" who breathes new life 
into ancient, sacred traditions so that they continue to function in 
modem times. Campbell describes this role in an interview with Bill 
Moyers in The Power of Myth: 

There is a kind of secondary hero to revitalize the tradition. This 
hero reinterprets the tradition and makes it valid as a living 
experience today instead of a lot of outdated cliches. This has to 
be done with all traditions. (1988, 141) 

The idea of Silko as "secondary hero" fits well within the Lakota 
definition of the mixed blood as interpreter between the human world 
and the spirit world. By placing the mixed blood within the existing 
Laguna mythic tradition through the characterization of Tayo and 
thereby creating a new mixed blood mythology, she is showing 
contemporary Native Americans, mixed bloods and fullbloods, a way 
to live in modem society. Tayo and the other important mixed blood 
characters, Betonie and the Night Swan, represent the kind of adap- 
tation that is necessary for survival in the face of contemporary reality. 
By creating a new ceremony, one that is inclusive rather than exclusive, 
she has also opened a road upon which the mixed blood can retum 
home to ritual traditions which have fueled the endurance of tribal 
people for thousands of years and which now have room for him or 
her as well. 

Though Silko cautions all of her readers against acquiescing spir- 
itually to a mechanistic society which erects altars to technology at 
the expense of humanity, I believe her primary interest is in sending 
a signal to tribal people eveiywhere that a resistance path remains. 
Whether on the land or tied to urban areas for economic reasons, a 
sacred space must be created that allows one to remain Indian. Through 
Ceremony, Silko demonstrates that there is a way to live in the modem 
world without giving in to the "witchery." That way is through 
remembrance, adaptation, and recreation. At the onset of the novel 
Silko writes: 

I will tell you something about stories, 
[he said) 
They aren't just entertainment. 

Don't be fooled. 
They are all we have, you see, 
all we have to fight off 
illness and death. 



The Mixed Blood Writer as Mythmaker 



241 



You don't have anything 
if you don't have the stories. 

(1978, 2) 

For a long time nnixed bloods did not have the stories. Now, thanks 
to Silko, we have new stories and we are part of them as well. 
Throughout the novel, Silko has successfully translated tribal realities 
to non-Indians and mixed blood realities to fullbloods. True to form 
as a mythological descendant of the ancient Orphan-Wild Boy, she 
has broken some rules along the way, but she has also purchased a 
contemporary mythic space for mixed bloods everywhere, and through 
it all she sends a strong message to the camp of the "manipulators." 
We are being healed. We will return. We have not vanished from this 
red earth. 

Notes 

1. This definition was conveyed by Mr. Looking Horse during a conver- 
sation with a student following his appearance as a guest lecturer at San 
Francisco State University. 

2. Many tribes have Wild Boy or Blood Clot Boy myths. There is a Pueblo 
myth about the Water Jar Boy that is somewhat analogous to this one. The 
Water Jar Boy came about through the mixture of earth and water. Those 
interested should see Elsie Clews Parsons, "Tewa Tales," Memoirs of the 
American Folklore Society 19(1926): 193. 



Works Cited 

Allen, Paula Gunn. 1986. The Sacred Hoop: Recovering the Feminine in American 
Indian Traditions. Boston: Beacon. 

. 1990. "Special Problems in Teaching Leslie Marmon Silko's Cere- 
mony" American Indian Quarterly 14: 379-86. 

Amett, Carroll. 1983. "Song of the Breed." In Songs from This Earth on Turtle's 
Back, edited by Joseph Bruchac, 14. New York: The Greenfield Review 
Press. 

Bieder, Robr-t E. 1980. "Scientific Attitudes toward Indian Mixed-Bloods in 
Early Nineteenth Century America." The Journal of Ethnic Studies 8(2): 17- 
30. 

Bevis, William. 1987. "Native American Novels: Homing In." In Recovering 
the Word: Essays on Native American Literature, edited by Driann Swann 
and Arnold Krupat, 580-620. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Campbell, Joseph. 1988. The Power of Myth, By Bill Moyers. Edited by Betty 
Sue Flowers. New York: Doubleday. 

Deloria, Vine, Jr. 1970. We Talk, You ' isten. New York: Macmillan. 



^ iJ 



242 



Patricia Riley 



Green, Rayna. 1984. "Introduction." In That's What She Said: Contemporary 
Poetry and Fiction by Native American V^omen, edited by Rayna Green, 1- 
12. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 

Harris, Marilyn. 1974. Hatter Fox. New York: Bantam. 

Hudson, Charles. 1987. The Southeastern Indians. Knoxville: University of 
Tennessee Press. 

Parsons, Elsie Clews. 1926. "Tewa Tales." Memoirs of the American Folklore 

Society 19: 192-95. 
Silko, Leslie Marmon. 1978. Ceremony. New York: Signet. 
. 1980. "Interview." In This Song Remembers: Self Portraits of Native 

Americans in the Arts, edited by Jane B. Kalz, 186-94. Boston: Houghton. 
Vkbster's Dictionary of the English language. 1988. "Half-breed." 



Index 



Abu-Haidar, Jareer, 215, 228 
Academentia, 83 
Academic discourse, 23 
Academic genre, 23, 28-29 
Academic literacy, 29 
Accuracy, 56 

Achebe, Chinua, 45, 120, 122, 228, 229 
Active learners, 73 
Acufta, Rodolfo, 96, 104 
Affiliation, 138, 177-178, 182 
African American literature 

literary theory, 107-112 

teaching works by women authors, 139- 
151 

Agrarian criticism, 112 
AIDS, 10-11 
Aiken, Conrad, 133 

Alarc6n, Norma, ix, 63, 96, 97, 104, 254 
Albertson, Chris, 174 
All God's Dangers, 31 
Allen, Paula Gunn, 99, 104, 232, 234, 235, 
241 

Allen, Roger, 229 

Althusser, Louis, 6-7, 57 

Amusing Ourselves to Death, 65 

Analects of Confucius, The, 134 

Anderson, James A., 71, 77 

Anderson, Sherwood, 133 

"And Now Let's Hear It for the Ed Sullivan 

Show," 77 
Andrews, William L., 141, 151 
Anglophilia, 130 
Annie Allen, 107 

AnzaldOa, Gloria, viii, 63, 64, 97, 98, 99, 

100, 103, 104, 105 
Apprenticeship, 20, 21, 25, 26 
Archetypes, 104 
Arguing, 86 

Armstrong, Louis, 167-168, 169 
Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN), 
208 

Amett, Canroll, 230, 234, 241 
Arnold, Matthew, vii, viii, x 
Aronson, Miriam (Mimi), 79, 80, 87 
AssimilationUm, 146 



Astaire, Fred, 131 
Attallah, Paul, 67, 77 
AtweU, Nande, 74, 75, 77 
Aufhebung, 100 
Authority, 119 
Authorship, 30 

Autonomy, 8, 9, 15, 72, 156, 157, 159, 161 
Ayler, Albert, 173 

Badness, 155, 156, 157-158, 161 
Baker, Houston A., Jr., 110, 113, 163, 169, 
174 

Bakhtin, MikhaU, 213 

Baldwin, James, x, 138, 165, 173, 174, 175 

Baraka, Amiri, 109, 113, 165, 169, 170, 

171, 173, 175 
Barrera, Mario, 96, 105 
Barthelme, Donald, 77 
Barthes, Roland, 124, 213 
Bartholomae, David, 22, 33 
Beast within us, 99 
Beaton, Isabel, 79, 80, 83, 90-93 
Bebop, 137, 168, 169-171, 173-174 
Beloved, x, 137, 153-163 
Belsey, Catherine, 57, 60 
Bennholdt-Thomsen, Veronika, 98, 105 
Beowulf, 154 
Bcrger, John, 31, 33 
Bemal, Martin, 111-^112, 113 

Berssenbrugge, Mei-Mei, 178, 199 

Beverley, John, 50, 61 

Be vis, William, 235, 241 

Bias, 119 

Biculturality, 205 

Bieder, Robert E., 230, 231, 241 

Big love, 154, 155, 160, 162 

Big stories, 145 

Bizzell, Patricia, 26-28, 33 

Black American Literature Forum, 109 

Black Aihena: The Afro-Asiatic Roots of Clas- 
sical Civilization 

Volume 1: The Fabrication of Greece, 
1785-1985, 111-112 
Volume II: The Linguistic and Archr- 
ological Evidence, 112 



244 



Index 



Black Fire, 108 

Black Folk Here and There, 112 

Black Literature and Literary Theory, 108 

Black nationalists, 107 

Blacks: Or a Clown Show, The, 107 

Black Talk, 173 

Black windows, 108 

Black Writers Conference, 108 

Black Writers Respond to William Styron's 

Nat Turner, 108 
Blaise, Clarke, 60 

Blue Dragon, White Tiger, 202, 203, 205- 
206 

Bluest Bye, The, 140, 147-150 

Blues matrix, 169 

"Blueprint for Negro Writing," 166 

Bohannan, Laura, 124, 136 

Book of Odes, The, 132, 134 

Border cases, 9 

Borderlands, 63 

Bom on the Fourth of July, 201 

Boyle, T. Coraghessan, 77 

Bremond, Claude, 213 

Broken Promises, 188 

Brooks, Gwendolyn, 107, 108, 113, 134 

Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, 149 

Brothers in Arms, 206 

Brown, Claude, 158 

Brown, Laura, 13, 15 

Brown, Sterling, 166 

Broyles, WUliam, 206-207, 211 

Burger's Daughter, 121 

Burgos-Debray, Elisabeth, 2, 48, 49-55, 57, 

58, 60, 61 
Burke, Kenneth, viii, 63, 64, 187, 199 
Burton, Robert S., ix, 64, 115, 254 
Byars, Betsy, 65, 66, 78 

Cadden, Vivian, 71, 78 

Cain, WUliam E., 175 

Calkins, Lucy McConnick, 74, 75, 78 

Campbell, Joseph, 240, 241 

Cassidy, Thomas, 140, 144, 151 

Castellano, Olivia, 103, 104, 105 

Celebration of otherness, 59 

Ceremony, x, 232, 235-241 

Cervantes, 16, 24, 30, 33 

Chan, Jeffery Paul, 199 

Chang, Diana, 183, 199 

Chanoff, David, 210 

Chicana feminism, 96-104 
Coatlioie State, 100 
future directions of, 102-103 
mestiza concept, 99, 101-102 
Native Woman, 99, 100-101 
origins of, 97-98 



Chicano Movement, 96-98 
Chickencoop Chinaman, The, 188 
Children of Gebelawi, The, 138 
Chin, Frank, 179, 181, 184, 185, 188, 199 
Chin, Marilyn, 178, 180, 199 
Chinaman Pacific & Frisco R, R, Co., The, 
184 

China Men, The, 184-187, 196 

Chinese American literature, filiation and 

affiliation in, 177-198 
Chinese Revolution, 133 
Chinweizu, Onwuchekwa Jemie, 45 
Christian, Barbara, 147, 151 
Christian, Meg, 79 
Christopher, Renny, x, 138, 201, 254 
"Chronicle," 178 
Civil Rights Movement, 8 
Class experience, 8. See also Social class 
Cliff, MicheUe, 116, 122 
Clifford, James, 81, 95, 116, 122 
Coatlicue State, 100 
Cohen, Elizabeth G., 74, 78 
Coherence, 8, 12-13 
Coleman, Omette, 169, 170, 173 
Colie, Rosalie, 16, 17, 33 
Collaboration, 74 
Colonialism, 206, 207 
Colonialist mentality, 36 
Colonization, 99 
Commedia, 39 
Common language, 7 
Communality, 202 
Communal mode of power, 102 
Community, 7, 21 
Confessions of Nat Turner, The, 108 
Confucius, 134, 136 
Connectedness, 38 
Consciousness, 6-7 
Context(s), 13, 38, 63-64 
Contextual knowledge, need for, 140, 150- 

151 

Coon Come, Matthew, 82 
C6rdova, Teresa, 99, 105 
Couch potato, 73 
Counter-genre, 17, 19 
Crapanzano, Vincent, 59, 61 
Critical education, 29 
Critical thieory, 94 
Cross-cultural studies, viii, ix 

need for, 2, 39 
Cross-cultural teaching, translation as a 

method of, 47-59 
Crown, Bonnie R., 205, 211 
Cultural cnticism, 1, 3-15 

changing the object of analysis, 12-14 

defined, 7, 10 



Index 

and the defimtion of literature, 11-12 

history of, 5-6 
Cultural realities, 56 
Cultural Revolution, 125, 126, 132 
Cultural studies, 39 
Culture 

conceptualization of, 5-6 

heterogeneity of, 63 

homogeneity of, 8 

and the study of literature, vii-viii 

as an uneven system of relations, 12- 
13 

Culture and Society, 5 
Culture -bound terms, 47 
Cunningham, Wiletha (Billy), 79, 80, 84, 
86, 95 

Cutright, Melitta J., 67, 68, 78 
Daly, Mary, 83, 95 

Dance and the Railroad, The, 191, 194 
Daniels, Lee A., 165, 175 
Dante, 39 

Dasenbrock, Reed Way, w, 2, 35, 45-46, 

125, 134, 139, 204, 254 
Davidson, Donald, 2, 40-43, 45, 46, 125 
Decentralized teaching, 74-75 
Decolonization, 36 
Deconstruction, 37, 38, 135 
De-disdplinary teaching, 14 
Definitiveness, 97 
Delany, Martin, 168 
Del Castillo, Adelaida R., 99, 105 
Deloria, Vine, Jr., 236, 241 
de Man, Paul, 38 
Demystification, 27 
Deng Xiaoping, 134 
Derrida, Jacques, 9, 37, 38, 135, 213 
Designing Groupwork: Strategies for the Met- 

erogeneous Classroom, 74 
de Tocqueville, Alexis, 231 
Difference, 7-8, 41, 48, 55-56, 60, 87 
Differentiating, 115 
Differentiation, 64 

Dingwaney, Anuradha, \x, 2, 47, 61, 254 
Discrimination, 149 
Displacement, 1 18 
Doan Van Toai, 202, 210 
Dolphy, Eric, 173 

Don Quixote, 1, 16-18, 19-20, 24-26, 29- 
30, 33 

Double-consciousness, 168 
Douglass, Frederick, 31, 33, 168 
Dragonwings, 181-182 
Drake, St. Clair, 112, 113 
"Dreams in Harrison RaUroad Park," 178- 
179 



245 



Drew, Benjamin, 163 

Du Bois, W. E. B., 146, 168, 169, 175 

du Maurier, Daphne, 76 

Dundes, Alan, 156, 163 

Eagleton, Terry, viii, 1, 2 

East Meets West Foundation, 203 

Eastwood, Clint, 134 

Elbow, Peter, 117-118, 122 

Eliade, Mircea, 228, 229 

EUot, T. S., 44, 107, 113, 224, 229 

Ellington, Duke, 169 

Ellis, Trey 77, 78 

Ellison, Ralph, 107, 108, 113, 187, 199 
Empowerment, 60, 72-73, 102, 117-118, 
120 

"The End of a Beginning," 178 
Enlightenment, 120 
Equal rights legislation, 149 
Equiano, Olaudah, 155, 163 
Ethnic background of teachers, be, 80-81, 
93-95 

Ethnocentric generalizations, 119 
Ethiopia and the Origins of Civilization, 111 
Exclusion, 13 

Executive Order 8802, 149 

Experience, 8 

Experts, teachers as, 139 

False empowerment, 118 
Family Devotions, 191-194 
"a father's wishes — the birthday letter," 
180 

Faulkner, William, 77, 107 

Feather, Leonard, 172, 175 

Feeney Mark, 165, 175 

Feminism, be, 1, 8-9, 94 

Verrk, Rosario, 47 

Fidelity 54-55 

Filial piety, 177 

Filiation, 138, 177-178. 181 

Finnegan's Wake, 95 

Fire Next Time, The, 165 

First Worid, 50 

Fic»h, Stanley 21, 37 

Fisher, Walter R., 220, 224, 229 

Row, 69, 74 

Fluidity, 76-77 

FOB, 188-191, 194 

FOB and Other Plays, 187, 188, 191 

Focus on Collaborative learning, 74, 78 

Fbppa, Alaide, 55 

Ford, Richard, 77, 70 

Form, 25, 76 

Fbucaull, Michel, 9 



246 



Index 



Bout Modernizations, 127, 135 

Fowler, Alistair, 18, 33 

Fragmentation, 64, 116, 118 

Frank, Gelya, 59, 61 

Franklin, John Hope, 149, 151 

Free choice, 6 

Free Jazz movement, 173 

Freeman, James, 210 

Friere, Paulo, 81, 95 

Frith, Simon, 4, 15 

From Trickster to Badman, 158 

Gadamer, Hans-Georg, 37, 38 
Gang of Four, 132 
Gamer, Margaret, 153 
Gamett, Henry Highland, 109, 113 
Garvey, Marcus, 168, 169 
Gates, Henry Louis, Jr., 108, 113, 163, 174, 
175 

Geertz, Clifford, vii, viii, x, 28, 33 
Geiger, Susan N. J., 59, 61 
Generic disguise, 19 
Generic hierarchy, 18, 25, 30 
Generic identification, 18 
Generic institutions, 19 
Genet, Jean, 107, 113 
Genovese, Eugene, 161, 163 
Genre(s), ix, 1-2 

in academic discourse, 20-24 

denned, 18 

as a social institution, 16-33 
as socializing institutions, 30-31 

Genre theorizing, 19 

Giddings, Paula, 145, 146, 149, 151 

Giddins, Gary, 169, 170, 175 

Gillespie, Dizzy, 109, 170, 171, 175 

Gim^ez, Martha, 97, 105 

Girgus, Judith Scot-Smith, ix, 63, 65, 254- 
255 

Gladstone, J. R., 124, 136 
Global village, viii 
G6mez-Pfef\a, Guillermo, 47, 61 
Goodman, Benny, 109, 169 
Gordimer, Nadine, 121, 122 
Gorin, Joe, 52, 61 
Green, Rayna, 231-232, 242 
Grelmas, Algirdas Julien, 213 
Group work, 74 
Guide, Tht. 121 
Guillen, Claudio, 19, 33 
Gutierrez, Guslavo, 81, 95 

Half-breed, 231 

Hall, Stuart, 5, 6, 10, 15 

Htnsberry, Lonalne, 107, 108 



Harper, Michael, 134 

Harris, Marilyn, 233, 242 

Harris, Trudier, 108 

Hatter fox, 233, 236 

Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 76 

Hayslip, U Ly, 202-203, 209, 210-211 

Head, Bessie, 116, 117 

"Heart of a Champion," 77 

Hearts of Sorrow, 210 

Heath, Shirley Brice, 31, 33 

Heble, Ajay, 170, 175 

Hellman, Lillian, 107 

Hemenway, Robert E., 145, 146, 151 

Hemingway, Ernest, 76, 133, 134 

Henry, Jules, 201 

Hermeneutics, 37, 38 

Hilliard, Asa, 111 

Hines, Gregory, 131 

Hispanic, emergence of, 97 

Ho Chi Minh, 204, 208, 209, 211 

Hoggart, Richard, 5 

Homebase, 182-184 

Homing in, 235 

Horace, 111, 113 

House of the Seven Gables, 76 

Hudson, Charles, 238, 242 

Hughes, Howard, 127 

Humanism, 1, 9, 10 

Humanist paradigm, 6, 8 

Hundred Great Names, 130 

Hurston, Zora Neale. 140, 143, 144, 146, 

151, 166 
Hurtado, Alda, 101, 105 
Hwang, David Henry, 187-194, 199 
Hybridization, 116 

Identification, 53, 55-56 
Identity-in-differencc, 104 
Ideology, 6-7 

// / Die in a Combat Zone, 206 

Ihechukwu, Madubuike, 45 

Immediacy, 48, 55 

Im-mediation, 59 

Inada, Lawson Fusao, 199 

Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl: Written 

by Herself, 140-143, 148 
Indenture, 21 
Infanticide, 153 

Informed inlcrprelers, teachers as, 139 
In-gToup defiance, 113 
Initiation, 27 

Inquiries into Truth and hiteprelation, 41 
In Search of Our Mothers' Gardens, 109 
InsUnt publishing, 73 
Inlegrationisl context, ix, 63, 107 



o r 

c 0 O 



Index 

Intentionalist, author-centered accounts of 

interpretation, 41 
Interdisciplinary curriculum, 83 
Interdisciplinary teaching, 14 
Intermarriage, 230 
Interpretation theory, 40, 41-42 

irtentionalist, author-centered, 41 

reader-oriented school, 41 
Interpretive charity, 40, 43, 125, 128, 133 
Interpretive community(ies), 21, 37, 137, 

140, 150 
Interpretive possession, 39 
In the American Grain, 184, 185 
In ihe Middle: Writing, Reading, and Learn- 
ing with Adolescents, 74 
Invisible Man, 107, 187 
L..Rigoberta Menchd: An Indian Woman 

in Guatemala, 2, 48-59 
Iser, Wolfgang, 37, 213 
Islas, Arturo, 199 
Isolation, 74 
lyeska, 231 

Jackson, Darwin, 113 
Jackson, John G., Ill, 113 
Jacobs, Harriet A., 140, 141, 151 
James, George M., Ill, 113 
jamieson, Sandra, x, 137, 139, 255 
Jehlen, Myra, 184, 199, 202, 212 
Jefferson, Thomas, 230 
Johnson, Richard, 10, 15 
Jones, LeRoi, 108, 113 
Jordan, Jennifer, 145, 151 
Joyce, James, 77, 107, 113 
Joy Luck Club, The, 195-198 
June Fourth, 133, 135 

Kat2, Jane B., 237 

Kauffman, L. A„ 100, 105 

Kinds of Literature: An Introduction to the 

Theory of Genres and Modes, 18 
King. Martin Luther, Jr., 95, 168 
Kingston, Maxine Hong, 132, 138, 177, 

184-187, 188, 194, 196, 199 
Knowledge, 22, 39-40 
Knowledge sites, 22 
Kovic, Ron, 201, 212 
Kristeva, Julia, 122 
KureUhJ, Hanif, 116 

Uu, Alan Chong, 180, 199 
Lawal, Baba Tunde, 159, 163 
Uich, Pcnelop*, 67, 69, 78 
Learning, 39 

AS A nthiral process, 88 



247 



Lefevere, Andre, 59, 61 

Lessons from a Child: On the Teaching and 

Learning of Writing, 74 
Levine, Lawrence W., 161, 163 
Levi'Strauss, 6 

Li, David Leiwei, x, 138, 177, 255 
Life histories, 49, 50 
Lincoln, Abraham, 208 
Lincoln, Kenneth, 214, 229 
Linden Hills, The, 150 
Lingustics of contact, 63 
Linguistic theories, 9 
"Linguistic Utopias," 63 
Literacy, 29 
defined, 81 

ind the literary text, 6 
LiteracyMlliteracy dichotomy, 218 
Literary criticism, 5, 13, 31, 213-214 

specialized schools within, 109 
literary separatists, 107 
Literary theory, 1 
Literature 

place of in the classroom, 32-33 

in the television age, 75-77 
Little, John, 156 
"Uttle Gidding," 224 
Liu, Wu-Chi, 199 
"Local Sensibilities," 179 
Logos/mythos conception, 220 
Looking Horse, Orval, 231, 241 
Lord, Betty Bao, 132 
Lorde, Audre, 104, 105 
Lost origins, 99 
Lott, Eric, 171, 175 
Lum, WingTek, 179, 199 
Lundquist, Suzanne Evertsen, x, 138, 255 
Luxner, Larry, 214, 229 
Lying tales, 145 

Lyotard, Jean- Francois, 102, 105 

Mahfouz, Naguib, x, 138, 213-228, 229 
Maier, Carol, ix, 2, 47, 61, 255 
Maimon, Elaine, 20, 21, 22, 33 
Mainstream canon, 109 
To Make a Poet Black, 166 
Mfli^in^ of the English Working Class, The, 
5 

Malcolm X, 168 
Mao Zedong, 132, 133 
Marckwardl, Albert H., 124, 136 
Martin, Frank G., 113, 114 
Martin, Reginald, Lx, 63, 107, 255 
Matalene, H. W., 64, 124, 255 
Material culture, 128 
Material production, vii 



248 



Index 



Matrix canon, 109, 110 
McCorkle, JUl, 72, 78 
McDowell, Deborah, 139, 151 
McLaughlin, Andr6e Nicols, 97, 100, 105 
Media literacy, 68 
Mediated conxmunication, 71 
Mediations, ix, 2, 48, 49, 53 
Melting pot, 101 
Melville, Margarita B., 99, 105 
Menchtj, Rigoberta, 2, 48-58, 61 
Mestizo nationalism, 102 
Metatextuality, 108 
Mexican- American, 97 
Meyer, Timothy P., 77 
Middle-school curriculum, 75 
Midnight's Children, 60 
Mies, Maria, 98, 105 
Mill, John Stuart, 133 
Minh-ha, Trinh T., viii, 1, 2, 60, 61. 98, 
105 

Mini-lessons, 75 
Minority genius, 1 77 
Mitologia NahuAtl, 99 
Mixed blood(s),. x, 138, 230-241 
Moby Dick, 1 1 

Molyneux, Maxine, 101, 105 
Momlgliano, Amaldo, 216, 229 
Montagu, Ashley, 67 78 
Mora, Magdalena, 9^, 105 
Moraga, Cherrie, 97, 103, 105 
Morrison, Toni, x, 116, 137, 140, 147-150, 

151, 153-154, 157, 158, 160, 164 
Morton-Williams, Peter, 158, 164 
Moyers, Bill, 240 
Mukherjee, Bharati, 116 
Multiculturalism, ix, 64, 115 
Multicultural literature, teaching, 35-45 

arguments for, 35 

interpretation and, 40-45 

knowledge of culture and, 36-37, 39- 
40 

Multicultural teaching 

cultural background of teachers and, 

80-81, 93-95 
for a multicultural neighborhood, 81- 

83 

polarization, growth of, 84-86 
practical knowledge and, 83-84 
need for simplicity in, 90-93 
as stereotyping, 87-90 

Muftoz, Caries, 96, 105 

Murray, Albert, 175 

Music, as a key to cultural understanding, 
166, 168-169 

Narayan, R. K., 121, 122 
Narrative, defined, 124 



Narrative of the Life of An American Slave, 
31 

Narrative probability, 224 
Narrative theory, 213 

The Children ofGehelawi as an example 

of, 213-228 
National Association for Chicano Sti^dies, 

99, 105 

National Council of Teachers of English 

(NCTE), viii, 115 
National Uberation Front (NLF), 205, 207, 

208-209, 210 
Native American literature, 230-241 
Native Woman, 100-101 
Naylor, Gloria, 150, 151 
Neal, Larry, 108, 113, 165, 175 
New Criticism, 94, 112 
North, Don, 212 

Northside View of Slavery, A, 156 

O'Brien, Tim, 206-207, 212 
Objective historical text. 111 
Off-centeredncss, 116 
Ohmann, Richard, 19, 31, 33 
Old Man and the Sea, The, 76 
Ong Walter, 218 
On Literacy, 118 
Open form, 76 
Oral culture, 218-219 
Oral history, 49, 55, 210 
Oresteia, The, 154 
Oriental mysticism, 203 
Orientalism, 115 
Origin, 98 

Omelas, Charies, 96, 105 
Ortiz, Simon, 239 
Othering, 64, 115 
Oxenham, John, 218 

Palmer, Patricia, 71, 78 

Palpable God, A, 216-217, 222 

Papp, Joseph, 188 

Parent node, 178, 179, 130 

Parker, Chariie, 167, 169, 175 

Parsons, Elsie Clews, 241, 242 

Passing theory, 40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 125, 134 

Passive learners, 73 

Pastoral, 19, 31 

Patai, Daphne, 49, 51, 55, 59, 61 

Pattison, Bruce, 124, 136 

Pattison, Robert, 118, 122 

Peer learning, 73 

Pt'led, Mallityahu, 229 

People's Liberation Armv (PLA), 129 

P6vez Firmat, Gustavo, 59, 61 



L .7 



Index 



249 



Picaresque, 19, 31 

Pittman, Robert W., 71, 78 

Platitudes, 77 

Pleasure, 14 

Piug'Jn Drug, The, 65 

Plural authorship, 31 

Plural identity, 116 

Polarization, growth of, 84-86 

Poovey, Mary, ix, 1, 3, 13, 15, 39, 139, 256 

Popular culture, 4 

Portrait of the Enemy, 210 

Postman, Neil, 65, 78 

Poststructuralism, 8, 9-11, 111 

Poulet, Georges, 108 

Povey, John E, 124, 131, 136 

Power, 6, 110 

Power of Myth. The, 240 

Practical knowledge, 83-84 

Pratt, Mary Louise, vili, 63, 64 

Prejudice, 119 

Price, Reynolds, 214-217, 222, 223, 228, 
229 

Print-orality dichotomy, 218 
Prior text, 56 

Prior theory, 40, 41, 44, 45, 125 
Privilege, 23 
Professionalism, 94 
Programming, 69 
Project Giant Step, 90 
Pryse, Marjorie, 144, 151 
Pygmalion, 31 

Question of Power, A, \\7 

Racism, 95 

Radical otherness, 202 
Randolph, A. Philip, 149 
Readability, 48 
Reader, role of, 2, 37, 38 
Reader-oriented schools of interpretation, 
41 

Reader-resiX)nse criticism, 37, 38 
Reading, decline of, 75 
Reagan, Nancy, 109 
Reagan, Ronald, 97, 133-134 
Rebecca, 76 

Recovering the Word, 235 
Redding, J. Saunders, 166, 175 
Referentiallty, 9 
Referential meaning, 7 
Reification, 13, 14 
Reilly, John M., 174, 175 
Rei " tion of the university, 24 
ReiiiaK, Henry H. H., 135, 136 
Repres^^?ntation(»), 10, 11, 12 



Representativeness, 8 
Repression, 8, 9, 60 
Resources of Kind, The, 16 
Ridlcv, Chauncey A., x, 137, 153, 256 
Riley,' Patricia, x, 138, 230, 256 
Rimmon-Kenan, Shlomith, 213 
Rivera, Ida, 79, 80, 90-93 
Roberts, John W., 158, 161, 164 
Rojas, Guillermo, 97, 106 
Romance of the Three Kingdoms, 181 
Rofi (OW, Gretchen, 229 
Rosengarten, Theodore, 31, 34 
Rosner, Karen, 86 
Rousseau, Jacques. 133 
Ruiz, Vicki L., 99, 106 
Rushdie, Salman, 116, 117, 122 

Saakana, Amon Saba, 46 

Sacred Hoop: Recovering the Femitiitte in 

American Indian Traditions, The, 232 
Said, Edward W., 51, 61, 115, 122, 177, 

199 

Sango myth, 158-159, 161 

Sanris, Greg. 119, 123 

Satanic Verses, The, 116 

Saussure, Ferdinand de, 6, 9 

Savage, Mary C, ix, 63, 79, 83. 95, 256 

Savery, Pancho, 137, 165, 256 

Scene, defined, 63 

Scholes, Robert, viii, 137, 138 

"Secret Life of Walter Milty, The," teaching 

in China, 124-135 
Seiburth, Richard, 54, 61 
Self-consciousness, 5 
Self-segregation, 146 
Sellassie, Sahic, 42-44, 46 
Separatism, 60 

Separatist context, ix, 63, 107 
Shakespeare, William, 19, 32, 34 
Shame, 60 

Shaw, George Bernard. 31, 34 

Shayon, Robert Lcisis, 67, 78 

Shipler, David K., 209-210, 212 

Sidrin, B<^n, 173, 175 

Sign and the Signifying Monkey The, 108 

Signifying and syinbolic systems, vii 

Signifying chain, 9, 11 

Silko, Leslie Marmon, 31, 34, 138, 232- 

233, 234, -L36-241, 242 
Slei-in, lames F., ix, L 16, 28, 34, 256 
Snow, Edgar. 133, 136 
Social da^s, 26, 3D, 94 
Social text, 30 

Social thought, rrfi^',!!' .*lion nf. 2B 
"Soldier's Honu'," 134 



Of , 



250 



Index 



Sotnmer, Doris, 51, 61 
Song, Cathy, 132, 179, 199 
"Sonny's Bluw/' x. 166-168, 171-174 
Souls of black Folk, The. 168 
Southrastrm Indians, T'r^ 23H 23'^ 
Specialized th«)ry, Hi. 
SpecificiH 8 

SpcllfTum, A n . \70 
Spencc, Jonathan D., 133, 136 
'^•j>*'nr*v. Ifjrl^rl, 111 
Spivak, Gayatri C, 99. 101, 102, 104. 106 
Sportiwntn The, 77 
Spnngslecn, I5rucc 1. 3-4, ir>, 39 
Stanley, Heidi, 65 
Slepio, Robert b., 139, 151 
Slerfotypes, 56. 80, 88, 104 
Sllmp5on, Catharine R , viii, 137. \3H 
Stolen legacy. 111 
StcryiellrK 31 

Sloryldling. 138 214. 21» 
"Storytelling in the CUssrcion^. Cruising 

Vexed Chasms/ 1 19-120 
Stowe, ! larrlel fk^ecla^r, 76, 141 
Strevens fVtcr, 124< 136 
Structuralism, 1 
Structuralist paradigm, 6 7 
Structures. 6-7 
Siyron, VVilham, 108, 114 
Summer Institutes for Tfathtrs of li't-ra 

lure, viii, IJ^ 
Sv-ncrrtism. 109-110 

Talking acro^^ luhure'i 

danger oi o^honny, and. )15-lUi 
empowerment 117-llH 
<*nt(«urflRinji;. 120-122 
frjgmrntaiion and, 1 1 6 
f.iuJeh!^ A% cultural ambassadotN, 1 18- 
119 

TjlKin^j CMro<,$ the ^'^pjcr-*. 120 122 
Talkmp, b^^ck to a trxt 
Talking Head^. The, 6? 
Tan. Amy. 195. 199 
Tate. Claudia 142, 151 
Taylor Cetd 173 
Team-te^chiTi^'^ 14 
Tcdiock. D€nni!V. 3x ^9, 6i 
Tf'lcconsciousncss, 71,7^ 73 
Television, in the r]a*;«.raom 

conl**«'< tf*'attMl hy, it 61. -77 

vs j>nnt. 67-6* 7~. 

and t'^ather a^ farilKalt^r, 73-/ 4 

teacher>' resistance to. 63, 

69 



remjJCsK The, 32 

Temple of Afv Famili^K The, 150 

Ten Year* of Chao«, 132 

Terkel, Sluds, 31. 34 

Text, 137 

Textbooks, and acidemir disrour'ir. 26-28 
Textual interplay, 219 
Ti ttuahly, 137 ' 
Texlual Pou^eK 137 
Th»n T^ni^fiv 2''M 
r/idf* VV/tj/ She Saii/. 231 
Their tves Were WjUhir^^ God, 140, 143- 
f47 

Theor)-, definpd, 1, 213 

Things Fall Apart, 120 121 

Third Wurld culturr-i, 47, SO, 210 

r/iM Bridge Called My B^d. 103 

T/iis ScM< Remtmbers, 237 

Ihomf ^^-'n I. l\ 6. 8 

Threr X'm'C^/t r!5. The. 197 

Thu Huong, 21 1 

Thurber, James, 124, 12';, . .<6 

Tiano, Susan. 106 

Tichl, Cecrlia, ix, 63. 6S, 2S7 

lienar^men b<]UArc. 133, ! 

Tcvdorov, T/vftan IH, 34 

Toomer, Jean, 164 

Toyo^hima, Chieko, 87, 89 

TranKuituration, 48, 59 

Translation, 47 

Involving students In. S7-'58 
and lan^;uagt» arq»jr.,i:iun, 4^ 
rc'le of ethr«jy,rapher in 
role of trars!a!cir in. ?3~i4. iSH 
<ielf-rpf1<'xiV(!y ir>. !'»9 
vs undcrslandmg 12t 

lran*^parcnc>. "^3, 54 f»*^ 

Tran Van Dinh 202. 203. 20H-,!U-*. 212 

TraW'lla. )ohn. 131 

Treichler. Pauta 10. r3 

Tribal eihnicity ^-»9 

Fnel Le, 202 

Triinbur John x 10, l'- 

Tnr»imer, Ji^?pph K 233 

Trumig Nhu Tany:, 202 204 207. 212 

Turner. Victor 213 

IV Ktd, ihr, 65-66. 70 

IJI^nnv Ann ] 0.ifr> 221 22'^ 
Un:lf r -i'< Ciibi'i, 117^ 
fnev^^nrr 12 
Unihed author \ VP 
Umver"?^! fxf^rtfnct'-. 8/ 
UmvetMl'ty H».^ ^it/ 
Universal truth. 8 



Indfx 



University discourec, 22 
Uu$ of Uittacy, The, 5 

Van Home, Hairict, 67 

Vjin Sertima, Ivan, 111 

Vjitishing American ibeme, 233-234 

Vflcz, Diana, 47, 62 

Vennti, Lawrence, 59, 62 

Vrrhovek. Sam Mowp, f<2, 95 

Vemaculai theory, 169 

Vielcong Mtmoir. A, 202, 204, 207-209 

Vlrlname.e American lileraiurc*, 201- 21 1 

von VWflhof, Claudia. 98, 103 

Vu-Duc Vuong. 202 

Walker, Alice, 109, 114, 1 16, 1 17, 1 18, 123, 

150, 1!'»2, I'^ft 
W^IL Cheryl A . 1^2 
Wallace, Catherine, 124, K*6 
Wallace, Dawcl Fosicr, 77, 7H 
Walton. Ortiz M.. 170, 176 
Wamock. John, x 
Warn(xk, Tilly, 2^3 
Warien, Rosaniu, 59, 62 
Warren. Sketl, 100, 1U6 
Warrior Kin<?,. 42-44 
Washington, Booker T, 168. 169 
Washington, Mary Helen 144 M?. 1"'2 
WaUetanJ The. 107, 154 
Wjlyju, Lawrt'ike C. 55, 59, 62 
Watson-Franke Maria Birbara, ^9. S9. f»2 
WjyJ of ^fring. 31 
tVjV' u ilU Vwrd'} 31 
WfUli' You lisim 
Wtst. Cornel. 14, 1^ 
Wr^frot?. |pin. T-H. If.4 



251 



When Htar>:n and Earth Changed Places, 

202, 209-2U 
Whitbread, Jane, 71, 78 
White, Hnyden. 124, 136 
White, James Doyd, 56, 59, 60, 62 
White, Patti, x 
Whitcman, Paul, 169 
Whitman, Walt. 187, 199 
Wild Boy myth, 238-239, 241 
Wildr. CKrar, 40 
William*, Chanctltor, 111 
William?, Martin, 176 
Williams, Ravmon.l vii, viii, ix, x, 5, 6. 7, 

69-70', 78 
Williamv Shcrley Anne, 169, 174. 176 
Williams William Carh*^, 1B4, 1H5, 200 
WillinKham, Calder, 67, 78 
Willie, Cornelia, 141 
Willis, Susan, 146. 152 
Winn, Mari#-. 6^, 7A 

Womar\ Wurnor. Thf. 138, 177, 186, 187, 

188, 194 
Women's Movement, 9 
VSbng, Ntllie, 1 78, 20O 
Wimx Shawn 182- 184. IHf.. 187. 199, 

2^>0 

VVt>fl;iriv. 31 

Wright, Ann. 2, 53-54, 60 
Wright, Richarc^. 158. 166, 17^. 
Writjnp; acro',' the curriculum, 21 26 
WrifiM? ti-tth ^^ou'cr, 117 

Year of the /'rJv."J i'l'' l^*'. 1*^-^ 
Yellin, lean fa^.in HI, 1^^2 
Yep, UuTence^ 1W1-IM2, 200 
Ycunf^^l Djui^hter the, 179 

/-ui'll.j i'aliiuj ^'7. li'^ 



Editors 




Joseph F. Trimmer h professor of English at 
Ball State University/ v/hcre he currently teaches 
courses in writing nonaction and cross-cultural 
literature. He has published numerous articles 
on United States life and literature, directed 
international scholars' workshops at the Smith- 
sonian Institution, and consulted on Middlelowtis 
a six-part film series that aired on PBS. His 
textbooks include Wridtig with a Purpose, T/ir 
Riverside Reader, r ' • Fictions, He was program 
chair for the 1989 N'CTE Summer Iniitituto for 
Teachers of Literature/ w^hich was devoted to 
cultural criticism. 




Tilly Warnock is director of composition at ih^ 
University of Arizona She ha*i published articles 
on rhetoric, ^^riting centers, and literature, a^ 
well as a textbook titled VVn/inx Oilical Acuon. 
In 1990. she was program chair for the NCTE 
Summer Institute for Teachers of Literature; the 
topic was Cfo^^-Cullural CJrjliti'm jncJ fhr 
Teaching of literature. 



233 



Contributors 



Norma AUrc6n is profos^or of ethnic studic^ at the University of CLTlifornia, 
Berkeley, where she teaches courses in Chicana feminism and literature 
and social movements and serves as the editor and publisher of Third 
Woman Press. She has published articles in collections of essays and in 
journal*^ such af:. Cultural Crih-.jue, Cultural Studies^ and Americas Review. 
She has also written a book titled /7it' Discourse of Difference, a study of 
the pcx^try of Kosario Crtstrllanos. 

Roberl S. Burton is assis*anl professor of English at California State University, 
Chico, where his trarhing inti-resls include multicultural, po'fcoloniaL and 
twentieth-century British literature. His articles have appeari^d in CrUu{uc, 
Note^ Cotiiemi^L^rary Literature, and The Rffercfue Guide to iMgli^h 
iiteriHure, He has presented papers on Salman Rushdie, Kazuo Ishiguro, 
and Cynthia Kadohata. 

Renny Christopher is a doctoral student in the Literature Board at the 
University of California. Santa Cru/. where she teaches rnur^^e^ ui tv. cntieth- 
century American litcramre aiui Ajnerican studies, She has published 
articles on Vietnamese literature aiid wurkm^-tlass literature in journals 
suih as Vietuaffi Gcrirration and ha^^ contributed a chapter to an antho!o^;y. 
Readini^ the I iter-iturct' cf Atiiin Af!icni.\i. ^-hv is curfently lunipleting a 
study on Vietnamese works and the representation t»f Vietnamese in Euro 
American wnrk^^. 

Reed Way Daftcnbrock av>oci,ue prt>]V' .';< T r*f }!n^;li'^h at N'ow Mexico State 
L-nivcf Mtv. whi'ie h*^ tcciclu'^ tourse*. in modem and non Wof^iorn literature 
and literary theory His bvnnk'. include I he Lifi*rjry ;Vr(u (^m of Ezra PouuJ 
and \\\'fidhiim Lfttis and a collection (ff e^say^^. After David^.^n Ccn!cmpor,;f'y 
Anahiic Philc^o^ihy aud Literary theory, lie has written extensively on 
multiculturaiism in journals such as PMLA. CvUe^^e English, and Diy^ent. 

AnurAdha Dlngwaney is assl^itant prole'-^or of linglish al Oberlin Colliy.e, 
wheic she teach r^^ co'jr-rs r^i An^lophonii literatures uf the Third World. 
She ha'i published arCides on Salman Ru«;hdie and o^hor Third World 
writer*; and on ffnun»s» pf?da^;o^!y. bhv l*"- ciurcntly ujmplcJiu^ a !onf;er 
sMdy on the dis- nr-^.tv/; rtT-i^Laiice in the work of v.riHer- from the Afritart 
and hidian di/i'^^p^^ra-i. 

JudUh S(Ol-Smllh Glr^us tr.irhr^ n;i.l\h' v.hi*-,-! !:n^;lish a^ fhr> l l^-rpj^h Hall 
ho?i| in Na'^hvdlr. Tennc^iee. on l ff>rf]if rly tv^nj^h? mid ih' and cn Jary 



Contributors 



255 



English in Albuquerque, New Mexico, and Eugene, Oregon. She has 
published articles on various professional issues in journals such as Edu- 
caiiottal Leadership and is currently researching the behavioral patterns of 
female students in the all -female classroom. 

Sandra Jamleson is assistant profcsr.or of writing at Colgate University, ivhcrc 
she also leaches courses in African American lileraturc and cultural studies. 
She is completing a study of the role of textbooks in the teaching of 
reading and writing. She recenily learn taught a cours*^ railed Ihv Poelirt. 
of African American Women Writers with Houston Baker of the University 
of Pennsylvania. 

David Lclwei Li is assistant professor of English at the University of Southern 
California, where he leaches courses in Asian American and contemporar)' 
American literature. He has published articles on Maxine Hong Kingston 
in periodicals such as Criticism and Americatt Literary History. He is currently 
completing a book on the dialogica) f(>fmalion of contemporary Chinese 
culture. 

Su/anne Everlsen lundquisl is as^.ocialc professor uf English at Brigham 
Young University, where she teaches courses in Native American sacred 
texts and rnoiferu n(»vels. Her publicatirins include Trickster: A I'ramfor- 
mation Archetypr, Cullege Composition: A Cout^e in l.tlmographic Thitikin^, 
and an essay in Approaches to Teaching Momaday's The IVdy to Rainy 
Mountain. Her iiUorest In MahfoUit grew out of a course in novels of the 
Third World, which she taught to senior English majors. 

Carol Maler is profc^^sor of Sp.inish at Kent Sfate University where she i'. 
affiliated with the Institute for Applied Linguistics, and teaches courses in 
the theory and practice of translation. S\\v has published In (he Feminine 
Mode: Issay? on Hispanic Womrtt Writers imd has Iranslaled works by ^ieveru 
Sarduy, Oclavio Armand, and Carlot-i Caiifield. Two of her current projec ts 
arc a translation of Rosa Chacel's \\ctnoriii< de Leti^ia Wille *uul a cotU cliun 
of essays she is editing with Anuradha Dingwan* y. Ihuwe^^n lanQua(c> and 
Cultures: Tran^Jation and Cn'ss-C uU^rjl Text-, 

Reginald M^. Iln is prufessor vf Lngli^li al Meu\|»his b\Mt: L'nivor^.icv v.hcrc 
he leaches courses in African Arneruan literature. I lis artii Irs have appeart-d 
in College Tn^;;h:Ji, lUack Amenain lilvriiturc Foruri, and The S-^ut^^ Afhv:ti^ 
Rf vieiL\ and his books include Ishntavl Reed and the Seic Black Acyihetic 
Critics He has rerenlly completed a lord loundatiun leave, during which 
he researched the pcililic? of literary trilkisn\. 

H. W, Matatenc 1'^ associate profe^fior of linptirh at the Univrr^'Uy of Smith 
Carolina v/hcre he tea':he^ txnii-^"- in ei>chternthMTn!ary Mritish literaJurr. 
He hj"- edited inlle(.tiL»n i-f r;,>jys. RortJtttui}'^: iViA ChUutc A Tribute 
/Sfnrsr Pec^'nan 'ind a /^I' #i '^nn'^ii/ * ^ //<; \%\ r,'. and ha. publit^icJ aniclc" 
in jt'Urnah surh as C'.'llr^e Ln^U.^h. He reM'f(Mv team taught a niu'se in 
Chliurr and rhine^^j Anieruan U'rrWiTf^ wifh Vrnlr-.'^i^r '»an>^ Devcu nf 
Shanti L'rU\<fr?ily 



256 Contributors 

Mary Poovey is professor of English at Johns Hopkins Universitj', where she 
teaches courses in nineteenth-century British culture. Her books include 
The Proper Lady and the Womnn Writer: Ideology as Style in the V/orh of 
Mary Wolhionecraft, Mary Shelley, and Jane Austcu and Uneven Developments: 
The Ideological Work of Gender in Mid-Victorian England. Her chapter in this 
book was first presented as the keynote address ai the 1989 NCTE Summer 
institute for Teachers of Literature and was subsequently published in 
College English, 

Chauncey A. Ridley assistant professor of English at California State 
University, Sacramento, where he teaches courses in African American 
literature. He has written on the relationship between African American 
folklore and conlemporar)' short fiction in journals such as Obaidian. His 
essay on Toni Morrison is part of a larger study he Is completing on the 
theme of "badness" in African American literature since Jean Toomer. 

Patricia Riley is a doctoral sludeni in ethnic sludieb at the University of 
California. Berkeley where her teaching interests include contemporary 
Native American literature and N'ativ. Amoricart mythologies. Her publi* 
cations include "The Death of Jim Loney. Ritual of Recreation" in Fictional 
Ifiternationai A mixed blood Cherokee, she is currently editing a volume 
uf essays, Growing Up Native Atr^ericati. 

Mary Ct Savage^ a teacher of writing and liu^ature and director o( interdis- 
ciplinary prof^rams at the college level for lv;enty years, is now a storyteller 
and consultant in multicultural education. At prc';enf, ^he is writing We 
Are the One^ We't e Been Watting For: F^^a-j^ in Literature ami Liberation for 
Multicultural Timei. She directs the Parent Stor>'tellin^; Workshops' A Home 
and-Schuol Liter«Ky Project in several elementary schwls on the tower 
ea^l 'iiile of \'rv, York City an arli'^lMn-re^idence of the Meriry Street 
Settlement 

Pancho Savery is a^sociaie prott.'*.' 'i of L:n^*,h^h at the University of Ma^^^^a 
ihu^etls, Boston, where he teaches courses in African American literature 
and m<Klen> and contempiT^ry dram i He h.^s published i^rlides on Ralph 
Flli^on. Saunders Rf^dJing, and I^'V DeCarava in journals such a^ Ulack 
s^mcnaui Literature Forunj and Ti:c fnurnr,l of Url\in ( Cultural SluJic- 
and ha's edited a colleMiim of essays. Appro'^ichcj tc TfJi/nrj^ LI/iiLVi's 
Inviyiblr Mcu*,. Hr is currently working on a ^ludv of critical and pedagc«gicat 
i«iMies in the teaching of African American literature. 

James Sluvln piffr^^^'r of I p^;]i=^h at Grvir^;etn..n Ur-wer^itv, where he 
rexubrly teaches co-U vrs in the theory arul Irarhing of writing He h the 
corditnr of two lHv:ik^, Ihe Futun vf Doiti ^al Proyjamy i*t in^U^- auJ Iht" 
K\y,hl ^f^'r^;^gr. '.nid nun^eri^n^ ^r-M^'lr^, on the p-'!jM<; f>f r^'adin.^. arid 
writing and their teachmg Hi<i < haptcr in thi^ ln^:»k w.^^ hfs! pre^^^nted at 
the VfyiMirit v\ Cnulc^ciKV vi\ \,VfXi^h A\\.] \\\\] ayyf:AT a% i iliaptrr in hi- 
ficw bx'k InifC'Jiuiri,^: 



Contributors 



257 



Cecelia Tichi is professor of English at Vanderbill University^ v/here she 
teaches courses in the American novel, environmental literature/ and 
American literature and technology. She has published arlicles in journals 
such as Amcricafi literature and Early Aruerican lilerature and serves as 
one of the coeditors of The Harper American Literature. Her other books 
include Shifting Gears: Technology, Literature, Culture iu Modernist America 
and EltLtronic Hearth: Creatinj^ an American Television Culture. Her chapter 
in this book grew out of an informal discussion in which she and Judith 
S<*oi-?mith Ciirj^us discovered that they share a similar interpretation of 
the role of television in the classroom. 



Jl oseph Trimmer and Tilly Warnock have 
assembled seventeen essays that explore how 
cultural and cross-cultural studies arc revising 
and reanimating the teaching of literature. In 
the "Theories" section, contributors trace the 
history of cultural studies through feminism 
and postsrructuralism; explore genre as a 
cultural formation; and speculate about the 
iMterprcriV',' problems of cross-cultural literary 
studies. ^'Contexts" examines how vnrious 
contexts inform an understanding of students, 
texts, and theories of teaching and learning. 
"Texts" focuses un individual literary works, 
offering culturally c(M^scit)us strategics of 
interpreting texts by Asian Americans. 
African Americans. Native Americans, and 
(Others. 




