DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 461 625 



SP 037 939 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Strong, Karen Roberts 

Invisibility of Identity in the Social Context. 

1998-04-13 

1 8p . ; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American 
Educational Research Association (San Diego, CA, April 
13-17, 1998) . 

Opinion Papers (120) -- Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

♦American Indian Education; * American Indians; *Females; 
*High School Students; High Schools; Racial Bias; Secondary 
School Teachers; Sex Bias; ^Social Environment; Teacher 
Attitudes 

^Identity Formation; Identity (Psychological) 



ABSTRACT 



This paper examines social anonymity of Native American 
girls in high school, highlighting the importance of social context and 
discussing the issue from the perspective of Native American females. A 
national view of Native American women has portrayed nonexistent persons. The 
Euro-American view accepts males as intrinsically, universally dominant and 
females as subordinate. The Native American perspective of the Native woman 
is missing from fiction and nonfiction. Native peoples regard women as 
neither inferior nor superior to men. A proactivist view of Native American 
womanists as culturally intact heroines can replace negative definitions of 
Native American women existing in literature. Often, a deficit model is used 
to explain the overall failure of Native American high school students, 
negatively comparing tribal culture with a positive view of the mainstream. 
Native American females' high school achievements are often ignored by 
mainstream teachers and administrators, and teacher racism is an ongoing 
problem. High school teachers must learn a viewpoint beyond an American 
mainstream definition. Much educational policy regarding Native American 
students is based on published examples of failed teaching. Educational 
policy must be based on positive descriptions rather than the opposite of 
failure. The positive description of Native American women must become part 
of the theoretical foundation of educational policy and instruction to 
establish positive learning models for application in schools as a conscious 
learning experience in the classroom. (Contains 65 references.) (SM) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



<N 



Q 

w 



Invisibility of Identity in the 
Social Context 



Karen Roberts Strong 

1205 E. Florida #22A 
Urbana, IL 61801-6039 
robertss@students.uiuc.edu 



^for American Educational Research Association 
at San Diego, California 
13 April 98 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



U.8. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

□ This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction qu&lity. 



e points of view or options stated m this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or policy 



Invisibility of Identity in the Social Context 

Karen Roberts Strong 

Introduction 

A closer look at the trials of high school as a personal experience shows an 
invisible observer non-participant of American middle class social life in high school. 
As a result, I was unremembered, unwelcome, and unhonored for my academic and 
athletic high school achievements at graduation. My witness of the social context in 
high school has not been heard publicly before. 

The universalist overlay of dominant opinion and practice over my high school 
educational experience caused me to question the morality of some instructional 
practice. My personal response was to withdraw from dominant educational practice. 
As a child and a teenager, I projected an invisible personality. As a college student, I 
aggressively protested the dominant nature of this practice. As a teacher, I practiced 
this dominant behavior until I felt comfortable in my classroom. I realize now, that this 
comfort level is responsible for many teachers maintaining the premise of dominance 
in the classroom. My own fear caused me to hinder my personal reasoning regarding 
dominance issues. Many times, I hid my research findings and refinements from 
myself, both physically and mentally. The patience I had learned to project toward my 
students became a real problem, projecting into my research efforts. Slowly, these 
internal barriers were resolved, and I bolstered my action research findings with 
newfound bravado. 

National Definitions of Native American Women 

A national view of Native American women has defined a nonexistent person. 
Medicine (1975, 86), Jaimes and Halsey (1992,320), and Almeida (1997, 758) quote 

1 




3 



existing literature which has called Native women drudges. This long-established 
Euro-American view accepts males as intrinsically and universally dominant and 
females as intrinsically and universally subordinate. The Native American 
perspective of the Native woman is missing from both fiction and non-fiction. Native 
peoples regarded women as neither inferior nor superior to men (Bowker 1993,36). 
Both sexes were valued for the contributions they made to their society, and their roles 
were regarded as complementary rather than competitive. 

Paula Gunn Allen (1989) alludes to Native American women as being the 
mothers of a vanishing race. Allen quotes fiction writers like Wadsworth and 
Hawthorne, who romanticized the vanishing Indian. While R.H. Pearce (1965) 
documented that American writers often utilized Native Americans as the perfect 
opposite example of what it means to be American. Thus, a national/American identity 
was established by offering a published example of what not to be, over and over. 

M. Meyer (1997) describes Native women as invisible or silent voices. A closer 
look at the trials of high school as a personal experience shows myself being an 
invisible observer, non-participant of the social life. I was one of five young teenage 
girls who stood behind two teenage girls who had public personalities and spoke for 
the rest of us. As a result, I was a nonentity whose academic and athletic high school 
achievements were ignored at graduation. Others walked on stage first to be 
recognized. I sat with the remainder of the graduating class, receiving my diploma 
alphabetically. My recognition as a member of the girls basketball team who won the 
1964 Nevada state championship and one who placed second in state (Alaska 1962) 
as a hundred yard dash runner went unnoticed. Nor was I recognized for placing first 
in the state for the Spanish Teachers of America (Nevada 1964) award. 

Almeida (1997,757) has coined the term “hidden half.” This definition is a more 
traditional tribally specific example of the Native American woman within historical 




2 



accounts. For example, when the European explorers came into Alaskan waters to 
establish trade agreements, Tlingit tribal chiefs offered slave women to the explorers. 
These traditional heads of clans told the explorers these women were their wives. As 
a matter of fact, the explorers never saw the chief’s wives. These women were hidden 
every time the explorers approached the village sites (Neilson 1 956 oral tradition). 
These negative definitions of Native American women, young and old, are being 
challenged. 

A Positive Definition of Native American Women 

A pro-activist view of Native American womanists as culturally intact heroines 

can replace these negative definitions of the Native American woman existing in the 

literature. The dictionary definition of pro-action is in favor of action. In this context, 

pro-activist means a plan in which a positive outcome is expected. Also in this context, 

culturally intact Native American women means those women living protected lives 

within the cultural norms and traditions of the native community. In explanation and 

as a definition of a complex term, the feminist doctrine advocating social and political 

rights for women has been tempered in this paper by the selective choice of the term 

womanist, meaning that a mature, positive approach to this doctrine will propose a 

steadfast practical application for lifelong use by those Native American women active 

in community service. Culturally intact heroines are Native American women who are 

mature, protected ladies willing to serve the Native American community, 

“even when the body aches with fatigue. Even 
when there is nothing left to give, there is an 
open door, an open heart.” 

(Johnson 1994,5) 

Within a traditional perspective of Native American women, Ardy Bowker states, 

3 




5 



from the native perspective, women were regarded as 
neither inferior, nor superior to men. 

(1 993 Sisters in the Blood, 36) 

These definitions can become more complex descriptions when a Native American 
voice is heard. 

The Deficit Model of Native American Education 

The Kennedy Report (U.S. Govt. ,1969) portrayed many brutal racial conflicts 

happening to Native American students during their failed high school experience. A 

deficit model has been used to explain the overall failure (Zintz 1960, Szasz 1974), 

negatively comparing tribal culture with a positive view of the mainstream. Serious 

communication problems have existed between Native Americans and the schools 

they attend. The communication problems have been well-documented since 

Sullivan’s 1845 article in the New York Morning News (Triplett 1883, Jackson 

1886, The Merriam Report 1928, Armstrong 1945, Kluckhohn & Leighton 1962, 

Woodward 1963, Wax 1971, Vogel 1972, Szasz 1977, Fuchs & Havighurst 1983, 

Oppelt, 1984, Prucha 1985, Salisbury 1986, U.S. Census 1980 & 1990). The 

existing literature is filled with descriptions of the problems.These problems are 

summed up by Jon Rheyner in his statement, 

“To begin with, being an American Indian in itself is 
no problem; however, being an American Indian and 
growing up and going to school in a non-Indian 
environment and society frequently is a problem.” 

(1988, ix) 

High School Failure: Whose Perception Caused This? 

As my personal experience, I witnessed young Native American womens’ high 
school achievements ignored by teachers and administrators. In fact, a young Native 

4 




6 



American woman may be damaged by this selective amnesic practice. Through my 
literature search, I found five psycho-socio factors create education barriers specific to 
literacy. Bowker’s (1993) five factors are: 

1 . poverty, not culture as the primary major barrier, 

2. adolescent pregnancy, 

3. lack of expectation toward Native American males, 

4. persistent teacher racism, 

5. child abuse in the form of neglect, physical abuse, & sexual abuse. 

I found in the literature, others were able to document the existence of this 
damaged educational experience whether this experience was caused by Native 
Americans or non-Native Americans (Dow, 1986; Hollan, 1990; Locke, 1992; Power, 
1994; Sarris, 1993). Intact educational experiences have also been documented by 
scholarly research (Hay, 1977; Krell, 1993, 1985, 1948; Larson, 1930; Mohawk, 1993; 
Scheper-Hughes, 1987; Scollon, 1972, 1979, 1989; Shweder, 1991; Smandych, 

1995; Spiro-Melford, 1993; Time-Life, 1989). Specific failed high school educational 
experience for many young Native American women has been documented by Jon 
Rheyner (1 988, 1 992), Janet Silman (1 994), Jane Katz (1 995). Ardy 

Bowker’s (1993) study focused on a positive outcome. Her study of 991 Plains Native 
American women offered significant findings concerning their literacy. Her book, 
Sisters in the Blood (1993) documents educational systems based on rejection, 
alienation, and oppression. Yet within that system she saw individual strength and 
commitment of Native American women and their families. Allowing the women to 
speak for themselves, their stories paint a clear picture of the factors that create 
barriers to school success. 

For example, poverty is one major contributor to the failure to continue in 
school. Unfortunately, all too often the educational system has treated poverty and 
culture as synonymous. More critical for the success of Native American women is the 

5 




7 



strong influence of both teacher encouragement and a school climate that offers all 
students a positive reinforcement. Persistent teacher racism is documented. These few 
factors are only primary reasons within a complex system including lesser variants 
which are integrated into a negative fabric blanketing the literacy opportunities of 
Native American women. 

Bowker’s research also highlights cultural discontinuity as one of the factors 
causing drop-out, causing adolescent pregnancy and a lack of expectation toward 
Native American males, and child abuse in the form of neglect, physical abuse, and 
sexual abuse. 

Five primary barriers to Native American women’s literacy within Bowker’s study 
are an articulate set of oral narrative findings from the broader twenty-seven factors 
causing barriers to young Native American women’s education found in Bowker’s 
inquiry study. These are not the experts reporting what they see or hear. Bowker’s 
scholarly, intentionally deliberate interview questions approach and question 
individual women living on or near reservations in order to address a problem long 
glossed over by policy analysts, both conservative and liberal. Through persistence, 
maturity, and the continued family and community support, Native American women 
have managed to reverse their negative teenage experience. 

Victoria Wyatt (1993) argues that oral narratives of Native women are 
necessary because so little exists in the literature, in their own voices. This research 
adds to the paucity of published works. Other published scholarly works (Almeida, 
1997; Medicine, 1975), includes excerpts from narratives of Native women. Casey 
(1995) claims that life histories offer a political voice which may change definitions 
and meanings (239-40). 



6 




3 



A Mainstream Educational Definition of Young Native American Women 

When American society applies universalist intent upon Native American 
high school age women, then an overlay of dominant opinion and practice project an 
element of control over a high school classroom. By excluding student opinion and 
decision-making, a teacher often faces a silent, unresponsive group of students. As 
the teacher’s instructional practice fails, the teacher may wonder why such profound 
ideas are not accepted. This teacher is at the end of a long line of researchers looking 
for answers. 

Since the seventeenth century the perspective of the Euro-American conqueror 
and his missionary allies have questioned the “problem peoples" (Vidich/Lyman 1994: 
30). Volumes of publications of 

“... their work recognizes both the historicity of preliterate cultures 
and the problems attendant upon understanding the world of the 
other from the other’s point of view.” 

(31) 

The answers to the questions posited have the perspective of the dominant opinion. 
These questions need to begin to include the perspective of the oppressed. Then 
answers may describe a positive concept. Imagine a positive outcome from a vignette 
of questions. So, why can’t a teacher pick and choose good ideas and present them 
in a classroom? 

A Hypothetical High School Teacher’s Redefined Perspective 

As a teacher, do you need to be reassured every day of your good teaching 
practice? Can you accept criticism? Second, don’t you think that a lesson 
or curricula may be perceived to be as a bizarre cut and paste entity, visually and 
mentally disparate to the students? Can you ask students why they do not respond to 

7 




9 



a lesson? Thirdly, is it possible that students may possess a good opinion or reason 
worth listening to? Can you be flexible enough as a teacher to admit to your mistakes 
and accept student advice in order to rethink a mismatched lesson? 

A postcolonial perspective for high school teachers can be introduced. By 
postcolonial, I mean a viewpoint beyond an American mainstream definition. For 
example, Freire (1996) expects student in-put in his teaching. Goody (1977) describes 
how restricted codes applied in the classroom setting results in a colonized abstract 
thought process. Ong (1995) compares the literate and oral processes to literacy. 

Gee (1996) describes the dominant and the inclusive language teaching processes. 
And, Bakhtin (1981) presents a historical overview of how memory has been affected 
by writing public discourse into epic and novel genre. These theories have been 
practiced as an inclusive action within the teacher-student relationship. This 
inclusiveness appeals to my altruistic and moral values of my parents, including the 
sense of history and community they taught me. 

My Personal Perception of Myself 

My place within human history has been of keen interest to me. The following 
are a sample of comments offered to me. My father told me always to remember what 
I say effects years of history around and beyond my lifetime. My undergraduate 
mentor, Sven Liljeblad was 108 years old when he told me that 500 years from now, I 
will be remembered for my children’s plays, not for my scholarly findings. Academic 
thought may march over, around, and past my theories. 

As a psycho-linguist, I have researched how Native American people became 
literate through operant cultural discourse. Rather than continue to address the Deficit 
Model describing the failure to teach Native Americans to read, I have described a 

8 




10 



positive process and the individual choices possible within this framework which I 
have observed and implemented as a language teacher through action research. 
These theories need to be replicated by others. My qualitative research reinvents 
self in a positive light. Michelle Fine (1994) claims that positive descriptions of self 
ruptures the texts with uppity voices (73) and probes the consciousness of the 
dominant others (78). The positive description does not address the differences, but 
identifies similarities to the dominant others. Thus, my theories may become part of 
instructional practice. 

I recognize myself as a whisperer from a collective of activist researchers (Fine 
1994, 81), who are willing to posit theories on behalf of social justice. Societal 
response and further refinement of positive theories can effect the learning process 
and environment of future students. The choices which society, educators, and 
administrators make can change the original intent expressed within a theory. 

As a Native American woman, I know my place in human history. As a scholar, 

I realize I will have to face my worst fears with academia. When my proposed theory 
develops into instructional practice, my scholarly efforts will be to direct proactively 
this practice into an inclusive format with solid connections to specific cultural tradition. 
For I consider the comparmentalization of cognitive thought outside of a cultural 
context the fundamental crisis within educational theory and practice of the twentieth 
century. We, as research educators, need to proactively reconnect cognitive thought 
processes to a singular tradition. Once cognitive thought is embedded into one 
tradition, a multiple thought process can develop into a new paradigm for learning. 

In other words, we Native Americans and others who have been oppressed need to 
heal and regain our intact cultural thought process. By learning a postcolonial 
experience, we can reach the next level of human experience. 

This time, let us (Native Americans) talk. Disregard your language shock 

9 




11 



response for the moment. Save it for your turn. Continue to listen. You may hear a 
provocative thought paradigm. 

Projection for the Future 

Much educational policy regarding Native American students has been based 
upon published examples of failed teaching (Rheyner, 1988) has proposed an 
opposite action to these negative experiences, suggesting teachers learn the culture, 
language, and learning styles of Native Americans. Earlier published lists of 
comparative behaviors of the teacher’s culture and the Native American students’ 
culture (Zintz, 1969) may be simplistic stereotypes. Failed instructional guessing and 
stereotyping has yet to create a successful program for Native Americans. Educational 
policy needs to be based upon positive description rather that the proposed opposite 
of failure. 

This positive description of Native American women needs to become part of 
the theoretical foundation of educational policy and instruction in order to establish 
positive learning models to be applied in schools as a conscious learning experience 
in the classroom. Another form of research needs to be published. Action research 
may offer more positive examples for teaching Native American children and adults. 
This form of classroom research may be slow and tedious, but more practical for 
success. More qualitative inquiry studies with a focus upon describing successful 
teaching practice, successful Native American student experiences, including Native 
American student voice and perspective can propose a positive educational 
experience for future high school teaching of young Native Americans. 



10 




12 



REFERENCES 



Almeida, D. A. (1997) The Hidden Half: A History of Native American Women’s 
Education. Harvard Edcuational Review, Vol.67, 4, Winter, 757, 758. 

Armstrong, O.K. (1945, August) Set the American Indians Free! The Reader’s Digest, 
47. 

Bakhtin, M.M. (1981) The Dialogic Imagination, University of Texas, Austin, English 
translation. 

Bowker, A. (1993) Sisters in the Blood: The Education of Women in Native America. 
WEEA Publishing Center, Center for Bilingual/Multicultural Education, Montana 
State University, 36. 

Casey, K. (1995) The New Narrative Research in Education. 239-240. 

Dow, J. (1986) Universal Aspect of Symbolic Healing: A Theoretical Synthesis. 
American Anthropologist, 88. Healers often create myths for a damaged 
culture to heal. 

Duran, E. & Duran, B. (1995) Postcolonial Native American Psychology. SUNY: 
Albany. A description of psychotherapy known as Post Traumatic Stress 
Syndrome, which intergenerationally overlays within most Native American 
families because of the genocidal government policy of the United States. 

Fine, M. (1 994) Working the Hyphens: Reinventing Self and Other in Qualitative 

Research, Handbook of Qualitative Research, N. K. Denzin & Y.S. Lincoln, Eds., 
Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, 73, 78, 81. 

Freire, P. (1996) Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Continuum, New York, third printing. 

Fuchs, E. & Havighurst, R.J. (1983) To Live on This Earth: American Indian Education. 
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico. (First published by Doubleday in 
1972). 

Gee, J.P. (1996) Social Linguistics and Literacies. 

Goodman, K.(1967) (in Gilyard, 1991) 

Goody, J. (1977) Domestication of the Savage Mind, Cambridge University Press. 

11 




13 



Gunn Allen, P. (1989) (Ed.) Spider Woman’s Granddaughters: Traditional Tales and . 
Contemporary Writing by Native American Women. Boston: Beacon. 

Hay, T. H. (1977) The Development of Some Aspects of the Ojibway Self and Its 

Behavioral Environment. Ethos, No. 5. A tribally specific description of an intact 
cultural concept of self. 

Hollan, D. W. (1990) Indignant suicide in the Pacific: An example from the Toraja 
highlands of Indonesia: Disruptive behavior in a Tonja Community. Culture, 
Medicine, and Psychiatry, v. 14, n. 3, Sept. A brief review of a dissertation 
describing a damaged cultural response. 

Jackson, H. (1886) A Century of Dishonor: A Sketch of the United States Government 
Dealings with Some of the Indian Tribes : Boston: Roberts Brothers, (first 
published in 1881.) 



Jaimes, M.A. & Halsey, T. (1992) American Indian Women; At the center of indigenous 
resistance in North America. In M. A. James (Ed.) The State of Native America: 
Genocide, colonization, and resistance. Boston, South End Press, 320. 

Johnson, S. (1 994) The Book of Elders: The Life Stories & Wisdom of Great American 
Indians. Harper, San Francisco, 5. 

Katz, J. (1995) Messengers of the Wind, Ballantine Books, N.Y. 

Kluckhohn, C. & Leighton, D. (1962) The Navaho. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday. 
American Museum of Natural History Revised Edition. 

Kramer, E.M. Consciousness and Culture. A description of an intact cultural concept of 
self. 

Krell, R. (1993) Child Survivors of the Holocaust-Strategies of Adaptation* Canadian 
Journal of Psychiatry, 38, no. 6, Aug. Discussion of the coping strategies of a 
damaged culture. 

(1985) Child survivors of the Holocaust: 40 years later. Journal of the 
American Academy of Child Psychiatry, 24, no. 4, pp. 378-380. Presents child 
strategies and psychiatric consequences of a damaged culture. 

(1948) Holocaust Survivors and Their Children: Comments on 
Psychiatric Consequences and Psychiatric Terminology. Paper read at 10th 
annual meeting of the APA, 17-20 May. No scholarly terms for their suffering. 



Larsen, N. (1930) Sanctuary. In Quick Sand Passing. Avoidance behavior. 

12 




14 



Locke, D.C. (1992) Increasing Multicultural Understanding: A Comprehensive Model. 
New York: Sage. Cross-cultural info for counseling the oppressed. 

Medicine, B. (1988) Native American (Indian) Women: A Call for Research, 
Anthropology & Education Quarterly, Vol. 19, 86. 

Meyer, M. (1997) Native Hawaiian epistemology: A case study of other intellectualism. 
Unpublished manuscript. 

Mohawk, J. (1993) Coming to Wholeness: Native Culture as Safe Place, Akwe:kon 
Journal, Winter. A reinvestigation of socialization as an intact cultural practice. 

Moskovitz.S. (1983) Love Despite Hate: Child Survivors of the Holocaust. New York: 
Schocken Books. 

(1983) Love Despite Hate: Child Survivors of the Holocaust and Their Adult 
Lives. New York: Schocken Books. 

Neilson, P. ; Sr. (1956) [Northwest Coast Art], Oral tradition. Sitka, Alaska. 

Ong, W. J. (1995) Oraiity and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word, Methuen, 
London & N.Y., reprint. 

Oppelt, N.T. (1984) The tribally-controlled college in the 1980’s: Higher education’s 
best kept secret. American Indian Culture and Research Journal. 8 (4). 

Pearce, R.H. (1965) Savagism and Civilization. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press. 

Piattelli-Palmarini, M. [1SQQ) Language and Language Learning. Cambridge, MA; 
Harvard University Press. 

Power, S. (1994) The Grass Dancer. New York: Putnam. An intergenerational 
description of barriers for the access to literacy. The contemporary Native 
American woman overcomes these barriers. 

Prucha, F. P. (1985) The Indians in American Society: From the Revolutionary War 
to the Present. Berkeley: University of California. 

Rheyner, J. (1988 sec. ed.) Teaching the Indian Child. Billings: Eastern Montana 
College, ix. 

Rosaldo, M. Z. (1984) Toward an anthropology of self and feeling. Culture Theory. 

R.A. Schweder& R.A. LeVine (Eds.) Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University 
Press. An intact example of grief and grieving. 




15 



13 



Rosaldo, R. (1989) Culture and Truth: The remaking of social analysis, Beacon Press, 
Boston. 

Salisbury, N. (1986) Red Puritans: The “Praying Indians" of Massachusetts Bay and 
John Eliot, in R. L. Nichols (Ed.) The American Indian: Past and Present, 3rd ed. 
New York: Alfred A. Knoph. 

Sarris, G. (1993) Keeping Slug Woman Alive: A Holistic Approach to American 
Indian Texts. Berkeley: University of California Press. A literary critique of 
Native American women’s stories which reintegrates the Cartesian components 
into a Native American perspective. 

Schlegel, F. von (1983) Despre Literatura: August Wilhelm si Friedrich Schlegel: 
Traducere, Prefata si note de Milai Ibasescu, Editura Univers, Bucurest. 
Rumanian language. 

Schwartz, M.T. (1995) Snakes in the Ladies Room: Navajo View on Personhood and 
Effect. Paper presentation at UIUC Krannert. Presents the cultural background 
knowledge needed to understand this delimna. 

Scheper-Hughes, N. & Lock, M. M. (1987) The Mindfull Body: A Prolegomenon to 
Future Work in Medical Anthropology. Medical Anthropological Quarterly, 1, 
no.1 . Three perspectives of the body are presented. These are body-self, 
social body, and body politic. 

Schilling, C. (1993) The Body and Social Theory. London/ Newbury Park, CA: Sage 
Pubs. Human body behavior as a damaged culture response. 

Scollon, R. & S.B.K. Scollon (1972) The Context of Informant Narrative Performance. 
An early description of bush consciousness. 

(1979) Linguistic Convergence. New York: Academic Press. A clearer 
description of bush consciousness with specific examples. 

(1989 fourth printing) Narrative, Literacy and Face in InlerEthnic 
Communication. Norwood, NJ: ABLEX Publishing Corporation, Vol. VII in 
the Series ADVANCES IN DISCOURSE PROCESSES. A full description of the 
Native American worldview as applied to language learning, as a child’s 
monolingual and/or bicultural experience. The language learning process is 
described as five aspects which are practically applied to daily problem-solving 
and observation. 

Sieber, J.E. (1992) Planning Ethically Responsible Research. Newbury Park, CA: 

Sage Pubs. 



14 




18 



Shweder, R. A. & Bourne, E.J. Does the concept of person vary cross-culturally? 
Paper. Relationship between what one thinks about, how one thinks, with a 
holistic metaphor. 

Silman, J. (1 988)ENOUGH IS ENOUGH: Aboriginal Women Speak Out, The 
Woman’s Press, Toronto, Canada. 

Smandych, R. & Lee, G. (1995) Women, Colonization and Resistance: Elements of an 
Amerindian Autohistorical Approach to the Study of Law and Colonialism. 
Native American Studies Review, 10, no.1 . Intact Native American women’s 
response to disenfranchisement. 

Spiro-Melford, E. (1993) Is the Western conception of self "peculiar” within the context 
of the world cultures. Ethos, 21 , no. 2, 1 07-1 53. A comparative typology of 
Western versus non-Western intact culture is too restrictive and lacks 
conceptual clarity. 

Sullivan, J.O. (1845, December) Editorial. New York: Morning News. 

Szasz, M.C. (1974,1977) Education and the American Indian: The Road to Self- 
Determination since 1929, second edition. Albuquerque: University of New 
Mexico. 

Time-Life Books (1989) Search for the Soul. A timeline description of the scientific 
fruitition of the components body, mind, and spirit and the learning process in 
the twentieth century. 

Triplett, F. (1883) Conquering the Wilderness. New York: N.D. Thompson. 

United States Government (1969) The Kennedy Report. U.S. Govt. Printing Office. 

United States Government. (1928) The Merriam Report. U. S. Govt. Printing Office. 

United States Government. (1980) U. S. Census Report. U. S. Govt. Printing Office. 

United States Government. (1990) U. S. Census Report. U. S. Govt. Printing Office. 

Vidich, A.J.& Lyman, S.M. (1994) Qualitative Methods: Their History in Sociology and 
Anthropology. Handbook of Qualitative Research . N.K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln, 
Eds. Sage, Thousand Oaks, 30,31. 

Vogel, V.J. (1972) American Indian Ways in Medicine. Science & Children, v. 9, n. 6. 

Wax, M.L. (1971) Indian Americans: Unity & Diversity. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: 
Prentice-Hall. 

15 




17 



Woodward, G. S. (1963) The Cherokees. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma. 

Wyatt, V. (1996) Female Native Teachers in Southeast Alaska: Sarah Dickinson, Tillie 
Paul, and Frances Willard. In S. Hayex and M.C. Magressi (Eds.) An Alaska 
Anthology. University of Washington Press. (Originally in M. Szasz (Ed.) 
Between Indian and White Worlds: The Cultural Broker. University of 
Oklahoma Press, 1994). 



Zintz, M.V. (1960) Indian Children are Different. New Mexico School Review, v. 40, 
Oct. 

(1957-1960) The Indian Research Study, v. 1 & 2. Sponsored Under Grant-In- 
Aide from the U.S. Office of Education, Cooperative Research Branch. 
Albuquerque, NM: College of Education, University of New Mexico. 



15 




18 



® 



U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education ( NLE ) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 







& 




-<fH| 




1 C»xt«X t~ 


Author(s): r 










Corporate Source: 


u 

a £rf Uirb&vu 


h 


Publication Date: 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 





The sample sticker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be 

affixed to all Level 1 documents affixed to all Level 2A documents affixed to all Level 2B documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE, AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY, 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

A 0 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

* 






c/ 




dr 


TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

1 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

2A 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

2B 



Level 1 Level 2A Level 2B 



O' □ □ 

Check here for Level 1 release, permitting reproduction Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction Check here for Level 2B release, permitting 

and dissemination in microfiche or other ERIC archival and dissemination in microfiche and in electronic media reproduction and dissemination in microfiche only 

media (e.g., electronic) and paper copy. for ERIC archival collection subscribers only 

Documents will be processed as Indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce Is granted, but no box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 



Sign 

here,-* 

please 



I hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 
to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 






Organization/Address: 



fcforM* ^ 




Printed Name/P os ition/Titte: 

L 



wn MMM 



m. 




FAX j 



[ m 






Date: 



LLL UrhllMj //- 0/gOl- 



l i d f M 



Ybro_ 



(over) 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 




IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 



If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 

THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND 

ERIC CLEARINGHOUSE ON ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION 
1129 SHRIVER LAB, CAMPUS DRIVE 
COLLEGE PARK, MD 20742-5701 
Attn: Acquisitions 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 

ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 
1100 West Street, 2 nd Floor 
Laurel, Maryland 20707*3598 

Telephone: 301-497-4080 
Toll Free: 800-799-3742 
FAX: 301-953-0263 
e-mail: ericfac@ineted.gov 
WWW: http://ericfac.piccard.csc.com 

pF-088 (Rev. 9/97) 

Devious versions of this form are obsolete. 



