DOCUMENT RESUME 



v 




ED 405 264 

AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



AVAILABLE FROM 
PUB TYPE 



JOURNAL CIT 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 
ABSTRACT 

reports by graduate students. Accompanying papers from their mentors 
establish a context for the student papers. In this volume the works 
are organized by the sponsoring university. Student papers presented 
are: (1) "Looking at Feminist Pedagogies: What is Seen in the 
Literature and What is Seen in an Art Education Studio/Classroom" 
(Carole Woodlock) ; (2) "A Critical Examination of Cultural Influences 
on Children's Drawings from Midwestern United States and Taiwan" 
(Li-Tsu Chen); (3) "An Urban Appalachian Community in Indianapolis: 
With Implications for Art Education" (Marjorie Manifold); (4) "Theory 
into Practice in Art Education: A Case Study" (Theresa Marche) ; (5) 
"Artistic Representation in Contemporary Kuwatit, Egyptian, and 
Iranian Paintings and Prints and Some Interpretation of These Works 
According to Islamic Law" (Faridah Mohammad); (6) "A Critical 
Analysis of the Computer Graphic Art of Japan Using Six Case Studies" 
(Jean Ippolito) ; (7) "The Role of Pedagogical and Subject Matter 
Knowledge in Preservice Art Teaching" (Jeanie Auseon) ; (8) "An 
Ethnographic Investigation of Creativity in Practicing Visual 
Artists/Teachers: A Conceptual Paper" (Susan Dodson); (9) "Roots, 
Branches, Blossoms, and Briars: Cultural Colonialism of the Mountain 
Arts in West Virginia" (Christine Morris); (10) "Issues of Education 
Surrounding Native American Art at the Iroquois Indian Museum" (Jill 
Hoffman); (11) "In the Family? The Inter-relationship of Art and 
Craft Teachers" (Gudrun Helgadottir) ; (12) "Computer Artists: A Study 
of Influences on Their Artistic Development and Production" (Mia 
Johnson); (13) "Art and Education in Leisure Institutions: Making a 
Case for Research" (Lara M. Lackey); (14) "Western Arctic Women 
Artists: An Ethnographic Study of the Historic Influences on the 
Artistic Education and Production of Women from Three Coexisting 
Cultures" (Joanne McNeal) ; (15) "Art as a Language" (Paula Eubanks 
Smith) ; (16) "The Influence of Visual Models and Instructional 

Methods on the Development of Students* Graphic Representations" 

(Jean Langan) ; (17) "Weaving a Destiny: A Portrait of Cultural 

Survival in Dagestan*' (Lorraine Ross); (18) "Andrea's Dilemma: 'I 
like the freedom that we got to draw whatever we wanted to, but I 
don't like the way we choose what we want to draw"' (Lisa 
Schoenf ielder) . (MM) 



SO 026 850 

Thunder-McGuire, Steve, Ed. 

Working Papers in Art Education, 1994-1995. 

Iowa Univ., Iowa City. School of Art & Art 
History. 

96 

164p.; For other annual volumes, see ED 379 199, ED 
390 797, ED 391 764-769, and SO 025 973-975. Also 
referred to in this issue as "Marilyn Zermuehlen's 
Working Papers in Art Education." 

Working Papers in Art Education, 13 North HaTl, The 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242. 

Collected Works - Serials (022) — Reports - 
Research/Technical (143) — Viewpoints 
(Opinion/Position Papers, Essays, etc.) (120) 
Working Papers in Art Education; nl3 1994-1995 

MF01/PC07 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Culture; *Art Education; ^Childrens 
Art; Community Education; Computer Graphics; 
Creativity; *Cross Cultural Studies; ^Cultural 
Influences; ^Educational Research; Educational 
Theories; Elementary Secondary Education; Islamic 
Culture; Museums; Preservice Teacher Education; 
Womens Studies 

Appalachian Culture; Weaving 



This publication presents manuscripts and research 



•50 <2f3-£> 5 5 O 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



•st- 

LO 

<n 



ir> 

o 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




M A R I L Y N Z U R M U E H L E N 

WORKING PAPERS IN ART EDUCATION 








BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

Jhis document has been reproduced as 
iceived from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 






• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



2 




MARILYN ZURMUEHLEN 

WORKING PAPERS IN ART EDUCATION 



is published by the School of Art & Art History of The 
University of Iowa. Manuscripts by graduate students, 
along with papers from their mentors which establish a 
context for the student papers are welcomed. They 
should follow the form of the Publication Manual of 
the American Psychological Association (3rd ed.) or the 
MLA Handbook. Send an original and one Macintosh 
Disk copy to Dr. Steve Thunder-McGuire, Editor Marilyn 
Zurmuehlen, Working Papers in Art Education, 
13 North Hall, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 
52242. 

Marilyn Zurmuehlen 

Working Papers in Art Education, 1994-1995 
Number 13 



1994-1995 



Contents 



1994-1995 

PAGE 

4 

CONCORDIA UNIVERSITY, MONTREAL 
Carole Woodlock/Looking at Feminist Pedagogies: What is Seen in the Literature and What is 

Seen in an Art Education Studio/Classroom 

1 3 

I N D I A N N A U N I V E R S I T Y 

Li-Tsu Chen/A Critical Examination of Cultural Influences on Children’s Drawings From 

Midwestern United States and Taiwan 

2 1 

Marjorie Manifold /An Urban Appalachian Community in Indianapolis: With Implications for Art 

Education 



Theresa March6/77jeo/y Into Practice in Art Education: A Case Study 

42 

N E W Y O R K U N I V E R S I T Y 

Faridah Mohammad/Artistic Representation in Contemporary Kuwatit, Egyptian, and Iranian 
Paintings and Prints and Some Interpretation of These Works According to Islamic Law 

45 

O H I O S T A T E U N I V E R S I T Y 

Jean Ippolito/A Critical Analysis of the Computer Graphic Art of Japan Using Six Case Studies 

54 

Jeanie Auseon /The Role of Pedagogical and Subject Matter Knowledge in Preservice Art 

Teaching 

70 

U N I V E R S I T Y O F M I S S O U R I 
Susan Dodson/An Ethnographic Investigation of Creativity In Practicing Visual 
Artists/T eachers: A Conceptual Paper 



79 



P E N N S Y L V A N I A S T A T E U N I V E R S I T Y 
Christine Morris/Roofs, Branches, Blossoms, and Briars: Cultural Colonialism of the Mountain 

Arts in West Virginia 

90 

Jill Hoffman/fesues of Education Surrounding Native American art at the Iroquois Indian 

Museum 

99 

U N I V E R S I T Y O F B R I T I SH C O L U M B I A 
Gudrun Helgadottir//n the Family? The Inter-relationship of Art and Craft Teachers. 

1 09 

Mia Johnson /Computer Artists: A Study of Influences on Their Artistic Development and 

Production 

1 1 5 

Lara M. Lackey /Art and Education in Leisure Institutions: Making a Case for Research 

1 24 

Joanne McNeal/Wesfern Arctic Women Artists: An Ethnographic Study of the Historic 
Influences on the Artistic Education and Production of Women from Three Co-existing cultures 

1 32 

U N I V E R S I T Y O F G E O R G I A 
Paula Eubanks Smith/Arf as a Language 

1 40 

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 

Jean Langan /The Influence of Visual Models and Instructional Methods on the Development of 

Students' Graphic Representations 

150 

U N I V E R S I T Y O F I O W A 

Lorrai ne Ross/Weaving a Destiny: Portrait of Cultural Survival in Dagestan 

155 

Lisa Schoenf \e\der/ Andrea’s Dilemma: "I like the freedom that we got to draw whatever we 
wanted to, but I don't like the way we choose what we want to draw" 



O 

ERIC 



5 



mentors introduction 



ELIZABETH J. SACCA 

Concordia University, Montreal 



Carole Woodlock describes the process through which she and her 
students negotiate a pattern of communication in the classroom. She works 
to actualize her own vision of feminist pedagogy that emphasizes community, 
room for every individual voice, shared learning, and multiple modes of 
understanding. She cites feminist ideals she includes in her vision: moving 
“away from oppositional stances such as theory versus practice, and 
masculine versus feminine,” valuing the whole and achieving “harmonious 
integration (Collins 1977, p. 54); living both content and practice concretely 
(Lewis 1992); and fostering empowerment, community and leadership 
through classroom interaction, with the objective of transforming the 
academy (Sandell 1991). Carole Woodlock concurs with Garger and 
Gaudelius who work to give up some of their power as “masters of the 
discourse,” to assure that students can become subjects, not merely objects 
in the classroom (1992, p.27). 

One can relate Carole Woodlock’s interest in negotiation to the 
comments of Statham, Richardson and Cook who consider the traditional 
patterns (stereotyped roles) of women as structural pressure. “But,” they say 
“we can decide whether to accommodate to those pressures, or to negotiate 
with our role partners to reject them outright or to modify them in part” (1 991 , 
P-3)- They see the role of university professor as an excellent position from 
which to conduct this negotiation. 

Attaining a university professorship is a true mark of distinction that 
can override normative expectations for gender-appropriate 
behavior. Such an accomplishment imbues the woman with a certain 
amount of authority and power that is not ordinarily present in our 
sex-graded society. The extent to which a women can use these 
attributes successfully to negotiate acceptable and empowering self- 
definitions and to convey them to her colleagues and students will 
affect the extent to which those role partners value her (1991, pp. 4- 



They point out that this is such a strong phenomenon that “the passive, 
intellectually subordinate professor might appear ‘deviant,’ regardless of sex” 
(1991, p. 5). 

1 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Statham, Richardson, & Cook relate feminist interest in negotiation of 
gender roles and contextual views of gender to symbolic interaction role 
theory. They consider the principles of role negotiation and subjective reality 
as “determinants of social life” to be “the essential underpinnings of the 
entire symbolic interaction framework” (1991, p.3). They ask about the 
processes role partners use To define their role relationship and the need to 
alter it” (1991 , p.144). This is the question Carole Woodlock asks, and the 
objective she works to actualize. 

Related questions about roles and their negotiation were asked by 
the members of the Research Center for Group Dynamics begun at MIT by 
Kurt Lewin in 1945. In 1946, then graduate student Morton Deutsch joined 
the Center that became renowned for its creativity, social values and 
contribution to social psychology. Some forty years later, Deutsch described 
the continuing influence of the Research Center group on his selection of 
graduate students. As have the researchers mentioned above, he 
recognized the potential social value of research . He said his program selects 
students with Tough minds and tender hearts,” because they want to train 
students who will conduct research that has practical value Tor a variety of 
social issues such as war and peace or justice: (Deutsch 1988, p. 94). 

References 

Collins, Georgia. (1977). Considering an Androgynous Model for Art 

Education. Studies in Art Education 1 8 (2) 54-62. (as cited by 
Carole Woodlock) 

Garber, Elizabeth and Gaudelius, Yvonne (1992). Object into Subject: 
Feminism, Art Education, and the Construction of the Self. 

Canadian Review of Art Education 19(1) p 12-33. (as 
cited by Carole Woodlock) 

Lewis, Magda (1992) Interrupting Patriarchy: Politics, Resistance and 
Transformation in the Feminist Classroom. In Carmen Luke & 

Jennifer Gore (Eds.), Feminisms and Critical Pedagogy pp. 
167-191. New York: Routledge. (as cited by Carole Woodlock) 

Deutsch, Morton (1988) [Interview] In Patnoe, Shelley, A Narrative 

History of Experimental Social Psychology: The Lewin 
Tradition (Recent Research in Psychology) pp. 90-95). New York: 
Springer-Verlag 

Sandell, Renee (1991). The Liberating Relevance of Feminist Pedagogy. 
Studies in Art Education. 32(3) 178-187. (as cited by Carole 
Woodlock) 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s 



Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



O 

ERIC 



7 



Statham Anne; Richardson, Laurel & Cook; Judith A. (1991). Gender and 
University Teaching: A Negotiated Difference. Albany, NY: 
State University of New York Press 



3 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Looking at Feminist Pedagogies: 

What is Seen in the Literature and What is Seen 
in an Art Education Studio/Classroom 

Carole Woodlock 

Feminist Pedagogy is about teaching in a particular way: recognizing 
the relations of power— based on gender, class, race and sexual 
orientation -that permeate the classroom. It is influenced by the 
emphasis of the women's liberation movement on 'process and 
accepts the intrinsic link between changing curricula and changing 
teaching practice. In this sense, feminist pedagogy is about 
validating the process of teaching... Feminist pedagogy make visible 
the real experience of gender in society, in the school and in the 
classroom. It unmasks the dynamic of power/powerlessness, the 
devaluation of women and the invisibility of their experience (Briskin, 
1990, p.1). 

Some Origins of Feminist Pedagogy 

In 1977 an issue of Studies in Art Education was dedicated to 
the research and theory on gender differences in art and art education. In 
that issue Georgia Collins presented a way to think about differences 
between masculine and feminine approaches to making and teaching art in 
education. Collins emphasized rethinking 'our' views on the objectives of art 
education. She considered the focus on "holistic and coherent views as 
overly simple. To accomplish a more complex and fulfilling inquiry she 
proposed "an androgynous model for art education". This model would 
move away from oppositional stances such as theory versus practice, and 
masculine versus feminine. It would incorporate qualities in a manner 
whereby these principles, although equal in relation to each other take on a 
higher value when submerged in a whole which ideally achieves their 
harmonious integration" (Collins, 1977 p. 54). In 1981 Collins took her model 
further, exploring possibilities for three approaches to teaching in art 
education: the integrationist, the separatist and the pluralist. Three years 
later in Women, Art, and Education Georgia Collins and Renee Sandell 
outlined a wide range of issues related to women's art education, particularly 
historical and social. From these inquiries, Collins and Sandell established a 
base for a dialogue on feminist pedagogy in art education. 

Renee Sandell wrote about the need for and the possibilities of, a 
feminist art education in her 1978 doctoral dissertation, Feminist Art 
Education: Definition, Assessment and Application to 

4 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen's Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Contemporary Art Education. In this she defines a feminist art 
education as being "conceptually, as well as literally, a hybrid between 
feminism (an ideology) and art education (theory and practice)... Art education 
refers to both the educating of artists and education of people about art and 
its relationship to society. Feminism applied to art education refers to the 
process of educating an artist via feminism, or education about feminism via 
art" (Sandell, 1978, p. 7). Sandell's and Collins' inquiries, and the many 
others form an armature for feminist pedagogies, where feminism as theory 
and feminism as action engage in dialogue and form modes of inquiry to be 
explored in the teaching and learning experience. 

Defining Feminist Pedagogy 

Sandell, in a more recent article, defines feminist pedagogy "as 
ultimately seek(ing) a transformation of the academy" (Sandell, 1 991 ). That 
transformation occurs when teachers and students create "classroom 
interactions that foster empowerment, community, and leadership" (Sandell, 
1991, p. 181). She sees feminist pedagogy as an "alternative instructional 
model" towards "shap(ing) and inform(ing) the processes of art teaching and 
learning" (Sandell, 1991, p. 180). 

How would one actualize this alternate model within the parameters 
of the teaching and learning site? To begin, I would want to generate a 
teaching philosophy which defines feminist pedagogy, as it pertains to my 
vision of teaching and learning. Then I would engage with students in such a 
way that this teaching philosophy, over time and after reflecting on the 
interactions in the studio classroom, became a 'reality'. The circular nature of 
this process would inform the teaching and learning site. 

Forming a Teaching Philosophy 

As Briskin stated in the opening quote, feminist pedagogy is "about 
teaching a particular way". Feminist pedagogy is a teaching process that 
focuses on power relationships in the studio/classroom. This teaching 
process is specific to the context of the actions. That context is the 
studio/classroom and its surroundings. Magda Lewis, a teacher of sociology 
in Ontario, describes her teaching process: 

The challenge of feminist teaching lies for me in the specifics of how 
I approach the classroom. By reflecting on my own teaching, I fuse 
content and practice, politicizing them both through feminist theory 
and living them both concretely rather than treating them abstractly 
(Lewis, 1992, p. 187). 



5 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



The main goal of my teaching process is to provide an environment 
that empowers the student and the teacher. To do this I use a self-reflective 
process that Lewis practices. Of great importance to me is the fusing of 
content and practice in the context of learning and teaching about issues in 
education, also one of Lewis' objectives. 

In my teaching process I have three points of reference: the student 
learning process, the action process and the unveiling of reflection process. 
The main goal in moving between these points of reference is for the student 
and teacher to become aware of their position and actions within the learning 
process in art education. This will better enable them to act and understand 
their actions in the future, in the studio/classroom or in another setting 
outside of the educational institution. I will briefly describe each of these 
points. 

The Student Learning Process 

In setting a tone for the studio classroom environment, a foundation 
of the curriculum is presented. How I set the tone depends upon the content 
of the course and the students involved. I start the course with a project that 
accentuates the focus of shared learning. I also present a format for the class 
that makes room for everyone's voice. This project establishes the essence 
of the curriculum. The essence is that each individual moves towards 
defining their personal processes of making and discussing art work in 
relation to being a member of a community. 

Skills are introduced when the students need them. When a student 
articulates that they feel their "needs" require redefining, they must 
communicate to me in such a way that I can take up an authoritative role to 
assist them in acquiring further skills to fulfill those specific needs. This 
pattern of communication is established and negotiated by the student and 
myself at the beginning of the course, and throughout the year it is clarified. 

Action 



I give the students a structure for three things: self-reflection, 
response through dialogue, and awareness of time as it relates to the 
process of self reflection and dialogue in activities inside and outside the 
studio classroom. Once the students have moved through this structure, 
they can initiate actions in the "Action Process": they can enact upon their 
process of making art, talking about art, teaching art, and listening to it 
through their own words. The students are empowered in the "Action 
Process," through the actualization of the reflective process. 



6 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Moving from a stance of being the object within the process, to a 
subject in relation to the process is a key transition within this point of 
reference. 

Using theory we can understand how an individual can move from the 
position of object to subject, and we can understand the importance 
of this move. We can also bring this understanding to our creating 
and viewing of artwork.. .These links between theory and lived 
experiences are reciprocal, each in turn replenishing and 
strengthening the other (Garber & Gaudelius, 1992, p. 20). 

Unveiling of the Reflection 

Placing the whole process in context and perspective is the third 
point of reference in my teaching process, and it's the first step towards the 
development of the philosophy of the individual student. Once the students 
have reflected upon the process, I can then assist them further by speaking 
about the evolution of their learning. This is where we unveil our process, 
deconstructing and reconstructing our curriculum. One objective of this 
unveiling is to clarify details within my curriculum and their curriculum, making 
both visible. This occurs when the group responds to art work made by one 
another. It also occurs in their reflections through writing, and through verbal 
dialogue with me. 

As the students grow in their ability to reflect and communicate, they 
are able to locate their actions and my actions. The students vocalize how 
these multiple "actions" belong to all of us as a group, while they are distinctly 
experienced by the individual. 

In recognizing the need for student empowerment through a 
melding of the affective and cognitive experience of a subject, 
feminist pedagogy also deals with the art educator's concern for 
human development through artistic enablement.. .(it) can offer an 
interactive process model for art instruction that address(es) the 
continuing needs for raising not only the status of women, but also 
for artistically empowering all individuals (Sandell, 1990. p. 185) 

Three approaches identified by Collins, the integrationist, the 
separatist, and the pluralist help us understand how we might further define 
the above model of feminist pedagogy. 



7 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Integration, Separatism and Pluralism 

With feminist reform as the end product of each approach, Collins 
discusses what integrationist, separatist, and pluralist might mean to the 
practice of the art teacher who adopts such a mode. The integrationist art 
teacher views her students as equal with no regards to differences in sex. 
A neutrality is encouraged and the art teacher should be dedicated to the 
development of "sex-neutral skills, attitudes, and behaviors" in the studio 
classroom. 

Nevertheless, explicit problems for women must be confronted in 
the art classroom and given full discussion... The prejudicial use of 
the notion of feminine sensibility in its arbitrary and unwarranted 
attachment to the female and her art would be examined and 
debunked (Collins, 1981, p. 88-89) 

The separatist art teacher expects and sees the "differences in 
interests, skills, and attitudes" (Collins, 1981, p. 90) according to gender. 
The art teacher should approach each individual student according to their 
gender. 



The separatist approach to art education will be extremely critical of 
traditional values attached to certain subject matters, styles, media, 
and life-styles in the art establishment.. .processes that have been 
devalued because of their feminine association need to be attended 
to with more respect... Support needs to be given female students 
as they explore personal experience and values in search for modes 
of expression (Collins, 1981, p. 90). 

The pluralist art teacher has components of both the integrationist 
and the separatist. She believes that gender differences are important to 
take into account, but she also believes the polarization of the two are 
unacceptable. The pluralist encourages the growth of the individual's 
sensibility and expression through engendering a balance between 
masculine and feminine awareness. Variety of interests and expression that 
generate from the individual are the goals of the pluralist art teacher. 

The pluralist art teacher, according to conscience and personal 
vision, might engage in remedial education for all art students to the 
end that they develop a full range of previously gender-identified 
skills, attitudes, and interests. Or the pluralist art teacher, fearing that 
the model of androgynous sensibility imposed on all art students 
would reduce variety in art, might seek to develop existing 



8 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



sensibilities and a tolerance and appreciation of differences 
(Collins, 1981, p. 91). 

Collins proposes that as teachers and learners we should engage 
publicly, in our classrooms, with our students, with these three approaches. 

A Pluralistic Feminist Pedagogy 

A teaching philosophy that has a feminist focus is a feminist 
pedagogy. Social change is one of the main issues in feminist theory, and 
feminist pedagogy is a mode one can invoke as a way to enact change in the 
art education studio/classroom. "All educators will find feminist pedagogy 
useful because through it they can address the issues of social change" 
(Sandell, 1991, p. 183). 

Through the consideration of content and pedagogy with a feminist 
focus the teacher of art can promote a learning site that empowers both the 
teacher and student. Meaning is made inside the classroom and the teacher 
has great influence on / upon / with, her students. Using a feminist 
pedagogical approach the teacher of art could foster individually centered 
meaning-making. This would be a great value to the formation of student 
knowledge and experiences as well to the learning and experiences of the 
teacher (Weiler, 1988). 

As teachers we must allow ourselves to escape the confines of (our) 
position for it is only when we do so that our students can exist in our 
classrooms as subjects. We must be prepared to give up some of our 
power. As teachers, we must no longer desire to be the masters of 
the discourse (Garber & Gaudelius, 1992, p. 27). 

Feminist Pedagogy gives us a chance to pull away from, broaden and 
destroy the assumed 'norms' and 'stereotypes' regarding not only gender, 
but race and class, within the learning site (Briskin 1990, Sandell 1991). 
Through the actualization of this pedagogy one can become visible and 
empowered, not from an outside act or voice, but from within and from one's 
own actions and understanding. Fostering multiple modes of understanding 
is vital to this organic process of teaching from a feminist perspective. 



9 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen'e Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



References 



Briskin, Linda. (1990). Feminist Pedagogy: Teaching and Learning 
Liberation. Ontario: CRIA/ICEF. 

Collins, Georgia. (1977). Considering an Androgynous Model for Art 
Education. Studies in Art Education, 1 8(2), 54-62. 

Collins, Georgia. (1981). Feminist Approaches to Art Education. The 
Journal of Aesthetic Education, 1 5(2), 83-94. 

Collins, Georgia & Sandell, Renee. (1984). Women, Art and 

Education. Virginia: National Art Education Association. 

Garber, Elizabeth and Gaudelius, Yvonne. (1992). Object into Subject: 
Feminism, Art Education and the Construction of the Self. 
Canadian Review of Art Education, 1 9(1), 12-33. 

Lewis, Magda. (1992). Interrupting Patriarchy: Politics, Resistance and 
Transformation in the Feminist Classroom. In Carmen Luke & 
Jennifer Gore (Eds.), Feminisms and Critical Pedagogy (pp. 
167-191) New York: Routledge. 

Sandell, Renee. (1978). Feminist Art Education: Definition, 
Assessment and Applications to Contemporary Art 
Education. Dissertation. Ohio State University, UMI: 7819659. 

Sandell, Renee. (1991). The Liberating Relevance of Feminist Pedagogy. 
Studies in Art Education, 32(3), 181. 

Sandell, Renee. (1977). Studies in Art Education: A Journal of 
Issues and Research in Art Education, 18(2), 54-62. 

Weiler, Kathleen. (1988). Women Teaching for Change: Gender, 
Class and Power New York: Bergin and Garvey Publishers. 



1 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



mentor’s introduction 



GILBERT CLARK 

INDIANA UNIVERSITY 

Some investigators, such as Kellogg (1970), have argued 
that there is a universal pattern of development in children's 
drawings and art. Others, such as Alland (1983), have 
maintained that such claims are exaggerated, and 
Deregowski (1980) has suggested that the drawing of 
children reared away from Western influences may develop 
in quite different ways. 

Thomas & Silk, 1990, p.39. 

Interest in, and questions about, universal or relative explanations of 
children’s drawings have been bandied about in art education writings for 
many decades. Obviously, this is an unsettled question with some very 
strong opinions being offered on both sides of the issue, along with all 
degrees of “in-between-ness." Research reports from other cultures have 
tended to be ambiguous, or clearly one-sided, about the argument. 

Ms. Li-Tsu Chen came to graduate study in art education directly from 
Taiwan and her immersion in the experiencing of those two cultures offer her 
a unique point of view about the universal/relativist controversy. Ms. Chen 
has become interested in the universalist/relativist controversy through a 
series of experiences and readings introduced during her graduate study at 
IU. She has looked at hundreds of children’s drawings, as work samples 
executed to the same instructions, from both the United States and Taiwan; 
she also had taught drawing to children in both cultures. She also has 
reviewed the extensive literature about children’s drawings that either avoids 
or confronts various universalist/relativist arguments. 

The research reported here is a beginning point for a forthcoming 
dissertation. Do children develop universally in their drawing patterns across 
all cultures or are there relative differences among children’s drawings that 
reflect the various cultures in which they grow up? Are international 
communications, such as television and advertising, erasing cultural 
differences? Are children in either Taiwan or the midwestern United States 
likely to share more differences or similarities in their drawings? Answers to 
questions like these are purely speculative at this time. I look forward to 
completion of the proposed research and Ms. Li-Tsu Chen’s answers. 



11 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



References 



Thomas, G.V., & Silk, A.M.J. (1990). An Introduction to the 

Psychology of Children’s Drawings. New York: Harvester 
Wheatsheaf 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



A Critical Examination of Cultural Influences on 
Children’s Drawings From Mid-western United States 

and Taiwan 

Li-Tsu Chen 



Introduction 

Background of the Inquiry Problem 

Many art education researchers have argued that children’s art 
development is not predetermined solely by genetic factors, nor is it a 
culture-free phenomenon. They have attempted to find evidence of external 
and cultural influences on children’s delineation of graphemes and graphic 
configurations through both within-cultural and cross-cultural comparisons 
(Wilson, 1985; Wilson & Wilson, 1979,1982, 1983,1984). It is still debatable, 
however, whether young children’s drawings illustrate apparent cross-cultural 
differences. Krampen (1984) provided evidence, through cross-cultural 
comparisons, that Olivier’s finding of 30 graphemes applied in children’s 
drawings is validated universally. Other researchers (Dennis, 1966; 

Carothers & Gardner, 1979; Brittain, 1990) have claimed that cultural 
differences are apparent in older children’s drawings only when they include 
more environmental influences. On the contrary, some researchers such as 
Alland (1983) and Wilson (1985) insist that children’s drawings are different 
across cultures and cultural influences are observable in children’s drawings 
right after they leave the scribbling stage. 

Statement of the Problem 

Discrepancies between claims about apparent cross-cultural 
differences and universal patterns in children’s drawings have created 
confusion and misunderstandings. Unfortunately, not many cross-cultural 
studies have been done to detect and describe cultural influences on 
children’s graphic development or cross-cultural differences among 
children’s graphic schemas through effective comparisons. Even though a 
few studies have been conducted within-culture and cross-culture 
comparisons, there are many other cultures left unexamined and the graphic 
symbolic realms of students within them are ambiguous or unknown to us. 

Purposes 

This study was designed to clarify relationships between cultural 
factors and child graphic development by means of examining the 



13 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



differences and similarities of graphic elements and formula in children’s 
drawings from the Mid-Western United States and Taiwan. 

Literature Review 

There are a variety of graphic solutions in children’s manipulation of 
graphic units, but children’s drawings look not only consistent but also rather 
predictable. Freeman (1980) said, “children’s drawings often look 
stereotyped” (p.1 9). Sets of canonical forms or graphemes can always be 
identified as dominating in children's drawings (Markham, 1964). Why could 
these uniform graphic features and predictable patterns appear commonly in 
children’s drawings? How can these canonical forms or graphemes be widely 
adopted and applied by children? Theoretical arguments between 
universalists and relativists are, therefore, important. 

For Kellogg (1970), children’s graphic formulae are evolved from their 
scribbling, markings, and formations, in which they perceive shapes, 
patterns, and forms for later practice of more advanced combination of 
shapes and representation of images. Kellogg proclaimed that, The 
development of child art is independent of associations and social 
environments” (p. 259). 

Standing on the same base with the universalists, but at the opposite 
end from Kellogg, Golomb (1992) proclaimed that children’s intention to 
make a visual likeness of real objects is the motivation and major force they 
use to seek better means and solutions to improve their drawings. What 
Golomb emphasized is that children modify and differentiate their graphic 
formula according to their perceptions of objects and their visual attributes. 

Wilson & Wilson (1985, 1979, 1982, 1983, 1984) thought graphic 
symbol systems are very much like languages, containing basic elements and 
culturally defined meanings, structure, and composition. Children's 
development in drawing is a process of learning and adapting to the culture- 
specific graphic languages which are invented and utilized by adults. These 
adult graphic models are passed through many channels such as comics, 
mass media, films, and peer influences. Adult graphic models help children 
reform their simple undeveloped graphic formula to create better drawings. 

Research Hypotheses 

This study is constructed to investigate the following research hypotheses: 
Hypothesis 1 : It will be possible to detect and classify culturally influenced 
differences in children’s drawings created in Taiwan and in the United States. 

14 




Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Hypothesis 2: Every culture develops its own graphic formulas, which are 
more or less different from each other. The graphic formulas applied by 
United States and Taiwanese students therefore will differ too. Each group 
of students have preferences for using certain particular motifs for houses 
and running persons, depicting certain games for playing activities, and 
developing certain themes and subjects for fantasy world. 

Hypothesis 3: There is a progressive order of developmental abilities in 
children’s drawings across cultures, in the United States and Taiwan, that are 
correlated with children’s handling of conventional forms and symbols. 

Method 



Population and Sample 

The subjects were selected from children at grades 2, 4, 6, and 8 in 
the United States and Taiwan, two classes from each grade of four schools in 
Taiwan and four classes from each grade of schools in the Mid-Western 
United States. The following table designates the numbers of the children 
tested in each grade. 

T able 1 

Number of the children tested at each grade level 



Grade 


Taiwanese children 


USA children 


2 


82 


103 


4 


76 


87 


6 


79 


87 


8 


134 


113 



341 310 



The United States sample was from communities in the Midwest, 
such as Bloomington, Indiana; Omaha, Nebraska; and Toledo, Ohio. The 
taiwanese sample was from four schools in three different locations: Yung Ho 
Middle School in the outskirts of Taipei City, the National capital; Chien An 
Elementary School in a suburban city; Fong Tain Elementary School and Tain 
Wei Middle School in Tain Wei Village, a rural area in central Taiwan. 

Instrumentation 

This study used Clark’s-Drawing-Abilities-Test in collecting 
children’s drawings. The Clark’s-Drawing-Abilities-Test has four items: 



15 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



(1 ) draw a house, (2) draw a person running very fast, (3) draw a group of 
friends playing on a playground, and (4) draw a fantasy world of your 
imagination. 

Every test booklet contains one cover page for personal data, and 
four pages of drawing items. There are brief but clear directions for each task; 
for example, directions for the first drawing are, “In the rectangle below, draw 
a picture of an interesting house as if you were looking at it from across the 
street. Use a #2 pencil and allow yourself no more than 15 minutes" (Clark, 

1 989; Clark & Zimmerman, 1984). Test booklets for Taiwanese students 
were translated into Chinese by the author, so that most educated Taiwanese 
children could understand them. 

Selection of the Clark’s-Drawing-Abilities-Test 

The Clark’s-Drawing-Abilities-Test has been used to measure 
children’s drawing abilities in general. In this study, however, it was used as a 
work-sample data collection device, gathering children’s work-sample 
drawings means that all subjects drew the same subject matters in the same 
media. This facilitated comparative methods as means of analysis. 

The Clark’s-Drawing-Abilities-Test was chosen because it possesses 
three characteristics considered beneficial and appropriate to the purposes 
of this study: (1) the activity of drawing with a pencil on paper is easy to 
administer and experienced by most children in both cultures; (2) the four 
drawing tasks appeal to those subject matters favored by a majority of children 
in various cultures; (3) its contents of four widely different drawing tasks 
provides a broad base for observations of children’s drawing habits and 
children’s perception of their environments and cultures. 

Content Analysis of Data 

Development of Categories for Analysis 

Analysis of responses is divided into two major categories- 
Mechanical Structural Elements and Thematic Emphasis Components (or 
Accessory Elements for item 1 ). Each category consists of subdivisions 
based on pictorial characteristics of the drawings. Because of the limit in 
length, only subcategories for item one are presented below: 

Item 1 : House 

Mechanical structural elements (Graphic strategies) 

1 . Spatial arrangement 

Pictorial depth: a. Size and position 
b. Baseline 

2. Use of shading/Tone and Value: 

16 




Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



a. Even/smooth 

b. Value/varied 

3. Line quality: a. Line weight similar 

b. Line weight varied 

4. Conventional forms and styles 

a. Structural forms for house 

b. Roof styles 

c. Smoke shapes 

d. Window styles 

e. Door styles 

f. Texture patterns for roof 

g. Patterns for wall 

h. Chimney styles 

5. Accessory: a. Wall decoration 

b. Roof decoration 

Environmental or Accessory Components 

1. Cultural features: customs, traditional symbols 

2. Inclusion of front or back yard 

3. Inclusion of fence 

Comparison of the categories f representational features of children's 
drawings from two different cultures will be based on basic statistical 
techniques. By means of coding each comparative item with numbers, as 
percentages, the search for culture-common drawing habits and tendencies 
will be facilitated. Simply to list different or similar aspects of children's 
drawings by two cultural groups through cross-cultural comparison, however, 
is not the end of this study. Expressions of interpretation also will be 
presented to make the numerical differences more meaningful and 
understandable. 

Anticipated Results 

Findings of a pilot study illustrated evidence of differences in 
children’s depiction of house styles and decoration: facial features, profile, 
clothing, and games, as well as in manipulation of lines, pictorial space, and 
compositional techniques. Culture-common or culture-related events, 
symbols, and designs are reflected in children’s drawings. It was ascertained 
that children's drawings reflect their perceptions of, and participation in, their 
environments, societies, and cultures. 



17 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen's Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Similarities in many aspects of graphic representations in these four 
drawing tasks across the Mid-western United States and Taiwanese groups 
also were found. They are especially obvious when children do not include 
too many details or oversimplify their drawing motifs. Contour drawings or 
schematic shapes for human or houses are applied often, but shadings and 
three-dimensional forms are hardly indicated, especially among younger 
subjects in both cultural groups. 

As revealed from findings of the pilot study and review of other 
research, it seems that both universal and cultural factors interact throughout 
the entire process of graphic development. The large number of drawing 
samples analyzed in this study will make differences or similarities more 
obvious across the four selected grades and two cultures. 

References 

Alland, A. (1983). Playing With Form: Children Draw in Six 
Cultures, New York: Columbia University Press. 

Brittain, W. L. (1990). Children’s Drawings: A Comparison of Two Cultures. In 
B. Young (Ed.) Art, Culture and Ethnicity, pp, 181-191). 
Reston, VA: National Art Education Association. 

Clark, G (1989). Clark’s Drawing Abilities test Bloomington, IN: 
A.R.T.S. Publishing. 

Clark, G., & Zimmerman, E. (1984). Educating Artistically Talented 
Students, Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press. 

Crothers, T., & Gardner, H. (1979). When Children’s Drawings Become Art: 
The Emergence of Aesthetic Production and Perception. 
Developmental Psychology 15(5), 570-580. 

Dennis, W. (1966). Group Values Through Children’s Drawings. 

New York: John Wiley & Sons. 

Freeman, N. H. (1980). Strategies of Representation in Young 
Children: Analysis of Spatial Skills and Drawing 
Processes. New York: Academic Press. 

Gardner, H. (1980). Artful Scribbles: The Significance of 
Children’s Drawing, New York: Basic Books, Inc.. 



0 




Marilyn Zurmuehlen’6 Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Golomb, C. (1992). The Child’s Creation of a Pictorial World. 
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press 

Kellogg, R. (1970). Analyzing Children’s Art Palo Alto, CA: Mayfield. 

Krampen, M. (1984). Children’s Drawings as Compositions of Graphemes: A 
Cross-Cultural Comparison, Visual Arts Research, 10(13), 7-12. 

Markham, S. (1954). An Item Analysis of Children’s Drawings of a House, 
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 10, 185-187. 

Wilson, B., & Wilson, M. (1979). Figure Structure, Figure Action, and Framing 
in Drawings by American and Egyptian Children. Studies in Art 
Education, 21(1), 36-43. 

Wilson, B., & Wilson, M. (1983). Themes and Structures in the Graphic 

Narratives of American, Australian, Egyptian, and Finnish Children: 
Tales From Four Cultures, Journal of Multi-cultural and Cross- 
cultural Research in Art Education, 10(1), 63-76. 

Wilson, B., & Wilson, M. (1984).Children's Drawings in Egypt: Cultural Style 
Acquisition as Graphic Development, Visual Arts Research, 

1 0(1), 13-26. 

Wilson, B.(1985). The Artistic Tower of Babel: Inextricable Links Between 

Culture and Graphic Development. Visual Arts Research, 11(1), 
90-104. 

Wilson, M. & Wilson, B. (1982a). The Case of the DisappearingTwo-eyed 
Profile: Or How Little Children Influence the Drawings of Little 
Children, Review of Research in Visual Arts Education, 15, 
19-32. 



19 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



mentor’s introduction 



ENID ZIMMERMAN 

Indiana University 



Most studies and development activities in art education have 
focused on urban and suburban students and few have been concerned 
with rural students. Marjorie Manifold’s research is unique in that she has 
chosen to study a population whose members have roots in Appalachia, but 
are living in an urban setting. Her insights are all the more powerful due to her 
personal involvement in the 10th community that is the cornerstone of her 
study. 



Many educators have viewed rural communities, and students from 
these communities, as culturally deprived. Coupled with most people’s 
reactions to inner city neighborhoods as blights on urban environments, 
students from the 10th Street community would appear to have little chance 
for success in mainstream schools throughout the United States. 

Marjorie Manifold's interpretation of adult 10th Streeters’ descriptions 
and reflections about artists and aesthetic attitudes, and her interweaving of 
these two themes with characteristics of their community, is helpful in 
understanding values and beliefs held by students from Appalachia 
backgrounds living in the inner-city. The educational implications she draws 
are important for art teachers and others conducting research about teaching 
a variety of students from different backgrounds in diverse settings. 

The second part of her investigations will contrast and compare 
reactions of members of two rural, Appalachian-transplanted communities in 
the Midwest with the inner-city 10th Street community. When her project is 
completed, she should be able to contribute greatly to literature about the 
needs of rural/urban Appalachian art students and how they might be 
educated equitably with a focus on their needs and abilities. With so much 
emphasis today on multicultural and global education, the backgrounds of 
students whose roots go back to Western and Eastern Europe often are not 
included as part of the newly cooked stew that has replaced the melting pot 
metaphor in education. Marjorie Manifold has demonstrated that the 
backgrounds of all students need to be considered when planning, creating, 
and implementing art curricula in the schools. 



20 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



An Urban Appalachian Community in Indianapolis: 
With Implications for Art Education 

Marjorie Cohee Manifold 

I first became interested in immigrant Appalachian populations when 
assigned to teach art in an Indianapolis elementary school which served an 
urban Appalachian community. The problems peculiar to poor, urban 
students were fully evident in this population and seemed stubbornly 
resistant to change. It became apparent that traditional practices were not 
effective. This initiated a quest to better understand the local 10th Street 
Community, and resulted in research exploring the community’s general 
characteristics, operant aesthetic attitudes, and perceived roles of art and 
artists in the community. From these research findings, it is anticipated that 
more effective, population specific, art educational programs may be 
developed and implemented. 

The 10th Street Community 

Those persons who consider themselves part of the unique 10th 
Street community live on and around a short eastern stretch of this 
Indianapolis street. Residents express strong self-identification as “10th 
Streeters”. As descendants of Appalachian born, urban immigrants, they are 
an “invisible minority” (Philliber, McCoy, & Dillingham 1981) and the second 
largest minority of this midwestern dty. 

The predominant migration of Appalachians to the urban centers of 
the Midwest, including the city of Indianapolis, occurred as an economic 
necessity following World War II. Those who remain of this urban Appalachian 
population are now third and fourth generation members. Self-preserving 
characteristics and prejudice against Appalachian groups have made them 
vulnerable to discrimination and contributed to their impoverished conditions. 

While not all 10th Streeters are native to or descendant from 
Appalachian sites, the characteristics of the 10th Street community have 
been strongly colored and influenced by this population. Therefore, the 
urban Appalachian qualities were those which were examined and addressed 
in this descriptive study. 



Methods 

In order to gain access to the community, I became involved in a local 
retail business venture which required daily, multi-level interactions with 

21 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 




26 



persons from the community. Thus, gatekeepers, individuals providing 
access to the inner workings of the community, came from relationships of 
trust forged with members of the 10th Street community. 

Initial data was collected through observations of behaviors, 
interactions, and conversations. Interviews were unstructured, informal, and 
open ended. Conversations, interviews, and observations were recorded as 
notations made at the end of the day or after significant events. Once a 
sense of comfort and trust seemed in place between me as the researcher 
and community members, a purposeful sample of artists and art informants 
were defined. Interviews became increasingly structured, focusing on 
specific issues of concern. These later interviews were recorded in notes 
taken during events, or recorded on tapes which I later transcribed. 

On-site data collection was followed by a four month period of data 
coding, categorization, and analysis. Procedures followed for this study were 
adapted from suggestions and guidelines given by Krathwohl (1993) and 
Bodgan and Biklen (1982). Those interviewed included male and female 
individuals ranging in age from teens to octogenarians. Following are 
descriptions of four groups of persons interviewed: 

Group A. Artists identified by community consensus. 

Group B. Artists who identified themselves as people who made art. 

Group C. Artists informants. These individuals fit the criteria of 
Krathwohl (1993) as “marginal persons who have less stake in the status quo 
or are not constrained by it” (p. 327). The individuals in this category were 
classified thus, because they were former 10th Streeters, or other urban 
Appalachians, not residing in the 10th Street community during the time of 
the interviews. 

Group D. Non-artist individuals. These were individuals living in the 
10th Street community who gave information regarding art and artists in the 
community, but were neither considered by others nor themselves to be 
producers of art. 

Groups A, B, and C consisted of 3 individuals each. Group D 
included conversations or interviews with 42 individuals. The behaviors and 
interactions of approximately 30 to 40 additional persons, the exact number 
was not recorded, were observed and noted. The conclusions drawn from 
these observations served as corroborative data. 

Findings 



22 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Analysis of the data produced two large categories: The artist and 
aesthetic preferences. Subcategories within these categories, drawn from 
the data, are described as follows: 

The Artist 

1. The artist, according to the 10th Street definition, is a person who “draws”, 
“paints pictures,” or “makes things" (art objects). 

2. The artist is rarely defined only by the role of artist. The artist will also be a 
wife/mother, husband/father, waitress, factory worker, mechanic, etc., with 
these roles considered of equal or greater importance to the individual's 
identity than the role of artist. 

3. The behavior the artist displays is a determinant factor in whether he or she 
receives community recognition as an artist. Those who display “appropriate” 
artist characteristics are likely to be rewarded by the praise and respect of 
community members. Those who do not, regardless of the quality of their 
production, are unlikely to be valued as artists. Two artistic characteristics 
were identified by the participants in this study: (a) modesty about his or her 
talent with disinterest in personal glory which would elevate him or her above 
other members of the community, and (b) willingness to create work for 
benefit of the family or the community. 

Aesthetic Preferences 

1. According to 10th Street explanations there is a preference for useful art 
objects, followed by an interest in art images with personal, religious, or 
seasonal referents. 

2. Realism is the preferred mode for depicting figural subjects. 

3. There is a preference for affordable techniques and accessible, 
inexpensive, and /or indigenous materials. 

4. Craftspersonship and realism are quality measures that take precedence 
over originality. 

5. There is an appreciation for bright, contrasting colors, and for materials 
which imitate expensive materials such as velvets, metallic fabrics, leather, 
and rhinestones. 

6. Craft shows, bazaars, and street fairs were mentioned as places where one 
could go to see art. The art museum was not mentioned as a place where art 
could be viewed. 

Discussion 

In an attempt to further examine the urban, Appalachian, 10th Street 
community, I will interweave the role of the artist and aesthetic attitudes, as 



23 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



O 



28 



described by the participants, with general characteristics of this population. 
Then I will derive some general classroom implications from this analysis. 



Familism and Individualism 

The social organization system familiar to the Appalachian culture is 
dominated by family-kinship relations (Wagner 1 973). The family kinship or 
familism relationship, was expressed in the often heard statement, “10th 
Streeters take care of their own." The indication was one of community pride 
and a self-reassurance that in times of adversity the community would serve 
as a safety net. “Squirrel” (Group B), a single homeless, urban Appalachian 
Cherokee suffering from alcoholism, was never observed to go without a daily 
meal, suitably warm clothing, or a place to spend the night in inclement 
weather. Alcoholism, though viewed as an unfortunate choice of behavior, 
was seen as a kind of individuality, and thus warranted neither condemnation 
nor interference. It was, frankly, “nobody’s business" except Squirrel’s. The 
kindness of community members was returned with gifts of jewelry crafted by 
Squirrel from found objects and beads in what he called his “Indian style." In 
giving his art as gifts to the community family, Squirrel displayed a required 
artistic trait of creating work for the benefit of the community. This was seen 
as appropriate community behavior. 

For 10th Streeters, artistic behavior must be community appropriate, 
but individualism allows a person, in terms of aesthetic choices, to be as 
outrageous or anti-social, by mainstream standards, as he or she wishes. 
Tattoos are a favorite body decoration and admired art form among 
adolescent and young adult 10th Street males and females. Chosen motifs 
for tattoos range from Confederate flags to elaborate dragons. Gang 
referents also are becoming popular motifs. 

Valuing and Seeking Personal Relationships 

Established trust is vital to successful interactions with members of this 
community. In personal relationships individuals are inclined to be trusting 
but they are suspicious of anything that threatens to compromise their 
independence (Smathers, 1970). The educational institution is seen as an 
uninvited intruder in the urban Appalachian community. Relatives of school 
aged children do not see it as their responsibility to establish rapport with 
school personnel. Rather, the onus is on the educators as outsiders and 
human embodiments of the educational institution to make their intentions 
known to the members of the community. An example of the chasm between 
school and community may be recognized in the prevalent inability of 10th 
Street parents to relate the names of their children’s teachers. Two teachers 
who were known by name were described as “real nice," or “friendly." These 

24 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers 



In Art Education 1994-1995 






29 



teachers also participated in out of school activities with their students, and 
showed interest in community members and community affairs. 



Have a Limited Time Perspective 

Because life in a hostile environment is tenuous, requiring immediate 
reaction to non-predictable, ever changing challenges, long range planning 
often makes little sense in an urban Appalachian community. Personal family 
needs require hands on and immediate responses. The ability to fulfill needs 
by creatively adapting available materials, requires immediate vision not long 
range planning. In art classes this ability is reflected by an appreciation for 
quick and easy projects which can be taken home and enjoyed immediately. 

Techniques or products which require expensive, commercially 
made materials and equipment present unrealistic, unattainable possibilities. 
Unless access to kilns, printing presses and other equipment and materials 
are made practically available, traditional arts and crafts will not be pursued 
beyond the classroom. Those persons driven to create art will make their art 
out of found or unconventional materials. Both “Squirrel” (Group B) and 
“Falcon” (Group C), for example, admit to searching through trash dumpsters 
to gather much of their material for artmaking. 

Strongly Identify with Place 

One of the surprising aspects of the 10th Street population is their 
impassioned affection for a geographic area which appears oppressively 
unattractive to those outside the community. Harold’s (Group D) comment, “I 
went away from 10th Street for awhile, but I had to come back. I love 10th 
Street! Ain’t no place like it in the world!” is typical of the sentiments 
expressed. Clearly, the urban Appalachian standard for beauty is dependent 
upon affective rather than formal criteria. 

Share a Non-Verbal Heritage 

Responses to events appear to be subjective and emotional rather 
than objective and logical. At this intuitive level, ability to verbalize responses 
remains very naive (Southward, 1986). Hamblen(1984) suggests that it may 
be the use of non-traditional speech patterns which hampers the ability of 
non-Appalachians to discuss art and aesthetic concepts in formal terms. 

What we perceive as inability to verbalize aesthetic concepts may merely be 
an inability to speak in the standard formal aesthetic lingo. These non-verbal 
characteristics should not be mistaken for an inability to understand 
sophisticated aesthetic concepts. There appear to be definite community 
standards by which art and art objects are measured. That these standards 

25 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



are communicated, whether verbally or non verbally, and understood, is 
indication of potent aesthetic cognition. 

Withdraw from Threatening or Frustrating Situations 

Early studies of the urban Appalachian population, (Wagnerl 973) 
indicated a tendency to withdraw rather than react aggressively or with 
hostility, when confronted with uncompromising or difficult situations. While 
older urban Appalachians may seek to avoid direct confrontation, younger 
urban Appalachians find it increasingly difficult to do so. Many use visual 
symbols and artistic expression to overtly display their increasingly defiant 
stance against dominant institutions and power structures of society. June 
(Group D) told about the community’s frustration when a local school was 
closed and use of the empty building for community activities was denied. 
When the school officials remained unresponsive to the community protests 
the frustration was acted out by adults and youngsters who “sneaked in that 
night and graffiti-ed (the abandoned school building) up real good!” 

Adhere to Gender Specific Roles 

The initial migration of Appalachians to cities was motivated by a need 
for the male member to find work. This move significantly affected the 
traditional role of the Appalachian female. In her mountain environment, her 
contribution to the household economy came from her interactive work with 
the environment. She was the one who cultivated the land, tended the 
garden, milked the cows, and was mother and nurturer (Ganim, 1986). 
Relocated in the city, women’s contributional opportunities were limited. 
Unable to find satisfactory avenues for integrating needs of her family, with 
her own personal needs and resources, a tragic number of urban 
Appalachian women interviewed expressed low self esteem, hopelessness, 
and self destructive behaviors. 

Lori Anne (Group A) was a woman who had reconciled a culturally 
dictated role with personal and environmental resources. Her strong maternal 
character found expression in her voluntarily assumed role of foster mother to 
several community youths in need, and in her production of art, particularly 
needle arts, which she made to clothe herself and her family, beautify her 
home, and give as gifts to others. 

The male roles in the community of being financial providers, meant 
that males were more likely than females to make art as a commodity for 
economic benefit. Men were found to be tattoo artists, sign painters, jewelry 
makers, and portrait artists whose art could be exchanged for cash or goods. 



26 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Art Educational Implications 



The following is an outline of suggestions for art teachers addressing 
the urban Appalachian student’s art education in terms of content and 
methodology. The suggestions are categorized as in the previous section 
and are implied by the findings of the community attitudes and ideas about art 
and artists, and the general characteristics of the community. 

Familism and Individualism 

1 . Balance opportunities for creating art as personal expression with 
opportunities to leam art techniques for creation of useful, shareable art. 

2. Use and discuss art exemplars from cultures which create community art, as 
well as, exemplars of personal expression. 

3. Allow co-operative and small group work and projects. 

4. Use a non-authoritarian teaching style which shifts the responsibility for 
behavior to the student. This is more likely to gain appropriate response from 
students who value individuality (Borman et al. 1978) within the boundaries of 
community defined propriety. The community of students should become 
the encouraging force for maintaining behavioral property. 

Value Personal Relationships/Suspicious of Institutions 

1 . Share your (artist/art teacher) art skills with the community. 

2. Invite local artists to share their aesthetic ideas, language and skills with 
students in the classroom. 

3. The artist in residence concept is one which presents possibilities for 
bridging the gap of trust between school and community. Local artists as well 
as mainstream artists should be included in this program. 

4. Find out when local festivals or art events are being held and plan to 
participate by including an exhibit of student work. Also display and share 
your own work. 

Have Limited Time Perspectives 

1 . Encourage art making of both immediate and long term projects. 

2. Emphasize the instruction of good craftspersonship. 

3. Avoid arbitrarily set time frames for completion of work! Rather, emphasis 
should be on completion of art which demonstrates satisfactory visual 
solutions and an appropriate degree of technical excellence regardless of the 
time this requires. 

Strongly Identify with Place 

1 . Be cautious of pushing environmental beautification programs without 
negotiation with community members. The concept of beauty must be 



27 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



O 



32 



negotiated, and there must be assurance that improvements will not result in 
unacceptable change of the sense of place. 

2. Community resources should be explored for materials which might be 
used in student art making. 

3. Encourage the study of local architecture, spaces, and artifacts. 

Non-Verbal Behavior 

1 . Begin art criticism exercises at the present level of the student and 
progressively, by building from one concept to another, raise the student to 
the goal level (McFee 1969). Moreall and Loy (1989) suggest, for example 
that popular mass produced commercial artifacts be compared to aesthetically 
acclaimed exemplars. 

Withdraw from Threatening Situation 

1. Be aware that aesthetic preferences of urban Appalachians differ from 
mainstream preferences. 

2. Do not avoid correction of behavior or guidance of ideas, but approach art 
activities and instruction in such a way that the student does not feel that his 
or her aesthetic sensibilities have been insulted, devalued, or threatened. 

3. Art presents a vehicle for social comment and outrage. Art teachers have a 
unique opportunity to instruct young urban Appalachian students in socially 
acceptable, yet powerful and empowering, expressive art language. 

Gender Specific Role 

1 . In guiding art students from this population, it would be helpful for the art 
teacher to be aware that parents are concerned that children of both sexes 
consider participation in family and community life as more important than 
personal self-sacrifice in pursuit of professional careers, including art careers. 
Art taught in the classroom should not deny or subvert this family/community 
goal. Art as craft and communication, as well as art for arts sake, should be 
validated. 

2. Art should not be categorized as strictly female or male appropriate. The 
necessities of economic survival in the urban landscape require a blurring of 
traditional gender roles. Therefore, both male and female students should 
be given options for increasing their productive/creative potentials. 

Future Research 

The descriptive study thus presented, is the first part of a two part 
investigation. I will next attempt to look at two populations of transplanted 
Appalachians in rural Southern Indiana. These rural Appalachian populations 
will be examined and contrasted and compared with urban Appalachian 
populations to determine similarities and differences in art attitudes as well as 

28 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



general characteristics. It is intended that the investigation will culminate in 
practical implications for development of effective art educational programs 
addressing the needs of both these Appalachian populations who settled in 
rural and urban areas of the Midwest. It is also hoped that generalizations 
from these investigations can be applied to populations of diverse students 
in a variety of contexts. 



References 

Bogdan, R.C. & Biklen, S.K. (1982). Qualitative Research for 

Education: An Introduction to Theory and Methods, 
Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 

Ganim, C. (1984). Herself: Women and Place in Appalachian Literature, 
Appalachian Journal, 13, 258-274. 

Hamblen, K.A. (1984). The Culture of Aesthetic Discourse (CAD:Origins, 

Contradictions and Implications, The Bulletin of the Caucus on 
Social Theory and Art Education, 4, 22-24. 

Krathwohl, D. R. (1993). Methods of Educational and Social 

Science Research: An Integrated Approach, New York: 
Longman. 

Philliber, W. H., McCoy, C. & Dillingham, H. (Eds.) (1981). The Invisible 

Minority: Urban Appalachians, Lexington, KY: University Press 
of Kentucky. 

Smathers, M. (1970). Suspicion and Community in Appalachia, in M. E. Glenn 
(Ed.), Appalachia in Transition (pp. 69-81). St. Louis, 
MO:Bethany Press. 

Southward, B. (1986). Attitudes of Three Urban appalachian Teenagers 
Toward Selected Early Modern American Paintings, Bulletin of 
the Caucus on Social Theory and Art Education, 6, 8-18. 

Wagner, T. E. (1973). Appalachian Migrant Studies in Cincinnati 

Public Schools. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, University of 
Cincinnati, Cincinnati. 



29 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



34 



mentor’s introduction 



ENID ZIMMERMAN 

Indiana University 



Theresa Marche’s interests in the world around her are intriguing and 
varied. An avid conchologist (a collector of shells and mollusks), scuba diver, 
canoe paddler, and scientific observer of the natural world, she brings her 
talents for thorough and in-depth investigation to this case study about 
change in art education programs in one Pennsylvania school district. Her 
canoe trip traverses waters of both the romantic/expressive stream of artistic 
self-expression advocated by Lowenfeld and the scientific/rational stream 
popularized by advocates of discipline-based art education. 

Her own personal journeys in the tributaries of these streams shed 
light on how theory and practice in art programs were affected in this school 
district. Using historiography as a method of data gathering and analysis 
enabled her to travel uncharted waters and map her own story through 
recollections of those who participated in the lived experiences of art 
education praxis in this school district. She also used archival, public, and 
personal documents to mark her course. All these sources of data have been 
synthesized, analyzed, and interpreted with the same care she takes to 
categorize the shells she has collected from streams, rivers, and oceans 
throughout the world. Her passion for covering the entire territory, down to 
the last minute mollusk, is evident in this case study. 



Theresa March6 is a recipient of a Getty Fellowship that enabled her 
to travel to Pennsylvania on numerous occasions to delve through many 
archives and memories of those in leadership roles and those who practiced 
art teaching at elementary through secondary levels. Her conclusions about 
how through time theories in art education were or were not implemented in 
classroom practice, are yet to be garnered. Once categorized and explained, 
these conclusions should add greatly to how theory affects classroom 
practice in a particular school district. Generalizations from this study should 
be far reaching for those who are “up the creek without a paddle” attempting 
to understand the relation between theory and practice in art education 
programs in their own school districts. 



30 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers 



In Art Education 1994-1995 



35 

o 

ERLC 



Theory Into Practice in Art Education: A Case Study 

Theresa Marche 

Beginning as early as 1800, the history of art education in the United 
States has been marked by a succession of theories delineating rationales, 
goals, and contents for art curricula. Art education history is a relatively new 
area of study and several authors have documented many of these historical 
trends (Belshe, 1946; Efland, 1989; Logan, 1955; Soucy, 1990). Their work 
primarily has concerned either beginnings of art education in America, 
evolution and general characterization of art education theories, or social and 
political climates attending each. As they were written, these accounts often 
gave the impression of a more or less complete implementation of a particular 
art education theory that was paramount at any time on an historical 
continuum. 

However, my experience as an art teacher in the public schools made 
me wonder if this was actually the case. Others have written about the 
discrepancy between educational theory and actual classroom practice that 
may appear even among those who profess to follow a particular theory 
(Cuban, 1984; Korzenik, 1990). Rogers (1990) discussed the process by 
which an existing art curriculum remained essentially unchanged while being 
‘rewritten’ in the language of a new education philosophy (p. 155). Such a 
process must be of concern to modern art education theorists, including 
those advocating the present model of discipline-based art education. 

This gap between theories derived from research and actual practice 
of teachers in classrooms has been noted in both art and in general 
education curricula (Belshe, 1946; Cuban, 1984; Dewey, 1965; Eisner, 

1988; Erickson, 1979). Moreover, various theoretical trends in art education 
have generally followed or reflected educational thinking on a wider scale 
(Eflan, 1990). Because classroom teachers often are responsible for 
teaching art as well as general curricula, problems of implementation found in 
art education history may prove to be relevant to a wide educational 
audience. 

Implementation of educational innovation may be influenced by 
choices of staffing, ease and simplicity of comprehension, manner of 
presentation to teachers, political choices, social or economic conditions, 
sense of tradition, or personal idiosyncrasies. Erickson (1979) speculated 
upon the influence of inappropriate models for researchers and practitioners 
while Jackson (1968), pointed to a disparity in the concerns and needs of 
those who research and those who practice. Latham (1993) pointed to failure 

31 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen's Working Papers in Art Education 1994-1995 






36 



of teachers to consult educational research literature to inform their 
classroom practice. 

If educational research is to be relevant to classroom practitioners, 
disparities between research and practice must be bridged. One may either 
emphasize the role of the researcher and remediate the practitioner, or 
evaluate the needs of the practitioner to inform the work of the researcher. It 
was the latter course that I chose when I decided to examine the art curricula 
from a single, suburban, middle-class school district in southeastern 
Pennsylvania as a case study. My objectives were to locate historical trends 
and influences that aided or impeded implementation of new theories in art 
education as they were interpreted, accepted, or rejected at the local level. In 
the study, I attempted to trace the process from theoretical levels, through 
state educational guidelines, down to the district level against a broader 
context of world events and general curriculum history. The ways the visual 
arts are taught today were conditioned by the beliefs and values regarding art 
held by those who advocated its teaching in the past" (Efland 1989, p. 1). 

Art Education History, 1800-Present 



Much of the research on art education history in the United States 
has been done in the last twenty years. Before that time, most historical 
accounts were derived from the Bureau of Education report prepared by 
Clarke (1874). In the years that followed, his account was summarized and 
augmented as individual chapters in a number of art education texts. The first 
book devoted entirely to the history of art education, Growth of Art in 
America’s Schools, was written by Logan in 1955. The decade of the 
1 980’s saw greater interest in the field and, along with numerous journal 
articles, two major books appeared, Art in American Schools in the 
Nineteenth Century (Wygant 1983) and, most recently, A History of 
Art Education (Efland 1989). Historical works by others, such as Erickson 
(1979), Hamblin (1984), Stankiewicz (1985), Freedman (1987), Zimmerman 
(1989), Korzenik (1990), and Soucy (1990) have appeared with increasing 
frequency in dissertations, journals and monographs in the past fifteen years. 

As I reviewed this history I began to see a process that is both cyclical 
and linear. Efland (1 990), echoing earlier writers, has identified two streams 
that have been flowing through art education history. In the 
romantic/expressive stream, the learner is central to the discovery of 
knowledge, while in the scientific/rational stream, subject matter, or 
knowledge, is at the center with the learner receiving it from outside sources. 
At the level of theoretical writing, a cycling of the two streams becomes most 

32 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



evident, especially after 1850, with opinion shifting readily at about twenty 
year intervals, usually in response to world social and economic events. 

In recent history, the romantic stream, in the form of creative self- 
expression advocated by Viktor Lowenfeld (1947), was the dominant view. 
Almost fifty years later this theory persists in practice, although writers and 
theorists (Clark, Day & Greer, 1985; Eisner, 1987) have been moving toward 
a more scientific/rational view. Their efforts are providing infusion of new 
subject matter into the rational stream that had almost disappeared at the start 
of the century. This has culminated in Discipline-based Art Education 
(DBAE), promoted by the Getty Center for Education in the Arts (1985). 

All of the above, however, concern art education theory, and it is 
important to remember that general curriculum history is often a history of 
policy rather than educational practice. Art education history is no different in 
this respect. “If we ignore how policy is translated into practice, we ignore 
reality” (Rogers 1990, p. 153). To complicate matters further, there are two 
levels of practice: curriculum prescriptions advocated within each art 
educational theory, and translations of those prescriptions into action by 
practicing teachers. 

In terms of curriculum prescriptions, art education history progresses 
in a more linear than cyclical fashion within each of the two streams. 
Chronologically, the romantic stream displays a relatively straight vector 
through time with some elements being added and others redefined, but not 
discarded. However, the rational stream shows a major discontinuity in the 
early twentieth century, at which time it almost disappears. For about forty 
years, very few rational-stream elements persist. Then, by mid-century, new 
theories appear that result in an infusion of new subject matter and a totally 
different direction than previous rational stream content. 

When educational theory and curricula are translated by local 
teachers into actual practice, there is a great amount of eclectic borrowing and 
adaptation from both streams. Examination of curricula ranging from the 1899 
Prang Elementary Course (Clark, Hicks & Perry, 1899) to modern district-level 
programs reveals an amalgamation of art educational practices derived from a 
succession of theories that were viewed as directly oppositional when first 
proposed. 

From historical inquiry, I have gained not only a background about art 
curriculum development, but also a striking picture of the discrepancy 
between theory and practice that has marked the field of art education. 
Because this discrepancy between theory and practice was central to the 



33 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



present study, knowledge about the processes of adoption or rejection of 
innovation became a primary concern. 

Within the area of educational systems analysis, much of the research 
on adoption of change has focused on mathematics, computers, science, 
and language arts. Numerous investigators have pointed to the key role of 
administration and central offices in successful adoption of innovation (Cox, 
1983; Crandall, 1983; Huddle, 1987; Miles, 1983; Oakes & Schneider, 

1 984). Educational systems thereby fit Rogers (1983) characterization as 
authoritative systems in which change is instituted and supported from above 
in a hierarchy, as opposed to being adopted in grass-roots fashion on 
individual bases. 

Art education, however, does not fit this authoritative model very 
well. Certainly for high-priority subjects such as math, reading, science, and 
computers, educational administration at the highest level is actively involved 
in producing innovation. Such an authoritative model, prescribed by Getty for 
implementing DBAE, has been effective in those situations where the Getty 
Center has invested considerable resources and support. Such efforts have 
not been the norm, however, and for much of its history in the public schools, 
art has been a marginal subject that rarely, if ever, receives such attention 
(Efland 1989; Eisner 1987). The sole administrator with active, close, long 
term involvement in art programs most often is the art department chairperson 
or art supervisor. 

Lacking an infusion of outside-in administrative direction and 
support, art programs often are left with inside-out, teacher initiated change 
that has been characterized as less effective (Cox, 1983; Crandall, 1983; 
Huberman, 1983; Huddle, 1987). Although Havelock (1973) provides a 
model of peer change agent/client interaction that often includes 
consultation of outside resources, the most common source of advice and 
support for a teacher is another teacher (Shanker, 1 986). 

According to Rogers (1983), if the change agent and client are too 
similar, no change is possible. Therefore, for change to diffuse from teacher 
to teacher, at least one of those individuals must be involved actively in 
personal growth, through such means as professional organizations or 
continuing education. There also must be opportunities for contact and 
communication among individual art department members. Given the relative 
isolation of art teachers from their peers, especially in elementary schools and 
rural areas, open communication channels become crucial if change is to be 
effected. 



34 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



O 

ERIC 




■ 



With this inside-out, peer agent innovation model, changes tend to 
occur in smaller increments than the outside-in model (Rogers 1983), thus 
making successful adoption and institutionalization more problematic 
(Huberman 1983; Oakes & Schneider, 1984). If this is the usual model of 
innovation for art programs there indeed may be little lasting change 
produced. 



Objectives 

Although discrepancies between theoretical and practical levels of 
education have been cited before, “few investigators have examined exactly 
what teachers have done in classrooms” (Cuban 1984). but actual classroom 
practice, because it most directly affects students, is an area where an 
historical understanding is essential. Therefore I framed the present inquiry 
as a case study, choosing to examine a suburban, middle-class school district 
in Pennsylvania where I taught for many years. During that time the art 
curriculum was written and rewritten several times, with varying amounts of 
change in practice produced. In this study, I decided to examine as broad a 
time period as possible for a chronology of change within that art curriculum in 
order to locate the source and process of adoption of any such changes. 

Research for this study was conducted from September of 1 992 until 
November of 1993, with a series of extended visits to Pennsylvania. Three 
types of data were collected: (1 ) documents from archival sources as well as 
public and personal sources, (2) interviews with art department chairpersons, 
students, art teachers and classroom teachers who are presently teaching or 
retired, and (3) my own personal memory and records. 

Data Collection and Analysis 

(1) Archival, public, and personal documents. A major source of 
documents was the district’s central administrative office. These documents 
included several long-range development plans for the district that included 
district policy statements, program evaluations and school population 
statistics. Personnel records and school district directories showing the size 
of the art department, pre-service education, class assignments, and in- 
service education gave a picture of the art faculty as a whole and of individual 
art teachers’ professional growth patterns. Because many of the district’s 
teachers, in both general and art education, were graduates of the local 
college, archives from that institution were helpful in understanding teacher’s 
pre-service educational experiences. 



35 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Much information also was found in the personal files of selected 
individuals including active and retired department chairpersons, art teachers, 
classroom teachers and past art students. Other documents of interest 
examined concerned special art activities, programs or shows. School 
calendars since 1970 have featured student art work and were considered as 
well as other photographic evidence found in personal records. Past 
students also provided examples of work done in their art classes. 



The earliest history of the district, concerning the several small 
schools that were consolidated to from the modern district, was derived from 
several locally produced area histories originally written for the 1975-76 
national bicentennial celebration. State mandated programs, studies, 
curriculum guides, and reports were located in files of the Pennsylvania State 
Department of Education, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania and collections of 
historical materials held by individuals at Kutztown University, Kutztown, 
Pennsylvania. Privately held family documents in the possession of one local 
individual were invaluable for information about the first art teacher in the 
district. 

(2) Interviews. While documents provided much important data, interviews 
with key informants guided further investigations and gave detail and depth 
to the record as well as presenting information from different personal points 
of view Principals among these informants were two past art department 
chairpersons, both of whom are still in the local area and whose tenure began 
during the final stages of district consolidation. Several retired classroom 
teachers living in the local area were able to shed light on early programs. 
Present and past district superintendents also played an important role in 
providing information. 

(3) Personal Memory. With twenty years of experience in this school 
district, my own records and memory spanned an important period of time 
from 1 969 until 1 990. Within that twenty years, the art curriculum was written 
and rewritten several times, both in response to local needs and state- 
developed mandates. Art program adjustments resulted indirectly from 
several administrative decisions .Also, within the department itself, at least 
one major philosophical stance was negotiated with curricular implications. 

Throughout the entire process of doing this research, it has been 
necessary to bear in mind the subjective nature of both historical documents 
and of human memory (Carr, 1961 ; Grele, 1991 ; Warren, 1978). Even before 
the historian begins a study, most historical records have been ‘selected and 
culled over time, as individuals have saved documents they regarded as 
valuable and discarded the rest. In many instances, the historian must use 

36 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen's Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



O 

ERIC 



41 



whatever is available. In interviewing, malleability and selectivity of each 
person’s memory must be appreciated. In addition, my own memory and 
assumptions will continue to play significant roles in the final form of this 
research. Wherever possible, findings were confirmed through multiple 
sources. If this was not possible, that fact also will be reported. 

Reporting 

This written account has been framed as a chronological narrative in 
four parts. First, I constructed a brief general history of the school district 
including that of the schools that pre-existed its formation. Indication of the 
local setting, both cultural and geographical, was included to facilitate an 
understanding of the events reported. 

The largest section of this research traced development of the 
school district’s art curriculum from 1924 until 1992. That history was divided 
into three parts. In the earliest part, from 1 924 to 1 960, the district was a 
loose affiliation of township and borough school districts served by a single 
art teacher, whom I would characterize as a painting master. Drawing upon a 
nineteenth century academic art tradition, this gentleman taught oil painting 
to future hobby painters at the high school. During the second period, from 
1960 to 1985, two strong art administrators in succession chaired a rapidly 
growing art department within an expanding, consolidated, bureaucratic 
school district. They administered an art program based on active teacher 
instruction in art concepts, skills, techniques, and vocabulary, despite the 
contemporary nationwide popularity of Lowenfeldian creative self-expression 
in art education. In the final part of this history, from 1986 to 1992, without 
the leadership of a department chair , individual members of the art 
department responded to a new administrative focus on “empowerment" and 
from contemporary art education discourse constructed a variety of 
educational approaches and practices. 

I am now in the process of concluding this study. I will search within 
this historical chronology for instances and possible sources of change, and 
for those forces that aided or impeded adoption of new models. In this way, I 
hope to accomplish my goal of shedding light on those means by which 
change was actually negotiated into this school district’s art program. 

Given the current emphasis on reform and restructuring in general 
education, and the work of the Getty Center in support of discipline-based art 
education, an understanding of educational change processes becomes 
quite valuable. But this understanding must extend beyond the adoption of 
official policy and reach to the level of practice, because it is at this level that 

37 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



students are most directly affected. If future art educational reform efforts, 
including DBAE, are to be effective, we need to know how and why art 
teachers adopt change. It is my hope that, at completion, this study will 
provide insights on that area of historical inquiry in art education. 



References 

Belshe, F. (1946). A History of Art Education in the Public 

Schools of the United States. Doctoral dissertation, Yale 
University. Published 1975, Ann Arbor, Ml: University Microfilms. 

Carr, E. H. (1961) What is History? New York: Macmillan 

Clark, G., Day, M., & Greer, D.(1985) Discipline-Based Art Education: 

Becoming Students of Art. Journal of Aesthetic Education, 

2 1 (2). 129-193. 

Clark, J. S., Hicks, M. D„ & Perry, W. S. (1899). The Prang 

Elementary Course in Art Education, Part IV, (Sixth 
year, books 7 & 8). New York: The Prang Educational 
Company. 

Clarke, I. E. (1874). Drawing in Public Schools: The Present 
Relation of Art to Education in the United States. 

Bureau of Education. Circulars of Information 1874, no 2. 
Washington DC: Government Printing Office. 

Cox, P. L. (1983). Complementary Roles in Successful Change. 

Educational Leadership, 41 (3), 10-13. 

Crandall, D. P. (1983). Teacher’s Role in School Improvement 
Educational Leadership, 41 (3), 6-9. 

Cuban, L. (1984). How Teachers Taught: Constancy and Change 
in American Classrooms 1890 - 1980 . New York. Longman. 

Dewey, J. (1965). The Relation of Theory to Practice in Education. In M. 
Borrowman (E.), Teacher Education in America: A 
Documentary History (pp. 140-171). New York: Teachers' 
College Press 



38 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Efland, A. (1989). A History of Art Education: Intellectual and 
Social Currents in Teaching the Visual Arts. New York: 
Teachers College Press. 

Efland, A. (1990). Art Education in the Twentieth Century: A History of 
Ideas. In D. Soucy & M. Stankiewicz (Eds.), Framing the 
Past: Essays on Art Education (pp. 117-136). Reston, VA: 
National Art Education Association. 

Eisner, E. (1987). The Role of Discipline-Based Art Education in America’s 
schools. Art Education, 4 0 (5), 6-45. 

Eisner, E. (1988). The Primacy of Experience and the Politics of Method. 
Educational Researcher, 1 7 (5), 15-20. 

Erickson, M. (1979). An Historical Explanation of the Schism Between 
Research and Practice in Art Education. Studies in Art 
Education, 2 0 (2), 5-13. 

Freedman, K. (1987) Art Education and Changing Political Agendas: An 
Analysis of Curriculum Concerns of the 1940s and 1950s. 

Studies in Art Education, 2 9 (1), 17-29. 

Getty Center for Education in the Arts. (1985). Beyond Creating: 

The Place for Art in America’s Schools. Los Angeles, CA: 
The J. Paul Getty Trust. 

Grele, R. (1991). Envelopes of Sound: The Art of Oral History. 

New York: Praeger. 

Hamblin, K. A. (1984). An Art History Chronology: A Process of Selection and 
Interpretation. Studies in Art Education, 2 6 (2), 1 1 1-120. 

Havelock, R. (1973). The Change Agent’s Guide to Innovation in 
Education. Edgewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology 
Publications. 

Huberman, A. M. (1983). School Improvement Strategies That Work: 

Some Scenarios. Educational Leadership, 41 (3), 23-27. 

Huddle, E. (1987) All That Glitters Isn’t Gold-- Four Steps to School 
Improvement. NASSP Bulletin, 71 (499), 80-86. 



39 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Jackson, P. W. (1990). Life in Classrooms. New York: Teachers’ 

College Press. 

Korzenik, D. (1990). A Developmental History of Art Education. In D. 

Soucy & M. Stankiewicz (Eds.), Framing the past: essays on 
art education (pp. 201-212). Reston, VA: National Art Education 
Association. 

Latham, G. (1993). Do Educators Use the Literature of the Profession? 
NASSP Bulletin, 77 (599), 63-70. 

Logan, F. M. (1955). Growth of Art in American Schools. New 
York: Harper & Brothers. 

Lowenfeld, V. (1947). Creative and Mental Growth. New York: 
MacMillan. 

Miles, M. (1983). Unraveling the Mystery of Institutionalization. 
Educational Leadership, 41 (3), 14-19. 

Oakes, J., & Schneider, M. (1984). Computers and Schools: Another 
Case of “...the More They Stay the Same:? Educational 
Leadership, 42 (3), 73-79. 

Rogers, A. W. (1990. Art Education in British Columbia Between the 
Wars: Official Prescription- Unofficial Policy. In D. Soucy & M. 
Stankiewicz (Eds.), Framing the Past: Essays on Art 
Education (pp. 153-164). Reston, VA: National Art Education 
Association. 

Rogers, E. M. (1983).Diffusion of Innovations. New York: The 
Free Press. 

Shanker, A. (1986). Teachers Must Take Charge. Educational 
Leadership, 44(1), 12-13. 

Soucy, D. (1990). A History of Art Education Histories. In D. Soucy & M. 
Stankiewicz (Eds ), Framing the Past: Essays on Art 
Education (pp. 3-31). Reston, VA: National Art Education 
Association. 



40 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 




45 



Stankiewicz, M. (1 985). Mary Dana Hicks Prang: A Pioneer in American Art 
Education. In M. Stankiewicz & E. Zimmerman (Eds.), Women Art 
Educators II. (pp. 22-38). Bloomington IN: Indiana University. 

Warren , D. (Ed.). (1978). History, Education, and Public Policy, 
Berkeley, CA: McCutchan. 

Wygant, F. (1983). Art in American Schools in the Nineteenth 
Century. Cincinnati: Interwood Press. 

Zimmerman, E. (1989). The Mirror of Marie Bashkirtseff: Reflections 

About the Education of Women Art Students in the Nineteenth 
Century. Studies in Art Education, 30(2), 164-175. 



, 

| 

i 



41 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 





Artistic Representation in Contemporary Kuwatit, 
Egyptian, and Iranian Paintings and Prints and Some 
Interpretation of These Works According To Islamic 

Law 

Faridah Mohammad 

The Quran (the sacred book) prohibited the making of idols, yet 
varying degrees of image making may be observed in the Islamic world. My 
research explores the variations in contemporary artistic representation in 
Kuwait, Egypt, and Iran. The hypothesis I explore is that variations to be 
found in the works of these countries could be accounted for by different 
interpretations of the Quran's prohibitions of idols. I have already completed 
field research in Kuwait, Egypt, and Iran to document artistic representation 
and to identify different interpretations. 

Four artists from each country were chosen and one work of each 
was analyzed. I identified the characteristic features, the influence of religion 
and tradition, on each work. I also interviewed two l Hama from each country 
(an Arabic term for clerics) to clarify how they view art expression. Views of 
both major divisions or sects, the Sunni and the Shiite, were considered. A 
comparison of the Ulama's differing interpretations tended to support the 
hypothesis that variations in the works were indeed influenced by religious 
law, even while the same styles are practiced in Kuwait, Egypt, and Iran; 
namely, realism, surrealism, impressionism, abstraction, representation, 
cubism, landscape, still life, and calligraphy. 

In Kuwait, the aesthetic features of the works derive solely from 
Islamic art tradition and culture. Figures with two dimensions, i.e., in graphic 
work, are allowed to be developed in exhibitions and galleries, but they are 
not found in the public domain. Three-dimensional figures are strictly 
prohibited. 

Some Egyptian artists, on the other hand, incorporated subject 
matter taken from the national tradition as well as Islamic art tradition. Two- 
dimensional works are produced with some restrictions. For example, 
representation of nude figures is permitted in two dimensions, although not 
in the public domain. Nude figures are not allowed in three-dimensional 
works. 



Similarities were also found in Iran as themes are taken from Iranian 
tradition, yet they exhibited intra-national differences based on the artist's 
location, for example, as in Isfahan and Khorasan. Two and three dimensional 

42 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



figures are displayed in the public, but the same restrictions apply to the use 
of nude figures as in Egypt. 

Differences found in Kuwait and Egypt may be attributed to the 
cultural traditions. Despite the fact of Egypt being Sunni and Iran being 
Shiite, they share a long tradition of civilization. For Iran and Egypt two and 
three-dimensional themes are on view in the public domain, while Kuwait is 
more restrictive with regard to two and three-dimensional images. 

The Ulama's interpretations varied from one country to another. 
These varying interpretations have their respective roots in the culture. The 
disagreement among the Ulama did not touch upon the unity of God, the 
basic religion, and the tradition, but rather involved specific details which 
affected people's lives. For example: 

1. Tribal affiliation. 

2. Political leadership. 

3. Outside influence by non-Muslim. 

4. Philosophic interpretations. 

The variations in interpretation are related to other factors that have 
influenced artistic representation. These factors are social, historical, cultural 
and individual. Although there is one Islamic law, the application of the 
doctrine differs from one country to another because of the uniqueness of 
their culture, heritage and religious interpretation. 

Art in Islamic countries shares common aspects of the traditional 
heritage and Western modernity: 

1 . The training of all modern artists, whether at home or abroad, is 
Western-oriented and follows Western norms, aesthetics and 
rules. 

2. Yet, most Islamic artists share a common search for their identity, in 
a way that will allow them to combine their Eastern origins with their 
Western education and way of life. 

3. Almost all modern Islamic artists, even those in the most 
progressive countries, have a problem communicating with their 
own societies. As in the west, artists tend to be alienated from the 
public. There are notable disparities between countries of the 
Islamic world, not only in their standard of living, but also in the 
development of the modern movement in each country. The 



43 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



prosperity of a country by no means reflects its cultural and artistic 
progress (Wijdan, 1989, p. 12). 

Suggestions for Resolution 

Industrial society occupies a unique position in history and 
geography. A religious authority in an Islamic country should present 
seminars and address a living artistic tradition of their respective country for 
the purpose of clarifying and interpreting it for the faithful people. 

Being an artist/researcher, I suggest seminars and conferences be 
held, not for a negative purpose, but rather as an attempt to advance the 
artistic tradition in light of the Quran, and the respect of different cultures, and 
in order to recognize the development of special terminology in the artistic 
tradition. 

As a committed art researcher, and as a religious person, I make 
these modest suggestions: 

1 . I need to expand my inquiry as an art educator in my college to 
strengthen Kuwaiti society through art curriculum and to 
strengthen the student of art education in light of this research. 

2 As an artist, I want other artists in the non-lslamic world to 
appreciate the motivation and inspiration now in several 
developmental directions among Islamic artists and cultures, so 
that they may appreciate contemporary Islamic art. 

3. As an artist researcher working in ISALTA (International Society For 
The Advance Of Living Tradition In Art), I will help organize 
seminars and conferences to produce norms. 

4. A series of conferences, in effect, may help the Ulama and the 
artist incorporate for further appreciation of the advancement of 
living tradition. 



44 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



A Critical Analysis of the Computer Graphic Art of 
Japan Using Six Case Studies 

Jean Ippolito 

Introduction 

In studying art, historians sometimes look at a body of art work of a 
particular time period or geographic area seeking stylistic similarities. If 
similarities are found, they attribute them to various reasons or causes. When 
approached by the term “Japanese Art," one might conjure up images of Edo 
period wood block prints or Kamakura period ink paintings. Much of the art of 
Japan today, however, does resemble these ancient classics. Words like 
“diverse” or “eclectic" might adequately describe the contemporary 
Japanese art scene. When seeing the diversity of art work produced by 
Japanese artists, it is interesting to speculate on whether or not there is a 
“style” in computer graphics that can be described as “Japanese.” Are 
Japanese cultural influences evident in this art? 

Not enough is known about Japanese computer graphics in the 
United States. Because of the lack of knowledge about the content of the 
artwork and the context in which it is produced, harsh generalizations are 
made about the computer art produced in Japan. I have heard comments that 
Japanese computer animations have no substance and that they are only 
technically finessed. I was told early on that research on computer graphic art 
in Japan would not be worthwhile because of its lack of innovation. 

I see the computer animations of Japanese artists as a reflection of 
postmodern Japan where the traditional is embedded in the new. Through 
interviews with artists and critical analysis of their artwork, I would like to add to 
our knowledge of recent Japanese computer art. 

Methodology 

In this study, six individual computer graphic artists of Tokyo are 
selected as case studies to represent the richness and variety of computer 
graphic art from Japan. Taped interviews are conducted to investigate each 
artist’s ideas, background, possible influences, perceptions of their own 
work, and personal philosophies on computer art. The artists' studios and 
working environment are observed and documented photographically and by 
journal. Computer animated films, stills and other art forms, are solicited from 
each of the artists for study. The artists' published works and personal 
catalogues are also examined. Their works are reviewed using the 

45 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 



1994-1995 



50 



descriptive, interpretative, and evaluative methods of art criticism explained 
by Terry Barrett in Criticizing Photographs: An Introduction to Understanding 
Images (1990). Emphasis is placed on description and interpretation with the 
understanding that the artists for this study were selected on the basis of 
their merit. 

The interviews and observations will provide information from the 
artists’ own personal perspective and from his or her own environment. The 
literature review will provide information from scholars and specialists of the 
field concerning Japanese culture and society in the artistic atmosphere of 
contemporary Tokyo where these artists reside and work. Furthermore, the 
chronological development of the artworks is documented and used to relate 
the content of the individual works to the artist’s intent. 

The Artists 

Yoichiro Kawaguchi was born on the island of Tanegashima in 
1 952. He graduated from Kyushu Art and Design University with a major in 
Image Design in 1 976. He graduated fro the masters program at Tokyo 
Education University in 1978. He was a professor at Nippon Electronics 
College in Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, until April 1992. Currently he is Associate 
Professor in the Department of Art at the University of Tsukuba in Ibaraki 
Prefecture. 

Kawaguchi is a “Renaissance” artist in that, his interest lies in the area 
of scientific discovery. The creation of a growth algorithm which stimulates 
the growth patterns of plants and animals found in nature launched him into 
international fame in 1982. Kawaguchi’s more recent abstract computer 
generated animations have evolved from that growth algorithm. Major turning 
points in his stylistic development are Growth: Mysterious Galaxy 1 983 
(scientific fiction type surrealism), Morphogenesis 1984 (shows new 
technological developments which allow flowing organic shapes), Eggy 1 990 
(very liquid and abstract), and Metropolis “Cell" 1993 (dark metallic colors and 
a change in algorithm). Kawaguchi’s development toward abstract 
expressionism is evident in a chronological overview of his work. 

Ryoichiro Debuchi was born in Tottori prefecture in 1958 and 
graduated from Kyushu Arts and Design University with a major in Image 
Design 1 984. He worked for two years at Tokyo’s ASCII Corporation, and 
now he works for High Tech Lab, Japan, a software and CD production 
company in Tokyo. Debuchi claims to be influenced by Yoichiro Kawaguchi. 
His work, however, includes some narrative elements, sometimes using a 
poem or story from Western literature as the basis of his animations. Debuchi 

46 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



ERiC 



.51 



values the randomness or unexpected character of the computer. He feels 
that this is the next step in a long series of art currents which sought 
randomness as a form of personal expression. These began with the 
Surrealists which influenced Dadaism and gradually found expression 
through machines in kinetic and technical art. Debuchi also feels that Guzen, 
or randomness has parallels in traditional Japanese aesthetics. 

Masaki Fujihata was born in Tokyo in 1956. He graduated from 
Tokyo National Arts University Department of Design in 1979. In 1982 he 
participated in the founding of SEDIC Corporation. In 1985 he established 
Frogs, Inc.. Currently he is Associate Professor in the Department of 
Environmental Information at Keio University’s Fujisawa Campus. 

Fujihata is a concept artist. He begins with an idea and creates a 
series of works based on that concept. Each series is different from the next. 
Different output methods also influence variation in his style; i.e., animations, 
stills, stereo lithographic sculptures, etc.. Fujihata’s work can be very 
philosophical, with undercurrents of meaning, or it can simply be an 
expression of his personal reaction to something. Much of his work is a pun, 
a joke, or a comment on the state of the arts. He often creates a computer 
algorithm with which to express his concept visually. The algorithm is the 
expression, and the output is the result. He feels, as an international artist, 
that he is no more influenced by Japan than an American or European artist 
living outside of Japan. 

Naoko Motoyoshi was born in Tokyo in 1961. She worked for 
ASCII Corporation and High Tech Lab, Japan. Now, she teaches illustration at 
Chiyoda Institute of Art and Technology. She also does contract work for 
NHK Television and the Shiseido Corporation. Motoyoshi’s animations and 
stills are usually composed of traditional Japanese imagery. 

Her work is impeccably crafted and beautifully composed. Some of it 
is considered by other artists as clich6; for instance, kimono-clad, doll-like 
figures with butterfly wings fluttering through groves of cherry blossom trees. 
Two years ago, Motoyoshi did a series of abstract stills entitled Acid Rain. 

She said that she wanted to produce some work which made a personal 
statement. Soon afterward, public demand encouraged her to return to her 
previous style. 

Naoko Tosa teaches computer graphics and video art at the 
Universal Electronic Media Education Institute in Machida, and at Musashino 
Fine Arts University. Although she has been prolific as a video artist for some 
time, her recent computer interactive work Neuro Baby has catapulted her 

47 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



into international fame. Neuro Baby is a collaboration between Tosa and the 
engineers at Fujitsu Corporation. 1 1 is based on an algorithm that detects 
pitch and mood in the human voice. A computer generated image of a baby’s 
face, reacts in various ways to people’s voices as they speak into a 
microphone. Tosa is a good example of a woman artist from Japan that 
focuses on the algorithm as expression, and does not fit the expected female 
stereotype. 

Ikuro Choh was bom in Fukuoka in 1 950. He graduated from T ama 
Fine Arts University in Graphic Design. Currently, he is an associate professor 
at Tokyo Zokei (Constructive Arts) University, and he is completing a Ph. D. 
Degree in graphic design at Tokyo National Arts University. 

Choh says that his knowledge of “fine art” is limited, because he is a 
"designer." In fact, he often does commercial work on a contract basis. Much 
of his computer graphic art wok utilizes traditional Japanese imagery such as 
kanji characters, torii gates, and bamboo. He once created a series of scrolls 
in the format of Heian emakimono by feeding Japanese washi paper into a dot 
matrix printer and printing various traditional Japanese images juxtaposed 
with 3-D geometric forms and computer programming script. Choh feels that 
the Cartesian Coordinate space used to generate 3-D graphics is based on 
Western Renaissance perspective, and that he would like to create a 
computer algorithm which is capable of expressing a more traditional 
Japanese aesthetic. 



Context 

American Views of Contemporary Japanese Art 

The following three major exhibitions of Contemporary Japanese art 
in the United States illustrate varied interpretations of contemporary 
Japanese art as portrayed in American museums in the last decade: 

A Primal Spirit: Ten Contemporary Japanese Sculptors L. A- County Museum 
of Art and the Hara Museum, 1990: Focused on ten sculptors who use 
natural materials and themes of growth, change, evolution and decay. 

Against Nature: Japanese Art in the Eighties, MIT List Visual Arts Center and 
the Cincinnati Contemporary Arts Museum, 1989: An exhibition about artists 
who work against common assumptions about Japanese art. 



48 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Tokyo: Form and Spirit, 1986, Walker Art Center, Minneapolis: A 
commissioned collaborative exhibition focusing on technology and design in 
Japanese art. 

The above are three very different exhibitions— all paint an honest 
portrait of some aspect of contemporary Japanese art. Each exhibition is 
curated from a different perspective. Some of these exhibitions were 
criticized for creating stereotypes of Japanese art. 

Identity Crises, the fear of stereotypes in Japan 

Many contemporary artists in Japan fear being labeled “Japanese." 
They prefer to be known simply as international artists. Their anxiety comes 
from the fear of being associated with clich6 images of Mt. Fuji, Samurai, and 
Geisha-images that Americans often think of when referring to Japanese art. 

Conclusions 

Compared to some of the fine art computer animations produced in 
the United States, Japanese Computer animations lack the structure of 
traditional storyboard preparations. Rather than the narrative quality of 
traditional Western animations, they consist of surreal, train-of-thought type 
imagery. They have a vague atmosphere or creative environment in which 
imaginative creatures appear, rather than a clear political or social message. 
Since Japanese computer art animations often draw on Western subject 
matter or styles, it is difficult to separate the two into distinct categories. 

Of the many currents within computer graphic art from Japan, two 
styles stand out, and sometimes conflict with one another. I call these the 
“expressive” and the “narrative” styles. The artists of the former category 
usually create a computer algorithm as a form of personal expression, and the 
computer graphic imagery that results from that algorithm form the primary 
elements of their artwork. The latter category, the “narrative” style, is imagery 
carefully planned by the artist before execution, and beautifully crafted in 
result. Animations are usually constructed using a storyboard script. They 
follow a logical sequence from one scene to the next, with a beginning, a 
climax and an end. They are often well edited, and sometimes produced by 
“designers” or artists who work for production companies. Often, the works 
in this latter category incorporate traditional Japanese imagery, which may 
give an international audience the impression of a “Japanese style." Ironically 
the storyboard production method, and it's logical build up of a sequence of 
events from beginning to end, is probably more of a Western influence, and 
may also result from an effort to produce work that appeals to a general 

49 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



international audience. The assimilation of traditional imagery combined with 
Western working methods in a High-Tech format is exemplary of 
postmodernism in Japanese art. 

On the other hand, the “expressive” style is intuitive rather than 
logical. As animation, it is sometimes criticized for its disjointed leaps.from 
one scene to the next, or one concept to another, with no beginning, climax 
or end. The expressive style may, in fact, be more closely related to 
traditional Japanese forms of expression in which personal style evolves 
unconsciously from the artist’s knowledge and practiced familiarity with 
technique. 

It is my opinion that the look of Yoichiro Kawaguchi’s work is clearly 
Western (like abstract expressionism), but it also has the influence of Oriental 
thought in its deeper meaning of evolution and change. In contrast, works 
like Namigaeshi of DaiNippon Printing Company are clearly Japanese from the 
traditional imagery, but also have the influences of the West in their logical 
storyboard production methods. 

I have found some parallels between Japanese computer graphic art 
and contemporary Japanese sculpture. Similarities are found in artist’s 
interest in nature, natural growth, unconscious growth, change, evolution, 
decay, etc.. There are also similarities in artist’s approach to form and space. 
Like other forms of contemporary art in Japan, there is rarely a political or 
social narrative. Differences can be found in the overall complexity of 
computer graphics when compared with the simplicity of form and materials in 
contemporary Japanese sculpture. 

A more concrete example of parallels between the two can be found 
in the expressive style of Yoichiro Kawaguchi. His growth algorithm uses two 
simple geometric shapes that are generated by the computer to build organic 
forms which evolve within an imaginary environment (the computer’s 
Cartesian Coordinate space). New forms evolve by randomly changing the 
variable parameters of the program. The contemporary Japanese sculptor 
Takamasu Kuniyasu, like Kawaguchi, uses two simple building blocks to 
‘grow’ his installation pieces. Kuniyasu’s primary elements are tree branches 
and bricks. He stacks these, one by one, in an intuitive fashion to form an 
installation within the space of a gallery. When working in this way, he claims 
to go into a kind of “meditative overdrive” which contributes to the random 
evolution of his work. Another contemporary Japanese sculptor, Tadashi 
Kawamata who lives in New York, creates installation pieces using scraps of 
lumber as his primary building blocks. These are assembled, sometimes with 

50 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen's Working Papers 



In Art Education 



1994-1995 



ERIC 



55 






the aid of assistants, to alter the form and space both inside and out of 
existing buildings. 

Both of these sculptors create different versions of their installations 
by variations on the same building blocks with the same working manner. The 
artists’ method of building an installation is their “algorithm." 

Is there a Japanese style in computer graphic art? 

There is no one Japanese computer graphic art style because the 
computer is a medium. As a medium, it influences “style," but since artists 
work in various styles, variety can also be found in the computer art of Japan. 

Postmodernism and Computer Graphics in Japan 

The computer graphic art of Japan, like contemporary Japanese 
sculpture, has a rich variety of influences. Computer graphic art is a mixture of 
modern electronic media with contemporary as well as traditional ideas. It is an 
example of the tensions and balance between high technology and tradition, 
the old and the new, the indigenous and the international in postmodern 
Japan. 



51 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



O 

ERIC 



56 



mentor’s introduction 



JUDITH SMITH KOROSCIK 
The Ohio State University 

One day, several years ago, Jeanie Auseon came to see me to 
inquire about pursuing graduate work and teacher certification in art 
education. Her richly varied background in interior design, educational 
counseling, and community cultural affairs set her apart from other entering 
graduate students. While I considered Jeanie's background to be an 
invaluable asset to the field of art education, Jeanie was uncertain of her own 
ability to succeed as an art educator. It is perhaps out of this uncertainty that 
Jeanie has become a keen observer of how others enter and succeed in the 
field. 



Today, Jeanie is regarded as an exceptional art teacher by her 
students, the classroom teachers at the elementary school in which she 
continues to teach part-time, other art teachers in the school district, the 
school administrators who have come to count on Jeanie's outstanding 
teaching and leadership abilities, and the parents of the elementary students 
she teaches. These accolades are echoed on campus where Jeanie has 
made outstanding contributions in the teaching of curriculum design and art 
classroom practices to preservice elementary teachers and art education 
majors. 



Despite her personal success, Jeanie continues to ask questions 
about what makes someone a good art teacher. She asks why some 
preservice teachers go on to become better teachers with each year of 
experience, while others do not. Many of Jeanie's questions have focused 
on curricular issues, such as: 

• Where do the ideas originate that preservice art teachers use 
in designing units of art instruction? 

• What drives a preservice teacher's decision to use particular 
artworks in their teaching as opposed to other works of art? 

• How do these novice teachers plan to introduce works of art 
to their students? 

• What linkages do student teachers make between the study 
of artworks and the studio component of their lessons? 

52 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art 



Education 1994-1995 



O 

ERIC 



57 



These are only a few of the questions that led Jeanie to ask about the 
nature of a teacher's pedagogical and content knowledge. If teaching and 
learning are bound by a teacher's personal knowledge, then it is essential to 
assess any causes for that knowledge to be lacking. Jeanie responds to this 
problem by asking why preservice art teachers experience problems when 
they attempt to construct lesson plans. Her intent is to discover some of the 
prevalent misunderstandings novice teachers may have about art and art 
learning so that she can make recommendations for improving teacher 
preparation in art. 

Jeanie is exceptionally well qualified to undertake this important 
research problem. Her personal history in the field suggests that she will 
bring valuable insights from the classroom to the interpretation of her 
findings, and she will discover ways to broadly disseminate her results. I can 
also envision Jeanie taking full advantage of any opportunity to apply the 
findings so that anyone entering the art teaching profession under her 
mentorship will achieve new standards of excellence as novice teachers. 



53 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



The Role of Pedagogical and Subject Matter 
Knowledge in Preservice Art Teaching 

Jeanie Auseon 

The Problem of Preservice Art Teachers' Limited Knowledge 

Base 

According to research on teaching, strong evidence exists that many 
beginning teachers have limited knowledge about their own discipline 
(Anderson, 1988, Shulman, 1986, 1987). A teacher's professional 
knowledge affects all phases of instruction-lesson content and planning, 
implementation, assessment, and reflection. In the domain of art education, 
limited knowledge affects the teacher's representation of the field of art, the 
focus of inquiry and criticism, and the criteria and method for assessment. Art 
teacher understanding also affects how (or if) studio activities are used to 
reinforce lesson content. Teaching howto teach and learning how to teach is 
difficult. Aristotle believed that ultimate understanding rested on one's ability 
to transfer knowledge into teaching (cited in Shulman, 1986). Toward 
Civilization, a report on arts education (NEA, 1988) describes the 
importance of high standards of teaching in the arts by knowledgeable 
teachers trained in the disciplines and philosophy of the arts . . . with a well 
developed "learner knowledge” and "teaching methodology" (p. 105). The 
fields of education and art education need more information on how art 
teacher knowledge is translated into art instruction as this in turn affects the 
knowledge their students will come to have about art. 

The Relationship of Teacher Knowledge and Art Teaching 

Current research on teaching describes a knowledge base of 
teachers and investigates how that knowledge affects lesson planning and 
instruction. Through research, several models of teacher knowledge have 
been developed (o.g., Elbas, 1983; Leinhardt and Smith, 1985, Shulman, 
1986, 1987, Wilson, Shulman & Richert, 1987). These models were used as 
a foundation in the design of this study. Though differences exist between 
the number of sub-components identified in each of the models, there is a 
general agreement that four main categories of professional knowledge for 
teaching are: (1) general pedagogical knowledge, (2) subject matter 
knowledge, (3) pedagogical content knowledge, and (4) knowledge of 
context (Grossman, 1990, p. 5, see Figure 1). 

The following operational definitions describe the three main 
categories of teacher knowledge used in this study. 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s 



Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 




53 



Figure 1. Model of Teacher Knowledge 



Figure 1.1. Model of Teacher Knowledge 




Grossman 1990 



55 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



General Pedagogical Knowledge 

Research literature defines this as the knowledge of teaching and 
learning theories, principles, and processes that cut across disciplines 
(Reynolds & Strom, 1988). It is also the skill in th use of teaching methods 
and strategies that are not subject-specific (Gudmundsdottir, 1987, p. 4). 

Subject Matter Knowledge 

This is the teacher's understandings of the subject she/he teaches 
(Gudmundsdottir, 1987, p. 6). The depth and organization of this knowledge 
influences how teachers structure and teach lessons (Wilson & Winberg, 
1988). Dewey (1904) referred to the role of subject matter knowledge in 
teaching and suggested that scholarly knowledge of a discipline is different 
than the knowledge needed for teaching. 

Pedagogical Content Knowledge 

Findings from research centers (e.g., the Knowledge Growth in 
Teaching project at Stanford, and the Center for the Learning and Teaching 
of Elementary Subjects at Michigan State University) have clarified how 
subject matter knowledge and general pedagogical knowledge are 
transformed into pedagogical content knowledge. 

Researchers have studied teachers at different professional levels 
during the process of lesson planning and teaching to analyze this 
transformation. A teacher's pedagogical content knowledge is described as 
the ability to: 

1 . understand the central topics, skills, and attitudes in a field 

2. know what aspects of these topics will be interesting and/or 
difficult to understand for students 

3. develop and/or select examples that best represent central 
ideas in a field 

4. question students effectively about these topics (Shulman 
and Sykes, 1986, p. 6). 

This study examines the organization, and utilization of 
pedagogical content knowledge by beginning art teachers. Because several 

56 




Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



sub-components of teacher knowledge are documented in teacher 
education literature, this study limits its examination to the variables of teacher 
understanding of learners' prior knowledge and teacher subject matter 
knowledge regarding key concepts. Cognitive research findings verify that 
teacher consideration of these factors might promote higher-order teaching 
and learning. Operation definitions of learners' prior knowledge and key 
concepts are as follows: 



1 . Learners' prior knowledge - All the accumulated knowledge, 

(including misunderstandings), skills and experiences a 
student currently possesses; what the student already 
knows about the material being studied (Koroscik, 1922). 

2. Key concepts - The basic ideas that lie at the heart of a 

discipline and allow for rich connections (Prawat, 1989, p. 6). 

In a report on professional education for teachers, Howsam, et. al., 
(1976) stated that "If the promise of the teaching profession is to be 
achieved, we must attend to the processes by which its knowledge base is 
developed and transmitted." Recent studies on teaching and learning have 
focused on teachers' roles, thoughts, actions, planning, thinking, decision- 
making, and identification of pedagogical principles and theories (Porter & 
Brophy, 1988). Such studies explain how teachers learn to teach and 
describe how they teach as a result of what they have learned. 



Understanding the impact of teacher knowledge is essential if education in 
general and art education specifically are to reshape teacher preparation as a 
means of improving the overall quality of art education in this country 
(Carnegie, 1986; Holmes Group, 1986; Shulman, 1986, 1987; Bellon, Bellon 
& Blank, 1992). 



Research Questions 

Questions addressed in this study have already been examined in 
areas of education which study how their disciplines are best transformed into 
school subjects. These questions have been transposed to the field of art 
teacher education for the purposes of this study. To examine the effects of 
pedagogical and subject matter knowledge on preservice art teaching, and to 
fill a gap in existing teacher education research, this study addresses the 
following questions: 



1 . What understandings do preservice art teachers have about 
learners' prior knowledge in art instruction? 



57 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



3 

ERJC 



B2 



2. How does a knowledge of learners affect the planning and 

content of art instruction? 

3. What do preservice art teachers select as key concepts in art 

instruction? 

4. How do selected key concepts affect the content and process 

of art instruction? 

5. How do preservice art teachers understand the role of studio in 

art instruction? 

6. How does the understanding of the function of studio affect the 

planning and content of art instruction? 

Overview of Research Methods 

A study with three phases was designed to explore these questions. 
The phases sought to incorporate the six aspects of pedagogical reasoning 
and action identified at the Knowledge Growth in Teaching project at 
Stanford (Gudmundsdottir, 1987). Those are: (1) comprehension, (2) 
transformation, (3) instruction, (4) evaluation, (5) reflection, and (6) new 
comprehension (p. 5). 

As previously mentioned, two sub-components of Grossman's 
(1990) model of teacher knowledge were selected as variables to be 
examined in each phase of this study. The variables are: (1) teacher 
understanding of the role of learners' prior knowledge, and (2) teachers' 
subject matter knowledge as represented by key concepts in art teaching. 

The function of studio in art lesson planning as it pertains to these 
two variables will also be examined. The design, participants, materials and 
procedures for each of the three phases are discussed below. 

Phase One: Lesson Plan Critique 

This phase analyzes student art teachers' comprehension and 
transformation of information into lesson plans. To examine student art 
teachers' understanding of the roles of learners' prior knowledge, key 
concepts, and studio in lesson planning, preservice teachers were asked to 
critique what they considered to be their most "successful" lesson plan from 
student teaching. They were given six questions to consider. 

58 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen's Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



O 

ERIC 



63 



Participants were four weeks into the sixteen weeks of student 
teaching when they were given this fifteen minute writing activity as part of 
the required coursework in their weekly Student Teaching Seminar. A 
critique form was provided on which they explained their understandings of 
their learners' prior knowledge, the key concepts selected for the lesson and 
overall unit, and the reasons they selected these key concepts. Participants 
were asked to describe any connections they made between the learners' 
prior knowledge and/or key concepts and the studio activity in this lesson 
plan. These critiques were analyzed as pre-test data. Three educational 
interventions occurred after this critique. These interventions were in the 
form of a workshop. After the workshop, a re-critique of this lesson plan 
(post-test data) was collected and is described in phase three. 

The nineteen participants in the study were art education majors at 
Buffalo State College, Buffalo, New York. A weekly seminar and sixteen 
weeks of student teaching are part of the requirements for teaching 
certification by the College's Department of Art Education. All participants 
had completed the required methods and studio courses for art teaching 
certification; a few had additional studio experience as they were practicing 
artists or had an undergraduate degree in art and were obtaining art teaching 
certification. None of the participants had previous formal teaching 
experience, though a few had worked with learners in informal art education 
settings. Fourteen of the nineteen participants were female, nine were male. 

Phase Two: Workshop on Cognitive Teaching-Learning 

Research and Art Teaching 

Phase two focused on the aspects of instruction and evaluation. It 
occurred in the form of an educational workshop during a weekly Student 
Teaching Seminar. The workshop has three teaching-learning activities. For 
the first activity, participants observed a summarized, videotaped unit of art 
instruction. Participants observed an interview with the art teacher from the 
first video as the second activity, direct instruction on cognitive learning 
research that advocates the consideration of learners' prior knowledge and 
teaching with key concepts was the third activity in this workshop. The 
workshop lasted approximately two-and-one-half hours. 

Activity One: Participant Observation of Art Instruction 

This activity is within standard practices in teacher education of 
requiring preservice teachers to observe and respond to experienced 
teaching during field observations (Bellon, Bellon & Blank, 1992). To 

59 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



understand how student art teachers consider learners' prior knowledge, 
key concepts, and studio during art instruction, participants were asked 
to observe a summarized, videotaped unit of actual art instruction. 

While watching the video, the nineteen participants were cued to 
think about and respond only to the variable in this study - learner's prior 
knowledge, and key concepts in lesson planning. For consistency, all 
participants observed the same videotape of art instruction. 

In order to provide the same teaching scenarios from which 
participants could make observations and comments, a summarized, 
videotaped unit of art instruction was produced. Several experienced art 
teachers were initially observed to determine whose teaching-learning 
activities best demonstrated observable connections between learning- 
teaching theories and practice. The sequential teaching of key concepts, 
the consideration of students' prior knowledge in lesson planning and 
implementation, and studio activities that reinforced lesson content were 
other criteria in the selection of which teacher to videotape. 

The elementary art teacher selected for videotaping has taught art for 
twenty-six years. She planned a summer visual art program for fourth and fifth 
graders. The theme for the eight session, eighteen hours of art instruction 
was "Stories and Storytellers in Art." This summer program provided the 
content for the videotaped unit of art instruction. Each of the eight sessions 
were videotaped. While editing the eighteen hours of art instruction, it 
became necessary to establish face and content validity of the summarized 
version of the art instruction - so as not to misrepresent what actually 
happened for the purposes of this study. Therefore, a rough prototype of 
the proposed final video was sent to three expert judges whose research 
interest is in teacher education and higher-order teaching and learning. They 
were asked to evaluate the prototype video and participant response 
booklets, and to consider the learners' prior knowledge and the key concepts 
in the video. General suggestions which might improve the sequence and 
content of the video and participant response booklet were also sought. A 
few minor changes were made as a result of these face and content validity 
determinations. A thirty-four minute video was the result of this collaboration. 
The videotape was edited in a professional facility. 

During the Student Teaching Seminar/Workshop, a prepared 
protocol instructed participants to observe the videotaped art lessons and 
respond in written form in their participant booklet. A field test and two pilot 
tests with the videos and participant response booklets were accomplished 

60 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



with art education majors prior to performing this study. There was 

an A component and a B component in the data collected during this activity. 

A ten minute break took place between interventions one and two. 
There was a table of snacks; participants had been advised at the beginning 
of the workshop that they would not be able to leave the classroom during 
the workshop. 

Activity Two: Participant Observation of Teacher Interview 

The second activity of the workshop was planned to give the 
participants an opportunity to listen to an experienced teacher talk about her 
decision-making process during lesson planning. By listening to the teacher 
from the first video discuss what she considered to be the learners' prior 
knowledge and the key concepts in each lesson, participants had a 
perspective in addition to their own to ponder regarding the learners' prior 
knowledge and the key concepts in the overall unit. There was an A 
component and a B component in the data collected during this activity 

Activity Three: Direct Instruction on Cognitive 

Teaching-Learning Research and Art Teaching 

Direct instruction bn cognitive learning research was the third activity 
in this workshop; for when teachers use both practical and research 
knowledge as the basis for instructional decisions, teaching strategies will be 
more effective (Bellon, Bellon, & Blank, 1992, p. 4). 

The definitions of terms such as cognitive learning, higher-order 
thinking, learners' prior knowledge and key concepts were presented. Up 
until this point, learners' prior knowledge and key concepts had been 
explained only with a contextual statement about their educational 
importance in higher-order teaching-learning. (The statements prefaced 
participant observation questions in the participant response booklets). The 
purpose of not defining the terms earlier in the study was to ascertain the 
preservice teachers' understanding of these terms as baseline data before 
the direct instruction. 

During the direct instruction, overhead transparencies were used as 
teaching aids, and segments from the first video were shown as examples of 
research theories being put into practice. The following segments provided 
real-life examples/non-examples of cognitive instruction: 

• the teacher attempting to assess the learners' prior knowledge 

61 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



• the teacher bridging the learners' prior knowledge and new lesson 
content using critical inquiry 

• the teacher attempting to clarify possible misconceptions in the young 
learners' prior knowledge 

• the teacher using a key concept in two different lessons--same big idea, 
different artists and artworks as illustrations of the key concept 

• the teacher using a familiar analogy from the learners' prior knowledge to 
illustrate a key concept about the theme of storytelling 

Two brief background questionnaires were completed at the 
conclusion of the workshop in order to gain information about the 
participants' art training and teaching and studio experience. 

Phase Three: Lesson Plan Re-Critique 

The third and last phase of the study focused on the student 
teachers' new comprehension and reflection. The participants were asked to 
re-critique their original lesson plan. As in phase one, they were cued to 
reflect on their decision-making regarding the learners' prior knowledge, key 
concepts, and the use of studio in their lesson planning. 

Phase Three: Follow-up Interview 

A follow-up thirty minute semi-structured interview occurred with 
twelve of the nineteen participants to conclude this third and final phase of 
the study. The twelve participants volunteered for this activity as it was not 
required in the seminar's coursework. These audio-taped interviews were 
designed to examine the reflections of preservice art teachers on learners' 
prior knowledge and key concepts in lesson planning. These interviews 
were also planned to infer how transfer from the teacher's knowledge base 
affects lesson content, implementation, assessment and reflection. Open- 
ended questions were asked about teaching experience, lesson planning 
experience, the use of artworks in teaching and studio experience. 

If there were questions about any of the participant's responses from 
phases one or two, an attempt was made to clarify the responses at this time. 
Participants were asked to explain their selection of key concepts and 
artworks for lesson content, and the methods they used to "connect" these 

62 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 



1994-1995 



0 



67 



ideas with prior knowledge and existing curriculum. They also explained the 
way in which studio functions in their lesson planning. 

In conclusion, each participant was asked to respond to the 
statement “After reflecting on the workshop on higher-order thinking, how do 
you now consider higher-order thinking and learning in your own lesson 
planning?" 

Data Analysis 

The study is inferential in nature, with the purpose of generalizing to 
a theoretical framework about the acquisition, development, and utilization of 
preservice art teachers' pedagogical content knowledge. Studies of this 
nature do not propose to generalize to populations or universes, but to 
expand and generalize theories (Yin, 1984, p. 25). Published strategies for 
analyzing qualitative data (i.e., Lincoln & Guba, 1985; Merriam, 1988) will be 
implemented. Novice teacher characteristics (i.e., Glaser & Chi, 1988; 
Grossman, Wilson, & Shulman, 1989; Koroscik, 1990) will also be 
considered. 

Categories, processes, and models from general learning research 
will be further identified and applied to the domain of art education. The two 
main variables will be investigated from the following written data: 

1 . lesson plans 

2. lesson plan critiques 

3. lesson plan re-critiques 

4. participants' responses to observations of actual teaching 

5. participants' reflections from listening to an experienced art 

teacher's explanations of her lesson planning 

6. participants' new comprehensions (i.e., follow-up interviews) 

7. background information from participant questionnaires 

Expected Findings 

It is expected that general pedagogical knowledge and subject 
matter knowledge will affect the content and process of instruction by 

63 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers 



In Art Education 1994-1995 



O 

ERIC 

yAi.Tilin.ii.’.lTLJ 



68 



preservice art teachers. These knowledges affect what and how they decide 
to teach. It is predicted that teachers with shallow subject matter knowledge 
will select key concepts that are not central to the field of art. Such concepts 
regarding artists might give little indication of how that artist has been 
influenced by earlier artists, by artists from other cultures, or by the beliefs 
and values of her/his time and place in history. Consequently, it is likely that 
learners would not have opportunities to make connections between artists, 
artforms, the study of history and cultures through art, and personal art 
making. The representation of key ideas in the form of artworks would also be 
constrained due to the teacher's shallow understanding of the world of art. 
The use of comparative exemplars and critical inquiry might be bounded by 
the teacher's inability to select artworks that represent a variety of artforms, 
different levels of abstraction and more than one culture and/or historical 
period. 



If preservice art teachers do not recognize the importance of 
considering learners' prior knowledge in lesson planning, their lessons will 
lack connections and relevance between the learners' prior knowledge and 
new information. Such unrelated content will not likely provide 
motivations/strategies to access previously learned information and transfer it 
to the new lesson. In addition, the misconceptions within a learner's prior 
knowledge might not be addressed. 

Certainly an art teachers' studio experience is predicted to influence 
the range of studio activities they select to teach their students. Limited 
studio experience in two-dimensional and three-dimensional art making could 
cause inexperienced teachers to focus on either two-dimensional or three- 
dimensional art making. The way in which art teachers understand the 
function of studio in art instruction causes them to use it as reinforcement of 
lesson content or perhaps as a separate art making activity. 

It is predicted that the intervention activities in this study will 
elicit teacher reflection and new comprehension about research on teaching- 
learning and lesson planning. 

Significance of the Study 

This study is important to the field of art education for several 
reasons. This study isolates and investigates the pedagogical content 
knowledge that tomorrow's art teachers bring to lesson planning and art 
instruction. The fact that it holds the possibility for being the first of a series of 
studies by this researcher about art teachers' acquisition, development, and 
utilization of pedagogical content knowledge means that an existing gap in 

64 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working 



Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



S9 



general education and art education literature might be lessened. 
Furthermore, this study gives art education a common language with other 
domains in education. Most importantly this study will demonstrate that the 
quality of art teaching is affected by teacher education. By using research 
variables and questions generated from well-regarded programs such as the 
Knowledge Growth in Teaching project and the Center for the Learning and 
Teaching of Elementary Subjects, this study attempts to connect with 
existing studies that have field and pilot tested similar research questions. 

Key ideas are just now being identified in domains such as 
mathematics (Lamped, 1 986) and science (Chi, Feltocich, & Glaser, 1 981 ; 
Larkin, 1 982). Though it is not likely or desirable that a field such as ad 
education will come to a consensus about all the "big ideas" for instruction, 
some ideas in a discipline are simply more impodant than others (Prawat, 

1 989, p. 6). This study seeks to identify what beginning ad teachers 
consider to be impodant ideas and concepts for ad instruction. 

This study will explore how the unique phenomenon of studio 
functions in ad planning and teaching by preservice teachers. Is studio used 
to reinforce lesson content? The personal reflections of these preservice ad 
teachers upon their own knowledge and experience has relevance to 
teacher preparation/instruction. Learning through research about preservice 
ad teachers' knowledge and experiences gives us a sneak preview of the ad 
teaching of tomorrow. Regardless of technological advancements in 
instruction and knowledge acquisition, teachers (including teacher 
educators) are still at the head of instruction. Thus, a study such as this on 
teaching and learning will always be timely. 



65 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



References 



Anderson, C. (1988). The Role of Education in the Academic Disciplines in 
Teacher Preparation. In Woolfolk, A. (Ed.), Research 
Perspectives on the Graduate Preparation of Teachers 
(pp. 88-107). New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. 

Bellon, J. J., Bellon, E. C., & Blank, M. A. (1992). Teaching From a 
Research Knowledge Base. New York: Macmillan. 

Dewey, J. (1904/1964). The Relation of Theory to Practice in Education. In 
R. Archambault (ed.), Dewey on Education. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press. 

Carnegie Task Force on Teaching as a Profession. (1986). A Nation 

Prepared: Teachers for the 21st Century. Washington, DC: 

Carnegie Forum on Education and the Economy. 

Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and 

Representation of Physics Problems by Experts and Novices. 
Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152. 

Elbaz, F. (1983). Teacher Thinking: A Study of Practical 
Knowledge. New York: Nichols Publishing Company. 

Glaser, R„ & Chi, M. T. H. (1988). Overview. In M. T. H. Chi, R. Glaser, & M. J. 
Farr (Eds.), The Nature of Expertise (pp. xv-xxviii). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Gudmundsdottir, S. (1987). Pedagogical Content Knowledge: Teachers' 
Ways of Knowing. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association. New Orleans. 

Grossman, P. L„ Wilson, S. M., & Shulman, L. S. (1989). Teachers of 
Substance: Subject Matter Knowledge for Teaching. In M. C. 
Reynolds (Ed.), Knowledge Base for the Beginning 
Teacher, (pp. 23-46). Oxford: Pergamon. 

Grossman, P. L. (1990). The Making of a Teacher. Teacher 

Knowledge and Teacher Education. New York: Columbia 
University, Teachers College Press. 



66 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



ERIC 



71 



Holmes Group. (1986). Tomorrow’s Teachers: A Report of the 
Holmes Group. 

Howsam, R. B„ Corrigan, D. C„ Denemark, G. W„ & Nash, R. J. (1976). 
Educating a Profession. Washington, DC: American 
Association of Colleges for Teacher Education. 

Koroscik, J. S. (1990). Novice-expert Differences in Understanding and 

Misunderstanding Art and Their Implications for Student Assessment 
in Art Education. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association, Boston. 

Koroscik, J. S. (1992). Assessing Student Learning in the Visual Arts: 

Application of a Theoretical Model. Paper presented at the annual 
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, 

San Francisco. 

Lamped, M. (1986). Knowing, Doing, and Teaching Multiplication. 

Cognition and Instruction, 3, 305-342. 

Larkin, J. H. (1982). The Cognition of Learning Physics. American 
Journal of Physics, 49, 534-541. 

Leinhardt, G. & Smith, D. (1985). Expedise in Mathematica Instruction: 
Subject Matter Knowledge. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 77 (3), 247-271. 

Lewis, A. & Smith, D. (1993). Defining Higher Order Thinking. Theory Into 
Practice, 32 (3), Summer, 131-137. College of Education, The 
Ohio State University. 

Lincoln, Y. S. & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic Inquiry. Newbury Park, 
CA: Sage. 

Merriam, S. B. (1988). Case Study Research in Education: A 
Qualitative Approach. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

The National Endowment for the Ads. (1988). Toward Civilization: A 
Report on Arts Education. Washington, C. C.: Author. 

Porier, A. C., & Brophy, J. (1988). Synthesis of Research on Good 

Teaching: Insights From the Work of the Institute for Research on 
Teaching. Educational Leadership, 45 (8), 74-85. 

67 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Prawat, R. (1989). Promoting Access to Knowledge, Strategy, and 
Disposition in Students: A Research Synthesis. Review of 
Educational Research, 59(1), 1-41. 

Reynolds, M. C. & Strom, S. M. (1988). Knowledge Bases for the Beginning 
Teacher. Paper presented at the February 20 Annual Meeting of the 
American Association for Colleges of Teacher Education, New 
Orleans, Louisiana. 

Shulman, L. S. (1986). Those Who Understand: Knowledge Growth in 
Teaching. Educational Researcher, 15(2), 4-14. 

Shulman, L. S. (1987). Knowledge and Teaching: Foundations of the New 
Reform. Harvard Educational Review, 57(1), 1-22. 

Shulman, L. S. & Sykes, G. (1986). A National Board for Teaching? In 
Search of a Bold Standard: A Report for the Task Force 
on Teaching as a Profession. New York: Carnegie 
Corporation, p. 6. 

Wilson, S. M„ Shulman, L. S. & Richert, A. E. (1987). 150 Different Ways of 
Knowing: Representations of Knowledge in Teaching. In J. 
Calderhead (Ed.), Exploring Teachers' Thinking (pp. 104-124). 
London: Cassess. 

Wilson, S. M. & Wineburg, S. S. (1988) Peering at History Through Different 
Lenses: The Role of Disciplinary Perspectives in Teaching History. 

Teachers College Record, 89 (4), 524-539. 

Yin, R. K. (1984). Case Study Research. Newbury Park, CA: Sage 
Publications, Inc.. 



68 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen's Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



mentor’s introduction 



LARRY A. KANTNER 
University of Missouri 



Susan Dodson earned her B.A. in art, speech and theatre from 
Morehead State University and her M.A. in English from Indiana University 
and Manchester College. She is currently an Associate Professor of Art at Me 
Pherson College, Kansas and pursuing her doctoral degree in art education 
at the University of Missouri. 

Her background, not only in art, but also in psychology, American 
studies, English, aviation, interpersonal communications, theatre and critical 
thinking and writing has provided her an interdisciplinary approach to life and 
the creative phenomena. 

Undergirded by the beliefs that life is interconnected and art is 
inclusive of all life, Susan takes a synthesizing approach to her teaching. She 
encourages creativity and the creative spirit, and invites students to be 
authentic, to find meaning in the creative process, and to experience the 
pulse of life--- their own creativity. 

It is not then surprising that she is deeply involved in her own creative 
endeavors which include watercolor, acrylic, pastel, fibers and jewelry. These 
media help give voice to her interest in the nature of creativity and the 
creative process. Susan grew up active in ballet, the theatre, and the visual 
arts. As a teacher, her experience with her college students she became 
interested and concerned with thinking and behavioral patterns that might 
effect creativity in many young adults. Her belief that creativity is a desirable 
and natural quality of what it means to be human serves as the grounding for 
her realization. She began to explore relationships between the nature of 
creativity and educational situations where creativity is affected daily. This 
interest has evolved into her present ethnographic research investigation on 
transformation through the multi-dimensional creative process. 



69 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers in Art Education 1994-1995 



An Ethnographic Investigation of Creativity 
In Practicing Visual ArtistsTTeachers: 

A Conceptual Paper 

Susan Dodson 

I live of my dying, and considering it well, 

I live happily in my unhappy state 

And he who knows not how such anguish is possible 

Let him enter the fire with me, and be consumed by fate. 

Michelangelo Buonarroti 



Michelangelo’s words bum with the passion of a person totally 
consumed by the creative spirit. His words crackle across the centuries, 
challenging us to be awake. 

Be awake to what? To authenticity. To meaning. To becoming 
human. T o creativity-- to the artist within. 

Creativity can unfold into a tapestry of transformation. Like the 
tapestry, creativity confronts and engages us with multiple strands that rise to 
the surface only to disappear again in the mysterious labyrinth before us. We 
see evidence of the interconnection of all the singular threads; we recognize 
that chaos has been transformed into order, weaving a visual harmony, a 
unified whole. This process of creativity, transforming concepts, ideas, and 
thoughts into concrete realities is an integral part of meaningful learning. 

Transformation, in this context, refers to a multi-dimensional creative 
thought process that results in an expansion of an individual’s thoughts 
and awareness such that life is experienced more holistically. Creative 
engagement becomes more meaningful and relevant to everyday life. This 
enlargement of consciousness likewise enlarges meaning for the individual 
through a creative thought process that is not observable, but whose 
outcome may be observable. The quiet connections that lie beneath the 
surface of forming and transforming through creative engagement pose a 
web of questions. What are the connections? How do they occur? What 
does transformation, or personally significant growth, mean in the context 
of creative endeavor? How is it experienced? What external and internal 
conditions encourage it? How does a practicing artist who is an educator 
effectively foster creativity and such significant learning experiences through 

70 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



art? How can an artist/educator most effectively elicit the whole person using 
paint, pastels, day, and other media? 

The primary purpose of this study is to investigate the nature of 
creativity and the creative process in the visual arts. The study explores select 
phenomena of creative endeavor in the lives of three artists who also teach. 
These phenomena include how creativity functions in the artists’ lives- 
including teaching; how creativity interacts with self-perception and life 
experiences; and how creativity is encouraged by these artist -teachers in the 
college classroom. 

Questions of the inquiry evolved from personal experience after 
studying with Peter London and Seymour Segal at the University of 
Massachusetts, N. Dartmouth, in 1 990. This proved to be a turning point in 
my own awareness of the power of imagery and creativity in relationship to 
centeredness and connectedness. I observed the potential and 
experienced the impact of the creative process as a beneficial and personally 
transforming phenomenon; since then, I have wanted to understand the 
dynamics better, to encourage my students to grow in more integrated and 
meaningful ways, and to advance research on this subject in art education. 

Course objectives, in the studies with London and Segal, included a 
wide variety of guided imageries, followed by specifically focused art 
expressions; these experiences concluded with discussion, either in small 
groups or the whole class. The discussions encouraged reflection, 
synthesis, clarification, and understanding of self and one another. 

Students, mostly older adults, were invited to participate. The only rule was 
that we suspend judgment and quiet any inner critical voices. 

The suspension of judgment allowed the adult participant, long 
familiar with constraints of convention, to experiment, to express, to risk, 
and to grow. The physical, mental, and verbal creative processes, in total, 
fostered several significant learning experiences: (a) honesty with self; 

(b) a deeper grasp of meaning in life, within and beyond the self; (c) a more 
acute awareness of wholeness, of connectedness with life; and (d) greater 
openness to one’s creativity. The totality of this unique experience was 
integrative, holistic, and transformative, to varying degrees. 

I not only have observed these positive energies as a student but 
also as a college art teacher. One class was a particularly challenging mix of 
students, and included two women acting out rebellion; two extremely shy 
and docile women; a very outspoken opinionated man; and a former 
construction worker whose reputation had been built on street fighting. This 
group did not congeal well; rather, they argued vehemently. These dynamics 

71 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



clearly called for objectives to facilitate better communication and attitudes, 
and clearer personal meaning of content. 

These objectives were approached by combining several guided- 
imagery and hands-on exercises with reflective discussion. One exercise, 
from Peter London’s book, No More Secondhand Art, was particularly 
beneficial to the class, “ Random Acts of Kindness, Senseless Gifts of 
Beauty" (1989, p. 162). This encounter asked participants to recall kindness 
shown to them, to meditate on this, and then express these experiences on 
paper with paints. Although reflective discussion was optional, the class 
chose to share their images and meanings. The transforming energy 
described previously became evident in my own students. Class members 
stopped biting at each other and began genuine dialogue that enhanced 
learning. The two rebellious women talked openly about their self- 
destructive behaviors and how our creative activities moved them toward 
greater honesty. The shy students took more active roles, and the 
outspoken “challenger of all viewpoints” began to mellow and listen. Such 
shifting dynamics appeared to be a small miracle. 

Another change occurred that further supported the question of art 
as a holistic and transformative engagement. As students began painting for 
the “Random Acts of Kindness" engagement, the “street-fighter” individual 
briskly left the room in a decidedly “no-thanks" attitude. I encountered him in 
the hall, where he stated that “ acts of kindness and gratitude were no one 
else’s business.” I invited him to step into the jewelry room to talk. As we 
talked, he shared about loved ones who had been kind. His clenched jaws 
relaxed and his whole demeanor changed as he remembered the touch of 
his grandfather. While continuing, he picked up a wire and began twisting it, 
looking at me most of the time. When our talk ended, he handed me the wire, 
saying it was a “little gift.” He had beautifully formed the wire into the word 
“Life." He had not only participated, but had experienced some degree of 
positive change. As London states, “Art is not only pretty, Art is Power. 
Power not only to transform the face of the page , but the quality of our lives” 
(1991, March). 

Art, like life, is a gift— a deep and vastly rich tapestry of expression and 
meaning. Inherent within the gift are many invitations to us, as both creators 
and recipients of life and art, to meaningfully participate in the creative 
process. We, as art educators, have unique opportunities to facilitate such 
creative engagement, thereby helping to enrich and elevate life for our 
students. This means encouraging students to explore beyond the surface 
of decoration, formal analysis, art as object, and art as entertainment, to 
experience connection with life and life-giving sources. The spirit of art 



72 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



invites us to be authentic and fully human, a particular challenge in 
contemporary western lite. 

We live in an age saturated with competitive, materialistic, and 
mechanistic attitudes; consequently, life is largely fragmented and 
secularized. Teachers, being products of contemporary life, cannot help but 
reflect current cultural values, to some degree, in the classroom. The creative 
encounter that results in art, inadvertently then, can be reduced to a 
commodity, a novelty, a form of entertainment-merely an object. Henri 
(1984) states that, “One of the curses of art is ‘Art.’ This filling up of things 
with ‘decoration,’ with by-play, to make them beautiful” (p. 204). Is it any 
surprise that creative engagement and its resulting art are often perceived as 
peripheral and irrelevant to valued and meaningful experience? 

The creative encounter, in the form of art is not, however, peripheral, 
irrelevant, or outside of ordinary or even, extraordinary, experience. Art and 
the creative process are closely connected to real life, as demonstrated by 
the theoretical framework for this research. The framework is comprised of 
writings by Martin Buber and Rollo May. The study’s central focus deals with 
the connection of creativity to everyday life. Buber’s holistic philosophy 
encompasses the total theoretical framework in that he addresses the 
creative person in the larger context, in relation to human and spiritual life. 
Rollo May’s philosophy parallels that of Buber, but with more attention to 
specific stages of the creative process. 

Buber distinguishes between the world of experience, “I- It,” and that 
of relation, “l-Thou.” The world of relation involves three spheres: our life 
with nature, with human beings, and with spiritual beings (p. 6). Central to his 
thinking is the concept of “l-Thou,” which implies an attitude of respect for 
and acceptance of ourselves and all life. Buber’s living mutual relation and 
genuine dialogue “elevate the quality of life to a preferred state” (London, 
1989, p. 8) . The result of genuine dialogue is that “the other is affirmed as 
what he really is, and thus he is confirmed as a creature” (Smith, 1 967, p. 27). 
As Buber succinctly states,” All real living is meeting” (1958, p.11). All of life 
is infused with grace, through which we can experience wholeness and 
harmony. 

In contrast, the world of experience encompasses an attitude of 
objectifying life, human beings and nature alike; Buber refers to this as Tit.” 
The “l-lt” mindset dehumanizes and despiritualizes life, and thus, diminishes 
creativity. Buber states, “If I face a human being as my Thou’.. .he is not a 
thing among things, and does not consist of things” (1958, p. 8). Moreover, 
a person needs a certain receptiveness in order to grow, one that cannot be 
forced. Buber says, ‘The Thou meets me through grace-it is not found by 

73 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



seeking. But my speaking of the primary word, it is an act of my being, is 
indeed the act of my being” (1958, p.1 1 ) • 

Buber relates this essential act of being to the creative process of art. 
The process of forming an image of the relation between human beings 
flames the power of art. Buber clarifies that “It is not the image taken from the 
mind of the artist (the I) or from the other he portrays (the Thou), but of that 
which occurs in the encounter" (Kohanski, 1975, p.1 56). Thus, Buber posits 
that the essence of art represents relationship, the “image of the 
between... neither the mystery of the things nor that of the spirit.. .but the 
relation between the two” (Kohanski, 1975, p.1 56). 

More specifically, Buber distinguishes between two classes of 
relation that humans establish with the environment, other humans, and with 
objects (Cohen, 1983, p.203) . Buber refers to one kind of relation as 
“realization” and the other as “orientation.” 

The orienting person, in relation to the creative process, is primarily 
interested in tangible benefits and advancement opportunities as opposed 
to it’s intrinsic values. As such, creativity is sought for profit and gain. Thus, 
art becomes a commodity. Buber describes orienting persons as failing to 
realize experience wholly. He states, ‘Theirs is a substitute for life, a surface 
existence in which life’s substance is exchanged for it’s husk, to which they 
apply the elegant epithets of culture, religion, progress, tradition, and 
intellectuality” (Cohen, 1983, p. 205) . 

By contrast, realizing persons embrace the creative process and art 
for their intrinsic values, and they experience these with all their senses. 
Buber explains that realization” has to do with those situations of exalted 
experience in life that arise in moments of intense experience and perception 
[and that] here we have the source of the creativity and daring of the human 
spirit” (Cohen, 1983, p. 204). Buber believes that the faculty of realization is 
strongest in the creative person, “in whom the soul’s capacity to realize 
reaches such a pitch of concentrated energy that he creates reality for 
everyone” (Cohen, p. 204) . Buber acknowledges that realization cannot 
operate all the time; simply being human prevents this. Even the most 
creative persons alternate between orienting and realizing, with moments of 
full realization being those in which the spirit feels joy and is exalted. These 
moments are of course, followed by moments of orientation. 

Buber’s concept of the creative person finds support from May’s 
insightful book, The Courage to Create. Creativity requires courage. 
Courage, requiring a centeredness within one’s being, is the capacity to 
move ahead in spite of despair (1980, p. 3) . To illustrate, May describes 




Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Cezanne, who, knowing his paintings to be of a major significance, was 
haunted by constant and painful self-doubt; yet Cezanne pushed on in spite 
of doubt and strong discouragement. May succinctly states, “Commitment is 
healthiest when it is not without doubt, but in spite of doubt” (p. 14) . 

May proposes four elements to his theory of creative process. First, 
the creative act is an encounter. For example, the artist may encounter a 
landscape, an idea, or an inner vision, which may or may not involve voluntary 
effort. In contrast, “escapist creativity is that which lacks encounter” (p. 40) . 
The second element is intensity or absorption, having heightened 
consciousness, and being wholly involved in the creation. The creator often 
experiences joy, referred to as exalted spirit by Buber, originating from the 
experience of actualizing one’s potentialities (pp. 44, 45) . The third element 
is purpose, which involves all levels of creative experience. We can will to 
give ourselves to the encounter with commitment (p. 46) . The fourth 
element of creative encounter is ecstasy. This describes those rare holistic 
moments when the subconscious and unconscious unite with the conscious 
to produce a “suprarational” experience (p. 49) . Ecstasy involves the total 
person, and to a degree, heals the split between subject and object so typical 
of Western thought and activity (p. 49) . 

The role of unconscious dimensions of experience is integral to 
May’s theory, particularly as the source for the creator’s breakthrough ideas. 
The predominant feelings from breakthrough area are gratification and joy. 
Such insight is not random, but comes in accordance with a pattern 
determined by commitment and conscious effort. Part of that effort requires 
solitude. Purposeful separation from the forever intruding world is essential 
to the artist. Solitude allows insights from the unconscious to emerge. When 
a breakthrough does occur, it tends to strike the creator as true. The artist 
glimpses a new reality, and such an experience may have a spiritual quality. 
May finds that many artists Teel that something holy is going on when they 
paint, that there is something in the act of creating which is like a religious 
revelation” (1980. p.75) . 

Summarily, May proposes that the artist’s “passion for form is a way of 
trying to find and constitute meaning in life. And this is what genuine 
creativity is” (1980, p. 1 61 ). Likewise, we as art educators have important 
choices to make regarding the quality of instruction and role modeling for 
students. The education we offer will have greater relevance and meaning if 
guided by a larger, more inclusive, and compassionate vision of all life, such 
as found in Buber’s concept of “l-Thou.” 



7 5 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



ERJC 



80 



References 



Alexander, S. (Trans.). (1991). The Complete Poetry of 
Michelangelo. Athens: Ohio University Press. 

Arieti, S. (1976). Creativity: The Magic Synthesis. New York: Basic 
Books, Inc.. 

Barron, F. (1969). Creative Person and Creative Process. New York: 
Holt Rinehart and Winston, Inc.. 

Cohen, A. (1983). The Educational Philosophy of Martin Buber. 

New Jersey: Associated University Presses, Inc.. 

Gardner, H. (1982). Art, Mind & Brain: A Cognitive Approach to Creativity. 
New York: Basic Books, Inc.. 

Getzels, J. & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1976). The Creative Vision: A 

Longitudinal Study of Problem Finding in Art. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons. 

Goodman, L. (1981. Death and the Creative Life. New York: Springer 
Publishing. 

Henri, R. (1984). The Art Spirit. New York: Harper & Row. 

Kirby, D. & Kuykendall, C. (1991). Mind Matters: Teaching For 
Thinking. New Hampshire: Boynton/Cook Publishers. 

Kohanski, A. (1975). An Analytical Interpretation of Martin Buber's 
l-Thou. New York: Barron's Educational Series Press. 

London, P. (1989). No More Secondhand Art: Awakening the 
Artist Within. Boston: Shambhala Press. 

London, P. (1991, March). Art as Transformation. Paper presented at the 

National Art Education Association Annual Convention, Atlanta, GA. 

May, R. (1980). The Courage to Create. New York: Bantam Books. 

McLuhan, T. (1971). Touch the Earth. New York: Outerbridge & 
Dienstfrey. 



76 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



O 

ERIC 



81 



Melrose, L. (1989). The Creative Personality and the Creative 
P rocess. New York: University Press of America. 

Owen, R. (1982. The Creative Personality and the Creative 
Process. New York: School for Social Research. Dissertation 
Abstracts International, 44, 04B, 1223. 

Smith, R. (1967). Martin Buber. Richmond: John Knox Press. 

Sudnow, D. (1978). Ways of the Hand. New York: Harper and Row. 

Zinker, J. (1977). Creative Process in Gestalt Therapy. New York: 
Vintage Books. 



77 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



82 



mentors introduction 

PATRICIA M. AMBURGY 

Pennsylvania State University 



Christine Morris’s dissertation, “Roots, Branches, Blossoms, and 
Briars: Cultural Colonialism of the Mountain Culture and Arts in West Virginia,” 
is a study of power and control in the arts. Christine asks a central question: 
Who owns the arts in West Virginia? Do the arts belong to the people of West 
Virginia’s Mountain Culture, those for whom traditional art forms are part of a 
living culture, a whole way of life? Or do the arts belong to the people and 
institutions that currently market the arts as tourist attractions, displaying them 
at state-controlled festivals in West Virginia and selling them at tourist shops 
along the interstate highways? 

Using cultural colonialism as a theoretical framework for her analysis, 
Christine examines the extent to which “insiders” (native West Virginians) or 
“outsiders" (people from outside the culture) presently control the cultural 
and economic survival of traditional forms of music, dance, and other arts in 
West Virginia. In addition to published materials, she draws on extensive 
interviews with insiders and outsiders, both the cultural artists and the arts 
administrators who are struggling for ownership of the arts. Her analysis of 
the conflicts between insiders’ and outsiders’ interests is significant for many 
reasons, not the least of which is that her interviews with the Mountain 
Cultural artists give them a voice in the struggle, in some cases for the first 
time. 



Christine’s research grows out of her own experience as a Mountain 
Cultural artist. Speaking from the position of an informed insider, her work 
combines scholarly analysis with personal commitment to art, art education, 
and social change. Her dissertation makes a genuine contribution to our 
knowledge in art education, one that goes beyond the boundaries of 
established disciplines to address issues in the world at large. 



78 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



O 

ERIC 



83 



Roots, Branches, Blossoms, and Briars: Cultural 
Colonialism of the Mountain Arts in West Virginia 

Christine Ballengee Morris, PhD 

The kingdoms of Experience 
In the precious wind they rot 
While paupers change possessions 
Each one wishing for what the other has got 
And the princess and the prince 
Discuss what’s real and what is not 

(excerpt from "Gates of Eden” by Bob Dylan) 

Dylan, Bob. (1973). Writings and Drawings. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
Inc. 



In this thesis, I examine the affect cultural colonialist institutions in 
West Virginia has had on the Mountain Culture, artists, arts and transference 
process. This is an ethnographic study. Interviews, observations, written 
material, and videos were used to substantiate the interviews with artist and 
institutional administrators. The results of the examination showed conflict 
and contradiction. Issues such as denial to exhibit art, stereotyping and 
misrepresentation of the culture and art, cultural differences, and 
decolonialization are explored. 

By examining the lives and art of the Mountain Cultural artists of West 
Virginia at the close of the twentieth century, this study investigates 
outsiders’ control of the cultural arts and ramifications of this control on the 
arts, artists, and the Mountain Culture. In prior studies, regional culture has 
been construed in simple terms as the locus of folk ideology or a set of 
doctrinal structures underwritten by traditional authority. In this study, 
regional culture encompasses material resources, value systems of 
community, time, place, and cultural perspectives. Culture reflects a particular 
history and set of socioeconomic conditions which are mirrored in the arts 
through style, language, and approach. This approach to the study of 
regional culture is in sharp contrast to prevailing works that have romanticized 
West Virginia Mountain Culture or dismissed it as the locus of exploitative 
policies imposed by agents of cultural capitalism. 

This research is an ethnographic study. Written data, material culture, 
historical data, interviews and observations were collected and analyzed. The 
interviewees were male and female ranging from 35-75 years old. Mountain 
Cultural artists and administrators of organizations that capitalize on West 

79 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Virginia Mountain Cultural Arts were interviewed. Clifford (1986) states that 
the danger of ethnography is that because data are based on oral accounts, 
ethnography is at best “true fictions,” inherently biased and incomplete. It is 
for this reason that triangulated inquiry was utilized as the structure in this 
study. Triangulated inquiry is a qualitative ethnographic approach in which 
social phenomena are observed in their natural setting, but supplemented 
with other data such as diaries, photographs, video, audio tapes, and 
newspaper accounts to provide a richer understanding of a complex social 
event (Sevigny 1978). This helps eliminate the “fiction” that Clifford states 
occurs when the only data utilized comes from interviews. In this study, I have 
utilized magazine articles and books written in the past twenty years, 
newspaper articles written in the past three years, films and videos made in 
the past twenty years, and interviews. 

I interviewed administrators and staff of institutions that purport to 
perpetuate Mountain Cultural arts of West Virginia The organizations are: 
Department of Culture and History, Charleston, West Virginia; Augusta 
Heritage Center, Elkins, West Virginia; and West Virginia Parkways, Economic 
Development and Tourism Authority, Beckley, West Virginia. The choices of 
institutional representatives were based on position within the institution, 
availability, and willingness to be interviewed. 

The artists were chosen because of their artistic experience, their 
extensive relationship with organizations in West Virginia that perpetuate 
and/or document the cultural arts, and their commitment to their culture. I 
spoke informally with artists at festivals and meetings about their artistic 
experience and their involvement with the institutions under examination. 

The artists I selected to be interviewed are those who have worked for 
Augusta Heritage Center, Department of Culture and History, and West 
Virginia Parkways, Economic Development and tourism Authority, have 
experience in several art forms or have organized arts functions, are members 
of the Mountain culture, have been active in reformation activities, and were 
willing to be interviewed. 

Statement of the Problem 

There are two groups with opposing views and values vying for 
economic success in West Virginia. There are outsiders whose origins are 
outside the West Virginia Mountain Culture, who are in positions which allow 
them to instruct, judge, change and/or organize Mountain Cultural art forms. 
The second group are insiders, comprised of those who are born into or 
reared in the Mountain culture, who instruct, create, and/or create 
organizations based on their cultural art form. In the current cultural struggle, 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



ERIC 



85 






the outsider has gained wide recognition as the perpetuator of Mountain 
Cultural arts by exploiting institutional policies that are not congruent with the 
philosophy of the Mountain Cultural artists. The outsider sees the insider as 
no longer necessary for the transference of cultural arts knowledge. 

Outsiders have learned to imitate the style and are now transferring their 
imitation to each other. An additional component in the paradigm is that this 
generation of insiders is not perpetuating themselves as quickly and as 
effectively as are the outsiders. The insiders are excluded from venUes 
controlled by the outsiders’ national network power base. Outsiders limit the 
insiders’ access to productions, performances, and interviews. This 
exclusion is a method of "culturecide". 

The exclusion or limited use of insiders is not the specific policy of 
any organization, but is an accepted practice employed by institutional 
administrators. Why this practice develops, who gains from this type of 
discrimination, what roles the outsiders have maintained in the cultural arts, 
and how the insiders have been affected are questions which will be 
explored in this study. 

What occurs is not a case of taking Mountain cultural arts for display or 
ownership, removing the context and replacing it with a commodity value as in 
tourist art (Whisnant, 1983). Instead, there is pilfering of the product, 
redefining the content and method of pedagogy, imitating the outsider’s 
version of the insider, and claiming the Mountain Culture as their own. It is not 
about objects, but about people. This is not about influence, but about 
intrusion. It is not about appreciation, but the redefinition by others to make a 
safe representation of Mountain Cultural art by eliminating the context of that 
art. It is not specifically about race, gender, or region. It is about the 
differences of values, beliefs, and traditions of cultures. It is not about style or 
technique. It is about the living history of a group of people and how that 
history relates to today. This is not about the past but the ability to 
understand the past and use that knowledge in the light of history to cope 
with and understand the past and use that knowledge in the light of history to 
cope with and understand conditions today. 

In October 1992, West Virginia's Department of Culture and History 
sponsored a meeting with artists and State Festival Administrators and staff. 

At this meeting, an attitude of stagnation and oppression was expressed by 
the Mountain Cultural artists. These artists were frustrated by the lack of state 
support and with exploitation. The West Virginia Mountain Cultural artists 
expressed concerns about organizations that utilize non-West Virginian 
Mountain Cultural artists to represent their culture and arts and about how to 
reach the younger generation effectively to ensure the continuation of the 

81 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



ERIC 

kiAii’IZinlTia 

— k 



88 



West Virginia Mountain Cultural arts. These issues, cultural colonialism, 
transference, stereotyping, self determination, economics and the impact of 
these issues on the arts will be explored in this study of ownership of the 
Mountain Cultural arts in West Virginia. 

Previous Appalachian studies and theories have addressed the 
"they" and "us" issue, utilizing a colonistic theory, as I do in this study, by 
referring to colonialization in a historical context with writers such as David 
Whisnant, Allen Batteau, and Helen Lewis, suggesting that it does not exist 
today. Traditional historians concentrate on historical events from an above 
view that reflects a white male perspective. Folklorists and anthropologists, 
who utilize a material culture theory, often view people and objects as the 
same thing. This approach dehumanizes those they seek to understand or 
explain. The vast majority of these studies are conducted by those who are 
from outside the culture being examined. The anthropological concept of 
culture probably would never have been invented, except for the fact that the 
colonial theater of operations necessitated a knowledge of culture in order to 
control the people and to legitimize the control. Discovering, documenting, 
and classifying a culture confirms difference and re-confirms the colonialist's 
agenda. Other researchers do not take into account the oppressive activities 
and colonialistic history of outsiders in West Virginia; therefore, their research 
objectifies the culture and leads to self glorification. What "they" did for "us." 
As an insider, I cannot utilize the traditional historical, folkloric, or 
anthropological perspectives. I see culture as living, dynamic, always 
changing, and spiritual. I am not burdened with the self-serving folkloric 
notion that the culture died in the 1940's; I know better. To be understood, 
we must speak for ourselves. The outsiders project their biases and lack of 
understanding of the culture; therefore, the view of the culture at which they 
arrive and present is flawed and skewed. 

Within the new historical approach and feminist critical pedagogy are 
arguments that objective research is impossible. I subscribe to both. 

Choices made, perspectives taken, and methods of analysis employed are 
naturally subjective; therefore, biases are always present. My personal 
experience, research, and interviews with Mountain Cultural artists and 
administrators of West Virginia arts institutions have led me to conclude that 
cultural colonalization exists within the Mountain Cultural arts of West Virginia. 

Colonialism in West Virginia 

Colonialism and internal colonialism are theoretically based on Marxist 
ideology that capitalism is the center of inequality. Although economics is a 
part of the situation, the theory is essentialist and reduces the complex socio- 

82 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers 



In Art Education 



1994-1995 



87 

o 

ERLC 



psychological, economic phenomenon to a simple explanation. Cultural 
colonialism expands the colonial model beyond capitalism because capitalism 
is not the foundation of cultural colonialism. Cultural differences, cultural 
misinterpretation, cultural exploitation for economic gain serves that purpose. 
The dominant culture ethnocentrically creates or takes control of institutions 
whose stated policy is to preserve the culture through educational courses, 
showcases, festivals, documentation, and tourist shops. The paradox is that 
individuals from the dominant culture become experts and judges, who then 
redefine the culture and the arts by institutional policies that determine who 
and what will be a part of the institution. Anytime cultural arts are 
commodified, the arts are bound to marketing rules and are no longer 
controlled by the culture from which they sprang. What the institution winds 
up preserving is an ethnocentric vision of what it believes the culture should 
be rather than that which is real. Those of the institutions state they are 
preserving the culture; however, their attempts at preservation have 
inexorably altered the cultural arts and changed the natural evolution of the 
culture. The colonialist attempt to change culture to fit a model set forth by 
the colonizer and the economic exploitation of the cultural arts and artists lead 
to a cyclical announcement by the institutions that the culture is dying due to 
modernization. With each cycle, a group of old artists is discovered and 
marketed which seems to keep the culture on e the edge of extinction and is 
an excellent marketing tool to increase sales, class attendance, and tourism 
and to maintain institutional power. 

The first stage of cultural colonialism occurs when outsiders establish 
art education courses to promote economic and social development for 
insiders. The outsiders establish themselves as experts of the culture and 
arts; creating non-cultural criteria to judge and exploit the art. In the second 
stage, insiders try to gain a share of control within the colonial institutions. In 
stage three, the colonizers view themselves as insiders and replace insiders 
with outsiders who imitate the cultural art forms. West Virginia Mountain 
Cultural artists are now in the final stage of cultural colonialism. 

During the 1930's, those from the outside proclaimed themselves as 
the authority and were not challenged by the insiders. By virtue of their 
assumed status and accrued power, they established credibility with 
foundations and publishing companies. One outcome of cultural colonialism 
is the re-definition of goods and services which satisfies the colonizer's 
agenda of economic gain. For example, in the case of Berea College's 
coverlets, the decision to improve quality included changing the traditional 
patterns, and creating a "new" tradition for the purpose of marketability. 

When outside criteria are used, boundaries are re-established and a 
stratification of the cultural arts occurs. These boundaries set up a need for a 

83 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



system to determine authenticity and purity, which brings about the 
stagnation of the arts into stereotypes. By the 1930s, the first stage of 
cultural colonialism was in place throughout Appalachia. 

The cultural colonialism which began in the 1930s was 
institutionalized in the 1970s. Many political and economic factors came into 
play in the 1 960s and 1 970s which affected the exploitation of West Virginia 
arts. National media attention on poverty in West Virginia helped to create 
President Johnson's War on Poverty. Federally supported VISTA 
(Volunteers In Service To America) workers were sent into the area with little 
training or cultural knowledge (Anderson, 1993). Many counterculture 
youths, desiring to escape the dominant culture, also sought asylum in the 
mountains. Disenchanted with their own culture, these colonizers sought, 
refuge by adopting cultures that provided relief in places that led them to find 
their "indigenous self" or the "pioneer within." Outsiders came to overt 
political power in 1976 with the gubernatorial win by John D. "Jay" Rockefeller 
IV of New York. The interest of the general public in West Virginia Mountain 
Cultural arts and socio-political movement converged and brought together 
groups of people with divergent agendas and cultures. 

During this period, The National Endowment of the Arts (NEA), under 
the direction of Livingston Biddle, stressed grassroots projects and initiated 
the Folk Arts Program as an independent division. Grants were plentiful and 
were given to state agencies for distribution to communities and individual 
artists. The NEA was convinced by outside experts, including Sharon 
Rockefeller (Governor jay Rockefeller's wife), that the Mountain Cultural arts, 
as represented in the 1930s were quickly dying. The NEA worked hard to 
preserve them by funding any project that attached itself to Appalachia. West 
Virginia was invaded by outsiders carrying tape recorders and cameras. Their 
lack of knowledge of the Mountain Culture resulted in misrepresentation of 
the culture and the treatment of other outsiders as insiders. Festival 
proceeds, documentation material, and art objects were stolen. David Trend 
(1992) examined culture, art, education, and politics in the United States and 
stated that the NEA itself was a colonializer, dominating all the arts by the 
funding choices it made. He also argued that the NEA was overly concerned 
with image and used image as criteria for funding. The United States 
Government was embarrassed by the nationwide publicity accorded West 
Virginia's poverty. This embarrassment could partially explain the massive 
federal funding. Good public relations and a positive image were needed to 
repair the rent in the social fabric brought about by the political turmoil which 
occurred during Viet Nam War era. Altina Waller (1 988) explored cultural 
differences between outsiders and insiders in West Virginia and stated that 
outsiders believed that an inferior culture was to blame for the years of 

84 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



poverty and that cultural enlightenment would cure the problem in 
Appalachia. Cultural enlightenment and the creation of a marketable image 
helped motivate federal funding for West Virginia. This funding fulfilled the 
government's external need for self-aggrandizement without regard for the 
Mountain Cultural need for self determination of identity in the arts, culture, 
and economic opportunity. 

The West Virginians, who were struggling for cultural and political 
efficacy, allowed the outsiders who represented themselves as experts to 
join them in their efforts. What the insiders didn't realize was that the 
outsiders' agenda was not the same as their own. The second stage of 
cultural colonialism occurs when the insiders decide to claim their cultural 
identity and efficacy within the system which unbeknownst to them, is taking 
the culture away. Larry Rader, a Mountain Cultural artist sums it this way: 

We let the music and culture slip through our fingers into their hands 
and then we have to stand around on the outside waiting to be 
invited back into our own music. But we've done a very poor job, the 
West Virginia people. We can't bitch too much. We gave it to the 
other people, let them come in and take it away from us. (Interview, 
September 1993) 

Administrators of newly formed institutions defined the arts in a 
traditional, anthropological manner. Policies were initiated which ensured the 
continuation of the frozen-in-time version of the arts. Younger artists who 
were seeking a place in the market as well as teaching positions were not 
aware that their arts had been institutionally appropriated until outsiders 
declared insiders' art as inauthentic because it did not sound or look like the 
revivalist's forms. The Mountain Cultural artists found they were being judged 
by colonialists' standards that honored nostalgic versions and they could not 
meet those standards because the culture had not remained static. 

The present day status of the cultural arts in West Virginia is a result of 
the policies and practices of the 1970s. Today, outsiders have established 
themselves as the authorities in organizations that promote colonialism. As 
an example, Augusta Heritage Center in Elkins, West Virginia, utilizes 
instructors born and raised outside the culture to teach Mountain Cultural 
arts, although knowledgeable insiders are available and qualified to teach 
(Blevin, interview, September 1993). This institution utilizes insiders to 
validate its cultural standing in order to receive grants from the state or the 
NEA. The outside instructors are hired each year according to how many 
points they accumulate during their employment: the more the better. They 
receive a predetermined number of points for good evaluations, high 



85 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



90 



workshop attendance, and they receive fifty points if they bring in a "real" 

West Virginia cultural artist for the afternoon. This show and tell attitude is an 
example of how Augusta Heritage views the culture and people which it 
exploits. By what can only be described as a lack of ethics, Augusta ignores 
the traditional, oral, and cultural method of transference and promotes a 
material culture attitude toward the ritualistic format. Changing the process of 
transference, the use of outsiders, and stereotyping the arts to meet 
Augusta Heritage Center's representatives' financial goals has resulted in a 
redefinition of the Mountain culture. The institution has established itself as 
the cultural arts expert, and through a hegemonic process, nationally 
perpetuates its version of the cultural arts as inclusive. 

The final stage of cultural colonialism occurs when the outsiders view 
themselves as insiders and the insiders' culture is reduced to a style and/or a 
historical memory. The institution's representatives interdict the artists who 
do not agree with them by branding them as inauthentic. This keeps the 
artists from posing a threat. The Mountain Cultural artists who choose to 
ignore the colonial situation and cooperate with the institutions are 
supporting institutionalized colonial policy. In Ward Churchhill's examination 
of the colonialization of the Native American, and as a Native American activist 
for self determination, he concludes, "in advanced colonial settings, the 
colonized are convinced to administer and impose on themselves the 
policies and regulations set forth by their colonizers"(1993, p 380). The 
participation of the colonized insider in governing and outside power over the 
insider brings up the question, how is colonialism maintained? According to 
interviews I- have conducted with Mountain Cultural artists and administrators 
of art institutions, I have identified the two following means of maintaining 
cultural colonialism in West Virginia: institutional authority and cultural 
stereotyping. 

Those in authority decide who and what will be included in the overall 
view of how the culture is seen and presented. Their judgments re-define 
the arts and the culture. Those who are judging the arts and crafts are not 
insiders, which may explain why many insiders are excluded. The older 
traditional craftspeople will probably not pay much attention to the Parkways; 
the danger lies in what will happen to the younger ones now, and in the next 
generation, as they try to accommodate themselves to the Parkways ideal. 
When Blevin(1993) was asked why outsiders are used to teach West Virginia 
Mountain Cultural arts, she stated that people of the culture were not needed 
to teach the arts, just good teachers. Whisnant (1983) concluded from his 
research of the historical intrusion in Appalachia that this attitude is a failure to 
understand the culture. The outsiders' flawed understandings of the social 

86 




Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



structure, intellectual habits, manners, and economic arrangements are not 
congruent with the actual culture. 

It is necessary to understand the consequences of cultural 
colonialism to determine needs and methods for decolonialization. The 
institutional representatives emphasize heritage which places its 
representation of the culture in the past. Having experts from outside the 
culture teach the arts communicates that the culture no longer exists. The 
culture and arts have been diluted to a style. The Mountain Cultural artists 
define their culture and arts as traditionally based but expressed in their time 
and place. The Mountain Cultural artists want absolute autonomy over their 
culture and arts. Many cultures are in the process of post-colonialization 
which espouses an inclusion of multiplicity. If West Virginia is to overcome a 
paternalistic state, the artists must pursue strategies and courses of action 
that will lead to decolonialization. This will not mean the preservation of a 
romantic status quo. The Mountain Cultural artists must control the direction 
of change and the identity of their beneficiaries. For a cultural revolution to 
begin, the oppressed must first know they are oppressed and then employ 
methods to counter the oppression (Trend 1992). What methods are 
needed and who will take part in the revolution? Those entrenched in the 
hegemonic establishment are sure to contest. Change means loss, and loss 
will be resisted. 

To liberate oneself from oppression is to unite in solidarity, break the 
silence, take responsibility, make a commitment to work for change and to 
value diversity within the culture. Resistance to the hegemony is in its 
formative stages. There is a growing realization among the Mountain Cultural 
artists of what has occurred and is occurring. They realize that it is up to them 
to resist further advances. The form this resistance will take is less clear to 
them than the realization that change is necessary. The insiders are no 
longer as firmly in the thrall of the outsiders as they once were. They are 
aware of their lack of participation in the economic benefits to be derived from 
the performance and sale of their art. The outsiders have taken the spirit of 
West Virginia Mountain Cultural arts and with their eschatological approach 
have stagnated and pickled the arts instead of preserving them. Their 
replacement is a pre-packaged, pre-fabricated culture with easy to read 
directions: you, too, can be a West Virginia Mountain Cultural artist. 

References 

Anderson, Colleen. 16 November 1993. Interview with Christine Morris. 

Berkley Springs, West Virginia. Transcript on file with Christine Morris. 

87 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



ERJC 



92 



Blevin, Margo. 5 September 1993. Interview with Christine Morris. Weston, 
West Virginia. Transcript on file with Christine Morris. 

Churchill, Ward. 1993. Fantasies of the Master Race. Maine: Common 
Courage Press. 

Clifford, James. 1986. Introduction: Partial Truths. In Writing Culture: the 
Poetics and Politics of Ethnography. Clrford, James & 
Marcus, George (eds.) Los Angeles, California: University of 
California Press. 

Rader, Larry. 4 September 1 993. Interview with Christine Morris. Weston, 
West VirginiaTranscript on file with Christine Morris. 

Seviny, Maurice. 1978. Triangulated Inquiry: An Alternative Methodology for 
the Study of Classroom Life. Visual Arts Education 8 (Spring): 6- 
9. 

Waller, Altina L. 1988. Feud. North Carolina: University of North Carolina 
Press. 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



88 



ERIC 




mentor’s introduction 



ELIZABETH GARBER 
Penn State University 



I am excited about Jill’s.thesis on issues surrounding Native American 
art in a museum. It is well conceived, signigicant, and timely. Non-Native 
american art in a museum. Non-Native American scholars in the arts and 
humanities are becoming more sensitive to the complexity of contemporary 
Native American issues. Recent legislation concerning artifacts in museums 
has helped make the world outside Native America more aware of the 
different contexts for understanding and valuing these artifacts. Issues of 
who speaks for whom and when are closely related to who teaches whom. 
While attending the Native American Art Studies Association meeting, Jill 
recently witnessed just how controversial these issues are. She returned 
with stories of impassioned soliloquies and heated debates. This is why I say 
her study is timely. Its careful conception, as the study of one museum (with a 
situating of this museum within others) helps insure its significance. The 
Iroquois Museum, in allowing her to explore the close association of Iroquois 
curators with those not of non-Iroquois heritage, is particularly appropriate. 
While it has relevance to education, it is education in the broader sense that I 
believe is encompassed by the humanities, for her study is very much 
involved with culture and art. It has the potential to offer groundbreaking 
insights at a fertile moment into the understanding and re-valuing of Native ' 
american artifacts and contemporary cultures. 

Jill has spent a significant portion of her studies at Penn State 
working with Native American culture and the arts. She has studied the art, 
culture, history, and education of numerous groups, particularly those in the 
northeastern U.S.. Her academic expertise and inherent energies are 
enhanced by a professional background in museums. It has been a pleasure 
working with her as well as a privilege. As a student participant myself in the 
Graduate Research presentations, I am particularly pleased to again be a part 
of this ongoing tradition, and thank Steve Thunder McGuire for his energies 
in stewarding it. 



89 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Issues of Education Surrounding Native American art 
at the Iroquois Indian Museum 

JILL HOFFMAN 

Issues surrounding Native American art include how to define Native 
art and its artists. Such issues are not merely the source of interesting 
philosophical debates. These matters have had to be handled within our 
judicial system resulting in laws that, for example, mandate the ways in which 
museums are to acknowledge and act upon requests for the return of certain 
objects held sacred by Native communities. For instance, the Indian Arts and 
Crafts Law attempts to protect Native-made arts and crafts from non-Natives 
who tried to cash in on a billion dollar industry. These legislative actions 
suggest that Native Americans endure a unique relationship with federal 
authorities directly because of their art. The economic tie between Indians 
and art involves a history of intervention by museums, anthropologists, 
philanthropists, and art educators. These same entities have helped to 
create our perceptions and definitions of Native art and the market within 
which such exists. While Native art has been created by Native Americans it 
has often been controlled by non-Natives. 

Native and non-Native curators, gallery owners, critics, and others 
express varying opinions about how to define Native art. Some would say 
that Native American art is only that which is old. There exists a blur between 
the boundary of anthropology and fine art, some objects having endured an 
aesthetic shift. The popularity of collections of Native objects and the 
pastiche of “Native American” patterns and colors utilized in contemporary 
design reveal the romanticized popular notions with which we regard Indians. 

Within such a market, Indians are perceived as significant only in that they are 
the fabricators for such collectibles-valued more is the object as souvenir of 
the “noble savage.” Perhaps the popularity of photographs by Edward 
Sheriff Curtis, for example, suggests that the image of the Indian of the past 
reinforces our collective impression of what an “Indian” is. Such images and 
ideas help to keep our understanding of Native people located and frozen in 
the past. Enculturated stereotypes of Native people, reinforced by media 
and popular culture images, do not encourage us to confront the reality of 
contemporary Indian lives. 

Debates which surround Native American art are not the only 
controversy within the Native art arena. Persons who are of Native American 
heritage who are also artists find themselves in the midst of various debates. 
Some would argue that the true Indian artist is one whose creative efforts 

90 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers 



In Art Education 



1994-1995 



O 

ERiC 



95 



reflects their tribes particular aesthetic forms. Others would argue that the 
“real” Indian artist is the one who produces work in the style associated with 
Dorothy Dunn, who, as an art educator, instructed Indian students in painting 
in Santa Fe in the 1 930’s. Still others would claim that the true Native art 
reflects the break with tradition usually associated with artists Fritz Scholder 
and T. C. Cannon during their tenure with the Institute of American Indian 
Arts. Still others believe that Indian artists are those easily identified with the 
Santa Fe Market or that their work should reflect “Indian themes.” Individuals 
of Indian heritage who as artists work in contemporary forms of expression 
have variously experienced displacement as they are categorized according 
to their heritage. The effects of such debates about defining Native art and 
artists is revealed in the experience of native photographers. As Rick Hill told 
me, as recently as twenty years ago he could not get into exhibitions of Indian 
art because photography was not considered an “acceptable” category for 
Native American artists. 

It is within this context of debates that I began my research into 
educational issues which impact the interpretation of Native American art. It 
soon became evident that museums have historically contributed a great deal 
to the ways in which Native American art and people are defined. Also, the 
emergence of Native museums makes the institution a common resource 
among Native and non-Native persons who try to make Native culture 
accessible. Because of the current debates surrounding Native American art, 
the history of relationships between museums and Native communities and 
the current challenges to museums by those who have been historically 
excluded, I wanted to know more about how non-Natives attempt to portray a 
culture outside of their own experience, and how Native persons regard the 
efforts of non-Natives as they seek to portray Native culture. 

Through a committee member, Dr. Victor Dupuis, Mohawk, Professor 
Emeritus at The Pennsylvania State University, I became aware of the 
Iroquois Indian Museum in Howes Cave, New York. The museum, located 
near Albany, New York, in what was originally Mohawk territory, is an 
anthropology museum which collects and exhibits contemporary Iroquois art. 
The museum was established, and is staffed and managed by non-Iroquois 
persons with the exception of a single Iroquois staff member and several 
Iroquois board members. 

“Iroquois” is a word, originally used by the French, which refers to the 
people of the Six Nations Confederacy, specifically the Mohawk, Oneida, 
Onondaga, Seneca, Cayuga and Tuscarora. Collectively, these people call 
themselves “Haudonosaunee,” the people of the Longhouse. The 
Longhouse refers to not only a housing structure but to an organized 



91 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



practice of beliefs and ceremonies. The Iroquois Indian Museum seeks to 
present the art, history and anthropology of all the nations of the Iroquois. 

Located in Schoharie county near Cobleskill, New York, the museum 
is situated in one of the most rural and low income areas of the state. Visitors 
to the museum are primarily from two groups: tourists and schoolchildren. 

The museum is located near Interstate 80 adjacent to a popular tourist site, 
Howes Cave. Many fourth grade and seventh local history, which many 
interpret to mean the history of the Iroquois. 

The Iroquois Indian Museum exhibits contemporary Iroquois art and 
also displays a variety of historical and archaeological objects. Educational 
activities show similar ties to other museums: a video installation, which 
presents Iroquois discussing their work; a children's museum which is utilized 
along with the main gallery for a variety of school programs including 
storytelling, programs about lacrosse, and experiences with artists materials; 
artist demonstrations; and lectures. The annual Iroquois Arts Festival allows 
the public to speak with and purchase art from some of the most well-known 
Iroquois artists and to enjoy Native music and the opportunity to see Iroquois 
dancers of which there are several internationally known groups A nature trail 
is the focus of the museum’s programs on Iroquois cosmology and 
ethnobotany. 

I began my study by conducting interviews with the staff of the 
Iroquois Indian Museum as well as two board members and four Iroquois 
individuals. For context, I visited other Iroquois-managed museums, all of 
which are in New York State. These include, the Seneca-lroquois Museum in 
Salamanca, the Oneida Cultural Center in Oneida, and the Six Nations 
Museum in Onchiota. Unlike the Iroquois Indian Museum (hereafter referred 
to as IIM), these tribal/community museums managed by Iroquois persons 
exist as cultural and historical resources for people within the local Iroquois 
community. The Iroquois Indian museum exists to educate non-Iroquois 
about Iroquois culture. 

Museums are currently challenged with a variety of problems which 
involve how to address the demands put forth by those cultures, 
communities, and individual artists who have been excluded from dialogues, 
exhibitions, and scholarly acknowledgment. My personal interest is in those 
issues which surround Native American art, culture and people. Of most 
interest to me is the realization that even as advanced as we may perceive 
ourselves to be late in the twentieth century, our American society still relates 
to Native communities in ways that seem archaic. I am both fascinated and 
troubled that legislation is still created which effects Native people directly 

92 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



because of their art, culture, religion, and home lands. In many ways, non- 
Natives, myself included, have more to learn and understand about Native 
Americans. Museums are possibly one way in which such learning can occur. 

My study on the IIM was begun in wanting to know more about how 
Native art and culture is presented and discussed within the context of a 
museum. In the interviews, I asked questions to which answers would be of 
interest to me, and hopefully other non-Native educators, in trying to interpret 
Native art. The interviews within which I participated were conducted from a 
generally informed study of the history and issues of Native American art, 
culture and museum relations. I also wanted the opportunity to speak with 
Native persons directly to find out their thoughts on how Native art, culture 
and people are presented within a museum. 

Those who participated in this study include: Michael Butler park 
manager for the IIM: Dave Fadden, Mohawk, educator at the IIM: John 
Fadden, Mohawk, co-manager of the Six Nations Museum, a family operated 
museum in Onchiota New York; Dr. John Ferguson, chair of the IIM board and 
former professor of anthropology at SUNY Cobleskill; Paul Fleishman, board 
member at the Museum; Cr. Christina Johannsen Hanks, founder and former 
director of the Iroquois Indian Museum; Richard (Rick) W. Hill, Sr., Tuscarora, 
artist and museum professional, currently special assistant to the director of 
the National Museum of the American Indian; Colette Lemmon, assistant 
director of public programs at the IIM; Catherine Raddatz, assistant director of 
business for the IIM; Stephanie Shultes, assistant director for anthropology at 
the IIM; and Mike Tarbell, Mohawk, former educator at the IIM. The questions 
that I asked reflect my interest in knowing more about how Native culture is 
portrayed at the IIM; how Iroquois persons perceive efforts of non-Native 
educators; and visitor expectations within the museum. 

After conducting taped interviews with all of the participants, I then 
transcribed the conversations and provided each participant with a copy so 
that they could review their comments. With only one exception, Mike Butler, 
the interviews are reproduced in full text within the dissertation and a review 
of these conversations reveals a variety of concerns and issues which relate 
to educational efforts in presenting Native American art at the IIM. In speaking 
with the museum staff and the Iroquois persons who participated in my 
questions, several issues became evident. While my interest was upon the 
educational aspects of the museum, the insights gained through the 
interviews and observations of programming are points which I think are 
applicable to other museums which would exhibit Native American art. These 
have implications for how we teach about Native art and culture, and the 
knowledge that we impart about such entities. Generally, issues which I 

93 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen's Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



t 



became aware of have to do with communication between individuals, 
cultures, visitors and museum staff. I have described the issues raised by the 
participants according to eight categories. 

1. The General Nature of Museums. The utilization of a museum to 
teach about Native art and culture is not an unusual practice even within 
Native communities. Many tribal museums re located within Indian 
communities and serve to teach about Native culture, history, and language. 
The IIM exists to teach non-Natives, primarily about Iroquois art and culture. 
What is important to note regarding this study and the IIM is the way in which 
the IIM emphasizes the present and not the past in the way that many 
mainstream museums present Native American culture. While historical and 
archaeological aspects are utilized, indeed necessary, to further 
understanding of specific aspects of Iroquois life, the IIM’s emphasis upon 
the present, the contemporary people, helps visitors to begin to reformulate 
their understandings about Native persons. In the IIM, the Iroquois, and all 
Native Americans, are presented to the public as part of living, viable, 
contemporary cultures and not as specimens of the past. 

2. The Museum as a Resource. The IIM is not merely an exhibition 
space for art and other objects. For Iroquois artists, and many of their families, 
the IIM is a major marketing tool for their creativity which in turn helps to 
provide income. The IIM is a link between other museums and collectors and 
the many Iroquois artists who have been largely ignored within the Native 
American art circle. Many persons think of only the Southwest and its market 
when considering Native art, but for the Iroquois artists who seek to present 
their creative efforts the IIM has provided, for some, an access to others who 
want to know more about their work. The museum also provides for 
interaction between the Iroquois artists and the buying public through the 
annual arts festival held at the museum. So, more than just providing an 
exhibition schedule, the IIM plays a role in the marketing of contemporary 
Iroquois art. 

3. Problems Encountered by Iroquois (Native) Staff. Of all of the 
comments that were shared with me in the interviews conducted in 1994, I 
was most interested in those that had to do with the ways in which Iroquois 
staff were affected by visitor comments and the working conditions of being 
at a museum. Romanticized attitudes about how Native people are have 
created a Pan-Indian mythology in the minds of many Euro-Americans. 
Expectations of visitors seriously impact upon the learning that can occur. 
Consistent expressions of erroneous beliefs, and insensitivity on the part of 
visitors who literally ask to see “real" Indians, tipis, and feathers, has proven to 
be too overwhelming for the Iroquois who work on staff at the museum. A 

94 




Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



high turn-over of Iroquois staff is a problem. In part because of loneliness for 
family and community (the museum is not located near any of the Iroquois 
communities), Iroquois staff often leave to return home because they feel like 
they are on exhibit. But Iroquois presence is valued and considered a 
needed aspect of museum education at the IIM. A possible solution for this, 
according to Rick Hill, is in hiring Indians as guest curators or consultants. 
Hiring native persons affirms lived culture as a worthwhile form of knowledge 
and expertise. 

4. The Museum Audience. Visitors to the IIM seem to expect an 
encounter with “a real Indian” and appear to be disappointed when such 
does not occur. Comments from participants suggest that visitors bring with 
them to the IIM a wide array of misinformation concerning Native people and 
their histories. Staff are challenged in how to manage the fascination that 
visitors have for Indian cultures and at the same time challenge visitors’ 
thinking regarding Indian people. Helping visitors to break old attitudes, 
stereotypes and assumptions means challenging many romanticized notions 
which many non-Natives hold about Native American people. Other 
challenges to this museum include having to be selective with information 
shared with certain visitors. For example, not everyone seems to be able to 
understand the concept that for certain Iroquois artists the materials with 
which they work, such as clay and stone, are considered to be literally alive. 

5. Educational Tools/Resources of the Museum. The IIM utilizes 
informational and learning resources in ways similar to other museums. 
However, the utilization of aspects of contemporary Iroquois culture to 
provide understanding of contemporary Iroquois art is of special interest. 
Likewise, the exhibition of contemporary Iroquois art is the main access 
utilized by the museum to help visitors begin to understand the realities of 
contemporary Iroquois life. The art within the museum is not considered 
solely out of context. The museums presents other events and activities so 
that visitors can more easily understand the content of much of the Iroquois 
art it presents. Opportunities to interact with Iroquois staff and artists allow 
visitors to ask their questions and receive information directly from the 
Iroquois individuals at hand. This also raises the point about authenticity and 
the experience that visitors have when they have the opportunity to speak 
with Native individuals. Several of the non-Native staff commented on the 
difference with which visitors respond to staff depending upon whether they 
are Iroquois or non-Native. My impression was that this was especially true for 
children who visit the museum, i.e., that it is an exciting experience to meet 
“an Indian.” The challenge then is how to maintain an atmosphere of respect 
towards the Native persons who work at the museum while at the same time 
try to direct non-Native curiosity and comments. 



95 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 




ERjt 



6. Iroquois (Native) Voice and Participation. As a museum, the IIM 
could not be easily duplicated elsewhere. A major part of the success of the 
museum lies in its years-long history of communication between the museum 
founders and several Iroquois individuals. The ability of Dr. Johannsen Hanks 
to create a relationship that included the skill of listening is key to the 
existence of the IIM. Through board participation, staff, and interns the IIM is 
aware of and responsive to the opinions of many Iroquois communities. 
Iroquois visitors to the museum are asked for their opinions and the staff 
responds in a variety of ways. For example, rewriting label text or even adding 
an additional label, if necessary, to express another Iroquois viewpoint 
regarding an idea or object on display would not be an unusual response. 
This is not to imply that all Iroquois agree with all that the IIM says or does. But 
the ability of the museum staff to listen to an communicate with Iroquois 
persons is vital to its attempts at presenting Iroquois culture. The museum is 
also challenged in how to remain neutral. Because it does not focus on a 
single nation among the Iroquois and rather tries to emphasize all of the 
Iroquois, the museum is able to stay clear, for the most part, from factions and 
political controversy which may be circulating among the Iroquois 
communities, and the museum is sensitive to issues about the ways in which 
religious matters are discussed and presented. 

7 . Complexities of Accessing Iroquois (Native) art. To begin a 
presentation within any museum on even one Native culture is a tremendous 
task. The richness, depth and intricate complexities of presenting the 
Iroquois culture alone is a major effort. No one museum can say everything 
about a culture. Indeed, as John Fadden told me, a museum can reflect 
culture but it cannot contain it. Therefore, the IIM presents a reflection of 
contemporary Iroquois culture and lives through the contemporary art that it 
displays. But a single visit to the IIM cannot fully answer all questions or erase 
all stereotypes. The commitment that the staff expects from a core of 
volunteers cannot be assumed lightly. The knowledge to be developed is 
broad and an investment of time and effort towards educating staff, 
volunteers, and visitors is not insignificant. There is much to learn about the 
reality of Native lives and the commitment to learning accurate information is a 
commitment of time. 

8. The Main Educational Goal of the Museum. Across the board, 
according to all participants, the perceived goal of the IIM is in the attempt to 
erase stereotypical attitudes about Native American people. For Dave 
Fadden there is the need for people to know that the Iroquois are still here. 
The IIM hopes that it can provide visitors with knowledge and understanding 
of Iroquois lives and it uses contemporary Iroquois art to begin that process. 



96 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen's Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Stereotypes and misinformation come from many sources. As Rick Hill told 
me, Native people who seek to provide accurate information about Indian 
realities are fighting ‘Toys-R-Us and Hollywood.” But museums may be an 
eventual positive resource for changing the false impressions that many 
people have regarding Native lives. This problem of stereotypes seems to 
pervade over everything at the museum. Indeed, the mission of the museum 
is to inform visitors that Indians, specifically in this case Iroquois, are not 
located in the past. 

In this paper I have tried to suggest the content of the interviews that I 
was able to conduct during my study at The Iroquois Indian Museum. Space 
does not allow me to fully express the content of the interesting and 
insightful comments made by the individuals who gave generously of their 
time in answering my questions. I think that the interviews conducted for this 
study are of great worth and interest as educators and museum personnel 
attempt to teach ourselves, students, and our museum audiences about 
Native culture. 

For me, this experience has suggested several questions regarding 
art education in general. What Pan-Indian beliefs do we perpetuate in 
classrooms and in galleries? In addition to our skills in studio production, 
criticism, and art history, have we also developed skills in listening and 
questioning with respect? Are we who are non-Natives willing to suspend our 
own attitudes and beliefs about Indians to learn the realities of their lives and 
the context from which their art is regarded? Are we as educators willing to 
acknowledge our practices of art education which have been insensitive, 
especially in regards to the creation of objects which relate to Native religions, 
and take the time to accurately re-educate ourselves towards the purpose of 
presenting accurate information to our students and museum visitors? 

This is a moment in history in which museums are being confronted 
by those usually excluded. Like other marginalized groups, Native Americans 
are also asking that their voice be heard in affirming who they are. Museums 
can be a strong starting point for the eradication of stereotypes if patience 
and sensitivity are utilized. Through this experience what I have learned, and 
want to share, is a sense that while many Native persons seek to have us 
listen, they are also willing to invite us into a dialog. Perhaps we are only in 
the beginning stages of a new paradigm, which no doubt will be constantly 
reworked, but it derives from such a beginning that the possibility exists for 
creating an understanding between people. 



97 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



mentor’s introduction 



RONALD N. MACGREGOR 
University of British Columbia 



To claim the role of mentor in the case of Gudrun Helgadottir is, I fear, 
something of a false pretense on my part, for I seem to learn as much from her 
as she does from me. I have known Gudrun since she came to this university 
in the 1980’s as a Master’s student. I do take some of the credit for 
persuading her to stay on to do doctoral work. 

Gudrun has brought together her interests in Icelandic education, in 
crafts (not a word that has had much vogue in North American art education 
lately), in history and historiography and in feminism, to create a dissertation 
that is as illuminating as it is informative. But her impact at UBC has by no 
means been confined to the quality of her writing. She has been a leader and 
an inspiration to her fellow graduate students. For her, the mentoring role 
has already begun; at the official outset of her career at the post-doctoral 
level, she can already look back on several years of being an example to 
emulate. She is an international art educator, in personal experience and in 
academic perspective. 



98 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



In the Family? The Inter-relationship of Art and Craft 

Teachers. 

Gudrun Helgadottir 

Note: In this paper names are treated according to cultural norms so 
that Icelanders are referred to by first name first and listed alphabetically under 
their first name. 



Introduction 

The way in which the visual arts are defined and designed in formal 
curricula as school subjects varies throughout the world. The Nordic 
countries have an elementary school curriculum tradition in which art has 
cousins; textiles and wood and metalwork. This grouping is closer to the 
British model of art and design and to the current art, design and technology 
than to the prevalent tradition in North America where a schism exists 
between fine visual art and industrial art, or technology. The contemporary 
configuration of the subjects such as their degree of integration varies 
between individual Nordic countries. For instance, Norway has fully 
integrated art and crafts into one school subject called forming, whereas 
Iceland has three distinct subjects which share a name and official curriculum 
goals. A basic assumption in the formal curriculum is that the three subjects 
are related branches of a family tree of school subjects (Adalnamskra 
Grunnskola 1977, 1989, Nordic Art Teacher Union 1987, B.C. Ministry of 
Education 1985, Washington State Technology Education Curriculum 
Development Project 1990). 

In this paper I discuss on one hand the curriculum identity of the 
subjects that is suggested by the formal curriculum, and on the other that 
which teachers of the subjects assume. It is widely recognized that the formal 
and lived curricula are separate but related entities (Eisner 1982, Goodlad 
and associates 1979, Zais 1976). The curriculum identity that the teacher 
assumes is crucial in understanding the relationship between formal and lived 
curricula as the teacher is the mediator between the two levels. The 
importance of this is underscored by studies which show teachers as either 
rejecting (Dow, Whitehead & Wright 1984) or actively adapting and 
developing curriculum to the extent that they can be seen as having a 
personal curriculum (Barone 1983, Berliner 1984, Doyle & Ponder 1977, 
Fullan 1982, Gray & MacGregor 1 987). My discussion here is limited to the 
relations between the school subject cousins; art, textiles and wood and 
metalwork. My concern is how the school subject art and crafts in Iceland 



99 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



relate or do not relate to one another. This relationship is manifested on one 
hand in curriculum documents and on the other in the life histories of art and 
craft teachers. 



Overview of the Study 

This paper is based on my dissertation that goes by the working title 
‘The meaning of the subject; Art and craft teachers’ curriculum identity as 
reflected in life histories”. The data, or evidence, as the historian would have 
it, is from three main sources; 

* Oral testimony in the form of professional life histories elicited 
through interviews. 

* Documentary evidence-mainly curriculum documents, education 
acts, journal articles, textbooks and other instructional material. 

* Objects produced in the context of teaching and learning or using 
the skills and knowledge generated through the subjects. 

The first category, the oral testimony, forms the bulk of my evidence and the 
other two are complementary. 

By curriculum identity I mean the professional identity conferred on 
the teacher by the subject he or she teaches. A school subject is not simply a 
curriculum construct. It also encompasses a community of individuals 
engaged in its practice; students, parents, advocates and teachers. 

Teachers form the core of this community through their sustained 
commitment and involvement in the subject. This condition also makes them 
the most logical choice as informants for a historical study that seeks to go 
beyond the printed remains of educational discourse. This is, in part, 
inevitable because that discourse contains a resounding silence about art 
and craft. 

To document this history I invited certified art and craft teachers in 
Reykjavik, Iceland to be interviewed about their lifelong relationship with the 
subject they chose to teach. In the selection I ensured representation from 
all three subjects, ranging from the first cohorts of certified art and craft 
teachers to the latest, men and women, from those specializations where 
both genders are present. 

The purpose of the interviews was to document the lifelong 
relationship that teachers have with their chosen subject. Each interview 
opened with an invitation to describe the teacher’s first memories of the 
subject at home or in school. The teacher was asked to proceed 
chronologically from these early memories to the present day. In most cases 

100 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



105 



a narrative unfolded without my prompting, but the interviews were semi- 
structured in that I ensured that certain predetermined topics were 
discussed. For instance, I almost invariably had to ask the teacher to state the 
rationale for the subject, and its value for students. Analysis of the interviews 
focuses on the effects of gender and subject specialization on the teachers’ 
curriculum identity. 

Curricular Traditions 

Documentary evidence such as curricula and published educational 
discourse suggests three traditions of art and craft as we know the subjects 
today; the vocational, the pedagogical and the aesthetic. 

The vocational tradition is different in Iceland than in other western 
societies because of the low level of industrialization throughout our history. 
The Icelandic economy is still resource rather than industry based and 
although vocational rationales surface in the educational discourse, their 
material base is in the trades rather than industry. Textiles are an exception 
here, in that this subject had the vocational relevance of preparing girls for the 
role of a housewife (Gudrun Helgadottir 1993, 1991, Petterson & Asen 
1989). 



The aesthetic tradition refers to curricula rationalized on the creation 
and appreciation of art and crafts. I subsume folk and fine arts under the label 
of aesthetic tradition. It differs from the vocational in that, its rationales are not 
job-related but rather related to perceptions of the quality of life. The 
romantic notion of the artist as genius, the artist as outside social and familial 
relations as well as the notion of morally beneficial effects of art appreciation 
are tenets of this tradition. 

The pedagogical tradition arose when proponents of mass education 
were faced with the task of devising and implementing curricula and 
instructional methods for large groups of lower class children. In this 
framework the school subjects had precious little to do with art or craft as 
practiced in the cultural context. Rather they were conceived as having 
pedagogical value contributing to the overall development of the child. This 
value was articulated by pedagogues and transmitted by teachers in schools. 
In the process art and crafts were transformed into school knowledge which 
is distinct from common knowledge. This is part of the legitimization pattern 
of schooling. 

It is important to note that art and the craft subjects have differed from 
the outset. The official curriculum rationales may have become progressively 

101 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



more similar, but the subjects are steeped in different traditions-- art in the 
aesthetic, craft in the vocational. 

Historical Context 

The public elementary school system in Iceland is relatively young by 
European standards. This is due to the predominantly rural character of 
Icelandic society until the early 20th century. Up to that point, Iceland was a 
traditional, semi-feudal farming society. Public elementary schools were 
founded in towns in the late 19th century and the first public school act 
passed in 1907. Drawing and crafts were taught sporadically from the early 
schooling attempts but depended on the interests and abilities of individual 
teachers. Drawing was made compulsory in 1926 and crafts--that is textiles 
for girls and wood and metalwork for boys, were mandated in 1936. 

The first specialist teacher training program in wood and metalwork 
was founded in 1939 as the first program of instruction of the School of 
Crafts. A program for art teachers was added a couple of years later, then a 
training program for textile teachers in 1 947. All these programs were 
initiated within the School of Crafts, which today is the Icelandic College of Art 
and Crafts. The craft teacher training programs were moved to the Teachers’ 
College in 1 951 , but the art teacher training program remained with the art 
college until 1 986. This institutional shuffle, which apparently was a matter of 
resource management rather than educational rationalization, has had lasting 
impact on the profession (Althingistidindo 1947, Lydur Bjornsson 1981, 

Bjorn Th. Bjornsson 1979, Bjarni Danielsson, Gudrun Helgadottir and Skulina 
Kjartansdottir 1982). 

The status of the subjects within the elementary school curriculum is 
best described by noting that they are universal, that is compulsory for all 
students in grades 3-9. They are to be taught by specialists in specialized 
facilities. Basic materials are provided to the students free of charge. The 
current time allotment is 180 minutes per week for the three subjects 
combined, and they should be part of an integrated curriculum in the primary 
grades (Adalnamsskra Grunnskola 1989, Vidmidunarstundaskra 1993). 

Despite this sizable allotment of instructional time and resources, the 
subjects are not central in the curriculum. They are not part of the national 
assessment of graduation requirements from elementary school, nor does 
school based assessment in art or craft in any way affect students' progress 
through the grade levels of elementary school. In general parlance, the 
subjects are deemed beneficial but not essential. 



102 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Curriculum Identity 



The interviews suggest that art and craft teachers have developed 
different curriculum identities, and that difference cannot be readily related to 
the traditions discernible in official curricula. It can better be explained by 
reference to the dichotomy between the private and the public spheres. The 
idea of human society having separate spheres of public and private is quite 
central in western thought and can be traced back to the ancient Greek 
concept of the oikos and the polis (Rosenberg 1982). The Marxist notion of 
productive and reproductive spheres is a parallel characterization. This 
dichotomy has been wanting in many ways (Ehlstain 1 981 ). Despite its flaws 
it is illuminating in this case. 

Both art and craft teachers professed a deep need to make things, to 
produce objects. The context of that production differs. Art teachers identify 
with artists and the world of professional artists and exhibitions. Gratification is 
received from the acknowledgment of an external public such as gallery 
owners or attendees, consumers and critics. Craft teachers identify 
themselves with the handiperson, the person who can fix and make things 
about the house. Art teachers identify with a role in public life, whereas the 
craft teachers, men and women, focus on the private or domestic life. 

The artist-teacher identity that the art teachers assume is based on a 
notion of the male artist’s professional life with its need to compartmentalize 
public and private spheres. Art is made in the studio, where the artist works 
uninterrupted. It is a place of work in a public rather than private sense. Many 
of the art teachers I interviewed rent studios, but most were torn between 
family, teaching and artmaking and found it hard to spend any time producing 
art in the studio. Whereas the art curricula have followed the aesthetic rather 
than vocational tradition, the art teachers live by a concept of the artist’s 
vocation. 

The craft teachers, men and women, found ways to satisfy their need 
to produce crafts that harmonized more with their family responsibilities. They 
rarely had a work space separate from their home. Their workshop might be in 
the basement or in the garage, but on the premises of their home. The 
presence of their children or other family members was seen as integral to the 
project rather than an imposition. In some cases family members worked 
together, for instance on building a house and in other cases family members 
had to be on hand for fitting of clothes or to try out techniques to be taught. 
The ability to enhance personal relations by the gift of crafts was an apparent 
gratification for the craft teachers. Where the curriculum suggests a 



103 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



vocational relevance to the productive sphere the teachers have a domestic 
or reproductive sphere orientation. 



Conclusion: Distance Between Close Relatives 

I mentioned earlier that the curriculum rationales for the three 
subjects have been converging. More precisely an emphasis on creativity 
had been extended from art to crafts and objectives relating art, design and 
craft were added to the art curriculum. That is, the boundaries of the 
vocational and aesthetic traditions have become blurred. Furthermore, 
explicit demands for integration were made in the 1977 curriculum. This was 
part of a general trend toward subject matter integration (Namskra fyrir 
barnaskola 1950, Adalnamskra Grunnskola 1977, 1989). 

In practice the art and craft subjects have not integrated and teachers 
did not seem keen. on the idea of integration. They honor an ancient Norse 
proverb that stipulates a certain distance; let there be a brook between 
friends, a river between relatives. The explicit reasons teachers gave me for 
the lack of art and craft integration were mainly institutional constraints such as 
timetabling, physical space limitations, difficulty covering the curriculum within 
the time allotment, lack of planning time, etc., but other comments revealed 
underlying reasons. Firstly, groups perceive their subject as marginal: they 
are afraid to lose any further ground through integration. The main 
assumption is that any movement will further erode a curriculum base already 
perceived as weak. 

Secondly, and undoubtedly related, is a basic distrust or even dislike 
of the other cousins. This stems from their different upbringing and differing 
traditions. Art teachers were traditionally trained in an art college of 
education. Art teachers characterized craft teachers as unlike them, as being 
more conformist, less creative, not artistic or aesthetically inclined. The 
sentiment was echoed by craft teachers’ belief that art teachers are culture 
snobs. Wood and metalwork teachers did not have much respect for “the 
women” and in this context that always means textile teachers, whom they 
see as conservative old maids. The textile teachers have difficulty relating to 
the wood and metalwork teachers because of a perceived lack of professional 
commitment, particularly to curriculum planning and cooperation. All parties 
go about their business resolutely ignoring their poor relations. This of 
course does not help their marginal status and effectively blocks any 



104 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



concerted effort at advocacy, and much curriculum development is 
impossible in such a besieged atmosphere. 

The relationship mapped on the curricular family tree is not borne out 
in the life histories of art and craft teachers. This is an example of how we as 
researchers of curricula and instruction must bear in mind that we are not 
simply researching concepts, but the manifestation of concepts in the 
practice of people. 

References 

B.C. Ministry of Education (1985). Elementary Fine Arts Curriculum 
Guide/Resource Book. Victoria: Queens Printer for British 
Columbia. 

Barone, T. (1983) Things of Use and Things of Beauty. The Story of the 
Swain County High School Arts Program In E. Eisner (ed.) The 
Educational Imagination (2nd ed.) (pp. 275-295). 

Berliner, D.C. (1984). The Half-full Glass: A Review of Research About 

Teaching. In P. L. Hosford (ed.) Using What We Know About 
Teaching. Alexandria VA: A.S.C.D. 

Dow, 1. 1., Whitehead, R.Y. and Wright, R.L. (1984). Curriculum 

Implementation: A Framework for Action. Ontario Public 
School Teachers’ Federation. 

Doyle, W. & Ponder, G. (1977). The Ethics of Practicality: Implications for 
Curriculum Development. In A. Molnar and J. Zahorik (eds.) 
Curriculum Theory, (pp. 74-81) Washington: A.S.C.D. 

Ehlstain, J. B. (1981). Public Man Private Woman: Women in Social 
and Political Thought. Princeton University. 

Eisner, E. (1984). Alternative Approaches to Curriculum Development in Art 
Education. Studies in Art Education 25(4), 259-264. 

Fullan, M. (1982) The Meaning of Educational Change. Toronto: 

O.l. S.E. 

Gisli Agust Gunnlaugsson (1988). Family and Household in Iceland 

1801-1930. Studies in the Relationship Between Demographic and 
Socioeconomic Development, Social Legislation and Family and 



105 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Household Structures. Studia Uppsalensia 154. Uppsala, 
Sweden: Institute of history, Uppsala University. 

Goodlad, J.l. and associates (1979). Curriculum Inquiry. N.Y.: McGraw-Hill. 

Gray, J.U. & MacGregor, R.N. (1987)/{PROACTA: Personally Relevant 
Observations About Art Concepts and Teaching Activities. 

Canadian Review of Art Education 14, 23-33. 

Gudmundur Finnbogason (1905). Skyrsla um fraedslu barna og 

unglinga veturinn 1903-1904. (Report on the education of 
children 1903-1904). Reykjavik: Gutenberg. 

Gudrun Helgadottir (1991). Halldora Bjarnadottir and the Development of 
Textiles at a school in Iceland. Nordisk Konferens iSloyd 
Rapport. Gothenburg: University of University. 

Gudrun Helgadottir (1993) Art, sloyd and the good life. 

Presentation National Art Education Association, Chicago III. April. 

Ingolfur A Johannesson (1983). Menntakerfi i motun. (Education 
system in formation). Published thesis. Reykjavik: University of 
Iceland. 

Lydur Bjornsson (1981). Agrip af sogu kennaramenntunar a Islandi 
(Overview of the history of teacher education) Smarit 
Kennarahaskolans og Idunnar 8. Reykjavik: Idunn. 

Menntamalaraduneytid (1950) Namskra i teiknun (Curriculum in drawing) 
Reykjavik: Gutenberg. 

Menntamalaraduneytid (1977). Adalnamskra Grunnskola. Myn og 
handmenntt. (Elementary school curriculum. Art and Craft). 
Reykjavik: Gutenberg. 

Menntamalaraduneytid (1989). Adalnamskra Grunnskola. (Elementary 
school curriculum). Reykjavik: Gutenberg. 

Nordic Art Teachers’ Union (1 987). Comparative Summary. In Nordic 
paradise? Lund, Sweden: Wallin and Dalholm. 

Petterson, S. & Asen, G. (1989). Bildundervisningen och det 

pedagogiska rummet. Tradtioner, forestallningar och 

106 




Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



undervisningsprocess inom skolamnet teckning/bild i 
grundskolan. (Art education and the pedagogical space). 
Stockholm: Hogskolan tor lararutbildning, Institutionen tor 
Pedagogik. 

Washington State Technology Education Curriculum Development 

Project (1990). Technology education. Basic learning for 
living in the twenty-first century. Vol. 1. 

Zais, R.S. (1976). Curriculum: Principles and Foundations. 

N.Y.: Harper & Row. 



107 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



mentor’s introduction 



RONALD N. MACGREGOR 

University of British Columbia 

Mia Johnson is one of a new breed of art educators, for whom the 
computer is not just a sophisticated problem-solving device, but is instead 
one manifestation of a whole new way of living, thinking and reflecting. Her 
Master’s thesis made it quite clear that the language my generation had 
grown up with was simply inadequate to describe the processes or evaluate 
the products of computer artists. The taken-for-granted attitudes that she 
has developed as a member of this “new breed" have given both of us a new 
appreciation of how the adviser-student relationship may be defined. 

While, even in traditional settings, one expects to see some 
exchange of readings between student and adviser, as both come to grips 
with the dissertation topic, in Mia’s case I can honestly say that I have been 
given more to read than I have assigned. The result has been, for me, the 
unusual sense that Mia’s dissertation will in some ways reflect my own efforts 
to grapple with an area that I still only dimly understand. 

In situations where I am often stumbling to catch up, the role of 
mentor is, then, something less than authoritative. Nevertheless, I can at 
least draw on fairly extensive past experience with graduate students in 
identifying Mia Johnson as an art educator of promise, whose work is on that 
new frontier where technology and sensibility are continually redefining each 
other, and where, it is not too fanciful to say, new directions in the field are 
likely to be set. 



108 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Computer Artists: A Study of Influences on Their 
Artistic Development and Production 

Mia Johnson 



I have worked in the field of art education for 26 years. I worked first 
as a secondary art teacher, then as an artist and art reviewer, and currently as 
a university art educator. I returned to the University of British Columbia to do 
graduate work in 1990. For the past ten years, I have been interested in how 
images are constructed on a two-dimensional surface. After painting imagery 
myself and teaching art to secondary students and adults, I studied how 
children make pictures. My findings were published in two books for parents, 
Teach Your Child To Draw and.Understanding and Appreciating 
Your Child’s Art. 

During my first year ot graduate studies in the Master's program, I 
examined the visual and neurological processes that occur during the artistic 
process of translating an object or scene onto a two-dimensional surface. A 
theoretical model was later published in Visual Arts Research 19(1), 1993. In 
the second year of my Master’s program, I became interested in how 2D and 
3D images are created with computer technology. Investigating computer 
graphics procedures allowed me to begin studying the theories of vision and 
cognitive processes that are embedded in the software and hardware itself. 

Although perception and cognition have been ongoing interests, for my 
thesis topic I decided to focus on the kinds of terminology used in the two 
fields. I compared 9000 terms that are used in art education and in computer 
graphics to describe the appearance and construction of visual images. Dr. 
Ronald MacGregor was my supervisor. In this study, I analyzed the elements 
and principles of design as they are taught in traditional art education, and 
examined the extent to which they are appropriate for an aesthetic model in 
computer graphics. A paper describing this research will soon be published 
in Studies. 

I am currently in the Ph.D. program for Curriculum and Instruction in 
art education, where I also teach computer graphics and elementary art 
education. I have been very fortunate in linking my interests. For example, 
my work at U.B.C. has allowed me to attend such professional computer 
graphics conferences as the Virtual Worlds Symposium and SIGGRAPH. My 
academic work has included doing 3D animation with Wavefront and Alias in 
the department of Computer Science, and making an interactive videodisk 
with Dr. Glorianna Davenport, M.l.T. Media Lab. As a result of my research 

109 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen's Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



into science and engineering applications of visual technology, I have 
become aware of the enormous degree to which knowledge in the field of art 
education is potentially valuable to the development of effective and 
powerful computer graphic images. My backgrounds in visual perception, 
spatial reasoning, studio work, aesthetics, and the psychological/metaphoric 
effects of imagery have all assisted me in making connections between the 
two fields. 

The working title of my Ph.D dissertation is Computer artists: A 
study of influences on their artistic development and 
production. I decided to do a triangulated study in this area because there 
is so little known about adult exemplars in the field. This study is in three 
parts. It includes an examination of computer art images as cultural and 
educational artifacts; a survey of artistic and educational influences on 
computer artists; and interviews with computer artists. I use the term 
"education" to describe both formal and informal ways of learning and 
developing an artistic vehicle and style. I am particularly interested in finding 
out how gender might affect the acquisition of knowledge about computer 
graphics, schemata and style, or access to concrete and electronic exhibition 
venues. 



In order to facilitate communication with computer artists, I have spent 
the past two years gaining hands-on computer graphics experience, a 
knowledge of different hardware and software, and a technical vocabulary As 
an examination of concrete computer art images, my dissertation investigates 
the schemata, content and styles that are evident in images produced by 
male and female computer artists. It also characterizes available sites and 
venues for exhibiting and disseminating computer art and theories. I am 
acquiring quantitative data first through content analysis of computer art for 
patterns of "authorship”, subject matter, methods, and program 
idiosyncrasies, and second through survey research on the Internet with 
practitioners in computer graphics groups such as SIGGRAPH. 

This dissertation investigates how computer artists go about 
acquiring their pictorial conventions, and the kinds of technical or aesthetic 
education they receive or acquire. It also looks at why they acquire them, in 
terms of the kinds of theories that inform their practice and the kinds of social 
interactions that influence their education, artwork, and access. The 
qualitative data is being acquired through semi-structured interviews with 
computer artists and analyzed with an ethnographic data analysis software 
program. The survey data is being analyzed with the support of a survey 
analysis program 



1 10 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



There is certainly a need tor curriculum models in computer art 
education. However, there has been little research on what Howard Becker 
would call the “art world” of computer artists, and even less that is 
synthesized for educational purposes. Most studies in computer art 
education have been centered around questions of how children interact 
with a new art medium in already-familiar art education contexts. That is, the 
focus is predominantly on how students accept or transfer previous art 
experience to a computerized environment, rather than on the technologies. 

I believe that researchers need to examine hardware and software as it is 
developed and applied in industry, science and the computer art world, and 
do more ethnographic studies of computer artists themselves. For example, 
to date only two studies have been done of professional adult exemplars: 
Demaria’s 1991 dissertation on the work of Charles Csuri and Morbey’s 1992 
dissertation on the work of Harold Cohen. Through critical examination of 
their work, artists can serve as models of theoretical and historical 
development in computer art. 

The neglect of its history, criticisms, and theories of art leaves 
students and teachers unable to deal meaningfully with sophisticated forms 
of computer graphics. They are disabled in their ability to comprehend 
electronic art, to work with current conventions of computer art, and to take 
part in the development of new aesthetics. I hope that this study will assist 
curriculum developers in understanding the ways of knowing and learning 
that are shared by adult computer artists; their transition from such other fields 
as computer science or traditional art; their moral and ethical outlooks; and 
their aesthetic preferences and their artistic theories. It may reveal gender 
differences in computer art education and production. 

I am ultimately interested in developing a discipline-based model for 
computer art education. Prototype models for traditional Discipline-Based Art 
Education recommend four areas of instruction: art history, art criticism, 
aesthetics, and art production. To integrate computer graphics as an 
emerging medium in art education and at the same time work within current 
models, a curriculum model would need to address these four areas. My 
current research indicates the need to consider; (1) the impact of traditional 
art history and the influence of developments in hardware and software on 
computer graphics history; (2) such critical values as those implicit in 
appropriation and simulation, as well as the effects of recognizable algorithms 
in commercial software; (3) the interrelationship of computer techniques with 
aesthetic elements of art, as well as the unique constraints and strengths of 
the computer medium; and (4) perceptual training in studio practice to 
increase powers of observation and visualizing skills for constructing 
computer images. 



1 1 1 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



As a graduate student at the University of British Columbia, I have 
been extremely fortunate to study with the following people: my advisor, Dr. 
Ronald MacGregor, who has a particular interest in image construction; 
computer scientists Dr. David Forsey and Dr. Alain Fournier of the U.B.C. 
Center for Integrated Computer Systems Research; Dr. Rita Irwin, a 
curriculum scholar and ethnographic researcher; the internationally 
respected art educators Dr. Anna Kindler and Dr. Graeme Chalmers; and Dr. 
Ken Stoddart, Department of Sociology, whose particular interest is the 
sociology of the arts and the conventions of art worlds. I would like to thank 
the Canada Council for the two-year research grant which is supporting this 
study. 



References 

Johnson, M. (1994). Beyond the Paint Program: Computer Graphics on the 
High End, Journal of the Canadian Society for Education 
Through Art, 25, 8-12. 

Johnson, M. (1993). A Cognitive Model for the Perception and Translation of 
a Three-Dimensional Object/array Onto a Two-Dimensional Surface, 
Visual Arts Research, 19(1), 85-99. 

Johnson, M. (1994). A Cognitive Model for the Perception and Translation of 
a Three-dimensional Object/array Onto a Two-Dimensional Surface, 
Art Education Review, Annual Report of Zohyung-Kyoyouk 
1994, Seoul, Korea, 10, 186-200. 

Johnson, M. (1993). A Comparative Study of Visual Elements in 
Traditional Art Images and Computer Graphics, 

Unpublished master's thesis, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia. 

Johnson, M. (in press). A Comparative Study of Terms Used in Art Education 
and Computer Graphics to Describe the Visual Properties of Images. 

Studies in Art Education. 

Johnson, M. (in press). Computer Painting and Perceptual Training, School 
Arts 

Johnson, M. (1994). Drawing Against the Odds, BCATA Journal for Art 
Teachers, 34(2), 46-47. 



112 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Johnson, M. (1995). The Elements and Principles of Design: Written in finger 
Jello? Art Education (NAEA).48(1), 57-61. 

Johnson, M. (1983). Everything You Want to Know About Drawing 
and Painting: A Studio Guide. Vancouver B. C.: Intermedia 
Press 

Johnson, M. (1985). The Pink Heart and Other Tamperings. 

Vancouver, B.C.:Bau-Xi Gallery. 

Johnson, M. (1995). Phenomenology and the Pilot Edition of the B.C. Visual 
Arts Curriculum. BCATA Journal for Art Teachers, 34(3), 41- 

43. 

Johnson, M. (1990).Teach Your Child to Draw, Los Angeles: 
RGA/Lowell House. 

Johnson, M. (in press). Teaching Children to Value Art and Artists. Phi 

Delta Kappan 

Johnson, M. (1993). Understanding and Encouraging Your Child's 
Art. Los Angeles: RGA/Lowell House. 



1 13 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen's Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



mentor’s introduction 

F. GRAEME CHALMERS 

University ot British Columbia 

Lara Lackey came to graduate studies in art education from a position 
as a community art center administrator. In addition to myself, as art educator, 
her Ph.D. supervisory committee consists of an adult educator, a professor of 
leisure studies, and a sociologist of education. 

T oo often art education is believed to happen only in schools. 

Schools of Education sometimes consider themselves primarily colleges of 
Schooling and Teacher Education, pushing courses in adult education, art 
therapy, counseling (in non-school settings), museum and gallery education, 
and “recreation” etc., to the fringes of the curriculum. Lara’s research 
challenges these notions. She claims that while art education may be 
peripheral and harder to find in schools, forms of art education can be readily 
identified in many non-school settings-particularly leisure institutions. As 
she states, this is where she is currently “submerged.” 

Lara Lackey’s study will have implications for persons working in a variety of 
contexts. She wants even school-based art educators to understand art 
education practices in non-school sites, and to consider what they can learn 
from the study of art education in leisure settings. Her questions too, are 
important for all of us. How are notions of art, artist, craft, constructed and 
acted upon in a variety of educational settings? I believe that her questions 
need to be asked and answered in a number of settings-even public 
schools. 

Such questions cannot be answered quickly, or by using methods 
that lead to only cursory understanding. It used to be said that graduate 
students in anthropology required at least two years “in the field" before they 
wrote any conclusions. Time is also one of the great strengths of Lara 
Lackey’s work. It is also multifaceted, involving many hours of observation, 
interviewing, and document analysis. Visual anthropology, via photography, 
has a special role. But especially important: she is taking time. As Lara herself 
states: Part of being an ethnographic researcher is learning to reflect on the 
assumptions with which you entered the setting and how your ideas have 
been altered...” After much “submersion” she is still not ready to write 
conclusions. Too often, qualitative studies lack rigor and are prematurely 
concluded. I am pleased that, at this point, we are presented only with 
emerging themes. Watch this space! 

114 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Art and Education in Leisure Institutions: Making a 
Case for Research 

Lara M. Lackey 

Is this a topic that you have created or did they give you a topic? 

Well, I don’t think you’re going to get a very long thesis out of that! 

(Comments of a senior-aged woman, a tole painter working at a 

community recreation center, upon hearing my explanation of my 

dissertation research.) 

In common-sense terms “education" occurs in schools, “leisure” is 
the opposite of work, and “art” fits within domains of play or recreation rather 
than work or education (Lackey, 1994 1 ). These interrelated conventional 
understandings are reflected and perpetuated by the ways in which art 
education has been institutionalized in Western society, remaining a marginal 
school subject but embraced readily as part of non-school learning 
environments. The research in which I am currently submerged offers an 
opportunity for art educators to question these ideas, as perhaps they 
already have. It also poses a challenge, however, to take art education 
practices that occur at non-school sites more seriously, and to consider what 
we might be able to learn from them. 

My research uses ethnographic methods to explore how art activities 
‘lit” within the contexts of two community recreation centers in Greater 
Vancouver. Community recreation centers .are familiar institutions throughout 
North America. In my city they are municipally funded, and their brochure 
covers commonly feature some child or adult engaged in a seasonal sport or 
physical activity-tennis, soccer, ice hockey, etc.. Indeed the field of 
recreation has its roots in physical education. Interestingly, however, a 
substantial portion of the content in these brochures may include that which 
is categorized as art or craft programming. Art activities are provided for all 
ages and within a range of structures-as part of special events, as one 
portion of a more general program of children’s “play” or child care, or as the 
exclusive focus of a course. Recently there has been a campaign to increase 
the emphasis on recreational arts programming in my region, and to find more 
ways to include art and artists in these centers. Much of my own background 
has involved work in community-based art education, and I have long been 



1 An expanded version of many of the arguments in this paper are offered in Lackey 
(1994). 



115 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



curious to see it I could understand just how art activity was framed within 
these kinds of contexts, dominated as they are by sport, fitness, and a focus 
on the physical needs of the body as distinct from the mind. 

There is a sense, however, in which the apparent triviality of such a 
study needs to be dealt with at the outset, and an argument needs to be 
made as to why it bears any relation to educational concerns. As noted, it is 
common to dismiss activity which occurs in non-formal settings as insignificant 
or not part of the realm of education. The fact that this activity occurs during 
what is labeled as “leisure" or “free time” suggests “play" or “non--work," 
somehow lacking in value, status, or importance. Ostensibly, my research is a 
case of “studying down." There are a number of good reasons why art 
educators need to pay attention to what happens in non--formal settings. 

First, it is the case that non-formal institutions and arts organizations 
increasingly view art education within their own mandates (Soren, 1 993). 
Arguably their motives and purposes (overt or tacit) in providing art 
educational activities may differ from those of schools, but often the activities 
themselves-what participants actually experience-may closely mimic school 
practices. The prevalent availability of art educational activities outside of 
school is a characteristic that distinguishes art from core school subjects, and, 
although non-formal art education has been left relatively unexamined by 
researchers, there is evidence in our literature that it creates a tension for 
school art educators and may be viewed as threatening to democratic 
educational access or to the primacy of schools as sites for art education 
(Chapman, 1992; Fowler, 1984; Kimpton, 1984; Smith, 1980). 

Second, the literatures of lifelong learning and adult education have 
encouraged us to reconceptuaiize what counts as education and to 
recognize that facilitated learning occurs in a wide range of contexts. In 
addition, critical theorists have noted the relationships between sanctioned 
schooling/curricula and dominant powers in our society, pointing to the 
relatively arbitrary ways in which learning experiences are selected for 
credentialing or not. (Illich, 1971; Bowles & Gintis, 1976; Apple, 1990; 

Apple, 1993). Other authors have urged us to consider both the possibilities 
that alternative sites offer for pursuing more democratic and egalitarian social 
agendas, and the common goals of “cultural workers” across a range of 
settings (Giroux, 1992; Trend 1992). 

Changes in technology as well as our appearing to be on the verge of 
significant shifts in our economic and social organization--what Lyotard 
(1979/1984) calls our “postmodern condition”~suggest that educational 



116 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



structures will soon change and evolve as well. Already we are seeing the 
blurring of lines between formal and non-tormal realms. 

One of the ways in which such changes occur is when school 
educators are urged to seek out relationships with non-school organizations 
in order to augment school art programs, and to enlist these alternative 
organizations as part of a broader art education network. Ironically, the 
common-sense assumptions surrounding notions of art and leisure, both 
linked to play and personal choice, may converge in ways which pose leisure 
institutions as somehow more “free” or more appropriate than schools for art 
education, a position that needs to be more closely examined. Rather, we 
are naive if we assume that any institutional context comes without ideological 
and structural parameters, complicated by complex issues of power. Where 
non-formal establishments engage in educational activity or form associations 
with schools, we need to understand and work to make explicit the contextual 
possibilities and constraints which necessarily frame the programming which 
is provided by such sites. 

I view researching art activity in community recreation centers as 
relevant to education for all of these reasons. These sites are interesting, 
however, because they can be viewed as places where the ideologies of 
sport, recreation, and leisure converge with those of art and education In 
addition, as these and similar organizations increasingly involve themselves in 
art educational practices, they solidify their own positions as art institutions, 
sites where forms of art knowledge are constructed and perpetuated. As 
such, they warrant the same kinds of critical analysis that has been applied to 
schools and other art educational contexts. 

About the Sites 

I have selected the two community recreation centers in which to 
conduct my work. One is situated in an area which has been described to me 
as generally lower income and highly “multicultural." For example, although 
the dominant social group in Vancouver is descended from Northern 
Europeans, an effect of British colonization, this community contains large 
populations of established and recent immigrants from Vietnam, China, and 
various countries in Southern Europe. In addition there is a prevalent First 
Nations presence in the area. I have been told that a number of youths who 
regularly attend the center and use its free "games room" have very troubled 
home lives. Many live in group homes or foster homes, and the center has 
special staff to counsel and work with these youth. This center is known for 
its strong martial arts program, although any kind of programming that costs 

117 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



122 



money is difficult to implement because of the community’s general inability 
to pay the fees. 

The other center is situated on the west side of Vancouver in a 
relatively affluent section of town. This site is filled with pale-skinned people, 
and there is a strong British influence--it is common, for example, to hear 
British accents among adults who frequent the center. Here, the only 
noticeable non-Northern European presence is a number of Filipino women 
who are the nannies to the large number of preschool children in the area. In 
this case, in courses designed for parents and children to attend together, or 
where adults are invited to the presentation of a final performance, it is often 
the nanny who attends or participates in the parents’ places. This center is 
known as a program “machine”. People line up to get into programs on 
registration nights, and the community demand for programming is so high 
that the center often cannot keep up with it. 

Questions 

The overriding question with which I am concerned is, How does art 
programming “fit” within the contexts of these centers? Some of the more 
specific questions in which I am interested, however, are, How do 
administrators, instructors, participants, and parents experience and 
understand the purposes of art programming in these settings? How do 
these perspectives converge with or diverge from each other? How are 
notions such as art, artist, craft, recreation, education, and leisure 
constructed and acted upon in these settings? How do issues of socio- 
economics, class, gender, and culture or ethnicity reveal themselves in these 
contexts? How do organizational culture and structure affect art programming 
in these settings? What formal and informal messages or assumptions do 
these institutions hold and disseminate about art programming within their 
frames: What possibilities and constraints for art educational activity might 
these sites afford? 



Methods 

I have been trying to gather relevant data to these questions through 
many hours of program observations and interviews with people who work in 
and use these sites. I will also be analyzing a range of documents produced 
in the settings, which I have been collecting over the past year. In addition I 
have been using photography to document artistic products and the visual 
environments of the centers, realizing the futility of trying to “describe” visual 
artifacts in my written field notes and becoming alert to the informal messages 
of the institutions which can in part be found in the structure of the buildings 

118 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



O 

ERJC 



123 



and in the interior designs and visual displays. In addition I gradually 
recognized that I could not understand how “art” programming is positioned 
and conceptualized within these settings without also getting a sense of the 
centers as wholes, and how approaches to visual art may be compared and 
contrasted, for example, with other activities. In this sense, my observations 
and research experiences have touched on a wide range of activities outside 
the categories of visual art or craft. 

Emerging Themes 

Part of being an ethnographic researcher is learning to reflect on the 
assumptions with which you entered the setting and how your ideas have 
been altered, perhaps how you have been surprised, by contact with the site. 
While I am not ready to write “conclusions” for this study-which is still in 
progress-1 can begin this process of reflection. 

First, in terms of my overriding question about how “art” is seen to 
‘lit” within these contexts, I think my assumption was that art might be 
perceived in a relatively cohesive or universal way in these institutions, and 
that it might be possible to state that perception in fairly succinct terms. In 
addition, I think that I assumed that it would be possible to find a great deal of 
what art educators might frame as uncritical practice, perhaps practice that 
promoted a notion of art activity as rather meaningless play. What troubles 
these assumptions is that art fits within these contexts in a wide variety of 
ways, according to the structure and perceived purposes of the programming 
within which it occurs, as well as the background and value of the people who 
instruct and administer it. Art projects I have observed, for example, included: 
egg carton “caterpillars” enhanced with pipe cleaners, feathers, glitter, and 
rolling plastic eyes created for the purpose of developing “gluing” skills; a 
collaborative mural produced to honor a multicultural community but which 
nevertheless was constrained and influenced by the ideological and 
structural frames of the social institution on which it emerged; oversized still 
life work in the “style” of Matisse; and clay tiles carved and stained with 
scenes of lake life, created by adults and children in the neighborhood as part 
of a project to celebrate and save a dying lake. (Later these tiles were sealed 
to the tops of the wooden tables in the center snack bar.) In other words I 
have found art education practice that is both as banal and as interesting as 
that which might be found in schools, permeated by the same kinds of social 
influences and artistic assumptions-art in the service of engendering 
technical skill; art as celebration; art as representation; art as emulation of 
historical work; art as a means of heightening awareness of social or political 
circumstances. In each case the practices are framed and negotiated within 

119 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s 



Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 





v 



structures, values, and beliefs that form the parameters of the social 
institutions in which they were produced. 

A second assumption I brought with me to my research was that I 
might find a fair amount of tension, in terms of how art was perceived. 

Between people who administered these centers and those who taught art 
courses in them. The administrators, almost without exception, have 
backgrounds in physical education and are often accomplished high-level 
athletes but have little or no experience in art; those who teach the art 
courses, however, at least those programs that focus exclusively on art, tend 
to be trained in art colleges. The assumption that there would be some 
differences in how the functions of art programming in these settings were 
understood by these two sets of people has proved to be at least partly 
correct, and can be addressed. The commonality between the two groups, 
however, is perhaps more interesting that their differences. What both 
groups seem to agree on is the possibility of the community center as a site 
for doing and learning all kinds of things, and the less-structured alternative 
such sites provide to schools, which both artists and administrators assume to 
be authoritarian and restrictive. Members of both groups, for example, told 
me that in choosing careers, they made deliberate decisions not to work in 
schools, in spite of an interest in working with people in learning 
environments. 

Yet another misconception that I arrived with was that people in these 
settings would be able to articulate fairly clearly the ways in which they 
perceived distinctions between “education” and “recreation." I have been 
interested in how these terms are often used rather arbitrarily to categorize 
and bestow status on activities. In this study, however, I have found their 
meanings to be quite blurred and overlapping, and certainly not easy to 
define. It is often, however, people who teach art in these settings who 
perceive what they do as “education” rather than “recreation." For example, 
one woman told me quite adamantly that what she did was not recreation, but 
"education wrapped in fun." 

Issues related to socio-economics, class, and culture leap out of the 
data in this study, especially pertaining to questions like, Who has leisure? 
and Who has access to these programs? These facilities are, after all, posed 
as being available and welcoming to all, and as meeting community needs. 
Who can participate, who can volunteer their time, who can justify making art 
for art’s sake rather than art perceived as functional, who can afford to pay as 
much for art supplies as one paid for the course fees, as well as the ways in 
which "needs” of each community are construed by those who design the 

120 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



programs in each setting, will undoubtedly surface as important in this study’s 
findings. 

Finally, there are issues emerging around how art and sport 
programming tend to divide along gender lines in these sites, and how that is 
reflected in the designed environments of the centers. The centers are 
physically built around major facilities like ice rinks, gymnasiums, fitness 
centers, and racquetball courts which tend to be used by males, although not 
exclusively. The art programs, on the other hand, are primarily used by 
females and the art facilities, by contrast, are small, cluttered and shared by 
many “arts” activities as opposed to being designed and designated for one 
type of program. 



Summary 

In this paper I have taken literally the notion of providing a “working 
paper” in art education, one which reflects my emerging thoughts as I 
progress in my research. Art educators need to pay closer attention to 
practice which occurs in non-school sites, and I point to some of the 
interesting questions that may be pursued in community settings, questions 
that are of interest to art educators working in a wide range of contexts. 

References 

Apple, M.W. (1990). Ideology and Curriculum (2nd Edition). London; 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 

Apple, M.W. (1993). Official Knowledge: Democratic Education in 
a Conservative Age. New York/London: Routledge. 

Bowles, S. & Gintis, H. (1976). Schooling in Capitalist America: 

Educational Reform and the Contradictions of Economic 
Life. New York:Basic Books. 

Chapman, L. (1992). Arts Education as a Political Issue: The Federal Legacy. 
In R.A. Smith & R. Berman (Eds ), Public Policy and the 
Aesthetic Interest: Critical Essays on Defining Cultural 
and Educational Relations (pp. 119-136). University of Illinois 
Press: Urbana/Chicago. 

Fowler, C.B. (1984). Some Arts Educators see the Community as 

Competition: Who Owns Arts Education? Design for Arts in 
Education, 86(2), 4-7. 



121 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Giroux, H.A. (1992). Border Crossings: Cultural Workers and the 
Politics of Education. New York:Routledge. 

Illich, I. (1971) Deschooling Society. New York: Harper and Row. 

Kimpton, J. (1984). Public Education and the Arts: Linked by Necessity. 

Design For Arts in Education, 8 6(2), 8-12. 

Lackey, L. (1994). Art, Education, Work, and Leisure: Tangles in the Lifelong 
Learning Network. Journal of Social Theory in Art 
Education, 14, 148-169. 

Lyotard, J. F. (1984). The Postmodern Condition: A Report on 

Knowledge (G. Bennington & B. Massumi, Trans.). Minneapolis: 
University of Minneapolis. (Original work published 1979). 

Soren, B. J. (1993). Nurturing mind, Spirit, and a Love of the Arts and 
Sciences: Schools and Cultural Organizations as Educators. 

Studies in Art Education, 34,(3), 149-157. 

Trend, D. (1992). Cultural Pedagogy: Art/Education/Politics. 

Cultural Studies in Education and Culture Series, H. A. Giroux and P. 
Freire (Eds ). New York: Bergin & Garvey. 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



122 



ERIC 




mentor’s introduction 



GRAEME CHALMERS 

University of British Columbia 



Joanne McNeal’s study is important for a number of reasons. It will 
focus on more that art forms; it will give voices to artists. It will give voices to 
women, particularly women in the North. It will give status and visibility to the 
“crafts” not just the “fine arts” as defined by the eurocentric Great Tradition. It 
will have implications for the art curriculum in Northern schools and colleges 
and may cause Southerners to re-think their notions of “art" and it's roles in 
people’s lives. This study relates well to DBAE, particularly to what Karen 
Hamblen has called the second generation of discipline-based art education. 
Joanne McNeal will study histories of Northern women’s art; she will look at 
the way the work of indigenous and other Northern women’s work has been, 
and is, discussed (aesthetics/criticism); and she will study women’s art 
production in the Canadian Arctic. All of this will lead to proposals for 
curriculum development that can either be consistent with, or challenge, 
DBAE theory. 

Although she acknowledges a number of limitations in applying her 
ethnographic perspective, Ms. McNeal is extremely well prepared to 
undertake this study. She has worked as both a teacher-educator and an arts 
festival organizer in the Canadian Arctic. 



123 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



128 



Western Arctic Women Artists: An Ethnographic Study 
of the Historic Influences on the Artistic Education 
and Production of Women from Three Co-existing 

cultures 

Joanne McNeal 

Abstract 

Indigenous women in the Western Arctic have produced artwork tor 
hundreds of years as their contribution to their family's survival. With the 
arrival of the European explorers and whalers new materials, techniques and 
incentives were introduced. Women of all three cultural groups now produce 
various types of artwork: the Inuvialuit (Eskimo), the Dene (Indian), and non- 
native or Euro-Canadian. These cultures, along with Metis now co-exist in 
most Western Arctic communities, and have expressed the need to 
understand and cooperate with each other more fully to ensure the survival of 
the arts in the education of future generations. 

The arts of all three heritage groups appear to have influenced each 
other as they developed in the Western Arctic Region over the last hundred 
years. Influences include historical education and church practices, changes 
in society and traditional ways of life, politics and government, various 
economic pressures including the decline of the fur industry, the rise and fall 
of the oil and gas industry, and the harshness of the Arctic landscape and 
climate. The traditional women’s artwork of all three cultures is interwoven 
with new materials and techniques, and must be understood within its 
historical context. 

In the past, the production of artifacts was gender related. Women's 
art forms were different from those created by men, and were usually 
unsigned. Most women in pre-industrial societies created articles to be used 
by their families such as clothing, footwear, utensils, or items of household 
decoration. Now in a development parallel to the Arts and Crafts Movement in 
Europe and America, many women living in the Western Arctic also produce 
artwork for sale. They produce a variety of art forms that are widely acclaimed 
for their aesthetic value. These include Moose and Caribou-hair tufting, 
embroidery, beadwork, fur inlay, printmaking, painting, Delta-Braid, fur 
clothing, porcupine quillwork, birchbark baskets, stained glass, pottery, 
quilting, fashion design, and mixed media. The Western Arctic is worthy of 
study because each cultural group has developed unique ways of using new 

124 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers 



In Art Education 1994-1995 



129 




materials and techniques to reflect their collective cultural heritage, yet the 
influence of the other groups is observable. 

Through interviews with more than fifty women who are artists, 
teachers, and or arts organizers, the stories of the women’s artistic lives will be 
pieced together to show the evolving forms of Western Arctic art production. 
There is much to be learned from the elder women themselves about past 
and present practices. How the lives of producing women artists have been 
affected by the fabric of these interwoven cultures is part of the study of art 
history and aesthetics. How the women talk about their art and education is 
part of the study of art history, criticism, and production. Through videotape 
and audiotaped interviews, the voices of the women themselves will be heard 
as they critically discuss their art and its value in their lives, as well as historical 
aspects such as how they learned their skills. These tapes are the raw data 
around which this dissertation is being written. 

Statement of the Problem 

Three cultures co-exist in the Western Arctic, in varying percentages 
in each community. In the MacKenzie Delta region (Inuvik, Aklavik, Fort 
McPherson, Arctic Red River, Tuktoyaktuk, Paulatuk, and Holman), the three 
cultures are fairly equal in numbers, and there is striking evidence of a mutual 
influence in the artwork of today's women. There is also evidence of a 
similarity among the cultural groups in the way women's art relates to their 
lives. However, we know little about the women themselves, or how they 
value their aesthetic contributions and artistic skills. We may still be able to 
learn from elders about old ways that pre-date the arrival of European 
influence. 

The indigenous peoples are struggling to maintain or revive their 
cultural identity, but the variety of artistic contributions to the cultural fabric of 
the entire region is rarely acknowledged. As land claims are settled, and new 
political structures emerge, affecting all sectors, this time of drastic change 
creates an urgent need for the cultures to understand each other. Each 
group has contributed an artistic, cultural, and educational heritage that is 
interwoven with others. All groups have expressed the need for increased 
knowledge and understanding of these complex interrelationships as 
important to future cooperation and survival. 

Rationale and Statement of Purpose 

The artwork produced by the women of the Western Arctic cannot be 
understood outside this context. Hence it is necessary to study the 

125 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 




130 



Map of Canadian Arctic Regions including Western and Eastern Arctic 



Communities of women interviewed and treeline' are indicated. 




o 

ERIC 






Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



historical, social, cultural, and aesthetic milieu in which this art is created. 
Therefore, the purpose of this study is to discover, through conversations 
with women artists, and those involved in the teaching and sale of art, the 
context and motivation for women’s artistic production. In discovering their 
reasons for creating art, what influences their artistic production, and how 
they learned their aesthetic skills, we gain insight to guide future generations. 
The knowledge gained through this study will enhance world understanding 
of how women maintain cultural identity through their art, how they benefit 
from cooperation with other cultures, and how they contribute to the 
education of future generations. This understanding has implications for 
curriculum in Canada’s North and all of North America, and will foster more 
appropriate Discipline-based Art Education practices. 

Significance of the Study 

This study emphasizes the importance of women’s art in maintaining 
cultural identity. It is significant not only in Canada, but in other countries of 
the world where indigenous peoples have been colonized by those of a 
dominant culture. How women in certain cultures resist assimilation and 
maintain cultural identity through their artwork is an important outcome of this 
research. Through education and passing on artistic skills to later 
generations, women contribute greatly to their own culture and also to the 
cooperation and understanding of co-existing cultural groups. The addition 
of this information to existing multicultural perspectives will lead to more than 
artistic cooperation, enabling Discipline-Based Art Education programs to 
better serve the various cultures of the world, and foster greater 
understanding among them. 



Methodology 

The research methods employed in this study are ethnographic 
Data was collected during three summers, 1992-1994, in the Northwest 
T erritories of Canada, mostly above the Arctic Circle. Primary sources were 
interviews with about thirty-five outstanding women artists. Additional primary 
sources were interviews with women who are arts organizers and teachers, 
more than twenty in total. All together more than fifty women were 
interviewed over a three year period, many more than once, and several were 
interviewed each year. Observations were written, and photographs were 
collected on each woman throughout the three years. They commented on 
the role of art in their lives, as well as on their growth and changes in their 
work. Major questions relating to the four art disciplines were asked. How did 
they learn their artistic skills? What are the influences on their artistic 
production? How do they relate to other cultural groups? How has the 

127 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



132 



educational process changed? What aesthetic value do they place on their 
artwork? How have they resisted cultural assimilation? How do they teel their 
skills can best be passed on to tuture generations? 

The interviews were recorded on videotape and audiotape to allow 
the women’s voices to be herd individually. The recordings also document 
the comments, expressions, demonstrations and stories told by the women, 
and assist study of these issues. Women were chosen generally on the basis 
of local recognition by their communities as outstanding artist, and/or through 
selection by their communities to participate in two festivals in Inuvik, NWT : 
The Great Northern Arts Festival, and the Western Arctic Crafts Festival. 
Additional women were interviewed in key positions related to the arts-festival 
organizers, store or gallery owners/managers, cultural teachers, and arts 
teachers. Supporting documents such as notes, letters, newspapers, 
comments, booklets, government publications, and archival materials were 
also gathered over three years. 

Personal Ground of the Researcher 

After working and teaching in the arts all my life, I first visited an Arctic 
community in 1 986 and was fascinated by the close connection between 
Arctic peoples and their art. In 1 989 I taught art methods at a college in the 
sub-Arctic for two years. The majority of my students were women from all 
over the arctic, and they did not think they had ever seen ‘art’. As I got to 
know them I was interested in what their art meant to them, and how proud 
they were of what they made. As they got to know me and trust me they 
revealed very personal stories to me, and later said it was about time the 
women artists got the kind of recognition given male artists. I observed that 
when their lamilies ran out of food, they made beautiful things to exchange 
with the Hudson’s Bay Store for groceries. I realized that art not only played a 
major role in supporting their families, but it gave them a sense of pride and 
economic independence that was both practical and truly empowering. As I 
supervised student teachers in various small communities, I noticed that each 
place had its own style of clothing and decoration. I asked lots of questions 
and learned that the patterns and motifs sewn into parkas and footwear were 
a mark of ’home’ and their community identity. In the larger communities there 
was wider influence, and other techniques and materials were used. I was 
fascinated and wanted to learn more. 

I have worked for three years as Assistant Coordinator of the Great 
Northern Arts Festival in Inuvik, NWT, to pay expenses to do this research. 
This allowed close proximity to Festival and other artists, and I asked their 
permission for an interview outside of Festival work. I also traveled to 

128 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



communities near to Inuvik, and some southern Arctic towns, to talk to other 
women . My former students and the Town Councils of each community 
helped identify the outstanding artists I saw. 



Literature Review 

The literature that provides background for this study crosses many 
disciplines including history, Northern studies, women’s studies, native 
education, art education, feminist theory and research, ethnographic 
research, anthropology, sociology, ethics, adult education, and more. I spent 
a year just reading and two years taking and auditing courses that covered 
these broad topics. These provided a sound grounding in the issues upon 
which I conducted the interviews. Now I begin the exciting work of analyzing 
the interview transcripts, and sorting through the influences on women's 
artwork of these three cultures in the Western Arctic. 

Support for the Project 

The proposal of this project was approved by the Ethics Review 
Committee of the University of British Columbia, and a Research License was 
granted all three years (1992-1994) by the Science Institute of the NWT of 
Canada. My housing in the arctic was graciously provided by Arctic College. 
Letters of support were received from the Status of Women Committee, 

Arctic publishers and women artists. I was privileged to have the help of 
former students who introduced me to key women in their communities. 

Arctic bookstores, and the NWT Department of Education, have offered to 
help publish a subsequent book on the lives and work of Western Arctic 
Women Artist in several indigenous languages for use in the schools. The 
Getty Center for Education in the Arts granted me a Doctoral Fellowship for 
1994-1995 based on the merits of this project. 

Expected Results 

The individual faces and voices of fifty Western Arctic Women who 
are acknowledged as artistic and/or educational and cultural experts will begin 
to be heard. Their comments on traditions and artistic learning styles within 
their memory, and on the role of art in their lives will enrich our understanding 
of the educational process. How they maintain their cultural identity through 
their art, and relate to other cultural groups will provide perspective on the 
role of aesthetics in cultural relations in colonized countries. Their personal 
accounts and insights will contribute a collective voice to the education of 
future generations. Copies of the video and audiotapes will be left in the 



129 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



communities or the Yellowknife Archives for future use and study. The 
addition of these voices to existing multicultural perspectives will foster more 
than artistic understanding. It will help shape curriculum planning policy, and 
enhance the role of arts in Canada and beyond. 



130 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In 



Art Education 



1994-1995 



135 

o 

me 



* 



mentor’s introduction 



ANDRA NYMAN 

University of Georgia 



Paula Eubanks Smith has chosen to examine critical issues related to 
the “use of art as an alternative avenue for learning for the hearing-impaired." 
She speaks from her heart as the mother of two hearing-impaired sons as well 
as her experience as an artist and educator. Her experience in these roles 
informs the direction of this research as she identifies the importance of 
curricula that is directly related to goals of self-expression, creativity, and 
communication skills. 

Paula examines the developmental processes of spoken language 
development and visual language in reference to the attainment of complex 
systems of symbols that serve as codes for the representation of meaning. 
She examines these issues through the lens of the OPTION school program 
by means of teacher surveys and interviews. She draws a provocative picture 
of the status of art experiences and their use in the education of this special 
group of learners. I am certain that her findings will provide a clearer picture of 
the possible connections related to the attainment of verbal and visual 
communication skills for these students. 



131 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Art as a Language 

Paula Smith 



Introduction 

My work dealing with art as a language unites my lite as an art 
educator and my experience as the mother of hearing-impaired twin boys. My 
career as a mother meant devoting ten years to the encouragement of 
language acquisition. Language acquisition is the fundamental issue for all 
hearing-impaired children (Paul & Jackson, 1993). Most children acquire 
language by hearing it spoken. When hearing is impaired, language 
development is either not possible, or is delayed, depending on the extent 
of the hearing loss. Then, intervention, sometimes extensive, is required to 
facilitate the language development needed for intellectual growth. 

Language, in reference to hearing-impaired children, usually means English 
in this culture, and/or sign language. 

There are two approaches to educating the hearing-impaired. Total 
Communication (TC) uses both sign language and lip reading. TC students 
sign and speak simultaneously. Oral education concentrates on using 
residual hearing, lip reading, cued speech, and speech therapy. The small 
private schools that use the oral method of education for the hearing- 
impaired have experienced an increased enrollment because of cochlea 
implants. These surgically inserted devices allow children who are totally deaf 
to receive auditory input so they can become part of the hearing world. 

I believe that art is a visual language which can provide an alternate 
avenue of learning for this population. The purpose of this study is to 
describe the state of art education in the OPTION schools and to explore the 
extent to which art is being used as a language. If anyone is using art as a 
language, it seems to be likely to be this group of educators who have a great 
need for additional methods of communication and the resources to develop 
those methods. 



The Literature Review 

To consider art a visual language, the definition of language must be 
explored and broadened. Lahey, a verbal language expert, defines 
language as a code, a means of representation, (Lahey, 1 988). Verbal 
language is often compared to visual language by art critics. Feldman (1981) 
cites similarities between visual and verbal languages, by referring to the 
combination of visual elements as syntax. Cromer (1966) in comparing the 
two languages cites common basic elements. The formal and figurative 

132 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



elements of art equal basic morphemes, complex structures equal syntax, 
and the meaning of art is its sernantics. 

Of course, artists view the visual language as superior. Kepes (1944) 
describes visual language as more holistic than spoken language, more 
efficient as a means of communicating knowledge than most other means of 
communication. Arnheim (1969) considers the visual language superior 
because it comes closer to the original stimulus than verbal language which is 
linear and one dimensional, by comparison. As an art critic, Feldman reads 
the visual language. Comparing the two languages, he says that reading the 
visual image has more sequential options than reading words. A picture can 
be read starting from many different points of view, and read from more than 
one point of view at a time, (Feldman 1976). A proponent of art criticism for 
even the youngest children, Feldman says we learn visual language, without 
formal instruction, earlier and more spontaneously than verbal language and 
that children with modest verbal reading ability can read complex visual 
images, yet are often presented with only simple, childish ones - “visual 
pabulum" (Feldman, 1981. p. 657). 

Very few researchers have applied the idea of art as a visual language 
to teaching children whose language skills are weak. Teaching cognitive 
concepts using art has been explored by Rawley Silver (1978,1979), who 
used art to teach the concepts of class, space, and sequential order to 
intercity hearing-impaired students, ages’ 8-17. Silver’s extensive work was 
followed by a study involving young hearing-impaired children who were 
successfully taught basic concepts through art activities (Greene, 1981). 
Greene’s study involved a different population, kindergarten and first graders 
in a southern school for the deaf. Classroom teachers taught Greene’s 
experimental, highly visual, curriculum. Scores from the art based phases of 
the curriculum were consistently higher than the control phases. Every 
student benefited from the art-based instruction. 

In a more general way, James & James (1 980) explored the value of 
art to hearing impaired students. Because art is an area in which visual, not 
verbal communication is of primary importance, hearing-impaired students 
can quickly comprehend the visual formation required for success in this area. 
Art provides an opportunity for language learning because students are 
actively involved in the experiences around which language is generated and 
because the language can be related to concrete objects, processes, and 
events (James & James, 1980). Nothing more about art and the hearing- 
impaired has been published in the literature of either art education or deaf 
education in the last decade. No theories connect art and language 
development. If that connection exists in the practical world of everyday 
teaching, it seems most likely to be in the OPTION schools. 



133 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



138 



Method 



To establish contact with the OPTION schools, a survey, consisting 
of three brief questions and one open-ended question, was mailed to all 
OPTION members. The survey asked whether or not the school had an art 
teacher, how much time per week students spent with the art teacher, and 
how frequently students draw or participate in art activities in the classroom. 
All of these questions could be answered by circling a possible response. 
The open-ended question asked how students benefit from drawing and 
other art activities. The survey requested the name of the art teacher or a 
classroom teacher, who could serve as an informed observer. The response 
rate was 81%. Nineteen of the twenty-one returned surveys were 
completed, generating a list of twelve people, (nine art teachers, two 
administrators and one non-art teacher), to be interviewed by telephone. 

The loosely structured interviews lasted from thirteen to forty-five minutes. 
The data were recorded as field notes on the interview guide. These field 
notes were then transcribed to form a description of each art program in the 
first person, retaining a sense of the teacher's voice. 

Analysis began after the first three interviews. Goals emerged as a 
category and the question of process versus product as a program goal was 
added to the interview guide. Several respondents identified their programs 
as “integrated” so the issue of integration of art into the curriculum was 
added. The development of graphs provided a visual picture that helped 
make connections between data. 



Results 

The data present a picture of art in the OPTION schools. This 
includes the educational preparation of the people who teach art, the variety 
of art media taught, the amount of art instruction students receive, whether or 
not art is integrated into the curriculum, the goals of art instruction, the 
inclusion of art history and art criticism, and how art is assessed. 

Teacher Preparation 

The survey reported nine of eighteen schools, or 50%, have a 
designated art teacher. That compares favorably with the national average of 
25% (Hodsell 1988). The educational preparation of these art teachers 
varied widely from one teacher who holds a masters degree in art education 
plus many years of additional course work in studio art, to teachers who 
studied other areas of art such as art history, medical illustration, or interior 
design. The teachers with the strongest backgrounds in art education were 
more focused on art-related goals than on linguistic goals. 



134 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Three respondents who had no formal training in art education spoke 
at length and with great enthusiasm about their obviously well developed 
programs. Two of these teachers had studied art history; they had only to 
invent methods for teaching a subject they love and understand. Still, three 
people out of twelve are poking around under unfamiliar rocks for curriculum. 
What motivates such a search into foreign territory? I believe that we all teach 
best what we believe to be most important. Language learning is so vital for 
hearing-impaired students and these teachers had based their programs on 
linguistic goals. Art is a powerful learning tool for meeting linguistic goals. 

Variety of Media 

The number of different media explored varied from five different 
media in one program to a program that included all eleven media listed on 
the interview guide: drawing, painting, printmaking, weaving, sculpture, 
ceramics, book arts, jewelry, photography, installation art, and film making. 

Instruction Time 

The average is 59 minutes per week. The National Art Education 
Association (NAEA) basic standard recommendation is 100 minutes per week 
of art instruction for elementary students; no specific amount of instruction is 
indicated for middle or high school students (NAEA 1982). This standard is a 
recommendation and not the actual amount of art instruction received by 
students. 

Art instruction in the OPTION schools ranges from 30 minutes to 150 
minutes per week. In most cases, students at all levels receive the same 
amount of art instruction. When the amount of art instruction varies within a 
school, the younger students, the ones with less well developed verbal 
language, receive more art instruction time in all cases except one. Do the 
younger students with weaker linguistic skills receive more art instruction 
because art augments and supports their language learning? That 
conclusion cannot be drawn from this data. 

Integration of Art into the Curriculum 

If art is being used as a language, it is likely to be used in all areas of 
study. All 19 of the surveys reported that students participated in art activities 
in the classroom. Interview respondents described 7 of the 12 programs as 
integrated. Three of those programs have art teachers who saw students 
separately for instruction in addition to classroom art experiences. One of 
those art teachers works closely with classroom teachers to design activities 
that are carried out in the classroom, like grid drawings used to illustrate math 
principles. This practice is consistent with NAEA basic standards 
recommending that classroom art activities be conducted with the guidance 
of an art specialist (NAEA 1986). 



135 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Some of the integrated programs, operating without qualified 
specialists, seemed to genuinely value art and make art an integral part of the 
curriculum. In one of those programs, the administrator specifically assesses 
whether or not the arts are included in classroom curriculum. In these 
comparatively small institutions, perhaps valuing art is not always expressed 
by hiring a qualified specialist to teach it, but rather by integrating meaningful 
art activities into the curriculum. 

Five art programs described in the interviews seemed to be separate 
from the rest of the curriculum. One teacher said, “I don’t go into the 
classrooms and don’t know what goes on in there.” Another observed that 
though teachers did art in their classes, it was mostly “craftsy stuff.” The 
classroom teachers in those five schools may be integrating art into the 
curriculum but their voices are not heard. 

Goals for Art Instruction 

Art is not being taught just for art’s sake in these settings. Linguistic 
goals are much more significant as the driving force behind art instruction 
here. While art-related goals are important, they are not central to the primary 
mission of these institutions, which is language development. 

When asked “How do you think your students benefit from art 
activities?’’, fifteen of the eighteen survey respondents listed two or more 
goals Fourteen of the survey respondents referred to communication or 
self-expression. The great majority of goals, stated in both the surveys and 
the interviews, were concerned with overall student development, rather 
than art skills. The most frequently mentioned goal was self-expression (cited 
13 times), followed by other linguistic goals (mentioned 12 times). Within the 
category of linguistic goals, art is used to elicit language, to motivate good 
speech, and to develop vocabulary. For example, when students drew eyes 
on their life-size Egyptian figures by making a dot, the art teacher taught 
them to draw all the parts of the eye. This created a list of new vocabulary to 
be reinforced by the classroom teacher. 

Other goals include creativity and risk taking (cited 8 times), self- 
esteem (cited 6 times), and fine-motor skills, including eye-hand coordination 
(cited 6 times) The 8 art goals mentioned included doing art right, mastery of 
different media, developing a sense of design, learning the basic elements of 
art, exploration and mastery of elements, art appreciation and awareness. 
Eleven other goals were mentioned including emotional release, being well- 
rounded, perceptual awareness, and fun. 



136 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen's Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Art History and Art Criticism 

Teaching art history and art criticism seems to be a function of the 
teacher’s interests and orientation, with no connections to other data. Art 
criticism was included in 10 of the 12 programs. Seventy-five per cent of the 
programs included some art history. Two especially well-developed programs 
were based on art history. One teacher begins the year on a football field 
marking the time of the dinosaurs, cave man, and all the periods of art she will 
introduce. Students at all levels progress through the history of art during the 
year. They begin with cave paintings, using crushed chalk on the walls of an 
interior bathroom, lit by flashlight. This is followed by a study of Egyptian art in 
which students created life-size figures that are used in a haunted 
house/tomb for Halloween. Greek, Roman, gothic, and renaissance, 
baroque, impressionism, pointillism, art nouveau, action painting and 
photography follow Egyptian art 

Five programs offered art history on a very limited basis. One teacher 
did not teach art history but had developed studio projects based on the work 
of artists such as Gustov Klimpt. Three programs had no art history. Three 
teachers cite a lack of resources as the reason for not teaching art history. 

One teacher said, in reference to art history, that she does not “have time for 
lectures." Another felt that art history required a time-consuming move into a 
different building. In all, four teachers said they did not teach art history 
because of time limitations. 

I was careful to define art criticism simply as talk about art. If art is a 
means of self-expression, it follows that the art work would provide an 
opportunity to elicit language by attaching words to the student’s visually 
expressed observations and ideas. Therefore, I had expected that all the art 
programs would include an opportunity for guided discussion of student work 
and perhaps their works of art as well. Art criticism takes place in 10 of the 12 
programs to some extent. Three teachers have well-developed approaches 
to art criticism including the following: discussing process and product while 
talking about book illustrations as part of whole language, comparing works of 
art and pointing out differences and similarities. In one program the students 
talk about their own work by discussing: (1) something they are proud of, (2) 
something they would change, and (3) something about their work that was 
fun. The two respondents who reported no art criticism were both art 
teachers who said they did not think their students would approve of using 
their art time for history and criticism. 

Assessment 

Four teachers assessed student progress by sending home 
individualized reports, always positive. Three of them cited fine motor skills, 
self-esteem, and creativity, as the basis for assessing student work. Three 

137 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



1 



programs are monitored by administration. One administrator of an integrated 
program stated that she gives feedback to the teachers about art ideas and 
expects them to include the arts in their planning. Two respondents reported 
that assessment was informal. Three respondents reported no assessment 
of student work. 

Conclusions 

Though no attempt was made to assess individual programs, viewing 
data across programs led to insights about how program characteristics relate. 
Experience with a wide variety of art media, integration of art into the 
curriculum, and well-defined, primarily linguistic, goals were associated. The 
program offering all 1 1 types of art media is also an integrated program and 
one with clearly defined goals. Three other programs, offering as many as 8 
different types of art media, are also integrated and have well-defined goals. 
Programs offering 7 or fewer different kinds of art media have not integrated 
art into the curriculum and have less well defined goals. 

This study reveals a great range in the value placed on art 
experiences as expressed in the connections drawn between art and other 
areas of the curriculum, the amount of art instruction provided, the nature of 
the art curriculum goals for teaching art, and how those are assessed. Art is a 
valued part of the curriculum in most of the OPTION schools. The emphasis 
placed on communication goals points to the use of art as a language. A look 
at the best of what happens in these programs reveals many ways in which art 
is used as a language. 

The study does not include as a distinct entity, the voice of the 
administrators. The children are not heard either, except as reported by the 
teachers. The parents are a vital part of their children’s education and need to 
be heard also. To paint a clear picture of how the visual language is used in 
these programs, I would have to visit the schools, talk to administrators, 
classroom teachers, parents, and students. 

This study has implications that go beyond the education of the 
hearing impaired. It has implications for students with specific language 
impairments and for children to whom English is a second language. Art 
reduces the problem of communication to one of translation. An idea is 
translated from the original thought into visual language. Verbal symbols, 
words, can then be meaningfully mapped onto the visual symbols. The visual 
referent acts as a bridge between the thought and the abstract verbal symbol 
with which it is associated. The result is communication. 



138 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



O 

ER JC 




ft 



References 



Feldman, Edmund. (1976). Visual Literacy. Journal of Aesthetic 
Education, 1 0(3/4), 191 -200. 

Feldman, Edmund. (1981). Art Criticism and Reading. Journal of 
Aesthetic Education, 1 5 (4), 75-95. 

Feldman, Edmund. (1981). Art is for Reading: Pictures Make a Difference. 
Teachers College Record, 82 (4), 649-656. 

Greene, Joseph Craig & Hasselbring, T. S. (1981). The Acquisition of 

Language Concepts by Hearing Impaired Children Through Selected 
Aspects of an Experimental Core Art Curriculum. Studies in Art 
Education, 22 (2), 32-37. 

Hodsoll, Frank. (1988) Toward Civilization. A Report on Arts 
Education. National Endowment for the Arts 

James, Phillip & James, Carol. (1980). The Benefits of Art for Mainstreamed 
Hearing-Impaired Children. Volta Review, 82 (2), 103-108. 

Kepes, Gyorgy. (1944). Language of Vision. Chicago: Paul Theobald 

Lahey, Margaret. (1988). Language Disorders and Language 
Development, New York: MacMillan 

National Art Education Association. (1982). Purposes, Principles, and 
Standards for School Art Programs. Reston, VA: National Art 
Education Association. 

Paul, Peter V. & Jackson, Dorothy W. (1993) Toward a Psychology of 
Deafness — Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives 
Needham Heights, Mass.: Allyn and Bacon. 

Silver, Rawley A. (1979). Art as a Language for the Handicapped 
Mamaroneck, NY Trillium Book Service EC 123 949. 

Silver, Rawley A. (1978). Developing Cognitive and Creative Skills 
Through Art. Baltimore University Park Press. 



139 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



The Influence of Visual Models and Instructional 
Methods on the Development of Students’ Graphic 

Representations 

Jean Langan 

The Value of Drawing 

The value of drawing exists in art education as part of a unique 
symbolic domain that needs to be investigated in its own terms before one 
can establish similarities to other symbolic domains, for example to language, 
mathematics, or music (Golomb, 1992). According to Arnheim, the visual arts 
such as drawing, even in childhood, are grounded in a graphic 
representational logic and the language of drawing can and ought to be 
studied in its own right (p. 2). 

Golomb points out that drawing is a uniquely human activity whose 
complex syntactic and semantic development can be studied systematically. 
Golomb sights the drawing performance as a truly creative activity of the child, 
who invents or reinvents in every generation, and across different cultures, a 
basic vocabulary of meaningful graphic representations. Thus, the way in 
which graphic representations are strung together to form compositions, how 
those graphic representations change for different age groups and through 
different methods of instruction and the significance of the drawing 
performance for students, is cardinal to art education. 

Drawing is an activity that almost everybody does at one time or 
another (Wilson & Wilson, 1982). The shared motives and reasons for 
drawing go from expressing an idea, to creating and inventing, to mastering a 
technique. The importance of drawing to the educational system, says 
Wilson, is three-fold. First, drawing is important because of its contribution to 
students’ cognitive processes. Second, drawing contributes to students’ 
competence and skill in the use of a valuable symbol system. Third, well- 
instructed drawing will promote the acquisition of knowledge and 
understanding through a special visual mean pervaded with feeling and 
aesthetic quality. Therefore, drawing should be the principal studio activity. 

Wilson indicates that many students equate drawing well with drawing 
accurately. Young people are influenced to be faithful to the model by the 
strong emphasis on visual realism in their graphic world. 



140 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Accurate drawing, according to Wilson, is based on detailed 
information about the parts, structure, foreshortened appearance, etc.. How 
to incorporate this information to a two-dimensional surface must also be 
known to achieve accuracy in graphic representation. 

Basic Research on Drawing 

The basic research on drawing describes the conventional strategies 
of children’s graphic representations. Cox (1986), reporting on the findings 
of Luquet (1913, 1927) notes that young children, ages' four to seven or 
eight years, are said to be in a stage of intellectual realism they draw what they 
know rather than what they see. In their drawing, they may include more of an 
object than they could possibly see from a particular viewpoint. When asked 
to draw a cup with its handle turned away and out of sight, five to seven year 
olds included a handle in their drawings of the cup (Freeman & Janikoun, 
1972). 



Freeman (1980) suggests the possibility that child’s drawing is 
knowledge-dominated only because the child lacks other specialized 
knowledge which would prevent that domination. In particular, the child may 
lack more complex or specialized skills. Freeman says knowing what 
something is does not guarantee that one know how it goes. In this case, the 
student may lack the more complex knowledge that allows the coordination of 
such skills as perspective and occlusion. 

Piaget and Inhelder (1967) suggested that the child’s early drawings 
are based on topical rather than projective relationships. Their 
representations of space do not exhibit Euclidean relations of proportion, 
length distance and shape and are unconcerned with the projective relations 
of perspective (Golomb 1992) It would follow that older students’ drawings 
may then be based on complex projective alignments among objects. It is 
assumed that adults, in a stage of visual realism, will draw using a more 
comprehensive compositional strategy including the coordinated use of 
occlusion, proportion, viewing positions and linear perspective (Cox 1986). 

However, studies such as Willats (1977a, 1977b), Duthie (1985) and 
Cox (1986) indicated that some individuals do not adopt a system of drawing 
in perspective even when they have reached the age when it is 
developmentally possible. Linear perspective is rarely used before 
adolescence, and even then only infrequently (Golomb 1 992). Other factors, 
then, such as less complex and less congruent drawing systems, must be 
considered in the graphic representations of students. Three possible 



141 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



considerations would be; less advanced projection systems, occlusion, and 
temporal order of graphic representational strategies. 

Willats (1977a, 1977b, 1985) conducted a series of studies that 
indicated one of the main types of drawing systems necessary to depict a 
hard-edged three-dimensional object is a projection system. In this system, 
the individual attempts to show how the object appears in space or how its 
angles project back into space. Willats presented the subjects with a scene 
consisting of a radio, a box, and a saucepan standing on a table. The table 
was arranged so that the subject faced one of the long sides. The radio was 
arranged so as partially to occlude the box, and all three objects occluded 
sections of the far edge of the table. The subject’s point of view was 
controlled by the experimenter. 

Willats found six classes of projection systems adopted by children of 
ages' five to seventeen to draw a three-dimensional object. Lines in the 
picture which represented edges in the scene normal to the picture were 
termed orthogonals. Willats defined class one, as no projection system; class 
two, as orthographic projection, in which the orthogonals cannot be depicted 
because the projections of edges normal to the picture plane appear as 
points, class three, as vertical oblique projection, in which the orthogonals 
appear vertical instead of horizontal; class four, as oblique projection, in which 
orthogonals remain parallel; class five, as naive perspective, in which the 
orthogonals converge between 20 and 60 degrees; and class six, as 
perspective, in which the orthogonal angle of convergence is 60 to 100 
degrees. The drawing of the object will appear more realistic the higher it is 
on Willats’s drawing scale. 

In 1 984, Chen, Therkelsen and Griffiths conducted a longitudinal 
study about the relationship between learning and representation drawing. 
They used the same six classes of projection systems as Willats (1 977a, 

1 977b) for their criterion Their findings about the representation of six to 
ten-year-old subjects supports the Willats studies. 

Since we should not consider perspective drawing as a stage- 
dependent natural endpoint of development (Golomb 1992), neither should 
we consider the acquisition of other complex drawing strategies to be stage- 
dependent. Visual knowledge and techniques for graphic representation 
that lead to more sophisticated drawings must be disseminated through art 
instruction. 

Kindler (1992) has pointed out the necessity of careful consideration 
of learning strategies which children spontaneously employ to solve 

142 



O 

ERIC 

hffliflaffHEaaaa 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



problems of pictorial representation-strategies such as occlusion and 
temporal order to name two. Projection systems have been looked at by 
Willats (1977a), Cox (1986) and Chen (1984), but there is a lack of information 
about other strategies. 

The debate spans more than fifty years, regarding the innate logic of 
graphic representation imagery of children's drawings. It was at first shaped 
by the view that simplicity dictated the depth of the child’s conception of the 
image. Now, there is growing evidence that children demonstrate a 
preference for complexity that goes beyond experience with a particular 
medium and that desire for complexity can convey (Freeman, 1980, Golomb, 
1983a, 1983b) 

The child’s perception is more advanced than the child’s drawing 
performance would indicate (Piaget, 1956; Golomb, 1992). There are 
difficulties for most children in the production of accurate graphic 
representations of objects (Willats, 1977a, 1977b, 1985; Freeman, 1980; 
Golomb, 1992). 

Implications for Art (Education) instruction 

Wilson, Hurwitz, & Wilson (1987) tell us that unless experience and 
education lead students, above fifth grade level, to transcend some of their 
biases, they will continue to use the same graphic solutions that young 
children, below fifth grade level, do, and may thus limit themselves to a 
lifetime of involuntary child-like graphic behavior. 

The pedagogical implications of basic research in the drawing 
process, as discussed by Hagaman (1990), outline the theoretical framework 
for art education today. The suggestions seem to rest upon three premises: 

1 . Drawing should be the principal studio activity in school art 

programs. 

2. Graphic models provide the most important contribution to the 

development of drawing ability. 

3. The school drawing program should utilize exemplary works of art 

in providing such models. 

The present study covers all three pedagogical suggestions. One, 
by using the drawing performance as a measure to gain information on 
instructional methods for art; two, by incorporating graphic models; and three, 
by utilizing exemplary works of art for drawing models. 



143 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Studio performance makes up the largest proportion of instruction in 
the art classroom. This study will provide instructional knowledge in the area 
of drawing performance and production. Results of a two-dimensional model 
and a three-dimensional model on drawing instruction and student drawing 
performance will be examined. A reproduction of an exemplary work of art 
and a still life array of objects corresponding to the art work will be used as the 
two-dimensional and three-dimensional visual models. 

Specifically, this study will examine the influence of direct modeling 
from visual models on the graphic representations of fifth grade, sixth grade 
and college level students. Conditions for the visual models will be two and 
three dimensional. The influence of the instructional training method of 
modeling drawing behavior on the graphic representations of this population 
will also be examined. Conditions for the instructional training method will be 
exposure or lack of exposure to the instructional training method. The 
independent variables of dimension and instructional methods will be 
manipulated by the experimenter. 

Three age groups of students will form the population and complete 
a drawing task under varied conditions. The pilot test and group one 
participants will be college level students. Groups two and three will be sixth 
and fifth grade participants. The students being examined are untrained 
rather than highly trained in art. Their overall experience with art is limited, 
mostly to that which they have received in school. In the Urbana/Champaign 
area, the population would not necessarily be privileged to art instruction at 
the elementary level. 

This study is concerned with the graphic representation strategies of 
fifth grade students and above, and the instructional methods that may 
positively influence those graphic representations. It expands on the 
research done by Willats (1985), adopting Willats’ six-class projection system 
as a measuring instrument. Further, the study will record changes in the 
students graphic representations in the areas of occlusion and temporal 
order during the drawing performance. Information on appropriate 
instructional methods for fifth and sixth grade as well as college students will 
be reported 



Research Objectives. 

Research objective #1 Providing visual models will lead the drawing 
performance of fifth and sixth grade and college level students toward more 
complex strategies of visual realism. 



144 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Research objective #2 The graphic representations of all groups will 
demonstrate the most complex strategies of visual realism in the condition of 
exposure to the two-dimensional visual model because the two-dimensional 
work has already solved the problems of translation from three dimensions to 
two dimensions. 

Research objective #3 The drawing performance of all groups will 
demonstrate more complex strategies of visual realism in the conditions of 
exposure to the instructional method of modeling drawing behavior. 

Research objective #4 Therefore, the drawing performance of groups 
one, two and three will show the most advanced strategies toward visual 
realism in the condition of exposure to the two-dimensional model with 
modeling drawing behavior. 



Method 



Design 

A three by four, repeated measures research design will be used. 
There will be three groups of subjects in four conditions. The population will 
be drawn from University and elementary students. Group one will be 
composed of college aged students. Group two will be composed of sixth 
grade students and group three will be composed of fifth grade students. 
Condition one will be no modeling instruction with exposure to the two- 
dimensional model. Condition two will be no modeling instruction with 
exposure to the three-dimensional model. Condition three will be modeling 
instruction with exposure to the two-dimensional model. Condition four will 
be modeling instruction with exposure to the three-dimensional model. 
Analysis of variance will be used to test for significance, correlation and 
interaction. The three main effects of age, modeling versus no modeling 
behavior and two-dimensional versus three dimensional models will be 
measured. 

Subjects 

The participants in this study will be students enrolled in Art 
Education 203, Art in the Elementary Grades, I, at the University of Illinois, 
students enrolled in the Saturday School art program at the University of 
Illinois and public school fifth and sixth grade students in the 
Urbana/Champaign, Illinois area. The subjects will be randomly selected from 
the available classes. The numbers of males and females will be 
approximately equal. 



145 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen's Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



150 



Materials 

Art Stimuli. Two-dimensional Model. The two-dimensional model 
used as the drawing stimulus in this study is an 1 1” x17” reproduction of the 
Master work of art, “Still Life with Letter to Thomas B. Clarke,” by William M. 
Harnett, 1879. The total number of objects is the two-dimensional still life will 
be eight. 

Art Stimuli. Three-dimensional Model. The three-dimensional model 
used as the drawing stimulus in this study will be a still-life array of objects 
corresponding in order and placement to the Master work of art, “Still Life with 
Letter to Thomas B. Clark,” by William M. Harriet, (1879). The objects will 
display the same viewpoint, proportion, perspective and occlusion as did the 
two-dimensional model. The total number of objects in the three-dimensional 
still life will be eight. 

Modeling Instruction. A video modeling the drawing behavior 
appropriate to this drawing task will be shown as an instructional method to 
each participant in condition three and condition four. 

Drawing Task. Each participant will be given an 11" x 17" sheet of 
white sulfite drawing paper and a soft lead pencil to use. Rulers and erasers 
will be available in the room. 

Procedure 

The first task of each participant will be to draw a still life array of 
objects from their imagination. The specific order and placement of the 
objects will be described in a set of printed instructions. These drawings will 
compile a baseline of information on the graphic representations of each 
participant. 

Condition one of the experiment will follow the baseline task by about 
ten minutes. The following instructions will be given for conditions one and 
condition two: Draw the still life in front to you. Look at it very carefully. Draw it 
exactly as you see it in this model. Draw it the best way that you can. There is 
no time limit. 

The same set of directions will be administered in conditions three 
and four with the addition of the video modeling drawing behavior. 



The student drawings will be evaluated, categorized and rated under 
three major headings: drawing system, occlusion and temporal order. 

146 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Analysis of Data 




References 



Chen, M. J., Therkelsen, M. & Griffiths, K. (1984). Representational Drawings 
of Solid Objects: A Longitudinal Study. Visual Arts Research, 

1 0(19), 27-31. 

Cox, M. (1986). Cubes are Difficult Things to Draw. British Journal of 
Developmental Psychology, 4, 341-345. 

Duthie, R. (1985) The Adolescent's Point of View: Studies of 
Forms in Conflict. University Press. 

Freeman, N. (1980) Strategies of Representation in Young 
Children. London: Academic Press. 

Freeman, N. & Janikoun, R. (1972). Intellectual Realism in Children's 
Drawings of a Familiar Object With Distinctive Features. Child 
Development, 4 3, 1116-1121. 

Golomb, C. (1983a). Children’s Graphic Planning Strategies and Early 
Principles of Spatial Organization in Drawing. Studies in Art 
Education, 24(2), 86-100. 

Golomb, C. (1983b). On Imaginary of Real Decalages in Children’s 
Representations: Compositional Trends in Drawing, 

Completion, and Selection Tasks. Visual Arts Research, 

9(2), 71-81. 

Golomb, C. (1992). The Child’s Creation of a Pictorial World. 

Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Hagaman, S. (1990). Recent Publications. Studies in Art 
Education, 31(3), 189-191. 

Kindler, A. (1992). Worship of Creativity and Artistic 

Development of Young Children. University of British 
Columbia Press. 

Luquet, G. H. (1913). Les Dessins d’un Enfant. Paris: Alcan. 

Luquet, G. H. (1927). Le Dessin Enfantin. Paris: Alcan. 



147 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 






152 



Piaget, J. (1956).The Child’s Conception of Space. London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul. 

Piaget, J. & Inhelder, B. (1967). The Child’s Conception of Space. 
New York: Norton. 

Willats, J. (1977a). How Children Learn to Draw Realistic Pictures. 

Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 29, 

367-382. 

Willats, J. (1977b). How Children Learn to Represent Three- 

Dimensional Space in Drawings. In G. Butterworth (Ed.), The 
Child’s Representation of the World (pp. 189-202). New 
York: Plenum Press. 

Willats, J. (1985). Drawing Systems Revisited: The Role of Denotation 

Systems in Children’s Figure Drawings. In Freeman, N. & Cox, M. 
(Eds.), Visual Order (pp.78-100). Cambridge University 
Press. 

Wilson, B. & Wilson, M. (1982). Teaching Children to Draw: A Guide 
for Parents and Teachers. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 

Wilson, B. & Hurwitz, A., & Wilson, M (1987). Teaching Drawing From 
Art. Worcester, MA: Davis Publications. 



148 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



153 



mentor’s introduction 



STEVE TH UNDER-MCGUIRE 

University of Iowa 



How ought we to make a podushka? How do we think about the work 
we do? What is our character? These are intrinsic questions to the daily life of 
the Tabasaran people from the Caucasus region of Russia. Lorraine Ross, 
over the course of several months, in two trips, to the northeastern part of the 
Caucasus mountains, engaged people in conversations about their weavings 
and about what matters most to them in their work, and talked about families 
and communities. 

When you talk to Lorraine you learn that while she was in Russia, and 
in particular in Dagestan, she found weaving to be inextricably crossed with 
important matters to the people whom she talked. --concerns about money, 
community responsibilities and what to teach children. Lorraine's hope in this 
writing and in her dissertation is to faithfully render an accurate portrait of the 
production of community and cultural meaning, often shared in Tabasaran 
weaving. In the pages of her dissertation, through narrative interpretation 
and analysis, Tabasaran women and men speak with Lorraine and tell stories, 
and , indirectly address each other with issues of Tabasaran life and art. 

The fundamental question Lorraine posed, and that was repeatedly 
posed by T abasaran women in their weaving was how to preserve and create, 
a coherent community meaning in their art. But the kind of weaving done 
depends on the people they are-a particular cultural meaning. And this is a 
story Lorraine locates beautifully in her inquiry. 



149 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Weaving a Destiny: Portrait of Cultural Survival in 

Dagestan 

Lorraine Ross 

“You are guests.” It is a phrase which is at the heart of the Caucasian 
culture, and one which my Moscovite companion and I heard repeatedly from 
the various Dagestinians, with whom we stayed during the summer. It is a 
phrase which provides honor to the family with whom one is staying and at the 
same time it elicits a profound sense of duty on their part to provide for the 
protection and well being of guests. This attitude gave me access to peoples 
lives within some of the small Caucasus mountain villages and allowed me to 
begin to examine the link between Dagestan peoples and their artistic 
activities. 

In Makachkala, the capital of Dagestan, as in any small city, I 
experienced a mix of cultures. Their individual identity and practice is 
revealed through the production of varied cultural artifacts. I had an 
opportunity to see the collective works and then move to the more specific 
sources. In the second largest city of Dagestan, Derbent, we visited the 
famous carpet bazaar. There, carpets of varying size hung along part of the 
old Derbent fortress wall. Vendors without a place to hang them lay them 
across the tops of cars, or sprawled them across the sidewalk. Eager to sell 
the three or four tapestries they each had, the information they provided us 
on the village source, helped us to determine where to go to investigate 
further the making of the carpets and tapestries. 

It is the Tabasaran people who are most renowned in Dagestan for 
their weaving skills. Living high in the mountains they continue to pass along 
accumulated tradition and understanding to each new generation. Their 
physical space reflects adaptations and beliefs through time and like other 
ethnic groups they have products which resonate with their identity. In 
making such objects they renew their community identity, habits, customs 
and life rhythms. This is the foundation of the community constitutive 
narratives which I hoped to begin to understand. 

The Tabasaran administrative center marked a transition between 
modernity and tradition and was the first point of meeting a large number of 
Tabasaran villagers. At the outset, I experienced an event that highlighted 
the Tabasarans sense of humor, and support of each other. 

In the late afternoon upon arrival of a large truck with low racks, 
everyone clambered on from all sides until there was no standing room. 
Suddenly, a blue decorated Russian trunk is brought alongside the truck 
along with a large water jug. I thought it was not possible to make room for 
these and yet suddenly a sea of hands reaches up as the trunk rises up and 

150 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



155 

o 

ERLC 



v 



flows along towards the front of the crowd. Somehow they found room for 
this item amongst all the people. Just as quickly, a child sweeps up the side 
passed from hand to hand until she reaches where she should go. It is an 
amazing scene of camaraderie and purpose. Everything and everyone seem 
to be included. It’s simply understood. 

As we set oft gaining constantly in altitude, the sharp narrow turns 
make us reel, fall off balance, and pile up against each other. The sea of flesh 
miraculously rights itself without losing someone over the side. Moments of 
entertainment come when men on horseback implicitly challenge our vehicle 
to a race. The crowd yells, “Davai, davaiY' (Go ahead, do it) as at a sport. 
Laughter, cheers and a few whistles go up as the rider is successful in 
spurring on his steed past the truck on the narrow road. 

Stopping only momentarily at a few villages, the strange ride lasts 
about one and a half hours after which we find ourselves in a village of about 
200 families, deep in the heart of the Tabasaran region. We had tacitly agreed 
to go with the veterinarian, whom we met while waiting for the truck. He 
brought us before a greenish blue wooden gate that pushed inwards to 
reveal an enclosed living space. Surrounding the outside of the house and 
yard with some sort of high enclosure right up to the roadway is typical of the 
Northern Caucasus life; an influence of Sufi Moslem in the area. Inside one 
often finds some sort of garden. Here it is primarily potatoes and onions, 
about the only crops that really do well at such elevation. The house is old 
and worn but once inside it appears quite comfortable. Ascending the 
staircase up to the living quarters they show us a room where we can place 
our bags. All along the hallway space, carpets are laid covering most of the 
floor and walls. 

Our room is also heavily embellished with carpets. Over my bed 
hangs a traditional carpet with some Turkish influence. Nearby there is the 
sign of a more contemporary changing aesthetic. For on one smaller carpet is 
the image of a popular Azerbaijanian singer. In the large guest room, we 
either dine alone or withour host, but never with the women of the family. This 
area is also generously decorated with carpets. A flood of reds, blues and 
greens greet the eye. A small one foot piece done in memory of our host's 
mother, hangs high up near the ceiling as are most ancestral portraits in the 
Caucasus. As in our sleeping area, there is another large pile of carpets and 
blankets. I have come to understand that these items which are heaped up 
are a sign of richness. They are not for show. Usually they are covered by 
some white cloth but, of course, one can still see the height of the pile. Such 
collections are fairly common in the mountain villages for they also serve as 
part of a dowry system. When a daughter marries, part of the collection will be 
sent to another family, whereas if a son marries the collection is likely to grow. 



151 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



156 



We find our host's wife in the main room. She rocks her most recent 
child while sitting on a large heavy sheepskin. We join her sitting momentarily 
on the typical low wooden Caucasus chairs where they usually lay a small 
carpet. A loom that rests behind her, occupies a large section of the room. 

The wool is dyed by hand and the balls hang from the top. A pattern wrapped 
in plastic for protection is inserted within some of the strands in the loom. She 
has completed about six inches and tells us it takes about two months for her 
to complete it if she works at it all the time but it's something she usually does 
during colder weather. It is a precise work. She has drawn out her pattern as 
she wants it, not made by anyone else and yet, it becomes clear that these 
carpets are of a certain Tabasaran style, for as we visit other groups of people 
the carpets are quite different. 

Life is difficult in these mountain villages. The strong Moslemic 
influence makes life especially difficult for women. They are generally 
responsible for everything within the household but often do other duties as 
well. For example, women in the villages often carried huge loads of grass cut 
by hand for the animals to eat while in the village. They also carried water on 
their backs. Water was generally a very precious item in most of the villages. 
They take care of the children and here in the Caucasus villages they tend to 
have large families. The family with whom we stayed had nine children, only 
one of whom was a girl. It meant that only one child would help our hostess 
serve, not only her spouse, but all the younger boys. 

Women are up at the crack of dawn to begin work, usually herding the 
animals out of the enclosure sending them up to the mountain hills. Cattle, 
chickens and sheep are the livestock here, with the long wool of the sheep 
fundamental to the weaving process. Every step is done by hand; cleaning, 
carding, dying, spinning of wool. They like to use acrylic fibers when 
obtainable; it is simply less work. 

The kombinat or collective provides an interesting counterpoint to ' 
the weaving done at home. Our first visit created a great stir of excitement, for 
we are from the outside and many of these women will not have the 
opportunity to see life beyond their own village. I went up and down the two 
long rows of looms where women are in pairs or occasionally three working on 
a carpet. They place the thread, hammer it down and then faster than the eye 
can follow, work magic with the thread as each one must be knotted. A 
sudden shift of wool color, and the same rhythmic stroke sweeps across the 
loom. They can do a large carpet in a month. For the women here it is one of 
the only kinds of work available in the village. 

The kombinat area and the teaching and sharing of weaving skills 
within the home, become times for sharing life’s problems and successes. 
Each person’s beliefs and attitudes, personal history and community history 
play a role in the making of their cultural artifacts. It is that interrelationship 

152 




Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



between Tabasaran life and art which begs further inquiry, further 
understanding and it is that relationship which I hope to continue to explore 
upon my return to the ancient mountain villages of Dagestan. 



153 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s 



Working Papers In Art Education 



1994-1995 



O 

ERJC 



158 



mentor’s introduction 



STEVE THUNDER-MCGUIRE 

University of Iowa 

By November of 1992 Lisa had come to know for a year the 12 
children who made up STP (Special T alent Program) art in a small Iowa farming 
community. At the invitation of the school superintendent she initiated an art 
program for "gifted and talented" middle school children. Lisa many times 
described the children and related anecdotes of their artmaking. 

Andy, Jake and Robyn figured prominently in some of her first 
writing, three years ago, as she tried simply to understand better her students 
in order to teach. Like the first marks in a drawing, "gifted and talented" art 
students were a mystery and a challenge to Lisa, since she discovered that 
like her efforts at their age art making was essentially a matter of compelled 
attention, a generative praxis of making and telling. 

I, and I suspect most graduate students in our program, were 
especially interested in the stories Lisa told of individual students when she 
showed slides and photographs of their work On one occasion Lisa recalled 
an instance in sixth grade when she drew for weeks on the cover of a 
notebook. For a period of time, her school days, she said, "revolved around 
continued work on my notebook drawing." 

Lisa's amplification of that anecdote to a metaphor for being "gifted 
and talented" over the next two months resulted in an impetus of sorts for 
composing the history of the STP Art Program. She was emerging from a 
bout of trying to define gifted and talented; she had been listening to the 
students artmaking decisions and she wasn't sure how to select students for 
the next year. The heart of the matter was that class-by-class, shared looking 
between Lisa and her students in the form of documenting, critiquing art and 
recording stories gave Lisa ( in her talking to students) a chance to look again 
and to reflect on what it means to be involved, in school, in a long self- 
sustained art project. 

Lisa's dissertation offers many rich stories, conversations and 
observations about children, who are gifted and talented in various artmaking 
decisions. In relating her own experiences and responses alongside a 
faithfully rendered portrait of the STP art program, Lisa follows Coles (1993) 
insistence to: "write as a witness trying to do justice through narration..." (p. 
30). Children making art different ways, for various reasons and for varying 
degrees of involvement over time, finally, is the subject of Lisa's research as it 
was her teaching. 

154 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



Andrea’s Dilemma: "I like the freedom that we got to 
draw whatever we wanted to, 
but I don't like the way we choose what we want to draw" 

Lisa Schoenfielder 

For three years I traveled to a rural Iowa community to teach middle 
school boys and girls in a gifted art program. The Special Talent Program In Art 
met at Wellman Elementary, in the art room, every other Monday afternoon for 
two hours throughout the school year. Wellman Elementary was a part of the 
Mid-Prairie School District, a consolidation of six rural communities that spans 
215 square miles, located about 25 minutes driving distance from Iowa City 
and the University of Iowa. My research has involved composing narrative 
case studies of students art making strategies. Andrea was a sixth grade 
student in the class whose situation over time, led me to "draw invisible lines" 

(Paley, 1990, p.xi) between what she and other children did and what could 
be learned. 

When it came time to make the cover for her artist's book, Andrea 
encountered the physical properties of paint, canvas, and water which 
became a grounding for her reinterpretation of an element from her story 
about the time she fell off her horse. When she painted a solid mass of 
lavender on a canvas board, some of the paint became swirled and mottled 
where a part of the surface had accidentally become wet. Andrea tried to blot 
up some of the water with a paper towel giving the solid mass an atmospheric 
effect. Kenneth Beittel (1973) spoke of a moment in the expressive act of an 
art making experience "where the conversion from unreflective to reflective 
thought comes about" (p. 56). Marilyn Zurmuehlen (1990) noted "the 
concrete physicality of a medium is a basis for reciprocity between makers and 
their materials, a grounding for reflective attention" (p.4), eliciting a shift "that 
distinguishes merely doing something with art materials from making art" 
(Zurmuehlen, 1992, p. 2). In that moment of reflection the sky-like effect gave 
Andrea the idea to repeat an image from the artist's book she had been 
working on for a number of weeks in class. The image was of her horse having 
broken into a full run with Andrea flying out of the saddle holding on for dear 
life, only this time, Andrea turned the configuration around 90 degrees, so the 
horse and figure were flying straight up into space rather than moving 
horizontally across the page as depicted in her artist's book. 

At the bottom of the book cover Andrea painted the very top of the 
planet earth so that it looked as if horse and rider were ascending into the 
unknown. Uncharacteristically, Andrea rushed to where I was, holding the wet 
painting out in front of her for me to see. For the first time that year, Andrea 

155 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working 



Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



ERiC 



160 



was pleased with what she had made. In her reordering and abstracting ot the 
image Andrea had recovered and embraced metaphorically something ot what 
she encountered when riding her horse. With an emerging piece ot art, 

Beittel (1982) stated, "it is not what the author intends but what the text 
actually brings torth tor us ..." (p. 19). The artist in creating something brings all 
ot her or his resources or "pre-retlective experience" to bear upon the work ot 
art. This moving torward into the present is an act that creates an "invitation”, 
according to Beittel, to recover bygone times, gaining insight into that 
experience. 

The painter Ben Shahn (1957) was so tamiliar with this moment ot 
retlection that Beittel and Zurmuehlen spoke of, that he named the 
contemplative voice posed at this juncture the artist's "inward critic". Shahn 
(1957) said "the artist must function and act as two people. On the one hand 
the artist is the imaginer and producer. But ...Also the critic" ( p.34). In first 
preparing to teach in the gifted art program my question was "what art 
experiences should I provide these students?" Keeping in mind the 
philosophies of Zurmuehlen, Beittel, and Shahn, I tried to set up a situation 
where the art students could make choices, coming to know better in 
themselves an interpretative inner critic who revises or refines an idea, as 
Andrea had experienced in making the cover to her artist's book. 

But Andrea had not always met with such success. At the end of the 
school year I asked the class to give a written response to some questions 
concerning the gifted art program. "What did you like best about our past 
year", was the first question I posed to students. Andrea answered, "I liked 
the freedom that we got to draw whatever we wanted to." Another question, 
"What did you like least about STP art class?" evoked this response from 
Andrea: "I don’t like the way we choose what we want to draw." What did 
Andrea's contradicting statement mean? On the back of Andrea's Xeroxed 
sheet were sketches she had made while students in the class finished 
writing their response to the questions I had asked. The three horses she 
had drawn and scribbled out caused me to reflect on the past year and 
provided some explanation for Andrea's written comments. This was not the 
first time I had seen Andrea lose confidence to complete a horse drawing. 
Could Andrea have been trying to say, "I like freedom to choose my subject 
matter, but I don't like it because the thing that I want to draw is too difficult for 
me?" Responses such as Andrea's have led me to think about the inner critic 
strategies gifted students put to work in order to accomplish satisfactorily, 
conceived images of objects, persons, or events. 

My first instinct toward situations I encountered with Andrea was to 
believe that she was lacking an essential ingredient needed to be in the 
gifted art program. Andrea was committed to something, to be sure, though 

156 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



I 



she had trouble following through with her plans. Most students in class 
became more committed to their projects as they invested more time and 
effort, but Andrea lost interest in her projects over time. With the exception 
of her cover, this seemed to be true of the artist's book Andrea made over a 
period of class sessions. 

The day the children started on sculptural environments and artist's 
books Andrea was one of a number of students less sure of what to make. 
Andrea had many stories about her horse, so many that it was difficult for her 
to tell the class about a single one. As children listened, laughed, and told 
their own stories in relation to artist's books we looked at from the year before, 
Andrea seemed excited. She laughed and listened intently to the stories and 
plans others had for art they might make but she began to chew nervously on 
the end of her pencil as she became one of the last to talk about her ideas. 
Andrea may have thought about the horse that she rode everyday, fed, 
groomed, and took to horse shows. When the attention turned to her she 
did not tell a story but said flatly that she would make a book about her horse. 
Some children could sit back and enjoy their ideas but Andrea from the 
beginning was frustrated. It was as if all of her horse experience worked 
against her when she tried to make her story-telling and image-making skills 
equal her knowledge of equestrianship. 

Andrea began a very small sketch of a horse on a large piece of paper 
but before she completed it she x'd it out and started a new sketch. Through 
most of the class period Andrea started, stopped, and restarted sketches of 
horses as she participated in the conversation at her table that grew out of the 
earlier discussion of artist's books. The students continued to swap stories 
as they began working on books and sculpture. Andrea told about the time 
she was knocked off her horse by a tree limb. The next time we met it was this 
story that she remembered and began to pursue in a series of drawings. 

Andrea started making the drawings for her book, first using pencil 
and then outlining in black fine point marker. As she outlined each drawing 
the image became more pronounced and permanent on the page. Andrea 
liked the contrast the dark marker made but she also became more aware of 
aspects of her horse that seemed unchangeable once she had outlined in 
marker. After Andrea had worked for a few class sessions on her book she 
continued working on it at home. Occasionally students in the two week time 
period between class did forget to bring their work back and were genuinely 
upset that they did not have the thing they wanted to be working on at 
school. On other occasions children left something behind because 
consciously or unconsciously it was a way for them to abandon the project. 
After completing several pages of her story, drawing with pencil, and then 



157 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 







162 



outlinging the image with black marker, Andrea left the book at home for 
good. 

When Andrea started her book the second time she worked only in 
pencil and focused more on the humorous element of the story, using familiar 
cartoon techniques. As she worked Andrea became increasingly 
discouraged and ready to give up the project altogether. At some point 
Andrea, wanting to be done with the book once and for all, focused more on 
whatever it would take to satisfy me. As I thought about her situation later, I 
realized that all of the children, at just about any moment might find 
themselves in a similar position to Andrea's because of a number of 
circumstances in their particular artmaking. 

I first mistook Andrea's lack of staying power as her not wanting to 
take the time and effort to make her drawings as good as they could be. 
However it became evident that Andrea's inner critic was as Ben Shahn 
(1957) described, "prompted by taste, highly personal, experienced and 
exacting" (p. 35). After spending a number of weeks making two different 
artist's books Andrea was still not satisfied with the drawings she had made. 
Upon reflection, I realized Andrea's problem may have initially seemed 
different from the other children, but in actuality it was the same dilemma all 
the students encountered at some point as they met with their desire to 
depict something in a particular way and the difficulties this presented. 

At the end of the school year when I looked at Andrea's written 
response and sketches I finally understood better her predicament. Giving 
Andrea choices produced for her an opportunity to face the gap between 
what is and what might be, in other words, to begin to identify the obstacles 
that prevented her from making her drawings look the way she thought they 
should. In her drawing as well as her written response Andrea attempted to 
name these obstacles to herself and to me. "I like the freedom," she said but, 
"I don't like the way we choose what we want to draw." At a point in her art 
making, in order to make better choices, Andrea needed more options. It is at 
times as Maxine Greene (1978) stated "if we knew how to identify openings in 
our lived situations, if we could actualize what we recognize to be our 
preferences, we would multiply our occasions for choice." (p.154) 

When the work of children's inner critic is considered a number of 
questions and issues emerge. For me, teaching in a gifted and talented 
program meant knowing how to respond better to the choices and strategies 
children, like Andrea, employ when they work for a sustained period of time 
on their art. Andrea struggled to make a more satisfying horse drawing which 
led me to consider how and when I could impart more precise technical 
direction to help her produce a more satisfying drawing. Andrea's choices led 

158 




Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 



me to know better how to be her teacher. Within a choice centered 
curriculum I gained an understanding of children's artmaking strategies and 
came to recognize these strategies as similar to my own and other artists. 



References 

Beittel, K. (1973). Alternatives For Art Education Research: 

Inquiry Into the Making of Art. Dubuque: Wm. C. Brown. 

Beittel, K. (1982). Metaphor as image of the round future. Visual Arts 
Research, Fall, 19-23. 

Greene, M. (1978). Landscapes of Learning. New York: Teachers 
College Press. 

Paley, V. (1990). The Boy Who Would Be a Helicopter. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 

Shahn, B. (1957). The Shape of Content. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Zurmuehlen, M. (1990). Studio art: Praxis, Symbol, Presence. 

Reston, VA:The National Art Education Association. 

Zurmuehlen, M. (1992, May). Studio Art: Shaping Our Individual 

and Collective Life Stories. Paper presented at the conference 
of the National Education Association, Phoenix, AZ. 



159 



Marilyn Zurmuehlen’s Working Papers In Art Education 1994-1995 




U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERl) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASTS 




This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)” form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release 
form (either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 




