DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 466 342 



RC 023 589 



TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 

PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Alaska Native Education Study: A Statewide Study of Alaska 
Native Values and Opinions Regarding Education in Alaska. 
McDowell Group, Juneau, AK. 

2001 - 11-00 

153p . ; Prepared for the First Alaskans Foundation. 

For full text: 

http : / /www. alaskool . org/native_ed/McDowell . pdf . 

Information Analyses (070) -- Reports - Research (143) 

MF01/PC07 Plus Postage. 

Academic Achievement; * Alaska Natives; * American Indian 
Education; *Cultural Differences; Culture Conflict; 
Education Work Relationship; * Educational Attitudes; 
♦Educational Needs; Elementary Secondary Education; ' Family 
Influence; Higher Education; Preschool Education; Rural 
Education; Rural Urban Differences; *School Community 
Relationship; State Surveys; Underachievement 
♦Alaska 



ABSTRACT 



This document contains four reports detailing a four-phase 
research project on Alaska Natives' attitudes and values toward education. A 
literature review examines the history of Native education in Alaska, issues 
in research on American Indian and Alaska Native education, dropout studies, 
student assessment, language and culture, learning styles, teaching styles 
and teacher training, distance learning and technology-based education, 
parent and community involvement, and higher education. The other three 
reports present findings of interviews with Alaska Native educational and 
cultural experts; a random telephone survey of 1,000 Alaska Native 
households; and focus groups with students, parents, and elders in Anchorage 
and rural Aniak and with business representatives and human services 
personnel . Common themes that arose across the four studies included barriers 
to education for Alaska Native students, the role of language and culture in 
education, family and community problems contributing to the high Native 
dropout rate, racism in urban schools, high teacher turnover and poor teacher 
quality in rural schools, and the need for parent and community involvement 
in schools. Appendices contain 147 references, a list of relevant educational 
Web sites, and breakdowns of focus group findings by group type. (SV) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



Alaska Native Education Study: 

A Statewide Study of Alaska Native Values and 
Opinions Regarding Education in Alaska 






<N 

m 

a 



Prepared for: 

First Alaskans Foundation 

1577 C Street, Suite 320 
Anchorage, Alaska 99501 




GROUP 



Research-Based Consulting 

Juneau 

Anchorage 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE ; 



bo — 
IT ) =: 

co 

- 

O i 

< ©~ 

cERLC 



U S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Reseaich and improvement 

EDUCATIONAL resources INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) V 

^'This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

flair ri O 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this docu - 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERl position or policy 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



November 2001 



O 



Alaska Native Education Study: 

A Statewide Study of Alaska Native Values and 
Opinions Regarding Education in Alaska 



Prepared for: 

First Alaskans Foundation 

1577 C Street, Suite 320 
Anchorage, Alaska 99501 



Prepared by: 




GROUP 



Juneau • Anchorage 



November 2001 



Table of Contents 



Alaska Native Education Study: A Summary of Research Section 1 

Alaska Native and American Indian Education: A Review of the Literature.... Section 2 

Perceptions of Alaska Native Educational and Cultural Experts Section 3 

Alaska Native Household Education Survey Section 4 

Issues in Alaska Native Education: Focus Group Research Section 5 




'4 



r 



Summary 



Alaska Native Education Study: 
A Summary of Research 



Prepared for: 

First Alaskans Foundation 

1577 C Street, Suite 320 
Anchorage, Alaska 99501 



1 



GROUP 



Prepared by: 



Juneau •Anchorage 



November 2001 



Table of Contents 



Introduction 

Methodology 

Alaska Native Education Research Summary .. 

Barriers to Education 

Role of Family and Community 

Role of Language and Culture 

Education in Urban and Rural Settings 

Improving Education for Alaska Native Children 



1 

1 

2 

2 

3 

4 
.4 
.5 



Introduction 



Alaska Natives face many challenges in educational performance, attainment, and 
opportunities. In an effort to understand Alaska Natives' perspective on these 
issues, the First Alaskans Foundation embarked on an eight-month research project 
of Alaska Natives' attitudes and values toward education. The First Alaskans 
Foundation is a nonprofit organization created by the Alaska Federation of Natives, 
to influence positive changes in the lives of Alaska Native people. The Foundation 
engaged the Alaska research-based consulting firm McDowell Group, Inc. to 
conduct a four-phase study of Native education in 2001. 

This summary section outlines the methodology used in the four research 
components and summarizes the trends found in that research. Following this 
summary, this document contains complete detailed reports on the results of each 
component. 



Methodology 



The multiple-phase project included secondary research, key informant interviews, a 
household survey, and focus group discussions. This multi-method approach 
provided a more holistic analysis than a single method. The four reports contained 
in this full document are: 

• Alaska Native and American Indian Education: A Review of the Literature was 
completed in June 2001. This secondary research effort was a review of the 
literature of Alaska Native and American Indian issues in education. The report 
also identified methods that could enhance educational programs for Alaska 
Natives. 

• Perceptions of Alaska Native Educational and Cultural Experts was completed in 
September 2001. This document reports on executive interviews of Alaska Native 
educational and cultural experts conducted in the spring and summer of 2001. 

• Alaska Native Household Education Survey document was completed in September 
2001. A random telephone survey of 1,000 Alaska Natives' opinions, attitudes, 
and values toward education was conducted in the spring of 2001. 

• Issues in Alaska Native Education: Focus Group Research was completed in October 
2001. Focus group discussions on issues affecting Alaska Native education were 
conducted in the fall of 2001. High school students, parents, and elders from the 
rural village of Aniak and Alaska's largest city of Anchorage participated in 
focus groups, as well as Alaska Native executives from Native corporations, 
social services, health care, job placement services, and the oil industry. 

This brief summary chapter captures the major findings of the four research 
methods. Please refer to the individual report documents contained herein for 
detailed analyses. Beginning with a statement of the historical context of Alaska 
Native education, the summary focuses on consistent themes echoed throughout the 
research — barriers to education, the role of family and community, the role of 
language and culture, education in urban and rural settings, and, most important, 
solutions for improving education for Alaska Native children. 



Alaska Native Education Study: A Summary of Research 



McDowell Group, Inc. Section 1 • Page 1 



Alaska Native Education Research Summary 



Since the first Russian schoolmaster began teaching Aleut youth on Kodiak Island, a 
non-Native education system has determined educational policies and programs for 
Native people. Like American Indian nations in the Lower 48, Alaska Natives have 
struggled to make the system work for them, sometimes without success. 
Nationwide statistics indicate that Alaska Natives and American Indian students are 
the most at risk of all minority groups for failure in school. 1 When compared to non- 
Native students, they drop out of school more frequently, are less likely to graduate, 
and generally have lower educational attainment. 

For generations, various approaches have been taken to improve education 
outcomes. These range from attempts toward complete cultured assimilation to 
protection and inclusion of Native languages and culture. While there are some 
successes, statistics show much room for improvement. Results from McDowell 
Group research indicates that Alaska Natives value classroom education and can 
identify ways to improve their education as well as their educational experience. 

Trends are clearly seen in the findings from the four methods of investigation. Each 
trend is summarized below. These include perceptible barriers to education, the role 
that language and culture play in learning, and the role that family and community 
play in success in school. Finally, Native students may struggle whether they are in 
a large urban or small rural school, but rural schools cannot compete for teachers 
and staff, nor offer as many academic opportunities as urban schools. 



Barriers to Education 



Educational statistics often paint a rather dismal picture of the academic 
achievement of American Indian/ Alaska Native students. The research identifies 
barriers to academic success that begin in pre-school or kindergarten, and may 
continue throughout a Native student's academic experience. Among other things, 
these barriers include: 

• Language and culture differences among students, parents, and school staff. 

• Ignorance of Native culture among teachers and other school staff. 

• Curriculum, learning materials and teaching styles that do not relate to Native 
cultural experiences. 

• Standardized tests that do not take into account language and culture 
differences. 

• Differences in learning styles between Native and non-Native students. 

• Lack of educational role models and parents' attitude toward education. 

• Problems at home, including alcoholism, neglect and abuse. 



1 American Indian Relief Council, http://www.airc.org/living/education.html. 



Alaska Native Education Study: A Summary of Research 



McDowell Group, Inc. Section 1 • Page 2 



• Other factors that affect students' performance, such as poverty, indifference, or 
ambivalence toward education, boredom, and low self-esteem. 

Respondents in all levels of the research agreed these and other factors contribute to 
the gap that sometimes exists between the educational needs of Alaska Native 
students and the educational services they receive. The perception of a gap was 
most apparent in the household survey, in which four in ten respondents (42 
percent) said Alaska's educational system favors non-Native students. They did not 
believe Native students receive the same educational opportunities as non-Native 
students. 



Role of Family and Community 



Success in school is very dependent upon personal history. In the household survey, 
personal and family history was the primary reason given for the high dropout rate 
of Alaska Natives. When grouped by subject, 61 percent said substance abuse, 
pregnancy, low self-esteem, lack of motivation, peer pressure, and other personal 
issues led Native students to leave high school before graduation. Thirty-eight 
percent blamed family background: They said many Native families do not 
encourage schooling and youngsters lack role models in their homes. Violence in the 
home and family responsibilities also were given as reasons to stop attending school. 

Thirty-six percent of survey respondents cited cultural reasons, including the 
cultural divide between Native students and non-Native teachers. Only 19 percent of 
respondents listed academic reasons for dropping out of school. 

Focus group participants put the onus on parents to set high expectations for their 
children in school and help them succeed by becoming involved in their education. 
They looked at education as the combined responsibility of the school system, 
parents, and all parts of the community. As Native education experts noted — from 
their experience and research — good parenting skills and community involvement 
are important at all levels of a child's education. They count the most successful 
school districts as those that have parental and community commitments. 

Schools do not exist in a vacuum. If parents and communities are involved in the 
local school, the likelihood is greater that educational goals will be achieved, 
according to the literature. Called "mutual accommodation" in the literature, many 
studies show that schools and communities need to be engaged in shared leadership, 
where the school shares decision-making with the community. In communities 
where this has occurred, student performance reportedly has improved and greater 
trust exists between school staff and the community (Reyhner, 2001; Yazzie, 2000; 
Kushman, 1999; and others). Kushman states that "many parents and community 
members are content to leave education to the educators unless they have a 
compelling goal deeply rooted in community values, like preserving language and 
cultured knowledge" (Kushman et al, 1999, p. vii). 



O Alaska Native Education Study: A Summary of Research McDowell Group, Inc. Section 1 • Page 3 

:RIC 



9 



Role of Language and Culture 



The inclusion of Native culture and language in the classroom promotes academic 
success for Native students, according to the literature (Yazzie, 2000; Reyhner, 1993, 
1995; Lomawaima, 1995; Peacock & Day, 1999; and others). Household survey 
respondents, key informants, and focus group participants agreed that Native 
language and culture should be included in Alaska's school curricula. 

Classroom education is generally inconsistent with Native culture and the rural 
lifestyle. To close the divide between Western education and Alaska Native culture, 
experts and parents alike suggest that "Native ways of knowing" will unprove 
Native students' success. Among Native households, more than 80 percent said it 
was important to teach Alaska Native culture and language. In varying degrees, 
Alaska Native culture and language studies are being included in school curricula 
across the state. 

Experts agree that Native knowledge should not be limited to language 
development, history, and traditions. The inclusion of Native knowledge in the 
teaching of mathematics and science are equally important. Integrating indigenous 
and Western knowledge into the Alaska school curriculum is the focus of the Alaska 
Rural Systemic Initiative. Funded by the National Science Foundation and the 
Annenberg Rural Challenge, AKRSI is attempting to meld traditional knowledge 
with public school curriculum including math, science, technology, language arts, 
and social studies. The pilot program is geared toward rural Alaska, but urban 
schools would benefit as well. 

The McDowell Group research shows the importance of a balance between Native 
knowledge and classroom education. The incorporation of local knowledge also 
strengthens the ties of the school to the local community. 



Education in Urban and Rural Settings 



Over four in ten Alaska Natives say the Alaska educational system favors non- 
Native students. Households with and without children held similar views. In 
urban Alaska, Natives feel inequality in the classroom more strongly than do those 
living in rural Alaska. 

Other data in the McDowell Group research verifies a strong perception of prejudice 
in urban Alaska, where Native students are more likely to be in the minority. The 
transition from rural to urban Alaska is especially difficult for school children. 

While McDowell Group focus group participants indicated that Alaska's cities 
should do more to welcome and support Native students in transition, the students 
may lag behind academically long before they reach the cities. The National Indian 
Education Association indicates that racism is often a large factor in urban schools, 
making it even more difficult (NIEA, 1990). 



Alaska Native Education Study: A Summary of Research 



McDowell Group, Inc. Section 1 • Page 4 



Not only is the urban/rural divide geographic, economic, and cultural, it is also 
academic. Rural Alaskans do not believe their schools can compete with larger 
communities to attract good teachers. The high turnover of teachers, counselors, and 
administrators is also a problem in rural Alaska. Residents complain of poor teacher 
quality as well as teacher ignorance of Native and rural life. They say their students 
are not academically prepared for post-secondary education or the world of work. 

Alaska Natives students who move from the village to Anchorage are not 
competitive with their peers, or given enough attention to succeed, according to the 
research. A focus group participant expressed the problem like this: 

Very rarely does an Anchorage Native student have the attention 
needed to give them confidence to succeed, and a rural student coming 
into Anchorage does not have a competitive edge because the schools 
they come from are too small. 

Not only do rural schools have difficulty attracting and retaining good teachers and 
staff, rural schools lack course options offered in urban schools. Native education 
experts, business leaders who participated in focus group discussions, and Native 
household respondents said rural Native students are not well prepared for the 
transition to post-secondary education or to a job. 

Sixty-five percent of respondents in rural communities favored regional boarding 
high schools, compared to 57 percent of urban respondents. Focus group 
respondents saw regional schools as a way to expand village education and help 
students make a more successful transition from the village to the city. They 
perceived that regional schools would be better able to compete with urban schools, 
so their children would get a better education in a regional school. 

Rural schools often lack academic courses, counselors, athletics, music, libraries, and 
many other amenities that are offered in larger schools. Whatever the solution, rural 
students need greater educational opportunities. 



Improving Education for Alaska Native Children 



A major purpose of the McDowell Group studies on Alaska Native education was to 
identify methods to improve and enhance education programs. History cannot be 
changed, and many of the difficulties Alaska Natives face in school reflect failed 
education policies, an education system that inherently favors the majority Euro- 
American culture, and discrimination. 

It is up to parents and communities, as well as the educational system itself, to insist 
that all Alaska children have equal opportunity to be successful at learning, whether 
they live in rural or urban Alaska, are Native or non-Native. 

Alaska Natives value education in the schoolroom and the traditional classroom. To 
make school more relevant, Alaska Natives support a curriculum that embraces 
Alaska Native culture, language, ecology, and other Native ways of knowing. They 
want better teachers in their classrooms and more Native role models. They hope 
that parents will become more involved in their children's education. They want 
communities and families to share in the responsibility of education. After all, 
Alaska Native culture already teaches that it takes a village to raise a child. 



Alaska Native Education Study: A Summary of Research 



McDowell Group, Inc. Section 1 • Page 5 



Literature Review 



Alaska Native and 
American Indian Education: 
A Review of the Literature 



Prepared for: 

First Alaskans Foundation 

1577 C Street, Suite 320 
Anchorage, Alaska 99501 



Prepared by: 




GROUP 

Juneau • Anchorage 



November 2001 



Table of Contents 



Executive Summary *1 

Historical and Current Situation 1 

Findings that Enhance Alaska Native Education 2 

Introduction 3 

Purpose 3 

Methodology 3 

History of Native Education in Alaska 5 

Russian Schools 5 

Schools in the District and Territory of Alaska 6 

Statehood and Molly Hootch 7 

Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) 7 

Summary ® 

Current Status of Alaska Native Education: K — 12 9 

American Indian/Alaska Native Education: Issues in Research 10 

An Overview 19 

Dropout Studies 12 

Student Assessment I 4 

Identifying Special Students 15 

Native Students in Gifted and Talented Programs 15 

Alternative Methods of Student Assessment 16 

Impact of FAS/FAE on Special Education Programs 16 

Language and Culture 18 

Implications of Language and Culture for Curriculum Development 19 

Traditional Education in Urban Schools 20 

Summary 20 

Learning Styles 21 

Thinking Processes 21 

Demonstrating Knowledge 22 

Learning within a Group 23 



Teaching Styles and Training 24 

Teacher Training 25 

Content of Teacher Training Programs 25 

Specific Teacher Training Programs 26 

Distance Learning and Technology-Based Education 28 

Technology-Based Education 28 

Distance Learning 29 

Community Involvement 30 

Parental and Community Involvement 30 

Mechanisms to Facilitate Community Involvement 31 

Higher Education 33 

Barriers to Higher Education 33 

Native Enrollment in Alaska Universities 33 

Summary 35 

Recommendations for Further Study 36 

Bibliography 37 

Periodicals 37 

Books 40 

ERIC Resources 41 

Government Documents and Other Reports 42 

Appendix 46 

Educational Web Sites 46 




14 



Executive Summary 



Alaska Natives face many challenges in education performance, attainment, and 
opportunities. Since the first Russian schoolmaster began teaching Aleut youth on 
Kodiak Island, a non-Native education system has determined educational policies 
and programs for Native people. Like American Indian nations in the Lower 48, 
Alaska Natives have struggled to make the system work for them, sometimes 
without success. 

The performance of Alaska Natives and American Indians in school embodies a 
large portion of the literature on American education. On behalf of the First 
Alaskans Foundation, a nonprofit organization created by the Alaska Federation of 
Natives, McDowell Group, Inc. has completed a review of the academic literature 
surrounding the education of American Indians and Alaska Natives. The literature is 
one component of a larger study of Native education that McDowell Group is 
conducting for the Foundation. The purpose of this secondary research is to identify 
issues and methods that can enhance educational programs for Alaska Natives. 

McDowell Group offers the following summary of key issues: 



Historical and Current Situation 



Historical Perspective 

■ The difficulties many Alaska Natives face in school reflect the history of 
education that has emphasized American Indian and Alaska Native assimilation 
into mainstream culture. Educational reform has been underway for years in 
Alaska, yet it will probably take decades for true change to occur. 

■ Evidence of discrimination continues to exist in our school system. 



Data Limitations 

■ Statistics do not tell the entire story. Reliable generalizations of Native academic 
achievement cannot be made due to small sample sizes, varying statistical 
methods, and incomparable data. 

■ Dropout studies indicate high rates for Alaska Natives, however, recent research 
questions the validity of many of these studies. Many dropout studies blame 
only the student for failing to stay in school. A variety of other factors contribute 
to non-retention, including many factors found within the school systems. These 
studies also do not take into account "stopouts" - students who temporarily stop 
their education then return to school; a common trend amongst Native peoples. 




Alaska Native and American 
A Review of the Literature 



Indian Education: 



McDowell Group, Inc. Section 2 • Page 1 



15 



Findings that Enhance Alaska Native Education 



Language and Culture are Key 

■ Academic programs that honor both Native culture and language appear to be 
successful in improving academic achievement. It is important, however, that 
these programs recognize individual and subgroup differences among Alaska 
Natives. 

■ American Indian/ Alaska Native students perform competently and have a better 
understanding of mathematics and science when the curriculum integrates 
Native and Western knowledge systems. 

Learning and Teaching Styles 

■ A program that enhances the learning capabilities of one group of students will 
heighten the performance of the entire school. For example, holistic and 
experiential approaches that prove successful with Native students will enhance 
the education of all students. 

■ When teaching and learning styles match, educators are better able to address 
the needs of their Native students. Native learning styles differ from white 
students, for whom most educational auricula are written. 

Community Involvement is Key 

■ Schools do not exist in a vacuum. Research shows that Native student 
performance improves when schools reach out to the families and communities 
they serve. Parents, elders, and other community members should come together 
to design, implement, and support culture and language programs. 

■ Programs that link science to local ecology and tap the expertise of local experts 
create stronger ties between the school and community. Research indicates that 
Native student achievement improves. 

Native Students Need to “Own" Their Education 

■ Barriers to Native students' success in college or vocational education are rooted 
in personal background and previous educational experience. Many Natives lack 
a "sense of ownership" of their education. Greater Native participation in 
education planning and design will improve Native students' performance 
throughout their school careers. 

Despite the comprehensive literature, McDowell Group believes more research and 

a nal ysis is needed in many issues affecting the education of Alaska Natives. A list of 

recommendations for further research concludes this report. 



ERIC 



Alaska Native and American Indian Education: 
wiew of the Literature 



McDowell Group, Inc. Section 2 • Page 2 



16 



