Volume 1 8 Number 1 Foil 2006 pp. 1 1 6-1 45 


jaa 

Getting Them Through 
the College Pipeline: 

Critical Elements of Instruction Influencing 
School Success Among Native 
Canadian High School Students 


Yalta Kaiiu 

University of Manitoba 


( 


large body of research suggests that worldwide, Native pop- 
ulations (also referred to as Aboriginal, Indigenous, or Indian 
populations in this paper) in dominant majority culture coun- 
tries constitute a disproportionate number of students who leave 
school prematurely. Recent studies in Canada, for example, indi- 
cated a dropout rate of 66% among Native students compared 
to 37% for non-Narives (Bin da, 2001a; Manitoba Aboriginal 
Affairs Secretariat, 2002). In the United States, the dropout rate 
among Native American students in public high schools is nearly 
60% (Delisio, 2001; Germaine, 1996; Vail, 2004; Wood & Clay, 
1996). Most Native students leave the public high school sys- 
tem before qualifying to enter postsecondary institutions. Tliese 
students may not possess the requisite skills to participate in the 
economic life of their communities and society. In addition, they 
often lack the language and cultural knowledge of their people. 
Their identities and self-worth may be eroded. Therefore, they 
fail to realize the Native vision of culturally and linguistically 
competent youth ready to assume the responsibilities of their 


Copyright© 2006 Prufrock Prass, P,0, Box 881 3, Waco, TX 76714 


As a consequence of the Civil Rights Movement and related social 
movements, the post 30 years have witnessed an unprecedented rise 
in higher education enrollments among ethnic minority groups, women, 
and low-income students, as well as increases in the financial aid avail- 
able to these groups. However, certain ethnic minority populations, such 
as Native American and Native Canadian students, still experience dif- 
ficulty in the transition from the K-1 2 school system to higher education, 
despite policies enacted to increase access. The research literature cites 
the disjuncture between the home cultures of these students and the 
environments of the school as a major cause of the failure of Native 
students to make the transition from the K-1 2 school system to higher 
education institutions. These findings have prompted calls for the inte- 
gration of Native cultural knowledge and perspectives into the school 
curriculum. This Canadian study examined the outcomes of consistently 
integrating Native perspectives into the high school social studies cur- 
riculum throughout the 2003-2004 academic year. The teachers inte- 
grated Native cultural learning objectives, resources, and instructional 
methods. Critical elements of the integration processes thot appeared 
to increase academic achievement, class attendance, and participation 
among Native students’ are discussed. Teachers can draw on these ele- 
ments to implement effective teaching strategies for the preparation of 
Native students along the college pipeline. 


Konu, Y. (20061 Getting ihem rhfoogh the college pipelir^: Critical elements of instruc* 
fion influencing school success among native Canadian high school students, Joumoi of 
Advanced Academics, 18, 116-145. 


summary 



INFLUENCING SCHOOL SLCCESS AMONG NAHVE CANADIANS 


nations (Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples [RCAP], 
1996). 

Prominent among the many factors identified in the litera- 
ture as causing school failure for Native students in both Canada 
and the United States is the discontinuity between the home 
cultures of these students and the school environment (Cajete, 
2000; Cox & Ramirez, 1992; English -Currie, 1990; Haig- 
Brown, Hodgson- Smith, Regnier, 8c Archibald; 1997; Kanu, 
2002; Shade 8c New, 1993). Native students may move from 
their home communities to attend urban public schools, where 
more than 90% of the teachers are non- Native (Brady, 1995). 
In these cases, a lack of Native cultural knowledge/perspectives 
in school curricula and among teachers appears to be one of the 
crucial factors in school failure. This results in pedagogical and 
interaction patterns that produce negative learning experiences 
for Native students (Cajete; Haig-Brown et al.; Kirkness, 1998; 
RCAP, 1996). In Canada, the resulting underperformance and 
high dropout rates among Native students have led to dimin- 
ished employment opportunities, poor socioeconomic condi- 
tions, increased reliance on welfare, and the necessity to create 
adult educational programs (e.g., the Upward Bound project in 
Winnipeg) to give Natives and other groups whom traditional 
education has failed a “second chance” (Binda, 2001a). 

Native communities have responded to the lack of Native 
cultural knowledge in public school education in two ways. 
Beginning in the 1960s, they lobbied for programs that brought 
Native teachers into public school classrooms. Although there 
are many more Native teachers and many more Native teacher 
education programs than a decade ago, the numbers remain low 
relative to current and projected needs (RCAP, 1996). Second, in 
recognition of the Native teacher shortage. Native educators in 
both Canada and the United States have lobbied for the inclu- 
sion of Native cultural knowledge in school curricula (Binda, 
2001b; Cajete, 2000; Weeks, 2003) in order to restore continuity 
between the home cultures of Native students and the schools 
they attend. These educators belong to a community of research- 
ers who have extensively examined what Native students need in 


1 ] 8 Jouroal of AJvaocfd Academics 


Kami 


order to succeed in school and have suggested that when Native 
students ’cultural affiliation is valued in the classroom, motivation 
for learning is highest. According to Weeks (2003), Native and 
Western ideas converge; when teachers tap these confluences, 
learning becomes richer and more relevant. Native Canadian 
scholars, in particular, have argued strongly that the inclusion of 
Native cultural knowledge and perspectives across school cur- 
ricula would close the achievement gap between Native students 
and their non-Native counterparts (Battiste, 1998; McAlpine, 
2001) and increase the percentage of native students who gradu- 
ate from high schools and continue into postsecondary educa- 
tion (Simard, 1994). 

This study was a response to a call for the integration of 
Native perspectives into the curricula of Canadian public schools. 
There were three purposes: (1) to investigate how dominant cul- 
ture teachers can usefully integrate Native cultural knowledge 
and perspectives into the teaching of the existing curricula of 
urban public schools; (2) to appraise the effects of such integra- 
tion on the academic achievement, class attendance, and school 
retention of Native students; and (3) to identify and document 
the critical elements of instruction that appear to influence the 
academic achievement, class attendance, and school retention of 
Native students. This paper focuses on the third of these pur- 
poses: the critical elements of instruction. Documentation of 
the critical elements of instruction influencing the school suc- 
cess of Native students in dominant culture school contexts is 
particularly important in light of Kleinfeld s (1995) study of 
Native Alaskan students. According to Kleinfeld, what differ- 
entiated effective teachers of Indian and Eskimo students was 
their instructional style, not their ethnic membership. As school 
personnel seek equitable ways to prepare students for college, 
teachers might draw upon these elements to enhance and sup- 
port classroom learning for Native students. Teacher educators 
might also use such elements to prepare future teachers for cross- 
cultural instruction of Native students. 

First, I describe the theoretical framework that informed the 
study and the research methodology that describes how Native 


Volume ] 8 • Number 1 Fall 2006 1 1 9 


INFLUENCING SCHOOL SLCCESS AMONG NAHVE CANADIANS 


cultural knowledge and perspectives were integrated into the 
school curriculum. This is followed by a discussion of the effects 
of this integration on the academic achievement, class atten- 
dance and participation, and retention of the Native students in 
the study. 


Theoretical Framework 

This research is grounded in socio- cultural theories of cogni- 
tion and learning (e.g., Gay, 2000; Nieto, 1998; Vygotsky, 1981; 
Wertsch, 1991; Winzer & Mazurek, 1998) and radical multi- 
culturalism (Banks, 1994; Kanpol & McLaren, 1995; McLaren, 
1997). Socio- cultural theories link the development of childrens 
thinking, communication, learning, and motivational styles with 
the culture into which they are socialized, and posit that an 
intricate connection exists between culture and student learning. 
According to Wertsch (1991), all forms of cognition are socially 
situated within the contexts of small groups and vdthin broader 
social and institutional settings; cultural mediation constitutes 
one way by which cognitive processes become contextualized. 
Vygotsky (1981) asserted that various semiotic systems are used to 
negotiate meanings between individuals and to negotiate higher 
mental functions. These systems develop in specific ways within 
different cultures and act as negotiators of meaning and as agents 
that transform mental functions. Winzer and M azure k (1998) 
agreed, stating that childrens conceptual frameworks (i.e., their 
learning and thinking processes) are deeply embedded in their 
own cultures. Difficulties in classroom learning and interactions 
may arise when there is a discontinuity of, or mismatch between, 
a child’s culture and all the intricate subsets of that culture, and 
the culture of the teacher and the classroom. This may predispose 
the child to failure if the school or the teacher is not sensitive 
to the special needs of that child (see also Kanu, 2002, 2005, in 
press). Cultural socialization, therefore, influences how students 
learn, particularly how they negotiate, mediate, and respond to 
curricular materials, instructional strategies, learning tasks, and 


I 20 Jourottl of Advanced Academics 


Kami 


communication patterns in the classroom. Socio- cultural theo- 
ries assume that making the curriculum and the classroom pro- 
cesses compatible with the cultures of the students will produce 
a higher rate of academic achievement and school success for 
those students whose home cultures would otherwise conflict 
with those of the school. They thus argue strongly for the inclu- 
sion (and hence continuation) of learners’ cultural knowledge 
and experiences in the teaching and learning processes to make 
education accessible, relevant, and liberatory for the students. 
Unfortunately, the occasional inclusion of nondominant cultural 
perspectives in the school curriculum neither entrenches mul- 
tiple perspectives as part of mainstream academic knowledge nor 
sufficiently responds to diversity in the classroom. This has led 
radical multicultural theorists to advocate for consistent integra- 
tion of minority cultural perspectives throughout the school cur- 
riculum, both to destabilize the dominant cultures hegemony 
in the schooling processes (McLaren, 1997) and to address the 
issue of equity, as well as the qualitative value of justice (Dei, 
Mazucca, Mclsaac, & Zine, 1997). 

The adoption of socio-cultural or cultural discontinuity and 
multicultural frameworks for understanding, interpreting, and 
reporting on the effects of the integration of Native perspectives 
into the social studies curriculum did not discount alternative 
theories that have been applied to understand cultural conflict 
and minority student failure. Examples of alternative theories 
include macro -structural explanations of how the larger social, 
political, and economic structures outside of school influence the 
school experiences of minority students (Ogbu, 1982, 1987), and 
antiracism frameworks (e.g., Dei et al., 1997) that investigate 
how the institutional structures of the schooling processes affect 
students ’identities (race, class, gender, and sexuality). Where rel- 
evant, these alternative theories were also taken into consider- 
ation in the data analysis and interpretation of this study. 


Volume 18 • Number 1 ' Fall 2006 121 


INFLUENCING SCHOOL SLCCESS AMONG NAHVE CANADIANS 


Research Methodology 

The research study investigated three central questions: 

1. What are the most effective ways to integrate Native 
cultural knowledge and perspectives into the curriculum 
of urban public high schools? 

2. How does such integration impact academic achieve- 
ment, class attendance, and school retention among urban 
Native students in the public high school system? 

3. What are the critical elements of instruction that 
appear to affect academic achievement, class attendance, 
and school retention among urban Native students? 

The research was carried out in an inner-city high school 
selected for its mix of Native and non -Native students with pre- 
dominantly Anglo and Euro- Canadian teachers. Close to 33% 
of the 1,100 students in this school were of Native -Canadian 
heritage. Data collection occurred in two ninth-grade social 
studies classrooms. For ease of understanding, I will refer to 
the classroom where the integrated curriculum was taught as 
the “integration” classroom and the other classroom where the 
regular [nonintegrated] curriculum was taught as the “regular” 
classroom. Social studies classrooms were selected because social 
studies offers opportunities for the use of a variety of curricular 
materials, teaching strategies, and learning tasks that apply across 
different academic subjects. According to Kleinfelds (1995) 
Alaska study, Native students in ninth grade consist mainly of 
those who are first experiencing transition from small Band- 
controlled community schools to large urban secondary schools, 
and these students generally respond with silent withdrawal in 
the classroom. Because instructional problems at this stage are 
most acute, the effects of different teaching processes are likely 
to be visible in ninth-grade classes. 

Research participants included 31 Native students (15 from 
the integration classroom and 16 from the regular classroom) 
and the 2 dominant culture (Anglo-Canadian) social studies 
teachers who taught these students. The majority of the students 


I 22 Jourottl of Advanced Academics 


Kami 


in this school and all of the students in the study were from 
low socioeconomic backgrounds. Among the 31 Native students 
taking part in the study 27 reported having access to help and 
support with their schoolwork at home. Prior to beginning the 
study, the teachers reported that students were assigned hetero- 
geneously to their social studies classes and that, based on their 
2002—2003 grades, the overall academic ability across the two 
classes was fairly similar. The two teachers had similar qualifi- 
cations (a bachelors degree with a major in the social studies 
areas of history and geography) and more than 15 years of social 
studies teaching experience in the ninth grade classroom. Both 
teachers reported similar teaching goals: developing students’ 
conceptual understanding of social studies topics and their abil- 
ity to apply learning beyond the lessons. Both teachers expressed 
the belief that Native perspectives should be integrated into 
school curricula. However, the two teachers differed in terms of 
how they understood and implemented the integration of Native 
perspectives into the curriculum. This difference could account 
for the disparity we observed in student performance in the two 
classrooms. Teacher A from the integration classroom expressed 
a strong sense of self-efficacy in his ability to integrate Native 
perspectives into the curriculum, and he placed integration at the 
center of his teaching. On the other hand, Teacher B from the 
regular classroom practiced integration by occasionally adding 
Native content and perspectives where convenient, into a cur- 
riculum that remained largely Euro -centric. Teacher B believed 
that the controversial nature of most Native issues, his own lack 
of knowledge of Native culture, and the dearth of easily available 
Native resources for classroom use were serious impediments to 
the integration of Native perspectives. 

Both teachers used the same social studies textbook {^Canada 
Today y an interdisciplinary social studies textbook) and taught 
social studies twice a week. However, although Native perspec- 
tives were deliberately and consistently integrated into the plan- 
ning and teaching of the units in Teacher As classroom, no such 
integration occurred in Teacher B s classroom. 


Volume 18 • Number 1 Fall 2006 123 


INFLUENCING SCHOOL SLCCESS AMONG NAHVE CANADIANS 


Working with Teacher A, we (the researcher/author and her 
two Native Canadian graduate research assistants) integrated 
Native perspectives into (a) the student learning outcomes for each 
unit, (b) the instructional methods and strategies, (c) the learning 
resources and materials, (d) the assessment of student learning, 
and (e) as a philosophical underpinning of the curriculum. 

Integrating Student Learning Outcomes 

In setting student learning outcomes, we targeted Native 
and non-Native perspectives. Although the specific learning 
outcomes depended on the specific lessons, we identified and 
included values and issues reported as common and impor- 
tant among many Native -Canadian communities. We infused 
instruction on understanding the importance of respect in Native 
cultures, the vital role of elders, the importance of family and 
community to Native identity, the importance of spirituality in 
learning and education and in the lives of many Native peoples, 
the various effects of European contact and settlement on Native 
peoples, and Native contributions to Canadian society into the 
social studies curriculum. 

Integrating Native Learning Resources 

Where appropriate, we used Native literature (e.g., Moses & 
Goldie, 1992; Roman, 1998) to complement social studies unit 
topics. For example. Native origin and creation stories, stories 
describing Native ceremonies, and stories depicting the holis- 
tic and interconnected nature of Native identity were integrated 
into the ninth-grade unit on Canadian identity. To enhance cer- 
tain social studies unit topics, we incorporated videos and print 
material on Native issues and perspectives. For example, we 
included videos on the various ways in which European contact 
impacted Native lives, and print materials on how the Indian 
Acts violated the human rights of Native peoples. We integrated 
materials that addressed Native content and perspectives that 
were absent from the regular curriculum or that provided coun- 


I 24 Jouroal of AJvaoced Academics 


Kami 


ter-stories to what was presented in the textbook. For example, 
we incorporated Native governing structures prior to European 
contact into the unit on government and federalism, to counter 
the myth that Natives had no organized form of government 
before the arrival of Europeans. As elaborated elsewhere (Kanu, 
in press), this aggressive integration of Native resources into 
every unit was intended to provide breadth and depth of under- 
standing of the content of those units and to promote the devel- 
opment of higher cognitive skills such as reasoning and drawing 
conclusions based on multiple sources of evidence. In addition, 
this integration facilitated contrapuntal readings (Said, 1993) of 
the curriculum content, the reading and understanding of the 
content material from the perspectives of the “other,’’ usually the 
colonized and the subjugated. 

Integrating Instructional Methods and Strategies 

Pedagogical practices that had been documented as effective 
in the teaching and learning of Native students were incorpo- 
rated. Where appropriate, we used stories to enhance students’ 
understanding of curriculum content. Sharing and talking circles 
facilitated discussion on an equal, respectful, and nonthreatening 
basis. Illustrations and examples from Native culture and experi- 
ence provided learning scaffolds. Pieldtrips included visits to a 
pow-wow and a sweat-lodge. The social studies lessons fostered 
community support through group work and classroom visits by 
knowledgeable guest speakers from Native communities. Lessons 
promoted kinesthetic, visual, and auditory learning. Individual 
work and collaborative group projects provided ample oppor- 
tunity for independent decision-making and problem solving, 
both of which are valued educational goals in Aboriginal child 
rearing (Manitoba Education 8c Training, 2003). 

Integratmg Assessment Strategies 

The assessment of student learning utilized journals and 
portfolios, where students reflected on classroom activities and 


Volume ] 8 ' ' Number 1 • Fall 2006 1 25 


INFLUENCING SCHOOL SLCCESS AMONG NAHVE CANADIANS 


artifacts. Other assessments included students’ written work, 
class presentations of research projects (several on Native peo- 
ples and issues), story and drama performances, and traditional 
paper-and-pencil tests. 

Integration as a Philosophical Underpinning 
of the Curriculum 

When the integration of Native perspectives is a philosophi- 
cal underpinning of the curriculum, it ceases to be an occasional 
add-on activity in the classroom and becomes an integral part of 
curriculum implementation (Kanu, in press). During an infor- 
mal conversation with Teacher A prior to the commencement 
of the study, he expressed a strong belief in the transformative 
power of integration of Native culture to enhance the under- 
standing of all students about Native issues, to increase the self- 
esteem and pride of Native students, and to alleviate ignorance 
and racism among dominant cultural groups. For this reason, he 
integrated Native perspectives into not only in his social stud- 
ies course, but also his other courses, and even his extracurricu- 
lar activities with students. For instance, because of the increase 
in diabetes among Native peoples, this teacher encouraged 
more Native students to participate in gym and other physical 
activities. “The students love the game of lacrosse, so I stay after 
school to play it with them” (personal interview, June 12, 2004). 
Pictures, illustrations, and sayings reflecting Native spiritual 
values such as the Seven Sacred Teachings (Wisdom, Respect, 
Love, Courage, Humility, Truth, and Honesty) filled the walls of 
his classroom. For instance, he displayed an enlightening poem 
explaining the Native practice of “smudging” (e.g., “We smudge 
our eyes so that we’ll only see the truth in others.” “We smudge 
our whole being so that we may portray the good parts of our- 
selves through actions.”). A poster entitled “Great Peoples of the 
Past” contained portraits and accomplishments of Inca Indians 
along with other prominent explorers and inventors. A huge 
wall map displayed the names of North America’s First Peoples 
and where they are located. Prominently showcased on Teacher 


I 26 Jouroal of Advanced Academics 


Kami 


As “Consciousness Cupboard” were George Ancona’s vividly 
illustrated book PowWoWy Diane Hoyt- Gold smiths Potlatch: 
Tsimshian Celebratioriy and Basil Johnsons Ojibway Ceremonies. 
Students’ class assignments and research projects often required 
them to utilize these resources. 

These five approaches to the integration of Native perspec- 
tives into the social studies curriculum continued throughout the 
year in Teacher As class. To ensure fidelity of treatment dur- 
ing the teaching of the units, Teacher A was observed 63 limes 
during a 36-week period by the researcher and/or her research 
assistant. Thus, we were able to determine that, to a large extent, 
he was faithful to the lesson plans that we had prepared together 
with him. During the same time period, the teacher in the regu- 
lar class was observed 34 times. Neither the researcher nor her 
Native graduate students taught in either of the two classes. 


Data Collertion 

The Study utilized four methods of data collection. We col- 
lected data on classroom teaching processes and interactions 
through field notes, audiotapes, and sometimes video -re cord- 
ing to permit more intensive analysis of interactions, episodes, 
and processes. These data later provided the material for semi- 
structured interviews with the students. We also collected site 
texts, such as classroom-based scores on three social studies tests, 
two end -of- term exams and two class assignments or projects, 
samples of Native students’ written work, exit slips where each 
student summarized what he or she had learned in each les- 
son, and records of student attendance, class participation, and 
school retention. Tire tests, exams, assignments, and projects 
were the same for both types of classrooms, and care was taken 
to target conceptual understanding and higher level thinking 
in setting the tests, exams, and assignments. Teacher A and his 
students kept journals where they reflected on classroom activi- 
ties, assignments, and the integration processes. We conducted 
semis tructured and open-ended intenaews with the 31 Native 


Volume 18 ' ' Number 1 :• Fall 2006 127 


INFLUENCING SCHOOL SLCCESS AMONG NAHVE CANADIANS 


students to gain insights into their reactions to the teaching 
processes, episodes, and interactions. Using stimulated recall 
techniques (Calderhead, 1987), we asked interviewees to view, 
read, or listen to and then interpret and comment on classroom 
episodes, interactions, and processes. This allowed us to iden- 
tify the critical elements of instruction that appeared to affect 
academic achievement, class attendance and participation, and 
school retention among the Native students. Interviews were 
audio recorded, transcribed verbatim, and returned to the par- 
ticipants for verification before analyzing them as data. 


Data Analysis 

The research team and the student interviewees exam- 
ined collected data on teaching processes and interactions in 
both classrooms to discern critical elements of instruction that 
appeared to affect academic achievement, attendance, and reten- 
tion. Identified elements underwent an extensive ongoing pro- 
cess of constant comparative analysis (Bogdan &Biklen, 1998). 
We compared scores on class exams and assignments, as well as 
data on class attendance and school retention among Aboriginal 
students in both classrooms, and we used charts to display the 
findings clearly and concisely. We examined exit slips and col- 
lected samples of students written work for evidence of concep- 
tual understanding and higher level thinking versus simple recall 
of information. 


Findings and Discussion 

Impact on Academic Achievement 

Native students in the integration class significantly outper- 
formed their counterparts in the regular class on social studies 
exam scores. They also demonstrated a broader understanding 
of social studies content, higher level thinking, and improved 


I 28 Jourottl of Advanced Academics 


Kami 


self-confidence as the year progressed. Native students who were 
regular attendees in the integration classroom demonstrated a 
pass rate of 88.2% on exams and assignments. Their overall scores 
ranged between 61% and 83%, with a class average of 72%. The 
pass rate among regular attendees in the nonintegrated class was 
44%. Their overall scores ranged between 40% and 60%, with a 
class average of 48%. The written responses of the students in 
the integration class revealed higher conceptual understanding 
and included examples that juxtaposed Native perspectives with 
the perspectives of their textbooks. The Native students in the 
integrated class also demonstrated more confidence and more 
verbal participation in class. Native students’ responses in the 
regular class were more infrequent and were often limited to one 
or two words. 

Impact on School Retention 

There was no apparent connection between student attri- 
tion and the integration of Native perspectives. When the aca- 
demic year began on September 3, 2003, there was a total of 39 
Native students in both classrooms. By mid-October, 8 of these 
students (3 from the integration class and 5 from the regular 
class) had left, either because of parental relocation, pregnancy, 
or because these students were transferred into the sc hoofs tran- 
sition program (an alternative program for students designated 
as not yet able to cope with high school academic work). These 
findings suggest that factors other than cultural discontinuity 
may account for attrition among Native students (e.g., frequent 
mobility or high rates of migrancy). 

Impact on Class Attendance and Regularity 

We did not find differences between the two classrooms in 
terms of physical attendance and regularity. In each classroom, 
there was a steady group of Native students who were regular 
attendees — 10 students with an average attendance rate of 87% 
in the integration class, and 7 students with 83% attendance rate 


Volume 18 • Number 1 • Fall 2006 129 


INFLUENCING SCHOOL SLCCESS AMONG NAHVE CANADIANS 


in the regular class. Attendance among the rest of the Native 
students in both classroom types remained sporadic. This was 
reflected in the lower test scores of these students, which ranged 
between 40% and 60%. 

However, a clear difference supporting the cultural disconti- 
nuity theory emerged when regular attendees in both classrooms 
were asked in an interview to provide reasons for their regular 
attendance in social studies class. The reasons for attending class 
that were provided by the regular attendees in the integration 
class included the following: developing a better understanding 
of Native history and Native issues, increased pride in their cul- 
tural identity, and gaining self-confidence and higher self-esteem. 
They mentioned looking forward to social studies classes. By 
contrast, 5 of the 7 regular attendees in the other class reported 
that the only reason they came to social studies classes regularly 
was because they were “required or forced’’ to do so. One of them 
elaborated, “If I don’t get my attendance sUp signed by Mr. H. 
[Teacher B] I will lose the government financial assistance I am 
getting for attending classes” (Native student interview, June 18, 
2004). 

Significantly, the interviews revealed that reasons other than 
the integration of Native cultural knowledge and perspectives 
into the social studies curriculum contributed to the frequent 
or prolonged absenteeism among Native students in both class- 
rooms. Some of the reasons cited were having to take care of 
younger siblings at home; having no money and needing to work; 
having problems with parents, foster parents, or guardians; hav- 
ing legal issues (e.g., incarceration at juvenile centers; attendance 
at juvenile court); and returning to the reservation for a funeral, 
a wedding, or just to be with family. This complex array of issues 
indicates that the integration of Native perspectives alone can- 
not reverse achievement trends for all Native students. This sug- 
gests the need to look beyond the cultural discontinuity theory, 
towards macro- structural variables to account for irregular school 
attendance among some Native students. Such variables include 
the culture of poverty perpetuated by low Native employment 


I 30 Jouroal of AJvaoced Academics 


Kami 


rates and underresourced Native reserve schools that may neces- 
sitate student migration to urban centers to attend high school. 


Critical Elements of Instruction That 
Appeared to Influence Academic 
Achievement, Class Attendance, 
and Participation Among Native Students 

The research data revealed several elements of the integration 
processes that were critical to increasing academic achievement, 
class attendance, and participation among the Native students in 
the study. These elements were teachers’ sense of efficacy, teacher 
capacity, the integration of Native perspectives as student learn- 
ing outcomes, the use of teaching and assessment methods and 
resources compatible with Native cultural knowledge and per- 
spectives, community participation, and the creation of a nurtur- 
ing learning environment. 

Teachers^ Sense ofEJJicacy 

A teacher s sense of efficacy connotes judgments about the 
teachers own perceptions of his or her capability to accom- 
plish a task. Compared to teachers with low self-efficacy beliefs, 
teachers with strong perceptions of their own capability tend to 
employ classroom strategies that produce positive effects on stu- 
dents (Goddard, Hoy, 8c Hoy, 2004). In this study. Teacher As 
strong self-efficacy beliefs regarding the integration of Native 
perspectives led him to take measures that low-efficacy teachers 
may have found time-consuming or extraordinarily difficult. For 
instance, he reported attending informational workshops, read- 
ing materials on Native education, and mingling with Native 
peoples to enhance his knowledge and understanding of Native 
cultures and Native issues. He sometimes used his own resources 
to acquire the materials he needed, and he routinely spent time 
adapting material for student use in his lessons. Teacher A com- 


Volume 18 Number 1 Fall 2006 131 


INFLUENCING SCHOOL SLCCESS AMONG NAHVE CANADIANS 


mented . where there is a will, there is a way. ...” and “I 
believe we can learn a lot from Native cultures” (personal inter- 
view, August 12, 2004). Therefore, we deduced that Teacher As 
strong sense of self-efficacy explained why he perceived and 
approached the integration of Native perspectives as a central 
element of the curricula he taught. This and previous similar 
findings (e.g., Anderson, Greene, &Loewen, 1988; Ross, 1994) 
suggest positive links between teachers^ sense of efficacy and stu- 
dent achievement. In light of these promising results, schools 
should explore effective ways to develop and strengthen teach- 
ers^ efficacy beliefs about their collective capability to execute 
required courses of action to increase their Native students’ 
school success and transition to college. From a theoretical per- 
spective, “the link between collective efficacy beliefs and student 
achievement occurs because ... a robust sense of group capa- 
bility establishes expectations (cultural norms) for success that 
encourages organizational members to work resiliently toward 
desired ends” (Goddard et al., 2004, p. 8). According to a study 
by Goddard (2002), teachers tend to have a robust sense of their 
conjoint capability when they have the opportunity to influence 
instructionally relevant school decisions. 

Teacher Capacity 

Directly related to the teachers sense of efficacy is teacher 
capacity, defined here as the teacher’s knowledge (of the sub- 
ject matter or Native issues), attitude, personal interactions and 
instructional style, expectations for students, and commitment. 
Analysis of the field notes, videos, interviews and student journal 
entries suggested that for ^7//of the students interviewed, teacher 
capacity appeared to be the most critical factor affecting academic 
achievement. In the integration class. Native and non -Native 
student interviewees alike mentioned the following as critical 
factors in their superior academic performance: the “awesome 
ability of their teacher to explain concepts in clear and simple 
language,” his “use of a variety of teaching methods and strate- 
gies” that appealed to different learning needs, “his knowledge 


I 32 Jourottl of Advanced Academics 


Kami 


of Native culture” and his consistent “effort to integrate Native 
culture and content into social studies,” his ability to “encourage 
and motivate all students,” and “his positive attitude, high expec- 
tations for students, and respectful interactions with all students, 
especially Native students” (excerpts from students’ interviews, 
June 15, 2004). By contrast, interviewees from the regular class 
frequently expressed the need for a teacher “who cares,” “who 
is interested in us,” and “who can use teaching methods and 
resources other than transparency notes or the textbook and its 
end- of- chap ter questions most of the time ...” (excerpts from 
Native students’ interviews, June 18, 2004). 

Teacher capacity may account for the observed differences 
in student performance in the two classes, suggesting that 
successful integration requires sensitive caring teachers who 
are knowledgeable about Native issues and cultures and value 
them sufficiently to integrate them into the school curricu- 
lum on a consistent basis. This finding is supported by Bishop, 
Berryman, and Richardsons (2002) study, which identified simi- 
lar teacher personal attributes and pedagogical style as the cru- 
cial factors that promoted literacy learning skills among years 
1—5 Native Maori students in New Zealand. In Kanus (2002) 
study, Canadian Native students identified positive teacher atti- 
tude and teacher warmth and respect toward Native students 
as important factors that enhanced their learning in the pub- 
lic school system. Couture (1985) also supports this finding in 
his reference to the responsibility of the classroom teacher in 
accepting and accommodating Aboriginal students in the class. 
He wrote “the challenge (for the teacher) is to acquire an under- 
standing of fundamental Native cultural values and to create the 
conditions for maintenance and reproduction of these values” (p. 
7). Curwen Doige (2003) has also argued that accepting and 
accommodating Native students must move beyond whether 
they are visual learners, toward an understanding and acceptance 
of the paradigms from which they make meaning. For instance, 
through skillful classroom discussions of Aboriginal beliefs and 
values (e.g., the role of Aboriginal myths, rituals, and ceremo- 
nies in identity formation), Teacher A was able to infuse Native 


Volume ] 8 • Number 1 • Fall 2006 1 33 


INFLUENCING SCHOOL SLCCESS AMONG NAHVE CANADIANS 


spirituality (an important source of meaning- making for many 
Native peoples) into the ninth-grade social studies curriculum, 
thereby enabling the students to develop a stronger sense of who 
they were. These discussions were a mutually beneficial process. 
They provided learning opportunities not only for the students, 
but also for the teacher, whose enhanced knowledge and under- 
standing of Aboriginal culture liberated him from the position 
of the outside authority (Cajete as cited in Curwen Doige, 2003). 
Together, these findings suggest the need for policy makers to 
provide sustainable funding and encouragement for programs 
that improve the capacity of teachers to integrate Native per- 
spectives effectively (Kanu, in press). 

Native Perspectives as Student Learnmg Outcomes 

From the beginning, Teacher A and the Native graduate 
research assistants expressed a firm belief that identifying Native 
student learning outcomes for each unit of study and integrat- 
ing these outcomes at the lesson planning stage would be an 
effective approach to the integration of Aboriginal perspectives. 
From the point of view of the Native research assistants, prior 
identification and integration of Native learning outcomes at the 
lesson planning stage not only highlights important perspectives 
worth teaching and learning in the classroom, but also provides 
direction and focus for teachers wanting to integrate Native per- 
spectives. From the perspective of Teacher A, the inclusion of 
Native perspectives as student learning outcomes was simply 

. . . sound pedagogical practice because it places students 
at the center of ones teaching — ^who they are, their aspi- 
rations, and how these can be achieved. I always keep 
my students in mind when I set learning goals and when 
I look for content and resource materials . . . and these 
goals feature prominently in my assessments. I never for- 
get the links, (personal interview, June 15,2004) 


I 34 Jouroal of AJvaoced Academics 


Kami 


This claim was supported by our observations of this teacher s 
classroom. Teacher A shared learning outcomes with students at 
the beginning of each lesson because ‘T believe that sharing 
learning objectives informs the students about what I am trying 
to accomplish in the lesson and how they can help me get there 
. . (personal interview, June 15,2004). Students were required 
to complete exit slips listing the learning outcomes that had 
been achieved, and many of the Native students reported that 
inclusion of Native perspectives as learning outcomes helped 
them to see the relevance of the lesson to their lives. As one of 
them said during an interview, “this keeps us focused” (personal 
interview, June 15, 2004). In addition, we (the researchers) were 
frequently invited to provide feedback on the extent to which 
intended learning outcomes had been addressed and to discuss 
any unplanned outcomes of the lesson that had emerged. Hence, 
integrating Native outcomes at the level of learning outcomes 
may help the students and the teacher keep their minds firmly 
focused while remaining alert to unintended learning that may 
occur during the lesson. 

Integration of Compatible Teaching Methods 

As indicated earlier, a variety of teaching and learning meth- 
ods were used in the integration classroom. The Native students 
in that class identified four of these methods as particularly 
appealing and effective in promoting learning for them. These 
methods were the use of stories, Native guest speakers, field trips 
to Native communities, and discussion circles. According to 
some Native students, stories appeared to be effective for teach- 
ing content and for developing higher level thinking skills such 
as making inferences and drawing analogies. “First we listen to 
the story as Mr. B [Teacher A] reads it aloud and then we are 
asked to explain the lessons [the events] in the story and how 
they are different or similar to our lives or to what we are dis- 
cussing that day” (Native student, personal interview, June 12, 
2004). The field trips to a sweat lodge and a pow-wow and ensu- 
ing circle discussions were particularly valuable for two reasons. 


Volume ] 8 • Number 1 :• Fall 2006 1 35 


INFLUENCING SCHOOL SLCCESS AMONG NAHVE CANADIANS 


The trips provided the opportunity for Native students “to better 
understand and appreciate our cultural ceremonies and develop 
pride in our culture.” The circle discussions gave them voice and 
“confidence to discuss our knowledge and our opinions” {Native 
student, personal interview, June 15, 2004). As their confidence 
grew during the year, the Native students began openly chal- 
lenging ■^dews that they considered racist or stereotypical in their 
classroom. For example, during a small-group activity in the 
class, a Native student was overheard saying to another Native 
students, “You should never think that all White people hate 
smudging. ...” 

Classroom visits by Native elders and other experts from 
Native communities motivated the students in the integration 
classroom, enhanced the pride of Native students in Native 
knowledge and culture, informed Native and non-Native stu- 
dents about Native issues, and created connections between cur- 
ricular topics and the real world of Native students. During the 
research, we arranged for three separate visits by Native elders 
and experts to the integration classroom. Native and non-Native 
students alike described these visits as beneficial. For instance, 
after a classroom visit and follow-up discussion session with Joe 
(all names used in this paper are pseudonyms), an O jibway ath- 
lete and teacher who reported finding fulfillment in life through 
sports, a Native student in the integration class said, “Joes story 
was awesome. I can see myself going in that direction too ...” 
(informal conversation, March 10, 2004). A non-Native student, 
reflecting on a visit by a Native elder, ■wrote in his journal: “I 
have often heard that the sweet-grass ceremony is superstition. 
This week, I learned from Les [the Native elder] that the sweat- 
lodge, the drumming ceremony, and the sweet-grass are part of 
Native spirituality. We all have ways of expressing our spiritu- 
ality” (January 24, 2004). Community participation through 
elders and guest speakers from Native communities validated 
and accorded respect to Native knowledge in the classroom. We 
interpreted this as having a liberating effect because these ele- 
ments released Native students from the constraints of domi- 
nant cultural canons of knowledge. 


I 36 Jourottl of AJvancfd Academics 


Kami 


Integration of Native Resources 

The integration of Native resources appeared to promote 
breadth and depth of understanding of curriculum content and 
higher cognitive skills such as reasoning and drawing conclu- 
sions. In both respects, students reported that the counter- stories 
we provided, or those they found on their own through research, 
were particularly useful for understanding and challenging what 
was presented as factual content in the school curriculum. For 
example, after a unit on human rights during which several sup- 
plemental content materials were added to the textbook unit, a 
Native student remarked, . . Our discussion of the Aboriginal 
interpretation of the 1876 Indian Act provided a different per- 
spective and that really opened my eyes. ... I cannot believe 
that Aboriginals were not allowed to leave their reserves without 
a permit.” Another said, ‘T now see the banning of Aboriginal 
ceremonies in the past as cultural genocide, and I can defend my 
position on that if asked ...” (informal conversation, March 24, 
2004). 

These positive effects notwithstanding, integration at the 
resource level was the most difficult to accomplish due to the 
limited Native learning resources for student classroom use. 
To varying degrees, both teachers in the study identified this 
problem as a serious challenge to the integration of Native per- 
spectives in the classroom. For example, Teacher A wrote in his 
personal journal, “The biggest single issue has been the lack of 
appropriate resources for students. Most of the resources I have 
managed to find are at a reading level too difficult for the stu- 
dents. ... I believe that appropriate student resources are the key 
to integration” (September 2, 2003). Teacher B also cited the 
lack of student-level resources as one of his two main reasons 
for not integrating Native perspectives (the other reason was 
his perception that Native issues are too controversial). During 
our interview with him. Teacher B said, “Adapting the available 
materials to classroom level takes an incredible amount of time, 
time which most teachers, including myself, do not have” (per- 
sonal interview, June 20, 2004). This finding suggests the need for 


Volume ] 8 ' ' Number 1 :• Fall 2006 1 37 


INFLUENCING SCHOOL SLCCESS AMONG NAHVE CANADIANS 


greater attention to resource development to facilitate successful 
integration. In an earlier study (Kanu, 2005), teachers perceived 
similar lack of resources as a major impediment to the integration 
of Native perspectives. Similar findings were also reported by a 
nonprofit Canadian education research agency, Society for the 
Advancement of Excellence in Education (SAEE, 2004). They 
studied 10 schools across Western Canada where the integra- 
tion of Native perspectives into the school curricula was being 
undertaken. The SAEE study recommended funding for student 
resources if the intent of the federal government was to ensure 
that Native students received a level of education equivalent to 
their non -Native peers. 

Assessment Strategies 

Some of the strategies we used to assess Native student 
learning appeared to be more effective than others. For example, 
four Native students reported not being comfortable with oral 
presentations in front of the class. Student comments included 
“I am really a shy person” and “In front of an audience, I tend to 
forget what I want to say” (personal interview, June 18, 2004). 
However, the use of journals seemed acceptable to everyone. 
The Native students preferred journal writing because it pro- 
vided an opportunity to reflect on how they felt, thought, and 
experienced the content material and the activities provided in 
the class. According to Curwen Doige (2003), strategies such 
as journal writing add an element of spirituality to Aboriginal 
student learning because the students actually get the chance 
to “spiritually” work through curriculum content and classroom 
experiences from the inside out as they reflect on these experi- 
ences and write about them. 

A Nurturing Learning Environment 

Students in the integration class identified a nurturing 
learning environment as a critical element of instruction that 
promoted learning for them. By this, they meant a learning envi- 


I 38 Jouroul of AJvaocfd Academics 


Kami 


ronment “that is open [freedom to speak]” and “creates opportu- 
nity for our voices to be heard.” Asked how such an environment 
had contributed to her learning, a Native student from the 
integration class responded, “I feel respected in this class. Mr. 
B. [Teacher A] always insists that we listen to each other and 
respect what each of us has to say.” A non-Native student agreed, 
“I have learned more by listening to what they [Native students] 
feel when they are stereotyped” (student interviews, June 18, 
2004). This student revealed that the respectful circle discussions 
in their class had helped him to better understand certain Native 
issues and to change some stereotypical views he had held about 
Native peoples. Curwen Doige (2003) has highlighted the cru- 
cial importance of an appropriate learning environment in fos- 
tering the spirituality of Native students in the learning process. 
In a self-study of her own teaching in a class of Native and non- 
Native students enrolled in an Aboriginal Childrens Literature 
course (ED4688) in an eastern Canadian university, Curwen 
Doige discerned that an appropriate learning environment helps 
students gain insights into their own values and beliefs, connect 
learning to their prior knowledge systems, and value persons for 
who they are. She wrote, “Holding the spirit of each student in 
genuine respect is crucial to the learning that occurs in ED4688. 
I believe it is also foundational to cross-cultural understanding 
in any classroom with any age group” (p. 157). The creation of 
such a classroom environment is also grounded in sound theories 
of learning and development (see, for example, Battiste, 1998; 
Bruner, 1971; Cajete, 1994; Rogers, 1969). 


Conclusion 

Native cultural knowledge and perspectives were consistently 
integrated into the social studies curriculum of a Canadian inner- 
city public high school. This paper discussed some critical ele- 
ments of instruction that appeared to enhance classroom learning 
for Native students. Previous studies have reported gains when 
Native perspectives are included in school curricula. However, 


Volume ] 8 ' ' Number 1 • • Fall 2006 1 39 


INFLUENCING SCHOOL SLCCESS AMONG NAHVE CANADIANS 


there is still a dearth of knowledge about the specific elements of 
such inclusion that work best to reach Native students. Teachers 
can use these results to enhance their understanding of how best 
to teach Native students. The goal is to encourage Native stu- 
dents to complete high school and enter postsecondary institu- 
tions. It appears from this study that the integration of Native 
perspectives at the levels of student learning outcomes, instruc- 
tional methods and resources, assessment of student learning, 
and as a philosophical underpinning of the curriculum may 
results in better test scores, better conceptual understanding and 
higher level thinking, improved self-confidence, and increased 
motivation among some Native students to attend classes. Tire se 
outcomes are of crucial importance, not only for transitioning 
from high school to higher education institutions, but also for 
retention and success in those institutions. Teacher capacity, 
motivated by strong teacher efficacy beliefs, appears to be the 
most important factor affecting academic achievement, class 
attendance, and participation among the Native students in this 
study. Native resources, community involvement, and respectful 
and nurturing learning environments also appeared to enhance 
classroom learning for Native students. 

However, as the class attendance and school retention data 
in this study show, it would be naive to conclude that the inte- 
gration of these critical elements alone will ensure the transition 
of Native students from the K— 12 school system to college or 
close the academic achievement gap between Native Canadians 
and their White middle-class counterparts without address- 
ing the macro -structural variables of poverty and high rates of 
migrancy. That said, school factors such as low teacher expec- 
tations, racial discrimination and differential treatment of non- 
White students, curriculum delivery and pedagogical practices, 
and disconnection between school curricula and students’ lives 
have also been found to contribute to irregular attendance, dis- 
engagement with school, and eventual dropout among minority 
students (Coladarci, 1983; Dei et al., 1997; Deyhle, 1995; Vogt 
et al., 1987). Schools are increasingly being held accountable for 
student achievement in the K— 12 system, which is the pipeline 


I 40 Jouroal of AJvaocfd Academics 


Kami 


to higher education. Therefore, processes that contribute to equi- 
table and effective delivery of education for particular groups of 
students are invaluable. In this regard, the critical elements of 
instruction identified in this paper provide important strategies 
for classrooms with Native students. 


References 

Anderson, R., Greene, M., ScLoewen, P. (1988). Relationships among 
teachers’ and students’ thinking skills, sense of efficacy and student 
achievement, Journal of Educational Research y 32, 148-165. 

Banks, J. A. (1994). Multicultural education (3rd ed.). Boston: AUyn & 
Bacon. 

Battiste, M. (1998). Enabling the autumn seed: Toward a de- colo- 
nized approach to Aboriginal knowledge, language and education. 
Canadian Journal of Native Education, 22, 16—27. 

Binda, P. K. (2001a). Native diaspora and urban education: Intractable 
problems. In P. K. Binda (with S. Caillou; EAs.), Aboriginal educa- 
tion in Canada: A study in de-colonization (pp. 179—194). Vancouver, 
BC: Canadian Educators’ Press. 

Binda, P. K. (2001b). Aboriginal education in comparative and global 
perspectives: What have research and practice done for Aboriginal 
education in Canada? Canadian and International Education, JOif), 
1-16. 

Bishop, R., Berryman, M., 6c Richardson, C. (2002). Te toi huarewa: 
Teaching and learning in total immersion Maori language educa- 
tional settings. Canadian Journal of Native Education, 26, 

Bogdan, R. C., 6c Biklen, S. K. (1998). Qualitative research for education 
(3rd ed.). Boston: AUyn 6c Bacon. 

Brady, P. (1995). Two policy approaches to Native education: Can 
reform be legislated? Canadian Journal of Education, 20, 349—366. 

Bruner, J. (1971). Ihe relevance of education. New York: Norton. 

Cajetc, G. A. (2000). Native science: Natural laws of interdependence. 
Santa Fc, NM: Clear Light Publishers. 

Calderhead, J. (1987). Exploring teachers' thinking. London: Cassell 
Educational Ltd. 

ColadarcijT. (1983). High school dropout among Native Americans. 
Journal of American Indian Education, 23{\), 15—22. 


Volume 18 • Number 1 Fall 2006 141 


INFLUENCING SCHOOL SLCCESS AMONG NAHVE CANADIANS 


Couture, J. (1985, Spring). Native culture in the classroom: A possible 
end v\in. Journal of Multicultural Education^ 2—19 . 

Cox, B. G., 8c Ramirez, M. (1992). Cognitive styles: Implications for 
multicultural education. In J. A. Banks (Ed.), Education in the '80s: 
Multiethnic education {pp. 122—134). Washington, DC: National 
Education Association. 

Curwen Doige, L. A. (2003). A missing link: Between traditional 
Aboriginal education and the Western system of education. 
Canadian Journal of Native Education^27, 144—160. 

Dei, G. S., Mazucca, J., Mclsaac, E., 8c Zine, J. (1997). Reconstructing 
dropout: A critical ethnography of the dynamics of Black students' disen- 
gagement from school. Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press. 

Deyhle, D. (1995). Navajo youth and Anglo-racism: Cultural integrity 
and resistance. Harvard Educational Review., 65, 403-444. 

Delisio, E. R. (2001). Native American schools ponder: Assail drop- 
out rates. Education World. Retrieved August 9, 2006, from http:// 
WWW. edu ca tio n- wo r Id . com/a_i s su es/schools009 . shtml 

English -Currie, V. (1990). The need for evaluation in Native educa- 
tion. In J. Perrault Sc S. Vance (Eds.), Writing the circle: Native 
women of Western Canada (pp. 47—60). Edmonton, AB: NeWest 
Publishers Ltd. 

Gay, G. (2000). Culturally responsive teaching: Theory, research and prac- 
tice. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Germaine, R. (1996). Dropout rate among American Indian and Alaska 
Native students: Beyond cultural discontinuity. Retrieved August 10, 
2006 from http://www.ericdigest.org/1996-2/indian.htmJ 

Goddard, R. D. (2002). Collective efficacy and school organizations: 
A multilevel analysis of teacher influence in schools. Theory and 
Research in Educational Administration, 1, 169—184. 

Goddard, R. D., Hoy, W. K., 8c Hoy, A. W. (2004). Collective efficacy 
beliefs: Theoretical developments, empirical evidence, and future 
directions. Educational R£searcher,33lf), 3—13. 

Haig- Brown, C., Hodgson- Smith, K. L., Regnier, R., Sc Archibald, J. 
(1997). Making the spirit dance within: Joe Duquette high school and 
an Aboriginal community. Toronto, ON: James Lorimer and Co. 

Kanpol, B., 8c McLaren, P. (1995). Critical multiculturalism: Uncommon 
voices in a common struggle. Westport, CT: Bcrgin Sc Garvey. 

Kanu, Y. (2002). In their own voices: First Nations students identify 
some cultural mediators of their learning in the formal school sys- 
tem. Alberta Journal of Educational Research, 48, 98—121. 


I 42 Jouroal of AJvaoced Academics 


Kami 


Kanu, Y. (2005). Beyond culturalism: Toward post- cultural strategies 
for decolonizing Indigenous education. Canadian and International 
Education^ 34{2)y 1—20. 

Kanu, Y. (in press). Increasing school success among Aboriginal 
students: Culturally responsive curriculum or macro- structural 
variables affecting schooling? Diasporay Indigenous^ and Minority 
Education: An International Journal. 

Kleinfeld J. (1995). Effective teachers of Eskimo and Indian students. 
In L. Roberts Sc R. A. Clifton (Eds.), Cross-currents: Contemporary 
Canadian educational issues (pp. 68-96). Toronto, ON: Nelson 
Canada. 

Kirkness, V. J. (1998). Our peoples* education: Cut the shackles, cut 
the crap, cut the mustard. Canadian Journal of Native Education^ 
22y 10-15. 

Manitoba Aboriginal Affairs Secretariat. (2002). Aboriginal people in 
Manitoba. Winnipeg, MB: Author. 

Manitoba Education and Training. (2003). Integrating Aboriginal per- 
spectives: A curriculum framework. Winnipeg, MB: Author. 

McAlpine, L. (2001). Teacher training for the new wilderness: 
Quantum leaps. In R K. Binda (with S. Caillou; Aboriginal 
education in Canada: A study in de-colonization (pp. 105—199). 
Mississauga, ON: Canadian Educators* Press. 

McLaren, P. (1997). Revolutionary multiculturalism: Pedagogies of dis- 
sent for tbe new millennium. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 

Moses, D., & Goldie, T. (Eds.). (1992). An anthology of Canadian 
Native literature. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 

Nieto, S. (1998). With light in their eyes: Creating multicultural learning 
communities. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Ogbu, J. U. (1982). Cultural discontinuity and schoo]lng. Anthropology 
and Education Quarterly ^ 290— 307. 

Ogbu, J. U. (1987). Variability in minority school performance: A 
problem in search of an explanation. Anthropology and Education 
QziarterfyylSy 312-334. 

Rogers, C. (1969). Freedom to learn: A view of what education might 
become. Columbus, OH: Merrill. 

Roman, T. (Ed.). (1998). Voices under one sky: Contemporary Native lit- 
erature. Scarborough, ON: Nelson Canada. 

Ross, J. A. (1994, June). Beliefs that make a difference: The origins and 
impacts of teacher efficacy. Paper presented at the Conference of 
Canadian Association of Curriculum Studies, Banff, Alberta, 
Canada. 


Volume 18 • Number 1 ' Fall 2006 143 


INFLUENCING SCHOOL SLCCESS AMONG NAHVE CANADIANS 


Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples. (1996). Gathering strength. 
Report of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples (Vol. 3). 
Ottawa^ ON: Canada Communication Group. 

Said, E. (1993). Culture and imperialism. London: Chatto and 
Windus. 

Shade, B. J., 8c New, C. A. (1993). Cultural influences on learning: 
Teaching implications. In J. A. Banks Sc C. A. Banks (Eds.), 
Miilticiiltural education: Issues and perspectives (pp. 317—331). 
Boston: AUyn Sc Bacon. 

Simard, L. (1994). Curriculum adaptation: Just do it. In P. IC Bin da 
(Ed.), Critical issues in First Nations education (pp. 78—86). Brandon, 
MB: BUNTEP. 

Society for the Advancement of Excellence in Education. (2004). 
Sharing our success: Ten case studies in Aboriginal schooling. 
Retrieved September 15, 2006, from http://vsrww.saee.ca/publica- 
tions/A_02 1_H H H_MID . php 

Vail, K. (2004). Remaking high schools. American School Board Journal, 
797(11), 1-2. 

Vogt, L. A., Jordan, C., Sc Tharp, R. G. (1987). Explaining school 
failure; producing school success: Two cases. Anthropology and 
Education Quarterly, 75,276—286. 

Vygotsky, L. S. (1981). The genesis of higher mental functions. In J. 
V. Wertsch (Ed.), The concept of activity in Soviet psychology (pp. 
144-188). Armonk, NY: Sharpe. 

Weeks, D. J. (2003, Winter). Native and Western knowledge: Where 
minds meet. Mathematics Science Education Center/NorthWest 
Teacher, 1—7. 

Wertsch, J. V. (1991). A sociocultural approach to socially shared 
cognition. In L. S. Resnick, J. M. Levine, Sc S. D. Teasely (Eds.), 
Perspectives on socially shared cognition (pp. 8—100). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. 

Winzer, M., Sc Mazurek, K. (1998). Special education in multicultural 
contexts. New York: Prentice Hall. 

Wood, R, Sc Clay, C. (1996). Perceived structural barriers and academic 
performance among American Indian high school students. Youth 
and Society, 28{ 1 ), 40—6 1 . 


I 44 Jouroal of Advanced Academics 


Kami 


Author Note 

The research on which this paper is based has been reported 
in two other publications (Kanu, 2005, in press). However, the 
critical elements of instruction influencing Native student per- 
formance, which is the topic of this paper, was not the focus of 
those publications. 


End Notes 

1 The Native Canadian students who participated in this study 
were of Cree, O jib way, Salteaux, and Metis ancestry. 


Volume 18 • Number 1 ' Fall 2006 145 


