Selecting Diverse Resources of Native American Perspective for the Curriculum 
Center: Children’s Literature, Leveled Readers, and Social Studies Curriculum 

By Nadean Meyer 


Abstract 

Biased and inaccurate information about Native Americans continue in children’s resources and remain in 
many of today’s curriculum centers. While Native American students remain a minority in schools, accurate 
information is vital for understanding contemporary society and our history by both Native and non-Native 
students. Many states including Washington State are creating tribal sovereignty curriculum and adding 
tribal perspectives to their state curriculum. Valuable print and digital resources and sources of continuing 
selection assistance are suggested to increase the holdings of today’s curriculum center in three areas: 
children’s literature, leveled readers and social studies curriculum. 


Introduction 

"The Curriculum Center is full of bias and 
misrepresentations of Native People," 

"My children's favorite books reflecting their Native 
culture are not available in the Curriculum Center " 

The American Indian studies director at my 
university, like myself a former K-12 educator, 
shared these observations with me about our 
Curriculum Center when I arrived on campus five 
years ago. This interview caught my attention. 

While many faculty I interviewed remarked on the 
outdated look and content of the Curriculum Center, 
she was willing to say that we were missing an 
entire perspective and that the items we did have 
were inaccurate. She was correct. My first 
evaluation of the collection showed glaring gaps 
and the dated items she mentioned. These two 
issues are a common dual problem in children’s 
literature collections and school curriculum about 
Native Americans: misrepresentation or 
inaccuracies in the current resources, and gaps or 
missing key accurate resources (Almeida, 1996). It 
became one of my priorities to identify and select 
the best Native American youth materials I could 
find. Pacific Northwest tribes, both Northwest 
Coastal and Inland Plateau in Washington State, are 
my primary focus but because teaching United 
States history involves so many tribes and regions, 
every curriculum center needs quality resources 
with tribal perspective from tribes throughout the 
continent including Pacific Northwest tribes. Many 
of the references and selected resources list will 
assist other centers in their quest to provide accurate 
national and regional information. 


This project to enrich our center’s resources with 
more Native American materials heightened my 
awareness of the discrepancies in education of 
Native youth and current pedagogy of anti-bias 
curriculum and culturally relevant curriculum 
(Griffin, 200). A compilation of frequent 
misconceptions about American Indians provides 
answers to context in Do All Indians Live in Tipis?: 
Questions and Answers from the National Museum 
of American Indian (National, 2007). This book is a 
good entry for understanding complexity among 
tribes and the many fallacies that remain among 
non-Natives about American Indians issues. Other 
resources provide more details (Hirschfelder, 

Molin, & Wakim, 1998; Ongtooguk & Dybdahl, 
2008; Pewewardy, 1998) Dialogue in our state 
legislature, education departments, and with 
regional tribes is producing a new curriculum and 
awareness of the issues (Edmo, 2008; RCW, 2006; 
Where, 2008) that is mirrored in other states as well 
(Apthorp, D’Amato, & Richardson, 2003; 
Lomawaima & McCarty, 2002; Ngai & Allen, 

2007; Smiley & Sather, 2009). My strategic plan for 
increasing accurate Native Peoples’ curriculum 
materials comprises three areas of the curriculum 
center collection: 

• Children's literature 

• Leveled readers in reading series 

• Social studies curriculum. 

Each area of the collection needed culturally 
relevant materials with a Native perspective and the 
voice of tribes, both locally and nationally. Current 
materials were evaluated using criteria developed 
by experts in tribal history and children’s literature 


Education Libraries, Volume 34, Number 1, Summer 2011 

23 



(10, 1998; Almeida, 1996; Anthropology, n.d.; 

Seale & Slapin, 2005). 

Native People 

One of the first considerations was the 
nomenclature to use. Libraries use the subject 
heading “Indians of North America” or specific 
tribes for most materials. However, the preferred 
term for an individual of Native American heritage 
is their name and the tribal affiliation name 
acknowledged by the tribal member (Pewewardy, 
1998). With over 500 tribes in the United States, 
this can be a problem when referring to people from 
multiple tribes or mixed tribe heritage. While there 
is no consensus on group nomenclature acceptable 
to all Native People, the term “Native American” 
tends to be used in K-12 settings and “American 
Indian” in higher education. In Canada, the term 
“First Nation” and “Native People” is acceptable 
across many tribes. I will use several of these tenns 
interchangeably or in accordance with the 
resource’s use of the term. 

Both Native and non-Native students need to read, 
see and hear accurate representations of Native 
People in American history and contemporary life 
no matter where they live (Apthorp, Kinner, & 
Enriquez-Ohnos, 2005; Edmo, 2008; Ngai & Allen, 
2007), so it is vital for curriculum centers to provide 
culturally relevant resources. Both local tribal 
materials and resources representing major tribes 
throughout North America are necessary. While the 
statistics about American Indians can be confusing 
because of the difference between self-identified 
and tribal-identified people, recent data suggests 
that 1% of the U. S. population identifies in the 
census as Native American (State, 2008). Currently 
there are only three states (Kentucky, Georgia and 
Tennessee) with no federally recognized American 
Indian tribes (Department, 2008; Frantz, 1999). 
While 92% of American Indians who live on 
reservations are west of the Mississippi, more than 
half (54%) of the total population live in urban 
areas including many in the Eastern seaboard 
(Frantz, 1999, p. 87). Throughout North America, 
there are many Native People on and off 
reservations. 


The relatively small number of American Indians in 
the total population of North America does not 
represent the importance of all Americans 
understanding Native culture due to historical 
significance and contemporary sovereignty rights. 
Our nation’s agreements with tribes predate and are 
recognized in the U. S. Constitution, and there are 
many misunderstandings in U.S. society about 
Indian rights through treaties and law (Lomawaima 
& McCarty, 2002; National, 2007; Ngai & Allen, 
2007; Where, 2008). Some regions of the country 
will place greater emphasis on Native issues 
because of their history and current population. A 
Pacific Northwest regional report shows that Native 
youth in today’s schools are the largest minority 
population in Alaska and Montana and that 
Washington State, Idaho, and Oregon have a 
student Indian population of at least 3 % (Smiley & 
Sather, 2009). These numbers indicate a need for 
educational materials across the continent with 
particular emphasis in the West. My emphasis will 
be on national concerns as seen through the regional 
examples. 

Cultural Bias in Curriculum 

Bias in instructional material for children has been 
recognized since a seminal article in 1965 by Nancy 
Larrick, The All-White World of Children’s Books 
(1965). Her five year analysis of 5,000 children’s 
books centered on contemporary African Americans 
but it became a call to explore bias of Native 
American in children’s literature as well. 

The Council of Interracial Books for Children 
produced an influential brochure checklist "10 
Quick Ways to Analyze Children's Books for 
Racism and Sexism" in 1979. It remains the basis 
for book evaluation of bias today with almost all 
guides adapting that initial checklist (Ten, 1998). 
Washington State law has been specific about 
evaluating bias in content in instructional material 
since 1974. This commitment was recently 
reiterated in a new version of the manual 
Washington models for the evaluation of bias 
content in instructional materials: Guidelines for 
identifying bias (2009) and the general instructional 
materials guide (Washington, 2008). 

Inaccurate Native images and stereotypes seem 
pervasive in American culture (Hirschfelder, Molin 
& Wakim, 1999; McCarty, 2008; Mihesuah, 1996; 

Education Libraries, Volume 34, Number 1, Summer 2011 

24 



Pewewardy, 1998; Ongtooguk & Dybdahl, 2008; 
Unlearning, 1981) and can be seen in popular 
culture and media including children’s literature. 
Stereotypes of Native Americans as only living in 
the past in historical clothing and housing 
contributes to a lack of understanding of modem 
day American Indians, including urban Indians. 
These misconceptions need to be countered with 
accurate representations. As accurate materials with 
tribal perspective become increasingly available in 
print, oral, and web based resources; curriculum 
centers should provide resources that broaden our 
teachers’ perspectives and provide materials to 
teach all children. Resources in children’s literature, 
leveled readers and social studies curriculum in the 
curriculum center needs to be evaluated for mis¬ 
representation and gaps in knowledge. 

I: Children's Literature 

One major area of most curriculum centers is 
children’s literature. The Cooperative Center for 
Children’s Books not only collects children’s 
literature but also monitors the output of children 
literature with ethnic perspectives and ethnic 
authors including Native Americans. By reviewing 
this information on their website, it is easy to see 
the trends (Children’s, 2010). Statistics are available 
since 1994 in two categories: books by American 
Indians and books about American Indians. The 
latest figures (2010) show a paltry 22 titles about 
North American Indians and only 9 of those by 
Native American authors. This is from a total of 
approximately 5,000 annual children literature trade 
books. Previous years have some fluctuation, but 
Native American books remain negligible in overall 
publishing. The statistics in general are dismal, with 
a substantial reduction in both books and books by 
Native authors last year. Making sure these books 
are selected is one reason curriculum center 
directors should seek newly published material. 
Since many titles come from small or regional 
presses, a diligent search for those sources is 
required. Since 2006, the American Indian Library 
Association 

(http://www.ailanet.org/activities/youthlitaward.htm) bi- 

annually awards books in three categories (early, 
middle, and young adult) (2010, 2010). These book 
suggestions start the process of acquiring great titles 
for several ages. More libraries and people 


purchasing quality Native American materials 
produces economic incentive to publish more 
diverse titles (McElmeel, 2004). Knowing about 
quality resources has been an obstacle in the past 
(Almeida, 1996) but this award is a help for 
children’s book selectors. 

Two books set the tone for finding and selecting 
exemplary materials about Native Peoples in 
children’s literature. The first is a specialized 
bibliography, A Broken Flute. Issued in 2005 as a 
sequel to the ground breaking Through Indian Eyes 
(Slapin & Seale, 1992) created over a decade 
earlier, A Broken Flute is a selection guide, 
evaluative tool, and learning manual about Native 
literature including common stereotypes. Unlike 
other children's literature bibliographies, this work 
includes titles of books that the authors believe 
should not be selected and reasons why they should 
be avoided (Seale & Slapin, 2005) This information 
is necessary because standard reviewing sources 
sometimes recommended titles that contain 
problems with facts or mis-interpretation of tribal 
knowledge and perspective. Broken Flute, through 
its detailed analysis of titles, also helps education 
librarians and teachers expand their knowledge 
about Native Peoples and the variety of culture 
between tribes while discussing specific authors and 
titles. It also serves as a valuable selection guide, 
since it includes less well known authors and 
publishers. 

The second source is a guide on early childhood 
curriculum, Lessons from Turtle Island: Native 
Curriculum in Early Childhood Classrooms (Jones 
& Moomaw, 2002). The authors together model a 
dialogue approach to blend the Native perspective 
with early childhood education expertise. The 
authors’ framework gave me an "aha" moment. 
Native American perspectives were seamlessly 
integrated into many daily lessons and the 
curriculum planning. Rather than have a day, a 
week, or even a month that highlighted Native 
history and culture through story and activities, the 
Native perspective was included in most units. 
Common themes of shoes, families, trees, and 
additional topics include resources of Native 
Peoples. Over time, Native educators have 
developed this strategy of enmeshing Native 

Education Libraries, Volume 34, Number 1, Summer 2011 

25 




People’s perspective into existing curriculum 
(Edmo, 2008). It is a fine example of a combination 
of theory with practice, with many examples and 
book lists. These two books are excellent resources 
to check titles currently in the curriculum center 
collection, and they are recent enough to serve as a 
collective development resource as well. 

Frequently publishing house and major selection 
aids do not have knowledgeable staff to review the 
materials for authenticity (Harvey, Hardjo, & 
Welborn, 1995; McElmeel, 2004). With over 500 
recognized tribes in the United States, it can be 
difficult to determine tribal authenticity in 
children’s literature. Nevertheless, there are several 
sources to assist the book selector. A main source 
for new titles is the bimonthly publication, 
Multicultural Review. While it is not limited to 
Native Peoples, it does include current titles with 
competent reviewers. It is available in print or 
online by subscription; the current issue is available 
at the journal’s website 

(http://www.mcreview.com) , and it is indexed in 
four databases (Ulrich, 2010). Debbie Reese's blog 
American Indian in Children's Literature 
(http://americanindiansinchildrensliterature.blogspo 

t.com) augments selection journals with specific 
categories of new materials to purchase and some to 
avoid. Her knowledge of children’s literature is vast 
and she is aware of common reviewing errors, so 
she reviews current children’s literature with 
searchable past postings. Children’s literature 
author, Cynthia Leitich Smith also presents 
resources on her blog in designated section (Smith, 
2010). The organization Ovate has a store at its 
website (http://oyate.com) for purchase of Native 
materials. Specifically searching for Native 
American resources and checking their perspective 
is necessary to have quality, accurate materials and 
these sources help the curriculum center director. 
The issue of removal of traditional or older 
children’s literature that inaccurately portrays 
Native Americans remains a topic in children’s 
literature collection maintenance where children are 
exposed to multiple Native American stereotypes 
(Harvey, Hardjo & Welbom, 1995; Hirschfelder, 
Moline & Wakim, 1999; Morgan, 2009; Null, 2003; 
Pewewardy, 1998; Unlearning, 1981). However, the 
curriculum center often maintains key titles in the 
collection because of their historical significance for 


other reasons such as winning a major children’s 
literature award. It can be valuable to keep 
examples for use by faculty and students to leam 
about stereotypes. The DVD from Rethinking 
Schools 

(http://www.rethinkingschools.org/ProdDetails.asp? 

ID=9780942961409) Unlearning Indian 
Stereotypes based on the Council on Interracial 
Books for Children’s filmstrip and teaching guide is 
an inexpensive addition to assist in this process 
(Unlearning 1981). Thus, a children’s literature 
collection at the university may retain copies of 
titles such as Little House books, Sign of the 
Beaver, Indian in the Cupboard, Alligators All 
Around and more titles that are critiqued for 
damaging stereotypes. These books serve an 
important role of text analysis in the children’s 
literature classroom. With the addition of newer 
titles and highlighted book lists, most users can find 
materials for curriculum planning that will be 
positive and useful for today’s youth. 

II. Leveled Readers and Reading Series 

As curriculum center director, I cannot make 
changes in standard reading series, but I can seek 
supplemental resources that fill in gaps and provide 
our students and faculty with model examples of 
diversity in a culturally responsive manner. In 
Washington State, The Indian Education office 
worked with tribes to produce a set of leveled 
readers reflecting the cultures of the Northwest 
coastal tribes. The beginning text and illustrations 
on canoe, drum, and hunting and gathering are on a 
compact disc (Evergreen, 2002). These digital 
copies include short videos of tribal elders 
explaining the significance of the three topics. The 
National Education Association website (Online, 
2002-2010) features this curriculum with samples of 
the videos and the readers on the right side of its 
culturally responsive web pages 
(http://www.nea.org/home/16732.htm) . Other 
regional and state education departments have 
produced items now and in the past (Benne, 2004) 
Our Curriculum Center contains the latest 
mainstream reading series. They can be evaluated 
for instructional bias using the checklists provided 
to help teacher candidates find bias and more 
culturally relevant materials (Oyate, 2011; Reese, 
2011; Slapin & Seale, 2005; Washington, 2009). 

Education Libraries, Volume 34, Number 1, Summer 2011 

26 










The process of teacher candidates evaluating 
materials for bias is a lifelong professional skill that 
needs to be developed early. Standard textbooks are 
one of the key places to begin this process 
(Almeida, 1996; Gangi, 2008). Jane Gangi 
examines the many book lists of children’s 
literature that are given as examples in reading 
instruction textbooks and common manuals. She 
notes the overall whiteness of the examples, with 
often only 1% of all book suggestions depicting 
people of color (2008). The history of using 
culturally responsive materials for native students is 
beautifully told in a historical book with excerpts 
from many readers of the 1930s and 1940s when the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs made a concerted effort to 
produce books. While many of the first titles were 
by non-Native authors associated with reservation 
schools, examples of illustrations often featured 
Native illustrators, including many young people 
(Benes, 2004). 

Canada's First Nation people face similar issues to 
reproduce images and texts of their experiences for 
beginning readers. Eaglecrest Books 
(http://www.eaglecrestbooks.com ) has a leveled 
reading series that uses common topics and 
photographic images of First Nation people: fishing, 
with family, in celebration, and more. The eighty- 
five titles are available as sets or as individual book 
titles; they are available in English, French, and 
Cree languages. Other First Nations in Canada place 
leveled readers online for free download. Some are 
in English and French, and many are in the tribe’s 
language. 

The increase in teaching tribal languages as part of 
Native culture creates a need for more leveled 
readers for beginners of all ages in the Native 
language (Apthorp, D’Amato & Richardson, 2003). 
While some books are bilingual, many more are a 
leveled approach to learning the Native language. 
Increasingly the tribes or funding sources are 
posting these resources online for all to use. It is 
necessary for the curriculum center to provide 
access to these electronic resources as well as print 
resources in order to have culturally responsive 
leveled readers supplementing the standard reading 
series. 


III. Social Studies Curriculum 

The history of North American, particularly United 
States and Canada, always includes infonnation 
about American Indians, so there will be 
information about tribes, conflict, and events such 
as the Lewis & Clark Expedition in social studies 
textbooks (Bureau, 1998). History resources, non¬ 
fiction books, and social studies curriculum should 
include tribal perspectives and should provide 
today’s students and teacher candidates with 
accurate material. Tribal sovereignty is a key 
concept sometimes misunderstood by teachers and 
students. Federally recognized tribes are treated as 
governments within the United States. Many rights 
and practices of tribes predate the U.S. Constitution, 
and tribal sovereignty is mentioned in the U.S. 
Constitution as well (Lomawaima & McCarty, 
2002). Therefore, it is important for curriculum 
centers to obtain many resources that reflect the best 
practices for understanding American Indian history 
and tribal sovereignty. 

Many states include tribal history and government 
in their state social studies standards. In Washington 
State, Native Peoples' perspective is presented in a 
tribal sovereignty curriculum, Since Time 
Immemorial: Tribal Sovereignty in Washington 
State, available in 2010 (Edmo, 2008; Meyer, 

2010). By state statute (RCW 28A.345.070, 2006), 
school districts in Washington State are encouraged 
to incorporate information on tribal history and 
culture in the social studies curriculum units. This 
law sets up tribal relationships with schools, 
acknowledges the achievement gap of Native 
students, and creates the curriculum about tribal 
sovereignty and history for both Native and non- 
Native youth (Edmo, 2007). Other states provide 
curriculum about their regional tribes on the state 
education or tribe’s website. For a more complete 
list of digital accessible curriculum see 
http://research.ewu.edu/tribal under the tab state 
curriculums. 

One stellar example is Montana. As a pioneer in this 
area, with a mandatory curriculum with statewide 
resources, Montana’s Department of Education 
provides resources and research about tribes’ 
sovereignty and a historical perspectives 
curriculum. It is especially useful because of its 

Education Libraries, Volume 34, Number 1, Summer 2011 

27 





place-based focus which provides a model for other 
states. One Montana elementary school did an 
action research project about its adoption of the 
curriculum. The subsequent report answers many 
schools’ concerns about adding curriculum and 
using local tribal members as participants in 
developing and presenting the curriculum. Non- 
Native teachers are expected to leam as well prior 
and during the presentation of the curriculum (Ngai 
& Allen, 2007). A project at the University of 
Montana also created rich multimedia resources, 
both free online sites and inexpensive DVDs that 
feature interviews with tribal elders about regional 
history (Oyate, 2011; Regional, 2010). 

Alaska is another example of a statewide effort. 
Alaska provides online resources for the many Inuit, 
Aleuts, and American Indian perspectives. Their 
materials on their website Alaska Native Knowledge 
Network (http://www.ankn.uaf.edu/) extend beyond 
history curriculum into math and science curriculum 
as well. More tribes, museums, and state 
departments of education are digitizing resources 
that will assist the curriculum centers everywhere in 
providing appropriate materials from across the 
continent as well as local resources depicting local 
tribes. The Internet provides access to many 
resources that in the past would have been 
considered archival or regional only, but now can 
be used by today’s educators throughout the 
continent to enhance their own or their students’ 
knowledge of historical and current events from 
Thanksgiving to fishing rights. 

Recent reports clarify the role of education for 
students who are American Indians. The 
Washington State example Where the sun rises: 
Addressing the Educational Achievement of Native 
Americans in Washington State documents the 
achievement gap in state standardized testing and 
shares best instructional practices that are culturally 
relevant (Where, 2008). Its findings are based on 
many national research projects. The Northwest 
Regional Educational Laboratory completed a study 
of Indians Education Policies in five Northwest 
Region States: Alaska, Idaho, Montana, Oregon, 
and Washington. By examination of statutes, 
regulations, and policies of departments of 
education, this study determined the most 
frequently selected best practices. The same study 


also examined research studies (eleven) about 
Native students’ education nationwide and the 
recommendations arising from the research. These 
two available reports are useful for all curriculum 
centers because of the summary of available 
research. Several common themes emerged that 
apply to the type of resources curriculum centers 
should have available for today’s teachers in 
training. "Native cultures and history are part of 
school curriculum" is a key Indian education policy 
in all five Northwest states. Four studies stated that 
"all teachers are required to have training in Native 
American cultures and history" (Smiley & Sather, 
2009, p. 11). 

Results 

Narrowing the achievement gap amongst all 
students in education is a large part of today’s 
school refonn process and Native American 
students are a sub-group to target with appropriate 
resources about their history and sovereignty 
(Griffin, 2000; Ngai & Allen, 2007; Where, 2008). 
Education libraries and curriculum centers have an 
opportunity to help address the gap by providing 
examples of resources for culturally relevant 
pedagogy. 

The inclusion of American Indian materials helps 
teachers develop a respect and appreciation for 
Native People’s history. Our users can learn how to 
ask culturally specific questions and leam not to 
accept standard curriculum materials blindly 
(Almeida, 1996; Apthorp, Kinner, & Enriquez- 
Olmos, 2005; Gangi, 2008). The resources to help 
all teachers and students understand tribal 
sovereignty in our current world offers an 
opportunity to promote the coexistence of 
democracy and social justice (Lomawaima & 
McCarty, 2004). 

Five years later, Eastern Washington University’s 
Curriculum Center has many more Native Peoples 
titles (over 400 titles) and research guides to tribal 
information. I am in the midst of an American 
Library Association Carnegie-Whitney grant to 
produce a bibliography of youth resources for the 
Pacific Northwest Coastal and Inland Plateau tribes. 
This grant fosters cooperation with statewide tribal 
educators and libraries including visiting cultural 

Education Libraries, Volume 34, Number 1, Summer 2011 

28 




centers. This bibliography will be placed online for 
K-12 youth resources to update and expand the 
Smithsonian’s online book lists of K-12 youth 
resources for all regions of the United States 
(Anthropology, n.d.). Instruction for children’s 
literature, reading, and social studies classes 
includes Native People’s materials. Displays and 
events have been created to present the resources. 
Strategic targeted partnering and constant selection 
awareness allows highlighting this area of the 
curriculum center so that the Director of the 
American Indian Studies program now welcomes 
bringing her classes and promoting the center in her 
work as one of our partners. 

References 

2010 American Indian youth literature award winners 
announced. (2010). American Indian Library 
Association. Retrieved from http://ailet.org 

Aguilera, D., Lipka, J., Demmert, W., & Tippeconnic, J. 
(2007). Introduction to this issue: Special issue on 
culturally responsive education for American Indian, 
Alaska Native and Native Hawaiian students. 
Journal of American Indian education, 46 (3), 4-10. 

Almeida, D. A. (1996). Counter prejudice against 
American Indians and Alaska Natives through 
antibias curriculum and instruction. ERIC Digest 
ED400146. Retrieved from 
http://www.eric.ed.gov/PDFS/ED400146.pdf 

Anthropology Outreach Department. Smithsonian 
In stitution, (n.d.). A critical bibliography of North 
American Indians for K-12. Retrieved from 
http://anthropology.si.edu/outreach/indbibl/bibintro. 

html 


Apthorp, H. S., D’Amato. E. B., & Richardson, A. 
(2003). Effective standards-based practices for 
Native American students: A review of research 
literature. Aurora, Co: McREL. Retrieved from 
http://www.mcrel.org/PDF/Standards/5021RR Pract 

ices NAstudents.pdf 

Apthorp, H., Kinner, F., & Enriquez-Olmos, M. (2005). 
A teacher's tool for reflective practice: Racial and 
cultural differences in American Indian students ’ 
classrooms. MCREL. Retrieved from 
http://www.mcrel.org/PDF/Diversity/Cultural aware 

ness joumal.pdf 


Benes, R. C. (2004). Native American picture books of 
change: The art of historic children's editions. Santa 
Fe: Museum of New Mexico. 

Bureau of Indian Affairs. Department, of Interior. Office 
of Indian Education Programs & ORBIS Associates, 
Washington, DC. (1998). American Indian 
supplement to the national standards for social 
studies education. ED 420482. ERIC 
http://eric.ed.gov 

Children’s books by and about people of color published 
in the United States. (2011). Madison, WI: 
Cooperative Children’s Book Center. School of 
Education. University of Wisconsin-Madison. 
Retrieved from 

http://www.education.wisc.edU/ccbc/books/pcstats.a 

sp 

Department of Interior. Bureau of Indian Affairs. (2008, 
April 8). Indian entities recognized and eligible to 
receive services from the United States Bureau of 
Indian Affairs . Federal Registrar, 73(66), 18553-7. 
Retrieved from 

http://edocket.access.gpo.gov/2008/pdf/E8-6968.pdf 

Edmo, S. (2008). Building a sovereignty curriculum: A 
conversation with Denny Hurtado (Skokomish). 
Democracy & Education, 17(2), 44-48. 

Evergreen Center for Educational Improvement, & 
Washington State. (2002). Northwest Native 
American reading curriculum. Olympia, WA: 
Evergreen State College. 

Frantz, K. (1999). Indian reservations in the United 
States: Territory, sovereignty, and socioeconomic 
change. University of Chicago geography research 
paper, no. 242. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 

Gangi, J. M. (2008, Spring). The unbearable whiteness 
of literacy instruction: Realizing the implications of 
the proficient reader research. Multicultural Review, 
30-35. 

Griffin, A. (2000). Reading and the Native American 
learner research report. Olympia, WA.: Indian 
Education Office. Office of Superintendent of Public 
Instruction. Retrieved from 

http://www.evergreen.edu/kl2outreach/docs/RdgNAlr 

ner.pdf 


Education Libraries, Volume 34, Number 1, Summer 2011 

29 
















Harvey, K. D., Hardjo, L. A., & Welbom, L. (1995) 
Guidelines for selection of instructional materials In 
How to teach about American Indians: A guide for 
the school library media specialist. Westport, CT: 
Greenwood, http://aie.greenwood.com 

Hirschfelder, A. B., Molin, P. F„ & Wakim, Y. (1999). 
American Indian stereotypes in the world of 
children: A reader and bibliography. (2 nd ed.). 
Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. 

Jones, G. W., & Moomaw, S. (2002). Lessons from 
turtle island: Native curriculum in early childhood 
classrooms. St. Paul, MN: Redleaf Press. 

Larrick, N. (1965, Sept.). The all-white world of 
children’s books. Saturday Review, 48( 11), 63-65, 
84-85. 

Lomawaima, K. T. & McCarty, T. L. (2002). When 
tribal sovereignty challenges democracy: American 
Indian education and the democratic ideal. American 
Educational Research Journal 39(2), 279-305. 

McCarty, T. L. (2008). Evaluating images of groups in 
your curriculum. In M. Pollack (Ed.), Everyday anti¬ 
racism: Getting real about race in schools (pp. ISO- 
185). New York: New Press. 

McElmeel, S. L. (2004, November/December). Good 
intentions are not enough: Creating a book climate 
of diversity. Library Media Connections, 28-29. 

Meyer, N. (2010) Tribal sovereignty curriculum and 
resources in Washington State: An abundance of 
riches. MEDIUM, 55(1), 8-9. 

Mihesuah, D. A. (1996). American Indians: Stereotypes 
& realities. Atlanta, GA: Clarity. 

Morgan, H. (2009). Gender, racial and ethnic 
misrepresentations in children’s book: A 
comparative look. Childhood Education, 55(3), 187- 
190. 

National Museum of the American Indian. (2007). Do 
all Indians live in tipis?: Questions and answers 
from the National Museum of the American Indian. 
New York: Collins, in association with the National 
Museum of the American Indian, Smithsonian 
Institution. 


Ngai, P. & Allen, K. (2007). A process guide for 

realizing Indian education for all: Lessons learned 
from Lewis & Clark Elementary School. Helena, 

MT: Montana Office of Public Instruction. Retrieved 
from 

http://www.opi.mt.gov/pdf/IndianED/08processguid 

e.pdf 

Null, E. (2003) Accuracy and authenticity in American 
Indian children's literature: The social responsibility 
of authors and illustrators. 182-97. In Fox D. L. & 
Short, K. G. (Eds.). Stories matter. The complexity of 
cultural authenticity in children's literature. Urbana, 
IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 

Online resources for culturally responsive teachers. 
(2002-2010). National Education Association. 
Retrieved from http://www.nea. org/home/16723 .htm 

Ongtooguk, P. & Dybdahl, C.S. (2008). Teaching facts, 
not myths about Native Americans. In M. Pollack 
.(Ed.), Everyday anti-racism: Getting real about 
race in schools, (pp. 204-208). New York: New 
Press. 

Oyate. (2011). Oyate criteria for evaluating books. 
Retrieved from 

http://oyate.org/index.php?option=com content&vie 

w=article&id= 13 6&Itemid= 109 

Pewewardy, C. (1998, April). Fluff and feathers: 

Treatment of American Indians in the literature and 
the classroom. Equity and Excellence in Education. 
Retrieved from 

http://www.hanksville.org/storytellers/pewe/writing/ 

Fluff.html 

Regional Learning Project: Multi-media educational 
materials about American Indians and regional 
history (2010). Missoula, MT: University of 
Montana. Continuing Education. Retrieved from 
http://regionallearningproiect.org 

RCW 28A.347.070. (2006). Tribal relationships- 
achievement gap-curriculum-reports to the 
legislature. Retrieved from 

http://apps.leg.wa.gov/rcw/default.aspx?cite=28A,34 

5,070 

Reese, D. (2011). American Indians in children ’s 
literature blog. Retrieved from 
http://americanindiansinchildrenslitearture.blogspot. 

com 


Education Libraries, Volume 34, Number 1, Summer 2011 

30 
















Seale, D., & Slapin, B. (2005). A broken flute: The 
Native experience in books for children. Walnut 
Creek, CA: AltaMira Press. 

Slapin, B., & Seale, D. (1992). Through Indian eyes: 

The Native experience in books for children. 
Philadelphia, PA: New Society. 

Smiley, R. & Sather, S., Regional Educational & 
National Center for Education Evaluation and, 
Regional Assistance. (2009). Indian education 
policies in five Northwest region states: Issues & 
answers. REL 2009-081. Portland, OR: Northwest 
Regional Educational Laboratory. Retrieved from 
http://educationnorthwest.org/news/844 

Smith, C. L. (2010). Native American themes in 

children’s books. Children and YA author Cynthia 
Leitich Smith. Retrieved from 
http://www.cynthialeitichsmith.com/lit resources/di 

versity/native am/NativeThemes intro.html 

State and county quickfacts (2008). U. S. Bureaus of 
Census. Retrieved from 

http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/0Q000.html 

Ten quick ways to analyze children’s books for racism 
and sexism. Council on Interracial Books for 
Children. (1998). Adapted with permission. 
Department of Education. California. Retrieved from 
http://old.sandi.net/depts/instructional materials/10 

ways.pdf 

Ulrich's Web Global Serials Directory. (2010). 
Multicultural Review. Indexed in Education 
Research Complete, Soclndex and SoclndexFullText 
(EBSCO) and Book Review Digest Plus (Wilson) 
databases 

Unlearning "Indian " stereotypes: A teaching unit for 
elementary teachers and children's librarians. 
(1981). New York: Racism and Sexism Resource 
Center for Educators. 

Washington models for the evaluation of bias content in 
instructional materials: Guidelines for identifying 
bias. (2009). Olympia, WA: Office of 
Superintendent of Public Instruction. Retrieved from 
http://www.kl2.wa.us/Equitv/pubdocs/Washington 

ModelsfortheEvaluationofBias.pdf 

Washington State guidelines for selection of 

instructional materials to meet district and state 


standards. (2008). Olympia, WA: Office of 
Superintendent of Public Instruction. Retrieved from 
http://www.kl2.wa.us/curriculuminstruct/pubdocs/P 

ublishersNotices/GuidanceonSelectingMaterials- 

FINAL2009.pdf 

Where the sun rises: Addressing the educational 
achievement of Native Americans in Washington 
State. (2008). Pullman, WA: Washington State 
University. College of Education. Clearinghouse on 
Native teaching and learning. Retrieved from 
http://education.wsu.edu/nativeclearinghouse/achiev 

ementgap/ 

Selected Resources 

562 federally recognized tribes Federal Registrar April 
2008. http://edocket.access.gpo.gov/2008/pdf/E8- 
6968.pdf 

Aboriginal schoolbooks. Nortext. 

http://www.nortext.com/schoolbooks/index.html 

Alaska Native Knowledge Network. 
http://www.ankn.uaf.edu/ 

American Indian Library Association. Youth Indian 
Literature Award. 

http://www.ailanet.org/activities/youthlitaward.htm 

Anthropology Outreach Department. Smithsonian 
Institution. A critical bibliography of North 
American Indians for K-12. 

http://anthropologv.si.edu/outreach/indbibl/bibintro. 

html 


Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (U.S.) Eagle 
books series. 

http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/eagle.htm 

Children and YA author Cynthia Leitich Smith. 

http://www.cynthialeitichsmith.com/lit resources/di 

versity/native am/NativeThemes intro.html 

Eaglecrest Books http://www.eaglecrestbooks.com 

Four Directions Teachings 

■ http://www.fourdirectionsteachings.eom/resourees.h 

tml 

Great Falls, MT School District. Indian library resource 
search by theme. 

http://www.gfps.kl2.mt.us/Departments/IndianEd/Li 

brary/SearchTheme.asp 


Education Libraries, Volume 34, Number 1, Summer 2011 

31 






























Indian Education. Montana. Retrieved from 
http://opi.mt.gov/programs/indianed/ 

Indians of Washington State. 

http://kl2.wa.us/IndianEd/Curriculum/lndiansofWas 

hingtonState.pdf and K-6 

http ://k 12. wa.us/IndianEd/Curriculum/ Content- 

ActivitiesTeachingAboutNA.pdf 

Jones, G. W., & Moomaw, S. (2002). Lessons from 
Turtle : Native curriculum in early childhood 
classrooms. St. Paul, MN: Redleaf Press. 

MacRae’s Indian Books. 

http://www.macraesindianbooks.com/ 

Multicultural Review, http://www.mcreview.com 

Ovate, http://oyate.org 

Print resources. Museum of American Indians. 
Smithsonian. 

http://www.nmai.si.edu/subpage.cfm?subpage=educ 

ation&second=pub 

Reese, Debbie. American Indians in Children’s 
Literature blog. 

http://americanindiansinchildrensliterature.blogspot. 

com 

Regional Learning Project. University of Montana. 
http://regionalleamingproiect.org/ Includes 
http://www.trailtribes.org/ and 
http://www.nwhistorycourse.org/ Also available at 
Oyate.org 


Seale, D., & Slapin, B. (2005). A broken flute: The 
native experience in books for children. Walnut 
Creek, CA: AltaMira Press. 

Since time immemorial: Tribal sovereignty in 
Washington State, http://indian-ed.org 

Tribal sovereignty. Eastern Washington University 
Libraries research guide. 
http://research. ewu.edu/tribal 

Unlearning Indian stereotypes. Rethinking Schools. Rev. 
Originally produced by the Council on Interracial 
Books for Children in 1977. DVD. 
http://www.rethinkingschools.org/ProdDetails.asp71 

D=9780942961409 

Virtual Museum of Metis History and Culture. 

http://www.metismuseum.ca/browse/index.php?id=7 

04 

Wisdom of the Elders. 

http://www.wisdomoftheelders.org/ 

Nadean Meyer 

Learning Resources Librarian 
Eastern Washington University 
816 F Street LIB 100 
Cheney, Washington 99004 
509-359-4262- work 
509-443-8866- home 
nmeyer@ewu.edu 
nadeanm@gmail.com 
http://research.ewu.edu/currcenter 

http://research.ewu.edu/tribal 



Washington State Indian Education State Logo by Marvin Oliver (Used by Permission) 


Education Libraries, Volume 34, Number 1, Summer 2011 

32 


































