DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 466 098 



FL 027 355 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 



INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Ree , Joe Jungno , Ed . 

The Korean Language in America: Volume 6. Papers from the 
Annual Conference and Teacher Training Workshop on the 
Teaching of Korean Language, Culture, and Literature (6th, 
Manoa, Hawaii, August 2-5, 2001). 

American Association of Teachers of Korean. 

2001-08-00 

34 Op.; Production funds provided by the Korea Foundation. 
Collected Works - Proceedings (021) 

MF01/PC14 Plus Postage. 

Business Education; College Students; Computer Uses in 
Education; Curriculum Development; Educational Theories; 
Elementary Secondary Education; Error Analysis (Language) ; 
Essays; Evaluation Methods; Grammar; *Heritage Education; 
Higher Education; Immersion Programs; Journal Writing; 
♦Korean; Language Fluency; Language Maintenance; Literature; 
Oral Language; * Second Language Instruction; Second Language 
Learning; Sociolinguistics; Student Evaluation; Teaching 
Methods; Textbooks; Uncommonly Taught Languages; Vocabulary 
Development; Writing Skills 

Heritage Language; Language Contact; New York (New York); 
Politeness; Two Way Bilingual Education 



ABSTRACT 



This collection of conference papers includes: (1) 

"Theories, Evidence, and Practice in Foreign Language Teaching" (Richard 
Schmidt); (2) "Teaching Korean Grammar in Context: -myen and -ttay" (Sahie 
Kang) ; (3) "Teaching Politeness Routines in Korean" (Ho-min Sohn) ; (4) 

"Vocabulary-Building Activities" (Boyang Park); (5) "Implementation and 
Evaluation of a Task-Based Approach to the Teaching of the Korean Language" 

( Youngkyu Kim, Dong-Kwan Kong, Jin-Hwa Lee, and Young-Geun Lee) ; (6) "Effects 

of Task Complexity on L2 Production" (Young-Geun Lee) ; (7) "Recognition and 

Retention of English Loanwords by Learners of Korean" (In Jung Cho) ; (8) "The 

Number Concept of Korean People" (Sunny Jung) ; (9) "The Film, the Poem and 

the Story: Integrating Literature into the Language Curriculum" (Ann Y. 

Choi) ; (10) "Exploring the Possibilities of WBLT for Operational Testing 

Purposes: Web-Based Korean as a Foreign Language Testing" (Siwon Park); (11) 
"Increasing Korean Oral Fluency Using an Electronic Bulletin Board and 
Wimba-Based Voiced Chat" (Sunah Cho and Stephen Carey) ; (12) "Interactive 

Online Exercises: Retention of Non-Heritage Learners in a Mixed Class" 
(Hye-Won Choi and Sunghee Koh) ; (13) "Using HyperStudio for Teaching Korean" 

(Eun-Hee Koo) ; (14) "Developing a Business Korean Course Based on a 

Systematic Approach" (Andrew Byon) ; (15) "Two New Publications for 

Intermediate Level Korean" (Kyungnyun Kim Richards) ; (16) "Language Shift in 

Bilingual Students: A Sociolinguistic Survey of Korean-American College 
Students" (Steven K. Lee and Ruth Ahn) ; (17) "Recent Trends in Foreign 
Language Teaching in the United States: The Role of Heritage Learners" (Dong 
Jae Lee) ; (18) "Korean Language Education in New York City Public Schools" 

(Bongsoon Yow) ; (19) "An Analysis of Errors in Speaking Practice" (Sang-Il 

Lee) ; (20) "An Error Analysis in Relation to Typological Differences" (Boyang 

Park) ; (21) "Issues of Heritage Learners in Korean Language Classes" (Hi-Sun 
Helen Kim); (22) "Heritage vs. Non-Heritage Issues Revisited" (Clare You); 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



(23) "The Degree of LI Interference among Heritage and Non-Heritage Learners 
of Korean: Do Heritage Learners Have Advantages over Non-Heritage Learners?" 
(Jung-Tae Kim); (24) "English-Speaking Students' Written Language Development 
in Korean in a Korean/English Two-Way Immersion Program" (Joung Hoon Ha) ; 

(25) "Cross-Cultural Variations in Personal Essays: Second Language Writing 
by American Learners of Korean as Compared to Native Koreans ' Writing" 
(Ooyoung Che Pyun) ; (26) "Reflective Journal Writing in the Korean II Class" 

(Hye Young Chung) ; and (27) "Socio-Pragmatic Functions of the Interactive 
Sentence Ender -ney from the Politeness Perspective" (Soo-ah Kim Yuen) . 
(Papers contain references.) (SM) 




Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



\ 

N 




The 

Korean Language 
in America 



Volume 6 



U S DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 

✓ CENTER (ERIC) 

This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 

improve reproduction quality. 



Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



August 2001 

f \ 

PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

doe. J, 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

1 

y 



Edited by 



Joe Jungno Ree 




>=» 



O' 



The American Association of Teachers of Korean 



THE KOREAN LANGUAGE IN AMERICA 



VOLUME 6 AUGUST 2001 



Papers from the Sixth Annual Conference and 
Teacher Training Workshop on the Teaching of 
Korean Language, Culture, and Literature 

University of Hawaii at Mano a, August 2-5 



EDITED BY 
JOE JUNGNO REE 



Published by the American Association of Teachers of Korean 



O 

ERIC 



3 



Copyright@2001 by the American Association of Teachers of 
Korean 



Production funds provided by the Korea Foundation 
Printed in the United States of America 




CONTENTS 



Editor’s Remarks 



vii 



PARTI. KEYNOTE ADDRESS 

1. Theories, evidence, and practice in 3 

foreign language teaching 

Richard Schmidt 



PART II. APPROACHES TO THE TEACHING OF GRAMMAR 
AND PRAGMATICS 



Teaching Korean Grammar in Context: 


13 


-myen and - ttay 




Sahie Kang 




Teaching Politeness Routines in Korean 


25 


Ho-min Sohn 




Vocabulary-building Activities 


37 


Boyang Park 





PART III. METHODOLOGY AND PEDAGOGY 



5 . Implementation and Evaluation of a Task-based 45 

Approach to the Teaching of the Korean Language 

Youngkyu Kim , Dong-Kwan Kong , Jin-Hwa Lee , 
and Young-Geun Lee 

6 . Effects of Task Complexity on L2 Production 53 

Young-Geun Lee 

7 . Recognition and Retention of English Loanwords by 69 

Learners of Korean 

InJung Cho 




5 



iv 



PART IV. CULTURE AND LITERATURE 



The Number Concept of Korean People 

Sunny Jung 


77 


The Film, the Poem and the Story: Integrating 
Literature into the Language Curriculum 

Ann Y. Choi 


91 



PART V. TECHNOLOGY AND WEB-BASED INSTRUCTION 



10 . Exploring the Possibilities of WBLT for Operational 101 

Testing Purposes: Web-based Korean as a Foreign 

Language Testing 

Siwon Park 

11. Increasing Korean Oral Fluency Using an Electronic 115 

Bulletin Board and Wimba-based Voiced Chat 

Sunah Cho and Stephen Carey 

12 . Interactive Online Exercises: Retention of Non-heritage 129 

Learners in a Mixed Class 

Hye-Won Choi and Sunghee Koh 

13 . Using HyperStudio for Teaching Korean 141 

Eun-Hee Koo 



PART VI. DEVELOPMENT OF COURSES AND TEACHING 
MATERIALS 



14 . Developing a Business Korean Course Based on a Systematic 153 

Approach 

Andrew Byon 

15 . Two New Publications for Intermediate Level Korean 173 

Kyungnyun Kim Richards 



0 




6 



V 



PART VII. S OCIOLINGUIS TIC AND LANGUAGE POLICY ISSUES 

16. Language Shift in Bilingual Students: A Sociolinguistic Survey 181 

of Korean-American College Students 

Steven K Lee and Ruth Aim 

17. Recent Trends in Foreign Language Teaching in the United 203 

States: The Role of Heritage Learners 

Dong Jae Lee 

PART VIII. HIGH SCHOOL PROGRAMS 

18. Korean Language Education in New York City Public Schools 215 

Bongsoon Yow 

PART IX. ERROR ANALYSIS 

19. An Analysis of Errors in Speaking Practice 225 

Sang-Il Lee 

20. An Error Analysis in Relation to Typological Differences 249 

Boyang Park 

PART X. ISSUES REGARDING HERITAGE LEARNERS 

21 . Issues of Heritage Learners in Korean Language Classes 257 

Hi-Sun Helen Kim 

22. Heritage vs. Non-heritage Issues Revisited 275 

Clare You 

23. The Degree of LI Interference among Heritage and Non- 285 

heritage Learners of Korean: Do Heritage Learners Have 

Advantages over Non -heritage Learners? 

Jung-Tae Kim 



PART XI. DEVELOPMENT OF WRITING SKILLS 



24. English-Speaking Students’ Written Language Development in 

Korean in a Korean/English Two-Way Immersion Program 

Joung Hoon Ha 

25. Cross-cultural Variations in Personal Essays: Second 
Language Writing by American Learners of Korean as 
Compared to Native Koreans’ Writing 

Ooyoung Che Pyun 

26. Reflective Journal Writing in the Korean II Class 

Hye Young Chung 



PART XII. LINGUISTIC ANALYSIS AND ITS APPLICATION TO 
TEACHING 



27. Socio-Pragmatic Functions of the Interactive Sentence Ender - 
ney from the Politeness Perspective 

Soo-ah Kim Yuen 



Editor’s Remarks 



The sixth volume of The Korean Language in America (note the 
slight face-lift) is a collection of the papers presented at the 2001 annual 
conference and teacher training workshop of the American Association of 
Teachers of Korean (AATK), which was held at the Center for Korean 
Studies, University of Hawaii at Manoa, from August 2 through August 5. 

Of the thirty-five papers, some did not submit their written versions. This 
year’s conference was held jointly with the International Association of 
Korean Language Education (IAKLE), which is headquartered in Korea. 
However, the nineteen papers that the IAKLE colleagues presented are not 
included in this volume. 

As it has been for the past few years, the papers on technology and 
web-based instruction stand out in number. This is indeed encouraging 
because we can rest assured that teachers of the Korean language, culture, 
and literature are not lagging behind the rest of the technology world today. 

A gradual increase in the number of papers that involve the classroom-based 
or action research is also a welcome sign. We need more of hard, field- 
oriented research. It seems that problems associated with heritage learners of 
Korean are perpetual. Not surprisingly, we see included in this volume also 
several papers that address issues of heritage learners. 

The reader will agree with me that the papers on sociolinguistic 
issues as well as linguistic analysis in the context of language teaching are 
also welcome additions. Again, we need to have included many more of 
papers on such topics. What makes this volume particularly attractive is the 
inclusion of a paper on Korean language programs at the high school level. 

With regard to the degree of editorial streamlining, the manuscripts 
ranged from extensive to minimal. In one or two cases, I took the liberty, 
exercising the editor’s prerogative, of revising the title slightly to better 
reflect the content of the paper. I hope the authors will forgive me. I regret 
that parts of some manuscripts that required editorial attention were left 
unheeded. I equally hope that the reader will be forgiving and tolerant. 



via 



This year we were extremely fortunate to have special lectures from 
two distinguished scholars in the field of second language. Regrettably, 
however, Professor Richard Schmidt, who delivered a keynote address on a 
fascinating topic, was not able to provide us with a full version of his 
presentation. The lecture by Professor Michael Long, who is a leading 
authority on task-based language teaching, had to be taped because of his 
previous engagement away from the island. We hope to have the written 
version of his hour-long lecture included in one of the future volumes. 

I would like to thank all the contributors to this volume. I would also 
like to express my appreciation to the four anonymous reviewers of the 
abstracts. Above all, on behalf of the American Association of Teachers of 
Korean, I would especially like to offer my deepest gratitude to the Korea 
Foundation for providing us with the necessary funds to publish this volume. 

Tallahassee, Florida 

August, 2001 Joe Jungno Ree 




10 



Part I 



Keynote Address 



Theories, evidence, and practice in foreign language teaching 



Richard Schmidt 

Professor of Second Language Studies & Director, The National 
Foreign Language Resource Center 
The University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA 



Abstract 

There is no generally accepted theory of second language acquisition 
(SLA). Indeed, the major competing theories conflict in terms of basic 
assumptions concerning what language is and how it is learned. One 
might conclude, therefore, that SLA theory is not merely incomplete 
but also internally contradictory and generally irrelevant to FLT. This 
would be an unfortunate conclusion, but it is not necessary. If one 
focuses away from ontology towards empirical issues and views a 
theory as a set of laws (hypotheses that have been or can be verified 
empirically, in the spirit of Spolsky, 1989), it is possible to identify a 
fairly large number of empirical findings that qualify as having been 
solidly established. This presentation will provide an account of 
several fairly general principles that fall within the category of 
“generally accepted findings” -with particular attention to the notion 
of “black-boxing” and the ways in which these findings relate to best 
practices in foreign language teaching. 

I. Spolsky’s (1989) attempt at a general theory (some examples): 

Condition 1 

Language as System condition (necessary): A second language 
learner’s knowledge of a second language forms a systematic whole. 



Condition 2 



4 Richard Schmidt 



Native Speaker Target condition (typical, graded): Second language 
learner language aims to approximate native speaker language. 

Condition 23 

Native Pronunciation condition (typical, graded): The younger one 
starts to learn a second language, the better chance one has to develop 
a native-like pronunciation. 

Condition 24 

Abstract Skills condition (typical, graded): Formal classroom learning 
of a second language is favored by the development of skills of 
abstraction and analysis. 

n. The current scene: UG, cognitive theory, 
connectionism/emergentism, functional perspectives, sociolinguistic 
perspectives, sociocultural theory, interactionism, postmodernism 

III. The relevance of research and the issue of black-boxing: 

“Research refers to systematic enquiry and investigation that 
contributes to the knowledge base of a field, knowledge that provides a 
principled basis for making decisions about policies, decisions, and 
actions.” (TESOL Research Agenda Task Force,” Research Agenda - 
Year 2000 version, draft G, April, 2000) 

“Academic knowledge is now generally recognized to be a social 
accomplishment, the outcome of a cultural activity shaped by ideology 
and constituted by agreement between a writer and potentially 
skeptical discourse community ... One of the most important 
realizations of the research writer’s concern for audience is that of 
reporting, or reference to prior research.” (Hyland, 1999: 341) 

“Block deals with the question of accepted findings by using the term 
‘blackboxing,’ citing Latour as the source of the concept. By this term 
is meant the tendency to cite publications available in the literature as 
corroboration for some position without making explicit the details of 

ERIC 




Theories, Evidence, and Practive in Foreign Language Teaching 5 



those publications to the readers. Exploiting blackboxing in this way 
is termed a positive modality, an approach to which we have all 
become accustomed in reading articles in which some substantive 
declarative statement is accompanied by several references, putatively 
supporting that statement. A ‘negative modality’ exists when the 
purported corroborative evidence is subjected to evaluation.” (Sheen, 
1999: 368) 

“Providing evidence for a claim is one of the differences between 
rationalist scientific practices (which is to say, scientific practices) and 
non-scientific belief systems ... Scientists do not ‘blackbox’ to make 
their work more convincing to readers. They cite the work of other 
scientists as a (widely accepted) way of meeting some of the 
requirements concerning evidence in scientific discourse.” (Gregg, 
Long, Jordan, & Beretta, 1997: 541) 

“Learners’ first languages are no longer believed to interfere with their 
attempts to acquire a second language grammar, and language teachers 
no longer need to create special grammar lessons for students for each 
background.” Dulay, Burt, & Krashen, 1982: 5 

“A further extension of the hypothesis that attention is required for all 
learning is that what must be attended to is not just input from one 
channel as opposed to another or stimuli important to one task as 
opposed to another, but also different features of ‘the same’ input... If 
true, the hypothesis that no learning of correlated stimulus attributes 
occurs without attention means that in order to acquire phonology, one 
must attend to phonology; in order to acquire pragmatics, one must 
attend to both linguistic forms and the relevant contextual features; and 
so forth. Nothing is free.” Schmidt, 1995: 16-17. 

“The foundations of the hypothesis in cognitive psychology are weak; 
research in this area does not support it, or even provide a clear 
interpretation for it.” Truscott, 1998: 103. 



6 Richard Schmidt 



IV. 50 GENERALLY ACCEPTED FINDINGS (??) CONCERNING 

SECOND AND FOREIGN LANGUAGE LEARNING 

Factors related to social context: 

• The fundamental function of language is communication within a 
social context. 

• Individual attitudes towards languages, varieties, language 
learning, and teaching methods arise within a social, historical, and 
political context. 

• Community attitudes towards languages and varieties generally 
favor standardized varieties, official languages, languages 
associated with tradition, and languages with large numbers of 
speakers. But resistance and covert prestige are additional 
opposing factors. 

• Attitudes towards languages, particular varieties, and language 
learning are strongly influenced by attitudes towards the 
community of speakers of the language. 

• The second or foreign language classroom can also constitute a 
community. 

Individual differences: 

• Older is better in the short run; younger is better in the long run. 

• The effects of age on SLA are strongest for pronunciation; weakest 
for lexis. 

• Aptitude, attitudes, and motivation are systematically related to 
learning rate and ultimate attainment in adult SLA. 

• Ability to use language varies in accuracy, complexity, fluency, 
and communicative effectiveness. 

• People are motivated to do things that are interesting, relevant to 
their goals (instrumental, knowledge, communicative, etc.), and 
enjoyable. 

• Motivation is also affected by expectations of success or failure, 
self-confidence, anxiety, and other factors, as well as social factors 
such as student-teacher and student-student relationships. 



Theories, Evidence, and Practive in Foreign Language Teaching 7 



• Different learners use different learning strategies. More 
successful learners use a broader range of strategies more flexibly. 

• Language aptitude includes (at least) the sub-components of sound 
discrimination (oral mimicry ability) and verbal memory ability. 

• Language learning is enhanced when learning opportunities match 
learner’s strengths and preferences. (S3 1) 

Linguistic aspects of SLA: 

• Interlanguages exhibit both systematicity and variability at any 
time in their development. 

• Systematicity and variability are found at every level: 
phonological, morphological, syntactic, pragmatic. 

• Learners exhibit systematic differences according to different 
L1/L2 configurations. 

• The closer two languages are to each other (genetically, 
typologically, lexically) the quicker one can learn the L2 (positive 
transfer condition), at least in the beginning. (Cf. S34) 

• Unanalyzed language (memorized chunks) is useful to meet initial 
communicative needs and is related to both fluency and 
idiom aticity at even the highest levels of proficiency, but analyzed 
language is necessary for creative language use. 

• Creative language use requires both analysis (breaking units into 
constituent parts) and synthesis (combining analyzed units to 
create new utterances). 

• Constructions that involve changes only in initial or final position 
are easier than those that involve disruption of strings and internal 
movement. 

• Unmarked parameter settings are generally favored over marked 
settings. (S39) 

• High salience, high frequency, and semantically transparent 
constructions (e.g. ING) are favored over low salience, low 
frequency and semantically opaque constructions (e.g. 3 rd singular 
-S). 



8 Richard Schmidt 



Developmental considerations: 

• Learners do not learn isolated L2 items one at a time, in additive 
linear fashion 

• Learners rarely if ever move from zero to target-like mastery of 
new items in one stop. Backsliding and restructuring are common. 

• Both naturalistic and classroom learners pass through 
developmental sequences that are generally imperious to 
instruction. 

• Learners vary in their receptive and productive skills. Receptive 
skills usually develop before productive skills and usually develop 
to a higher level. (S8) 

• Second language development includes the process of 
automatization at all levels (phonology, syntax, pragmatics, etc.). 

• Accuracy is generally greater on tasks performed after planning 
than on tasks with no planning. 

General principles of learning: 

• Exposure to comprehensible input is necessary but not sufficient 
for SLA. 

• People learn what they pay attention to and do not leam much 
about the things that they don’t attend to. 

• Both implicit learning and explicit learning are possible. Implicit 
learning is more typical of young learners; explicit learning more 
characteristic of older learners. 

• Some aspects of language are (and perhaps must be) learned 
unconsciously. 

• Some aspects of language are (and perhaps must be) learned 
consciously. 

• Retreat from error is facilitated when negative evidence is 
available and attended to. (monitoring condition, noticing the gap) 

• There is a fundamental difference between knowing about a 
language and knowing (i.e. being able to speak, understand, 
read/write) a language. 





r 



Theories, Evidence, and Tractive in Foreign Language Teaching 9 



• The power law of practice: plotting the log of reaction time against 
the log of time-on-task results in a straight line. 

• Transfer of training (from one task to another) is common when 
tasks rely on common underlying principles, but such transfer is 
neither instantaneous nor perfect. 

Factors related to input, interaction, and instruction: 

• Variation in both the quantity and quality of input affects SLA. 

• Comprehensible input is generally more valuable that 
incomprehensible input. 

• Negotiation for meaning results in both interactional and 
elaborative modifications of the target language that enhance 
comprehensibility. 

• Both a classroom focus on form and negotiated interaction can 
(and often do) lead to learners noticing non-salient forms in input. 

• Both a focus on form and negotiated interaction can (and often do) 
lead to learners noticing differences between their output and the 
output of native speakers and other models. 

• Given the same access to communicative language outside of class, 
instructed learners progress faster and reach higher levels of 
ultimate attainment than purely naturalistic learners. 

• Formal classroom learning is assisted by analytical skills. 

• The more time spent learning any aspect of a second language, the 
more will be learned. (S51) 

• The more time spent practicing new skills, the more automatic 
these skills become. 

• Textbook rules are often descriptively wrong, theoretically 
unmotivated, and/or psychologically unreal. They may, 
nevertheless, be pedagogically useful. 



REFERENCES 

Dulay, H., Burt, M., & Krashen, S. (1982). Language Two. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 



O 

ERIC 



18 



10 Richard Schmidt 



Ellis, R. (1994). The study of second language acquisition. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

Gregg, K. R., Long, M. H„ Jordan, G., & Beretta, A. (1997). 
Rationality and its discontents in SLA. Applied Linguistics, 18, 
538-558. 

Hyland, K. (1999). Academic attribution: Citation and the 
construction of disciplinary knowledge. Applied Linguistics, 20, 
341-367. 

Long, M. H. (19890). The least a second language acquisition theory 
needs to explain. TESOL Quarterly, 24, 649-666. 

Pienemann, M., & Hakansson, G. (1999). A unified approach toward 
the development of Swedish as L2. Applied Linguistics, 21, 383- 
420. 

Schmidt, R. (1995) Consciousness and foreign language learning: A 
tutorial on the role of attention and awareness in learning. In R. 
Schmidt (Ed.), Attention and awareness in foreign language 
learning (Technical Report #9) (pp. 1-64). Honolulu: University 
of Hawaii, Second Language Teaching and Curriculum Center. 

Sheen, R. (1999). A response to Block’s (1996) paper, ‘Not so fast: 
Some thoughts on theory culling, relativism, accepted findings and 
the heart and soul of SLA. Applied Linguistics, 20, 368-375. 

Spolsky, B. (1989). Conditions for second language learning. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Truscott, , J. (1998). Noticing in second language acquisition: A 
critical review. Second Language Research, 14, 103-135. 




19 



Part II 



Approaches to the Teaching of 
Grammar and Pragmatics 



o 

ERIC 



£0 



Teaching Korean Grammar in Context: 
Teaching of -myen and -ttay 

Sahie Kang 

Defense Language Institute Foreign Language Center 



Introduction 

Over the centuries, grammar has been taught to improve language learners’ 
ability based on various reasons. Among them are: 1 

1. The study of grammar is important simply because language is a supreme 
human achievement that deserves to be studied as such. 

2. The study of grammar can be an important vehicle for learning to study 
something the way a scientist does. 

3. The study of grammar will help form the mind by promoting “mental 
discipline.” 

4. The study of grammar will help students score better on standardized tests 
that include grammar, usage, and punctuation. 

5. The study of grammar will help people master another language more 
readily. 

6. The study of grammar will help people master the socially prestigious 
conventions of spoken and/or written usage. 

7. The study of grammar will help people become better users of the language, 
that is, more effective as listeners and speakers, and especially as readers 
and writers. 

However, decades of research have suggested that grammar taught in isolation 
has little, if any, effect on most students’ learning for target language proficiency. 
Numerous researchers (Macauley 1947, Elley et al. 1976, McQuade 1980) during 
the twentieth century indicated that there is little pragmatic justification for 



1 Weaver (1996) pp. 7-8 




21 



14 SahieKang 



systematically teaching a descriptive or explanatory grammar of the language, 
whether that grammar be traditional, structural, transformational, or any other kind. 2 

Despite these results of research demonstrating its lack of practical value, 
language teachers certainly have reasons to continue teaching grammar separately 
from four language skills, reading, listening, speaking and writing. Especially when 
the language is genetically unrelated to the learner's mother tongue, many language 
teachers feel obliged to teach grammar overtly assuming that learners would not 
understand and utilize it unless they are taught systematically. 

Nevertheless, experienced students at Defense Language Institute (DLI) who 
seemingly have mastered grammar points have often experienced difficulty in using 
them in proper situations, in communicating with native speakers, or in understanding 
them with four different skills. With the new curriculum, teaching grammar in 
context , which has been implemented since 1997 at DLI, the teaching of grammar has 
been more successful. It has been well received by students because it allows 
students to function in real life situations, and it elevates students' motivation level. 
Rather than giving tedious grammar instruction and drills, instructors help students to 
function in the target language. Above all, the method has raised students’ speaking 
proficiency levels significantly during the last 4 years. 3 

Although the presenter agrees with the viewpoint of teaching grammar explicitly, 
it seems to be a matter of how to organize and present the grammar and how to have 
learners utilize it. For example, grammar points -myen and -ttay in Korean are 
often considered difficult to learn not because of their forms and conjunctions but 
because of their pragmatic functions which differ from English counterparts, if there 
are any. 4 If we could present a grammar point in a way that students can actually 
grasp its pragmatic function as well as its structure, students would use it effectively 
even outside their classrooms. 

To lay the groundwork for a more effective approach, this paper will address the 
teaching of grammar from the perspective of adult learning theory. Then, this paper 
will offer practical ideas for teaching grammar not in isolation but in context, so 
students can actually communicate with native speakers by using appropriate 



2 Weaver (1996), pp. 23 

3 Since the introduction of the new curriculum at DLI, students' proficiency levels of 
reading and listening have equally been raised significantly. Although there are 
many other factors which have contributed to the rise of proficiency levels, teaching 
vocabulary and grammar in context is definitely the driving force. 

4 Strictly speaking, I think, there are no English counterparts for these two forms. 



Teaching Korean Grammar in Context: -myen and -ttay 15 



grammar patterns in different kinds of functional situations with -myen and -ttay. 
In order to teach grammar in context, it is necessary to introduce them and utilize 
them in real world situations where all four skills are integrated. For example, if a 
person wants to buy a house, he/she reads an advertisement, calls the agent to ask for 
more information, listens, writes down key information, and finally decides on the 
house. Also it would be more effective to introduce related grammar points together 
rather than introduce them separately because students can compare their functional 
differences at the same time and would understand them more easily. 

In addition, this paper demonstrates two ways of teaching: the deductive 
approach and inductive approach, which are given in a detailed step-by-step 
description in the following sections. 

Adult Learning Theory 

Often in language classrooms, especially in grammar sessions, we forget that 
adult learners are not like children who are assumed to be in a blank state absorbing 
any and all information. Boylan and Kang (1995) summarized characteristics of 
adult learners: 

1. Adults prefer to be self-directed: They are less amenable than children to 
control exerted by a teacher-authority, who makes all decisions regarding 
what is to be learned, at what rate, and in which sequence. 

2. Adults come with life experience that can serve as a base for relating new 
learning: Fixed pre-packaged curricula which do not take experience into 
consideration are less effective than the participatory and experiential 
settings of group problem-solving and simulations, where learners can 
engage in hands-on activities with relevance to real life. 

3. An adult’s readiness to learn is based on his or her perceived role in life, in 
society, and on the job: A person will be much more motivated to learn 
something he or she sees as relevant to tasks to be performed eventually. 

4. Adults have a problem-solving orientation to learning: They will learn 
because they perceive a gap between where they are not and where they 
need to be, in order to be competent. 

All of these characteristics suggest that adult learners will learn effectively in relevant 
context by using their own experiences, knowledge, and problem-solving skills. 
Naturally, it can be assumed that adults will learn more effectively if they are put in 
real-world context. Similarly, grammar can be learned successfully if it is organized 





‘ c. 



16 SahieKang 



and presented in the context of a real language world. In many cases, grammar points 
are introduced in seemingly natural conversations, but the typical pattern is that 
explanations were given, and then some pattern drills with different sentences were 
given to students, all in the absence of meaningful contexts. After mastering drill 
exercises, it is often observed that the learners don’t know where to utilize certain 
grammar points and make many errors without knowing the reason. 

Teaching -myen and -ttay in context 

In this paper, -myen and -ttay are chosen because American students often 
misunderstand the usages of these two grammar points. Typically, these two 
grammar points are introduced by the translations “if for -myen and “when/while” 
for -ttay in most of the textbooks. 5 Without any pragmatic explanation, students 
often are confused and misused them because of their similarity in function. Their 
functions do overlap in some situations but not all the time. Also, at least the English 
translations seem to suggest that these forms have English “counterparts.” However, 
that is not really the case, as alluded to above. This means that students would make 
errors unless the differences in pragmatic functions are clearly taught. 

As Korean language teachers, we often notice errors or misuses of -myen and - 
ttay in students’ speech. Many times, students do not understand why their usage of 
-myen and -ttay is incorrect, however, although teachers provide some functional 
explanations and explicit error corrections. Because these two forms overlap in 
usage in many cases, it is very challenging even for the teachers to give clear 
functional explanations. 

The following are transcripts of a couple of examples that were recorded during 
“one-on-one speaking practice hours.” 

Example 1. 

A. Chwumal-enun pothong mwo haseyo? 



5 Korean Grammar for International Learners (p.13 & 126) provides translations of 
-myen as “if’ and -ttay as “when.” Pathfinder in Korean , Korean /, and Korean in 
Context give both translations “if’ and “when” for -myen, but they do not offer any 
explanation of when to translate it as “if’ and as “when.” Other textbooks merely 
provide Korean sentence examples of when -myen or -ttay are used without 
functional explanation. Therefore, it is basically the teacher’s job to provide 
different pragmatic functional explanations. 

0 

24 




Teaching Korean Grammar in Context: - myen and -ttay 1 7 



B. Chwumal-enun pothong mani chako, ppalayhako, kakkum younghwa-lul 
pomnita. Kuliko ilyoil-enun, ilyoilpam-enun -kakkum hankwukmal 
kongpu-lul harrmita. Hwu-e kyokwaseo-lul kapang-e neosumnita. 
Woenyahamyeon, wolyoil-e hakkyo kamyen kyokwaseo-lul ise pelimnita. 

A. An-kamyen an-ise peliciyo? 

B. ??? 

A. What do you usually do on weekends? 

B. On weekends, usually I sleep a lot, do laundry, and watch movies sometimes. 
And, on Sundays, on Sunday nights, and I study Korean sometimes. After 
that, I put the textbook in my bag. That's because sometimes I forget the 
textbook when I go to school on Monday. 

In Example 1, a native speaker would say kal-ttav instead of ka-myen in this context. 
It was mutually understood that the student goes to school every Monday. What the 
student actually says with kamyen misleads the listener that he does not go to school 
every Monday, but if he does, he always forgets his textbook. Or, it could mean that 
he would realize he forgot the textbook once he gets there. But within the whole 
context of the conversation, the student did not mean that. 

Example 2. 

A. cikum salko-itnun cip-i ettayo? Choayo? 

B. Ne. Achwu chosumnita. 

A. Ku cip-i ettekhe saynkyeknunci selmyen-hay chwuseyo. 

B. Che-chip-un ilchungchip-imnita. Cip-aph-e khun matang-i issumnita. 

Hvunkwan- e tule kal-ttav , woenccok-e puek-i itko, olunccok-e kesil-i 
issumnita. Puek-e 

A. How do you like the house you live in now? Is it good? 

B. Yes. Very good. 

A. Please explain what the house looks like. 




•* o 



18 Sahie Kang 



B. It is a one-story house. In front of the house, there is a big yard. When you 
enter the front door, the kitchen is on the left side, and the living room is on 
the right side. In the kitchen, .... 

In Example 2, a native speaker would say tule kamven instead of tule kal-ttav in this 
context. What the student actually says with -ttay makes the listener expect certain 
actions at the time when the speaker enters the house, such as taking off shoes: 
Hynkwan-e tule kal-ttay, sinpal-ul peseya hamnita (When you enter the front door, 
you have to take off your shoes.) However, it was a description where no action is 
expected. 

Example 3 below indicates where the confusion comes from. Although the native 
speaker asked with -myen what the student was going to do after the graduation 
ceremony was over, the student answered with -ttay with the function of -myen . 

Example 3. 

A. Kulem, cholepsik-i kkunna- mven mwuessul hal yechengimnikka? 

B. Cholepsik-i kkunnal-ttav theksas-e kayahamnita. Woynakamyen, 23ilputhe 
swuep-i sichakhayse kayahamnita. 

A. Kulayo? Kulentay, cholepsik-i kkunnal- ttav kipun-i ettelkkayo? 

B. Che kipun-iyo? Cholepsik-i kkunnal-ttav aju kippulkepnita. Tto, chokum 
sulpulkemnita. 

A. When the graduation ceremony is over, I have to go to Texas. The reason is 
that the class starts on the 23 rd — I have to be there. 

A. Is that so? Well then, how would you feel when the graduation ceremony is 
over? 

B. My mood/feeling? When it is over, I will be very happy. And, a little bit 
sad. 

When the native speaker asked a questions with -myen at the beginning, the intended 
meaning was what the student was going to do after graduation. Although the student 
understood the function of -myen well enough, he use -ttay instead of -myen to 
express a future activity. After the native speaker gave an implicit correction with 
the meaning of “at the time when the graduation is over,” he used it correctly. 



Teaching Korean Grammar in Context: -myen and -ttay 19 



These examples indicate that students did not grasp the pragmatic functions of 
the two grammar points clearly. Often they think -myen is used to show conditional 
clause, and -ttay is used where “when” is used in English. However, there are cases 
where both of them are used interchangeably as in the following authentic newspaper 
article. 



Ippalchilyo hwancha manumyen chuwka halak 



Chikwauisa Edwod Pies ssi(55)ui chwuchang-e ttalumyen, chusiksichang-i 
phoklakha- mven chia-ka kalachikeka inmomi silinun tung sthlesseng chiamwunchelo 
chikwalul channun hwancha-tul-i moleyulko, pantaylo chwusiksichang-i hwalki-lul 
ttil-ttav-nun hwanchatuli hyenchehi chwuletuntanun kessita. 

Tto, Chwusiksichang-I hanchang hwalkilul ttil- ttav -nun chia kyochengina skeyling 
tungui miyongchikwachilyoto hwalpalhi iluechintako hanta 

(Sunday Newspaper, Hankookilpo, June 

8, 2001, p.28) 

When there are many dental patients, stock market goes down 

According to Dr. Edward Prus’s opinion (55 yrs. Old), a dentist, when the stock 
market goes down, patients throng to the clinic with dental diseases such as fractured 
teeth or sore gums, which are caused by stress.. On the other hand, when the stock 
market grows lively, the number of patients decreases noticeably. 

And, when the stock market grows lively, orthodontic treatment and scaling are done 
more often (than before). ... 



As a summary, the following pragmatic rules can be provided to students. 

-myen is used when its clause shows a condition for the following clause: the action 
in the preceding clause takes place first and then the action in the following clause 
takes place. 

-ttay is used when its clause shows a time or duration of the action taking place, and 
both actions in both clauses take place almost at the same time frame. 





20 SahieKang 



When the preceding clause shows a time or duration of the action taking place and 
provides a condition for the following clause, both of them can be used. 

Obviously, however, learners wouldn’t understand what these rules mean unless they 
actually used them in context. 

Real World Tasks 

In order to teach the grammar points in context, real world tasks would give 
students chance to utilize the language and let them use their life experiences, 
knowledge, and problem-solving skills. Through the problem solving of real world 
tasks, learners keep utilizing grammar points as well as group of words. Such a 
process helps students store new knowledge in long-term memory rather than in 
short-term memory which psychologists say would go away mostly within 24 hours. 
Task-based instruction is well known to put students in real world context in which 
they can learn the language in a more meaningful way than with grammar translation 
and audio-lingual methods. 

The ways to organize tasks largely depend on whether to teach grammar points 
from the beginning as traditional grammar teaching, or not to teach them at all as 
naturalists suggest. This paper takes both suggestions. In other words, some 
grammar points need to be introduced from the beginning if there are no counterparts 
in students’ mother tongue (in our case, English), e.g. Korean subject markers, object 
markers, and indirect object markers. Some grammar points do not need to be 
introduced explicitly from the beginning if there are counterparts in the learner’s 
native language, e.g. tense markings. In such cases, students can induce the grammar 
rules and functions in the context on their own. Thus, the first option is called 
Deductive Way, and the second is Inductive Way. 

Also the choice between the Deductive Way and the Inductive Way could 
depend on the students’ learning styles. It is well known that analytical learners are 
less tolerable of ambiguities than global learners. Analytic learners like to study 
from charts rather than to make educated guesses on the unknown elements. On the 
other hand, global learners often enjoy ambiguities and do not stick to details. It 
would be natural that analytic learners would prefer the Deductive Way whereby they 
learn the rules first, analyze sentence structure based on the rules, and then interpret 
the text which includes such grammar points. Global learners would not mind 
reading a text which includes many unknown elements and to grasp the essential 
meaning. 

Basically, however, language learning requires both analytical and global ability 
because language is a complex component of all those characteristics. When we 

O 



Teaching Korean Grammar in Context: -myen and -ttay 21 



even listen to any speech of our native tongue, we do not listen to all the words 
uttered. When we are tasked to listen or read some texts to catch the main idea, we 
just listen to the main idea, not all the details of structures and forms. Or when we 
are tasked to find out certain detailed information out of listening or reading a text, 
we often focus on the information and ignore other parts of the text. In order to be a 
better language learner, analytical students would need to explore more of ambiguous 
texts with unknown elements, and global students would need some fine-tuning on 
their structural knowledge. In other words, to strengthen their weaknesses, both 
deductive and inductive ways should be exposed to both types of learners. 

Deductive Way 

First, the different functions of the two grammar points are explained in English 
within a narrative or conversational context. The teacher provides functional 
explanations of the two grammar points in plain language. It is better to use the plain 
language than to use linguistic jargons because many American students are not 
familiar with them unless they have studied linguistics. 

Second, the two grammar points are presented within a context of real language 
usage, i.e. conversation or passage either in listening or in reading a text. Then, 
students listen or read to comprehend the text. To comprehend the text, variety of 
activities can be associated with the text, e.g. matching a subtitle for each paragraph, 
fill the grid for essential elements, etc. 

Third, students engage in real world tasks with four-skill (reading, listening, 
speaking, and writing) integration where all different pragmatic functions are 
involved. With different skills, vocabulary items and grammar points are utilized 
many times. 

Finally, students do different role-plays in which different pragmatic functions can be 
used. These role-plays can be an individual presentation or a group demonstration. 
The final presentation will allow the teacher to check students' performances and 
errors and to give feedback to individual student as well as to the whole class. 

Task 1: You are going to 

Step 1: 

Inductive Way 

First, the two grammar points are presented within authentic reading or listening 
contexts without any explanation. Then, students listen or read to comprehend the 





22 SahieKang 



text. To comprehend the text, variety of activities can be associated with the text, 
e.g. matching a subtitle for each paragraph, fill the grid for essential elements, etc. 

Second, the teacher ask the students to figure out the pragmatic functions of the 
grammar points and come up with some rules or patterns in their own native 
language. Because this could be a quite challenging activity, working in small groups 
allow students to brainstorm with each other and get better results. 

Third, students engage in real-world tasks with four-skill integration where all 
different pragmatic functions are involved. Again, vocabulary items and grammar 
points are utilized many times with different skills. Then they are stored in long-term 
memory. 

Finally, students do different role-plays in which different pragmatic functions can be 
used. These role-plays can be an individual presentation or a group demonstration. 
The final presentation will allow the teacher to check students' performances and 
errors and to give feedback to individual student as well as to the whole class. 



References 

Boylan, P. & Kang, S. 1995, “Syllabus Design for the Less Commonly Taught 
Languages (Korean)/' Korean Language in America, Vol. 1, pp. 3-12. 

Elley, W.B., Barham, I.H., Lamb H., & Wyllie, M. 1976, “The Role of Grammar in 
a Secondary English Curriculum/’ In Research in the Teaching of English, Vol. 
10, pp. 5-21 

Macauley, W. 1947, “The Difficulty of Grammar,” British Journal of Educational 
Psychology, Vol. 17, pp. 153-162 

McQuade, F. 1980, Examining a Grammar Course: “The Rationale and the Result,” 
English Journal, Vol. 69, pp. 26-30. 

Weaver, C. 1996, “Teaching Grammar, Reasons for, Evidence Against,” Teaching 
Grammar in Context, pp. 7-8, Boynton/Cook Publishers. 

Korean Textbooks and Newspapers 

Dictionary of Korean Grammar-as a foreign language, Paik, B. 1999, Yonsei 
University Press. 

Hankookilbo, July 2001, Hankookilbosa 

Korean, Seoul National University Language Research Institute, 2000, Munjinmedia 

Korean Grammar for International Learners, Ihm, H,, Hong, K., & Chang, S., 1988, 
Y onsei University Press 





Teaching Korean Grammar in Context: - myen and -ttay 23 



Korean in Context, 1997, Defense Language Institute Foreign Language Center 

Pathfinder in Korean, The Institute of Language Education, 1998, Ewha Womans 
University Press 





TEACHING POLITENESS ROUTINES IN KOREAN 



Ho-min Sohn 

University of Hawaii at Manoa 

The aim of this presentation is to share and discuss with current and prospective 
classroom teachers of Korean some ideas about what the concept of linguistic 
politeness is, what linguistic devices for politeness are available, how language- 
specific devices and their sociolinguistic uses are crucially interrelated with the 
cultural perspectives of the speakers, what the functions of “politeness routines” are, 
and how they can be taught. 

1. Linguistic politeness 

Maintenance of politeness is an integral part of any successful interpersonal 
communication. Politeness is particularly sensitive and significant in intercultural 
communication, in that cross-cultural encounters take place among people with 
distinct linguistic forms and rules of speaking. 

Expressions of linguistic politeness, both verbal and non-verbal, are ubiquitous 
across all societies, although their forms and functions are different in varying 
degrees from language to language and from culture to culture. It is essential, 
therefore, for intercultural interlocutors to be aware of the underlying cultural 
differences and to use proper linguistic and sociolinguistic rules, conventions, and 
forms appropriate to the target language and culture. 

Language has essentially two functions — transmission or sharing of information, 
knowledge, and feelings on the one hand, and establishment, maintenance, and 
enhancement of human (social and interpersonal) relationships on the other. This 
distinction is particularly clear in interpersonal communication where both functions 
of language are conspicuous and interact delicately. Effective performance of the 
two functions of language is associated with two opposing sets of principles. For 
example, Lakoff s (1973) rule of clarity (“be clear”) and Grice’s (1975) Cooperative 
Principle (CP) with its four associated maxims of quality, quantity, relevance, and 
manner are relevant to the first function of language, while Lakoff s (ibid.) rule of 
politeness (“be polite”) and Brown and Levinson’s (1978, 1987) face-oriented 
politeness strategies, as shown below, are concerned with the second function of 
language. 



(1) Lakoff s rule of politeness (“Be polite”) and sub-rules 



a. Don’t impose on the addressee; 

b. Give the addressee his/her options; 

c. Make the addressee feel good. 

(2) Brown and Levinson’s politeness strategies 



I s ' level: 


Direct strategy 


2 nd level: 

eg.. 


Positive politeness strategies (15 strategies) 

Notice, attend to hearer's wants, needs, interests, goods 

Include both speaker and hearer in the activity 

Use in-group identity markers 

Exaggerate interest, approval, sympathy with hearer 

Seek agreement 

Avoid disagreement 

Give reasons 


3 rd level: 

e.g., 


Negative politeness strategies (10 strategies) 

Be conventionally indirect 

Give deference 

Question, hedge 

Apologize 

Nominalize 

Go on record as incurring a debt 


4 th level: 

e.g.. 


Off-record strategies (15 strategies) 
Give hints 

Give association clues 

Presuppose 

Understate 

Use metaphors 

Use rhetorical questions 

Be ambiguous 

Be incomplete, use ellipsis 


5 th level: 


No speech act 



Brown and Levinson assert that the more a speech act threatens the speaker’s or the 
addressee’s face, based on the speaker’s intuitive calculation of the relative closeness 
or distance of his/her relations with the interlocutor, of the relative difference in their 

33 : 



Teaching Politeness Routines in Korean 2 7 



status, and the degree of the imposition caused, the more the speaker will wish to 
choose a strategy on a higher level. For instance, the circumstances for direct speech 
include cases (a) when the speech act is used for great urgency, desperation, or 
efficiency, or in the addressee's interest; or (b) where the speaker is vastly superior 
in power to the addressee. On the other hand, their last level of strategy is just to 
keep silent. 

As I argued in Sohn (1988, 2001), most putatively universal proposals by 
Western scholars are only partially valid, in that linguistic politeness is viewed only 
as a feature of strategic language use in social interaction. Specifically, first, none of 
the afore-mentioned proposals touches on honorifics, either addressee or referent 
honorifics, in any systematic way. This is serious deficiency in that in languages like 
Korean and Japanese, utterances cannot be made without the speaker' s determination 
of his/her speech levels during social interactions with the addressee. Second, the 
proposals are concerned only with the speaker-addressee perspective, while the 
speaker -referent perspective is generally ignored. Third, none of them brings up 
normative politeness use, in addition to strategic politeness use. Fourth, no proposal 
takes into account vertically oriented and/or collectivistically oriented societies in 
any explicit or implicit manner. In fact, very few proposals have discussed cultural 
perspectives in any significant way. In Chinese, Japanese, and Korean cultures, for 
example, imposing on or not giving options to the addressee is very natural and 
generally polite when the speech act is in the interest of the addressee, as when 
imposing upon the addressee to eat more. 

In short, I argue that linguistic politeness is a significant feature of both language 
structure and use on the one hand and is used both normatively (obligatorily per 
discernment) and strategically (optionally and volitionally) on the other. I further 
argue that language-specific politeness devices and normative and strategic uses are 
crucially based on time-honored cultural perspectives. In addition, as an important 
social phenomenon and a facet of communicative competence and performance, 
linguistic politeness is both universal and culture-bound, in that its reflection in 
linguistic patterns and pragmatic usages manifests two-sidedness. 

That is, I assume that there are universal linguistic devices for politeness that 
individual languages and cultures choose from. Also, the sociolinguistic rules and 
conventions of politeness language use in a linguistic community are based in large 
measure on universal pragmatic principles in language use, filtered by the underlying 
cultural perspectives such as social norms of behavior, value orientations, and 
cultural assumptions. For instance, a putatively universal principle is that an indirect 
speech act is appropriate in the request or refusal in order to mitigate or soften the act 
to some degree. An example of indirect speech act is in regard to request for 



28 Ho-min Sohn 



information. I recently noticed the following message from a University of Hawaii 
professor to another, with a copy to me. 

(3) Dick, Would it be out of line for me to ask what an average start up cost 

for Natural Sciences would be? John 

The above kind of indirect speech act would be very frequent in Korean between 
distant adult equals or to a social superior. However, mismatches appear in several 
respects. First, the corresponding Korean forms are marked by appropriate social 
indexing for normative politeness. Second, when the same kind of request is made to 
an in-group junior or child, the speech act usually is relatively more direct. Third, 
first name basis between colleagues is an aspect of typical solidarity-based American 
culture, which is never shared by either Koreans or Japanese. This kind of mismatch 
is due to the difference in cultural perspectives. 

Another example is that, some time ago, a U.S. military officer left a note in 
Korean as in (4a) on the door of my office. 

(4) a. “. . . nay ka tangsin ul encey pod swu iss-sup-nikka? . . .” 

‘(lit.) When can I see you?' 

b. . . (cey ka) kyoswu*nim ul encey poyd wu iss-keyss-sup-nikka? . . 

‘(lit.) When do you think I can see you?’ 

Native speakers of Korean immediately know that this grammatically correct 
expression, with the deferential sentence ender, is nevertheless impolite. First, the 
first pronoun na(y) should not be used toward a social superior; the humble form 
ce(y) must be used instead, but, in this case, the pronoun is usually omitted because it 
is contextually understood. Second, the pronoun tangsin , though it is the highest- 
level second person pronoun — higher than the plain form ne and the familiar form 
cane y, still cannot be used to an adult social superior or equal. The person used it 
apparently because he thought the highest-level second person pronoun is 
appropriate in such a context. He was not aware of the sociolinguistic rule that no 
Korean second-person pronoun should be used toward a social superior or adult 
equal (except to one's spouse) in Korean and an appropriate third-person nominal 
such as kyoswu-nim ‘professor” or sensayng-nim ‘teacher’ must be substituted for the 
pronoun. Third, the person used the plain verb pota ‘to see’ as in English, not 
knowing that the humble counterpart poypta ‘to see (a higher person)’ is appropriate 
in such a context. Fourth, for further politeness, it is a conventional strategy to add 
the modal suffix -keyss to the main verb, which denotes the speaker/hearer 
conjecture. Thus, (4b) is a corresponding polite expression. 




Teaching Politeness Routines in Korean 29 



Why is (4b) conceived and perceived as appropriate and polite by native 
speakers, while (4a) is not? It is because the relevant sociolinguistic forms, rules, and 
conventions are crucially correlated with the cultural perspectives of Koreans’ 
relative hierarchism that senior persons should be treated appropriately with proper 
honorific forms. 



As alluded to in the above examples, linguistic politeness is expressed in a wide 
variety of devices in all cultures and societies. In Sohn (1988, 2001), I proposed a 
universal framework of linguistic politeness devices that human languages utilize, as 
in (5). 



(5) a. Devices of Linguistic Politeness 




hedges; tags; downtoners: 

litotes; conversational implicatures; 

passivization; ellipsis; 

indirect speech acts; rhetorical questions; 

nominalization; disclaimers; 

modal elements; cogitatives; 

soft intonation 



Figurative 



metaphors 

synecdoche 

metonymy 

proverbs 





30 Ho-min Sohn 



The scheme in (5) consists of four major sets and many sub-sets of politeness- 
indicating devices. Which devices are given particular importance depends on the 
specific languages and cultures involved. In Korean, Japanese, and Javanese, for 
instance, structural devices including extensively hierarchical address/reference 
terms and honorifics are the most crucial devices of politeness, although other sets of 
devices are also extensively used. In the United States, honorifics are of minimal 
significance, while illocutionary and expressive devices receive greater importance. 
The various putatively universal proposals discussed above are relevant, in general, 
only to illocutionary and expressive devices. The politeness devices are realized as 
linguistic patterns and forms in each linguistic community. Use of such politeness 
patterns and forms in socio-culturally appropriate ways is controlled by various 
sociolinguistic rules and conventions of language use, both normative and strategic. 
Such rules and conventions are in accordance with the interactants' relative power 
and solidarity, speech context, and the nature of imposition, and universal pragmatic 
principles such as those proposed by Lakoff, Brown and Levinson, and some others, 
filtered by cultural perspectives such as culturally-bound norms of behavior, value 
orientations, and commonly-shared cultural assumptions. 

2. Politeness routines 

With the above background notion of linguistic politeness, in this section, I will 
limit myself to the discussion of politeness routines for pedagogical purposes. The 
term “politeness routines” used here refers to more or less conventionalized 
politeness speech acts used routinely in daily interactions in a society. Typically, 
they include speech act patterns where strong face-oriented linguistic politeness is 
called for, such as address/reference term usage, commands, requests, inquiries, 
promises, arguments, claims, complaints, apologies, refusals, compliments, 
compliment responding, offers, expressions of gratitude, congratulations, welcome, 
greeting, and leave-taking. 

I will take up apologies in Korean in comparison with those in English, as an 
illustration. I believe that similar discussions can be made in regard to the other 
politeness routines. Olshtain and Cohen (1991) posit five strategies or patterns in the 
apology speech act set: two general strategies which depend less on contextual 
constraints and three situation-specific strategies, as follows. 

(6) a. General strategies: 

i. formulaic expression (explicit expression of apology) 

ii. acknowledgment of responsibility 

b. Situation-specific strategies: 



ERIC 




Teaching Politeness Routines in Korean 31 



i. explanation 

ii. offer of repair 

iii. promise of nonrecurrence 

Olshtain and Cohen point out that in addition to the main strategies, there are 
ways in which the speaker can modify the apology either by intensifying it or by 
downgrading it. The conventional intensifiers in English include “really”, “very”, 
and “terribly”. Thus, their English example of apology in response to forgetting a 
meeting with the boss is as follows. Notice that all the five strategies are 
incorporated. 

(7) ‘77n really very sorry (intensified expression of apology). I completely 
forgot 

about it (expression of responsibility). The alarm on my watch didn 7 go off 
as it was supposed to (explanation). Is it possible for me to make another 
appointment? Can we meet now? (offer of repair). This won 7 ever happen 
again (promise of nonreoccurrence).” (1991: 156) 

In the same context, a male native speaker of Korean would say something like 
the following to a much higher male boss, although it may sound a little unnatural to 
many out of a specific context. 

(8) “ cengmal coysongha-p-ni-ta (intensified expression of apology), kkamppak 
ic-ko iss-ess-sup-ni-ta (expression of responsibility), nul cal wulli-ten 
sonmok sikyey cocha allam i wulli-ci-l anh-ass-ketun-yo (explanation). 
coysongha-ciman encey tasi poy-l swu iss-ul-ci-yo ? hoksi kwaynchanh-usi- 
ta-myen cikum-i-lato poy-l swu iss-keyss-nun-ci-yo? (offer of repair), tasi - 
nun i-len il-i eps-tolok cwuuy ha-keyss-sup-ni-ta (promise of 
nonreoccurrence).” 

Although the five strategies are also generally applicable to Korean, one may 
easily notice the great differences between the two communication patterns (e.g., use 
of honorifics, omission of T, politeness-indicating sentence enders, careful indirect 
speech acts in the offer of repair, etc. in Korean). If the speaker is a female, if the 
addressee is a colleague or a social inferior, or if the relationship between them is 
very close as between college classmates, the Korean pattern would have to be 
changed to a great extent. 

hi regard to the goals for teaching the apology speech act, Olshtain and Cohen 
propose teaching the two general strategies (the expression of an apology and the 



32 Ho-min Sohn 



acknowledgement of responsibility) in the beginning level and the remaining 
strategies and intensification at higher levels. 

Let us take up the formulaic expressions in Korean only. While English 
formulaic expressions of apology include ‘Tm sorry”, “Excuse me”, “I regret”, 
“Forgive me”, and “I apologize”, etc. Korean has expressions such as mianha- 
'sorry (lit. feel uneasy)’, coysongha- 'sorry (lit. feel guilty)’, sillyeyha ~ 'excuse’, 
sakwatuli- 'apologize’, yongseha- ‘forgive’, cal-mot-ha- 'make a mistake', etc. The 
most frequently used ones are mianha ~ and coysongha ~. There are interesting 
restrictions in the usage of the two forms. First, observe the speech-level 
conjugations. 

(9) a. mianhapnita ; mianhayyo ; mianhaney ; mianhay; mianhata; mian; 

b. coysonghapnita; coysonghayyo; 
but not *coysonghaney; *coysonghay; *coysonghata; *coysong 

That is, coysongha ~ cannot be used to an intimate equal or a lower person in any 
context, that is, regardless of the severity of the infraction. 

Second, tnianha ~ cannot be used to in-group superiors even if the infraction is 
not severe. It may be used to out-group members, especially when the infraction is 
not severe. For example, when a student is late for class, he or she will use (10a), 
whereas when the teacher is late, he or she will use (10b). 

( 1 0) a. nuc-ese coysonghapnita/coysonghayyo. 
b. nuc-ese mianhayyo . 

The most frequently used intensifiers in Korean are cengmal 'very, really’, acwu 
'very, really’, and taetanhi 'very, greatly’. There are certain co-occurrence 
restrictions between them and mianha ~ and coysongha ~. 

One thing I would like to stress again is that Korean communication patterns in 
the use of politeness routines are governed by Koreans’ cultural perspectives, 
especially their value orientations. Koreans are relatively hierarchical and 
collecti vistic in their verbal and non-verbal behavior. These value orientations are 
reflected not only in linguistic structure as in address/reference terms and honorifics, 
but also in various sociolinguistic uses in real contexts. 

3. Teaching of politeness routines 




Teaching Politeness Routines in Korean 33 



Can politeness routines be explicitly taught? As indicated in Chick (1996: 344), 
it is general consensus among sociolinguists that explicit teaching of sociolinguistic 
conventions and rules is discouraged or ruled out. Chick quotes Gumperz and 
Roberts (1980: 3) as saying, 

(11) “The conventions of language use operate within such a great range of 

situations and have to take into account so many variables. There is no neat 
equation between type of interaction and the conventions which an 
individual might use. Every piece of good communication depends upon the 
response and feedback which participants elicit from each other in the 
course of the conversation itself and so every speaker has to develop his 
[sic] own strategies for interpreting and responding appropriately.” 

On the other hand, sociolinguists generally recognize that sociolinguistic 
conventions and rules of different social groups can be learnt through awareness 
raising of one type or another. For instance, Gumperz and Roberts suggest involving 
both learners and native speakers in evaluative discussion of their interethnic 
encounters to raise their awareness of their own contributions to miscommunication. 
Wolfson (1989) and some others argue that learners’ acquisition of sociolinguistic 
rules can be facilitated by teachers who have the necessary information and 
knowledge about speech acts, values, and patterns at their command. 

While accepting fostering learners’ awareness as a useful approach, I 
nevertheless subscribe to explicit teaching of politeness routines to adult learners of 
Korean. First, learning of politeness routines through awareness raising is time- 
consuming and can be fragmentary. Adult learners do not necessarily have an 
adequate awareness of what is involved in complex speech behavior. Hence, 
important speech acts that are not simply acquired over time must be taught for the 
learners to use them correctly and expeditiously. Second, politeness routines are 
largely conventionalized in usage and predictable to the language users. Thus, such 
more or less conventionalized expressions constitute a closed set and thus are 
teachable. Therefore, they must be taught systematically and intensively in various 
contexts lest the learners should use wrong forms inappropriately. Third, in learning 
politeness routines, a common source of miscommunication is sociolinguistic 
transfer, that is, the use of the rules of speaking of one’s native language when 
interacting with members of another community. Explicit teaching will contribute to 
keeping learners from falling into such pitfalls. Fourth, there are some experimental 
studies on successful explicit teaching (Olshtain and Cohen 1990, 1991; Dunham 
1992). 

Techniques for teaching speech acts have been proposed. Olshtain and Cohen 
(1991) propose the following five steps. 



0 



34 Ho-min Sohn 



(12) a. Diagnostic assessment 

b. Model dialogue 

c. The evaluation of a situation 

d. Role-play activities 

e. Feedback and discussion 

Cohen (1996) quotes Dunham (1992) as describing ten techniques for teaching 
complimenting behavior. 

(13) a. Reviewing how it is done in the native culture 

b. Reviewing how it is done in the United States 

c. Vocabulary phrase list 

d. Student practice 

e. Role playing in pairs 

f. Teacher role play with students in front of the class 

g. Projects in which learners must compliment native speakers 

h. Students' oral reports to the class following their field experiences with 

native 

speakers 

i. Connecting techniques to lengthen conversation 

j. Paired interaction with complimenting and connecting techniques 

The above techniques can be applied to teaching Korean politeness routines. 
Furthermore, adequate assessment tools need to be extensively developed (e.g., 
Hudson and Kim 1996). Needless to say, all these can be achieved only when both 
classroom teachers and pedagogical researchers in Korean spare no effort. 

References 

Brown, P. and S. Levinson. 1978. Universals in language usage: In E. Goody (Ed.), 
Questions and Politeness . Strategies in Social Interaction. Cambridge 
University Press, 56-289. 

Brown, P. and S. Levinson. 1987. Politeness: Some Universals in Language Usage. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Chick, J.K. 1996. Intercultural communication. In S.L. Mckay and N.H. Hornberger 
(Eds.), Sociolinguistics and Language Teaching. Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press, 329-348. 

Cohen, A.D. 1996. Speech acts. In S.L. Mckay and N.H. Hornberger (Eds.), 
Sociolinguistics and Language Teaching. Cambridge, England: Cambridge 
University Press, 383-420. 





Teaching Politeness Routines in Korean 35 



Dunham, P. 1992. Using compliments in the ESL classroom: an analysis of culture 
and gender. Minne TESOL Journal 10, 75-85. 

Grice, H.P. 1975. Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and J. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax 
and. Semantics , VoL 3: Speech Acts. New York: Academic Press, 41-58. 

Gumperz, J. and C. Roberts. 1980. Developing Awareness Skills for Interethnic 
Communication. Occasional Papers No. 12. Singapore: SEAMEO Regional 
Language Centre. 

Hudson, T. and Y. Kim. 1996. Pilot instruments for assessing cross-cultural 

pragmatics of nonnative learners of Korean (NFLRC Research Note No. 13). 
Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii, Second Language Teaching & Curriculum 
Center. 

Lakoff, R. 1973. The logic of politeness: or minding your p’s and q’s. Papers from 
the Ninth Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society. Chicago: Chicago 
Linguistic Society, 292-305. 

Olshtain, E. and A.D. Cohen. 1990. Thee learning of complex speech act behavior. 
TESL Canada Journal 7(2), 45-65. 

Olshtain, E. and A.D. Cohen. 1991. Teaching speech act behavior to nonnative 
speakers. In M. Celce-Murcia (Ed.) Teaching Englidh as a Second or Foreign 
Language. New York: Newbury House. 

Sohn, Ho-min. 1988. Linguistic devices of Korean politeness. Papers from the Sixth 
International Conference on Korean Linguistics ; 655-669. 

Sohn, Ho-min. 2001. Linguistic politeness in intercultural communication. Paper 
presented at the 2001 Pan-Pacific Applied Linguistics Conference in Cheju, 
Korea in July. 

Wolfson, N. 1989. Perspectives: Sociolinguistics and TESOL. New York: Newbury 
House. 



Vocabulary-building Activities 



Bo Y. Park 

Defense Language Institute Foreign Language Center 



Introduction 

I would like to introduce four vocabulary activities involving two-syllable Sino- 
Korean words. The purpose of these activities is for students to practice guessing 
the meanings of these words. In fact, there are a great number of Sino-Korean 
words in the Korean language because Koreans have used Chinese characters for 
written communication for almost two millenia. Among many kinds of Sino- 
Korean words, one to four-syllable words are common. Examples of one-syllable 

words are “ o h (M) (room)/’ or “o (Jfc) (older brother)”; two-syllable words are 
“A-|£| (§/£) (bookstore)/’ or “ijirL (IH3S) (railroad)”; three-syllable words are 
(It^JIS) (precious metal) or 21 (ft^A) (spokesperson)”; and 
four-syllable words are ‘S’ (^tif ^S&) (sentimentality)” or 

(BJJtiS?^) (riches, honor, and splendor).” The most common among these are 
two-syllable nouns. 

Vocabulary Exercises 

First, I would like to explain how two- syllable Sino-Korean nouns are 
formed from the semantic point of view. For example, the word, A) 

(service member),” is comprised of the two Sino-Korean characters, “?(^) 
(military)” and “?1(A) (person)/’ So, if students know the meanings of some 
other Chinese characters besides the meaning of the syllable, ”?(¥) (military),” 
they can easily recognize the meanings of some Sino-Korean compound nouns 
having to do with “military ” In case Sino-Korean nouns are not written in 
Chinese characters but rather in the Korean alphabet, which is common these 
days, if students know the meanings of Chinese characters, it is easy for them to 
guess the meanings of the Sino-Korean words out of context. In the following 
exercises students are supposed to guess the meanings of the Sino-Korean 
compound nouns from the Chinese characters whose meanings are already 
given. I think such exercises may work as an organizer, which is ‘‘part of a 
language learner's mind which works subconsciously to organize the new 
language system” (Dulay, Burt, & Krashen, 1982, p. 46). 






38 Bo Y. Park 



Vocabulary Exercises 



Exercise 1 

Write the meanings of the following Sino-Korean words in 
English: 



(1) £■=.($«)( 
(3)54($0R>< 
(5)S°J(¥A)( 
(7) «■«-(¥«)( 
( 9 ) 5*8 (¥ 4 ?>( 



S(^*) — Military 
— Use 

^(Mr) — Reduction 
(P£) - Group 
til (Am) — Preparation 
3K1t) — Shoe 



) (2) S3- (Wm ( 

) (4) 5-tfl (!^|2£) ( 
) (5) ^ } (*$) ( 
) <8)5*1 (W)( 
) (10) 5^pflM) ( 



S.((jla) — Hat 
A>(-£) — Business 
^(t?) — Orders 
mm.) — Clothes 
91(A) — Person 



Completed Exercise 1 



(1) 9?: 3- ( Military hat 

(3) (iJIJM) ( Military clothes 
(5) S*d (W A) ( Service member 
(7) S*§- (*$'HJ) (Military use 
(9) S^j (5fi fj) ( Military orders 



) (2) 'S' St (¥ib) ( Military shoes 
) (4)3-tfl(W2) ( Military forces 

) (5) S A } ( Military affairs 

) (8) S*] (*^|i#l) ( Military preparations 
) (10) (Km) ( Armament reduction 



5(J?) — Military 

■8-0W) — Use 

— Reduction 
*41 (l&) — Group 
*1 ( flU) — Preparation 
3('1t) — Shoe 



2-Ollfl) — Hat 
A H^) — Business 
^(‘n) — Orders 
^r(Hbt) — Clothes 
91(A) — Person 



) 

) 

) 

) 

) 



Exercise 2 

Write the meanings of the following Sino-Korean w ords in English: 

) 
) 
) 
) 
) 

^ *l) — Electricity 

*K5) — Son fHifc) — Current 



( 1 ) ( 

(3) ^ ^(tgfli) ( 
(5) u o v *d(#0t ) ( 
(7) ra^) ( 
(9) ( 



) (2 ) 7 Am&t))( 

) (4) ( 

) (6) *d #(««£) ( 
) (8)33(ffiK)( 
) (lO)^St(^di'i) ( 





Vocabulary-building Activities 39 



<!(!&) --- Line 
JKSS)-Talk 
7](M) — Energy 
^(t )) — Power 



— Report 
— Pole 
^(f j' ; ) — Stop 

-- Release 



Completed Exercise 2 



(1) ( Electric line 

) 

(3) ( Telegram 

(5) ( Electric discharge 

(7) ( Electron 

(9) ■'fl' TE tl; ) ( Te 1 ephone pole 



) (2) £ ^ ( Electric power 

) (4) *‘371 (r^M) ( Electricity 
) (6) ( Electric current 

) (8) ( Power failure 

) (10) niffS) ( Telephone 



*1( r£) — Electricity 

*}( i 1 ) — S on #( Ut ) — Current 

— Line — Report 

$&) -Talk - Pole 

7 1 ( H) -- Energy ^ ( f? ) — Stop 

^ (Jj) ~ Power a o v (J&) — Release 

Exercise 3 

Write the correct character combinations for the English phrases given 
below: 



( 1 ) Parents ( ) 

(2) Mother’s affection ( ) 

(3) Mother and son ( ) 

(4) Mother and daughter ( ) 

(5) Mother's milk ( ) 

(6) Wet nurse ( ) 

(7) Maternal right ( ) 



SL ( H) — Mother tt ($L) — M ilk 

Right 

7} (i 1 ) — Son M (#) — Woman, Daughter 

Father 

^ (tw) — Affection 



Completed Exercise 3 

(1) Parents 

(2) Mother’s affection 

(3) Mother and son 

(4) Mother and daughter 

(5) Mother’s milk 

(6) Wet nurse 

(7) Maternal right 

S(ftf) — Mother 
A( D — Son 
7 ti (tt) — Affection 



( +* ) 

( £-3 ) 

( 2-^ ) 

( 2.M ) 

( S.-8- ) 

( -frfi. ) 

( ) 

•n-(7L) — Milk 
( !x) — Woman, Daughter 



^ (I®) - 
*<£)- 



^l(lg) — Right 
— Father 





40 Bo Y. Park 



I gave Vocabulary Exercise 1 to one section of my class, which was 
comprised of 10 students. It was after a ten-minute routine speaking activity. The 
students felt a little bored. After the students did the exercises rather quietly, they 
gave positive comments on the exercise, "I like it," "We need more like this," 
and "This way, I remember." However, another student’s remark was that I 
should not provide Korean syllables like “2- (Hat)” or “Sj* (Shoe)” after “'2' 
(Military).” He said the reason is that because the Korean spelling of the Chinese 
characters was given, he was looking for the corresponding syllables instead of 
looking for the appropriate Chinese characters. I thought that made a perfect 
sense. Therefore, I changed the format of Vocabulary Exercise 2 as follows 
following his suggestion. Not surprisingly, I learned how to teach students from 
a student. 



Revised Vocabulary Exercise 2 

Write the meanings of the following Sino-Korean words in English: 



(D ^BcfSiK) ( ) 

(3) i®”®) ( ) 

(5) ( ) 

(7) ( ) 

(9) ( ) 



M('m' ) — Electricity 

/') — Son 
— Line 
SKIS) — Talk 
7](S5) — Energy 
- ! (7j ) — Power 



( 2 ) ( ) 

( 4 ) ^>( 75 ^ ) ( ) 

(6) *dl<7E?iO ( ) 

( ) 

(lO)*dB(^)( ) 



-fr($L) — Current 
— Report 
— Pole 
^(f¥) — Stop 
H(lffc) — Release 



A few days later, I gave the revised versions of Exercise 2 and Exercise 3 to 
the same students. It was after they had done routine reading activities in their 
textbooks. It seemed that they were waiting for some other activities. After I 
passed out sheets to them, I let the students exchange their conjectures freely. 
They did these exercises with great interest. While doing the exercises, they 
exchanged their opinions actively. Some students asked themselves, "What is the 
electric son? Isn’t it electron? Oh, that’s right." They came up with the right 
answer. A student asked another student, 

' means stop electricity. What is that?" The student of whom the 
question was asked said, "Stop electricity is power failure." He also came up 
with the correct answer. A student talked about Question (6), “wet nurse”, in 
Exercise 3. He said it was “2. -ft- (SfL).” A student next to him said, "No, it is ’ 





Vocabiilaty-biiilding A ctivities 4 1 



-n- 5L (£LB)7’ which was right. I think that he came up with the correct answer 
by thinking of the syllable order, milk [$l (-m)] and mother [3 (-£-)]. I found 
out that they answered almost every question correctly while I was checking 
their answers. After these exercises, the students seemed to feel that they had 
achieved something. The students' general comments on the revised exercises 
were "This is a lot better and very interesting," "We need something like this 
more," and so forth. I felt that the exercises were worth the time spent on them. 

In my opinion, these kinds of deductive vocabulary exercises are necessary, 
especially in early stage of learning a foreign language because “a great deal of 
vocabulary must be acquired very early on at least at the recognition level if the 
students are to be successful with the natural approach” (Krashen & Terrell, 

1983, p. 91). I suggest that I had my students try out the above- described 
vocabulary- building exercises at the right time because they were in the early 
stage of the Korean basic course (about the 25th week of 63 weeks) when I gave 
the exercises to them. 

Conclusion 

Vocabulary exercises are not limited to the ones I introduced. Many 
different ones can be made for the students to have fun learning while analyzing 
syllables consciously. Tasks that cause learners to focus on conscious linguistic 
analysis (such as fill-in-the-blank with correct morphemes) invite monitoring. 
“Monitoring is the part of the learner's internal system that appears to be 
responsible for conscious linguistic processing' 4 (Dulay, Burt, & Krashen, 1982, 
p. 58). I think after conscious linguistic processing, subconscious organization of 
the new language system occurs. 

When foreign language teachers teach vocabulary, it would be more 
pedagogical and productive not to provide a list of vocabulary related to the 
lesson the students will learn. They should teach vocabulary through exercises or 
games, encouraging the students to think and learn on their own. I submit that 
the technique which the students will have acquired through activities such as the 
ones that were presented above will be useful when reading authentic materials 
such as newspapers or magazines. 



References 

Dulay, H., Burt, M., & Krashen, S. (1982). Language Two. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 

Krashen, S. & Terrel, T. (1983). The Natural Approach. Hayward, CA: The 
Alemany Press. 




47 



Part III 



Methodology and Pedagogy 



Implementation and Evaluation of an Approach to 
Task-based Korean Language Teaching 

Youngkyu Kim, Dong-Kwan Kong, Jin-Hwa Lee and Younggeun Lee 1 
National Foreign Language Resource Center, University of Hawai'i at 

Manoa 



Introduction 

In recent years, there has been a call for task-based approaches to syllabus design 
and language teaching from a number of second language (L2) researchers, syllabus 
designers, and educators (see Breen, 1984, 1987; Candlin, 1987; Long, 1985; Long 
& Crookes, 1992; Nunan, 1989; Prabhu, 1984, 1987; Skehan, 1996a, 1998b; Willis, 
1984). In task-based approaches to language teaching, tasks are used as a basic unit 
of analysis in syllabus design and instruction. The usefulness and importance of tasks 
as a unit of analysis in syllabus design and instruction has been well documented in 
the literature (see Candlin & Murphy, 1987; Crookes, 1986; Crookes & Gass, 1993a, 
1993b; Long & Crookes, 1993; Nunan, 1993; Robinson, 1998; Skehan, 1998a; 

Willis, 1996). 

Tasks as a Unit of Analysis in Syllabus Design and Instruction 

Long & Crookes (1993), for example, argue that the choice of units of analysis is the 
most basic consideration in syllabus design because the chosen option will reflect the 
syllabus designer’s or the teacher’s belief in how people learn a L2, and affect the 
whole process of the curriculum. Long (1985 and elsewhere), particularly, in his 
proposal for Task-Based Language Teaching (TBLT), further argues for the 
advantages of using tasks as a unit of analysis in syllabus design and instruction as 
follows: 

1) Learner needs can be identified in terms of target tasks, which learners might have 
to perform after or even during learning the language, thus matching syllabus content 
or classroom activities with the learner needs identified from needs analysis (NA). 

2) While doing pedagogic tasks, students can also engage in meaning- focused 
interaction, obtaining more chances to make conversational adjustments (e.g., 
comprehension checks, clarification requests, and confirmation checks), which in 
turn may contribute to making input comprehensible (Gass & Varonis, 1994; Long, 
1983; Pica, 1994; Pica, Kanagy & Falodun, 1993). As for the benefits of 



In alphabetical order 



46 Yonngkyu Kim, Dong-kwan Kong, Jin-Hwa Lee, and Young-Getin Lee 



conversational adjustments. Long & Robinson (1998) also reiterate that 
"modifications to the interactional structure of conversation that result from the 
negotiation work increase input comprehensibility without denying learners access to 
unknown L2 vocabulary and grammatical forms, as tends to occur through linguistic 
'simplification', and provide important information about L2 form-function 
relationships” (pp. 22-23). 

3) With various types of focus on form techniques appropriately used (Doughty & 
Williams, 1998), students can get feedback as frequently and effectively as possible, 
and in so doing their attention is momentarily drawn to a specific linguistic form, 

i.e., noticing in Schmidt's (1990 and elsewhere) term, in the context of otherwise 
meaning-focused communication (see Doughty, in press; Long, 1996, for review). 
Such negative feedback "draws learners' attention to mismatches between input and 
output, that is, causes them to focus on form, and can induce noticing of the kinds of 
forms for which a pure diet of comprehensible input will not suffice (e.g., items that 
are unlearnable from positive evidence or are rare, and/or semantically lightweight, 
and/or perceptually nonsalient, and/or cause little or no communicative distress)” 
(Long & Robinson, 1998, p. 23). 

In sum, using tasks as a unit of analysis in syllabus design and instruction would help 
match syllabus content with learners' needs and provide learners with more 
opportunities to experience not only comprehension of input through negotiation for 
meaning but also feedback on production through focus on form and consequent 
interlanguage development or modification via noticing. 

Task-Based Language Teaching 

Long (1998, p. 42) describes steps in designing and implementing a TBLT program 
as follows: 

1. Conduct task-based needs analysis to identify target tasks; 

2. Classify into target task types; 

3. Derive pedagogic tasks; 

4. Sequence to form a task-based syllabus; 

5. Implement with appropriate methodology and pedagogy; 

6. Assess with task-based, criterion-referenced, performance tests; and 

7. Evaluate program. 

As a first step, learners' real-world or target tasks, which they eventually need to 
perform, are to be identified by task-based NA. The target tasks, once identified, can 
be grouped into relevant target task types, which are more abstract and superordinate 
categories. These target task types, however, are to be transformed into pedagogic 



O 



Task-based Approach to the Teaching of the Korean Language 47 



tasks before being used in the classroom. It is the pedagogic tasks that learners and 
teachers actually work on in the classroom. One target task type can be realized by a 
series of pedagogic tasks that are gradually assimilated to the target task. These 
pedagogic tasks are then sequenced to form a task-based syllabus, which in turn is 
implemented with appropriate methodology and pedagogy, e.g., focus on form. 
Students' progress is assessed with task-based, criterion-referenced performance 
tests. 

Implementation and Evaluation of Task-based Korean Language Teaching 
Modules 

The following sections briefly describe how TBLT has been actually implemented in 
Korean language teaching at the University of Hawaii at Manoa (UHM), focusing 
on two task-based Korean pilot modules, as part of the project “Task-based 
Language Teaching in Foreign Language Education” currently being undertaken by 
a team of faculty members and graduate students at UHM, led by Professors Michael 
H. Long, Catherine Doughty, and Craig Chaudron (More information about this 
project is available on the Internet at http://www.lll.hawaii.edu/nflrc/tblt.html). 

Task-based needs analysis and target task identification: Using two data 
collection methods (i.e., unstructured interviews and questionnaires), the first stage 
of the task-based NA was conducted. 25% of the total number of students taking 
Korean language classes at UHM in Spring 2000 were first selected by a stratified 
random sampling procedure and then interviewed. The findings from the transcribed 
interview data were then used in developing the questionnaire form. On the basis of 
the information from the questionnaire data, two target tasks, each of which 
comprised two task-based Korean-language pilot modules, were identified": 
Following street directions and Shopping for clothes. The second stage of the task- 
based NA included a collection and analysis of target discourse data 3 . The Korean 
language target discourse data involving oral interactions between native speakers of 
Korean were collected for each task and subsequently transcribed for use in 
developing the Korean TBLT modules. 

Development of task-based Korean TBLT modules: Based on (a) a set of 
guidelines for developing prototype task-based English-language modules, 
consisting of a series of seven pedagogic tasks (PTs), the last serving as an exit test, 



2 One target task initially identified was later replaced with another. 

3 Samples of genuine target discourse were also collected for the potential English- 
language prototype modules as the long-term goal of the project is the development 
of task-based NA procedures, prototype task-based nodules, etc. that can potentially 
serve as templates for other foreign languages. 




51 



48 Yoiingkyu Kim, Dong-kwan Kong , Jin-Hwa Lee , and Young-Geun Lee 



and (b) the results of the task-based NA carried out in Spring 2000, the Korean 
TBLT modules were prepared and implemented in Fall 2000. The modules included 
teachers' manuals, student workbooks, and teaching materials (e.g., audio tapes, 

OHP transparencies, maps, picture cards, etc.). 

Classroom implementation: One section of Korean 101 and two sections of 
Korean 201 participated in the pilot study. The three cooperating teachers had a 
training session, where they learned how to use the TBLT modules. Before the 
TBLT modules were implemented, the three classes were observed and audio- 
recorded to identify the characteristics of regular (i.e., non-TBLT) Korean classes. 
The week-long implementation of the TBLT modules, including task-based 
assessment, were observed and audio-recorded. Finally, after the implementation of 
the TBLT modules, the next regular Korean classes were observed and audio- 
recorded. 

Evaluation: A preliminary evaluation of the TBLT modules was carried out 
using multiple sources and multiple data collection methods: 

1) Korean graduate assistant (GA) discussions: Right after each TBLT session, 
the Korean GAs had a meeting to informally discuss their own class 
observation notes. Suggestions were made for the next session and for 
future work 4 

2) Discussions with cooperating teachers: GAs had informal meetings with 
participating teachers. These meetings were recorded and notes were taken. 

3) Analysis of student reaction questionnaires: Right after finishing TBLT 
sessions, students were asked to fill out questionnaires that were designed to 
evaluate the TBLT modules implemented. Two sets of questionnaires were 
prepared for the two target tasks. The two questionnaires followed the same 
format although there were some differences in actual questions. The 
students were given questionnaires corresponding to the TBLT module they 
had received. To facilitate students’ retrospection, the teachers briefly 
reviewed each PT by presenting the materials used for it. When students 
answered all the questions on the PT, the teachers proceeded to the next PT 
and went through the same procedures. Survey responses to Sections A and 
B in the questionnaires were coded for statistical analyses using Microsoft 



4 

The suggestions were incorporated into revising the pilot Korean TBLT modules in 
Spring 2001. 





Task-based Approach to the Teaching of the Korean Language 49 



Excel and SPSS for Windows. Responses to open-ended questions in 
Sections C and D were categorized and aggregated by two researchers. 

Conclusion 

This paper briefly described an on-going project on Korean TBLT at NFLRC, which 
is the first implementation of TBLT with tertiary-level English-speaking Korean 
language learners. A preliminary evaluation of the data collected from multiple 
sources (e.g., students, teachers and researchers) by multiple methods (e.g., 
questionnaires, unstructured interviews, class observations and conferences among 
researchers) provides empirical support that TBLT is a viable alternative approach to 
Korean language teaching and can provide a concrete model of TBLT 
implementation with wide applicability to college-level Korean language programs 
in North America. 



REFERENCES 

Breen, M. (1984). Process syllabuses for the language classroom. In C. J. Brumfit 
(Ed.), General English syllabus design (pp. 47-60). Oxford: Pergamon. 

Breen, M. (1987). Learner contribution to task design. In C. N. Candlin & D. F. 
Murphy (Eds.), Language learning tasks (Lancaster Practical Papers in English 
Language Education, Vol. 7) (pp. 23-46). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Candlin, C. N. (1987). Towards task-based language learning. In C. N. Candlin & D. 
Murphy (Eds.), Language learning tasks (Lancaster Practical Papers in English 
Language Education, Vol. 7) (pp. 5-22). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Candlin, C. N., & Murphy, D. F. (Eds.). (1987). Language learning tasks (Lancaster 
Practical Papers in English Language Education, Vol. 7). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall. 

Crookes, G. (1986). Task classification: A cross-disciplinary review (Tech. Rep. No. 
4). Honolulu, HI: Center for Second Language Classroom Research, Social 
Science Research Institute, University of Hawafi at Manoa. 

Crookes, G., & Gass, S. M. (Eds.). (1993a). Tasks and language learning: 
Integrating theory and practice. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual Matters. 

Crookes, G., & Gass, S. M. (Eds.). (1993b). Tasks in a pedagogical context: 
Integrating theory and practice. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual Matters. 
Doughty, C. (in press). Cognitive underpinnings of focus on form. In P. Robinson 
(Ed.), Cognition and second language acquisition. New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Doughty, C., & Williams, J. (1998). Pedagogical choices in focus in form. In C. 
Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language 
acquisition (pp. 197-261). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 




53 



50 Youngkyu Kim, Dong-kwan Kong, Jin-Hwa Lee, and Young-Gain Lee 



Gass, S. M., & Varonis, E. M. (1994). Input, interaction, and second language 
production. Studies in Second Language Acquisition , 16 , 283-302. 

Long, M. H. (1983). Linguistic and conversational adjustments to nonnative 
speakers. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 5, 177-193. 

Long, M. H. (1985). A role for instruction in second language acquisition: Task- 
based language teaching. In K. Hyltenstam & M. Pienemann (Eds.), Modelling 
and assessing second language acquisition (pp. 77-99). Clevedon, Avon: 
Multilingual Matters. 

Long, M. H. (1991). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching 
methodology. In K. de Bot, R. Ginsberg, & C. Kramsch (Eds.), Foreign 
language research in cross-cultural perspective (pp. 39-52). Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. 

Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language 
acquisition. In W. Ritchie & T. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of research on second 
language acquisition (pp. 413-468). New York: Academic Press. 

Long, M. H. (1998). Focus on form in task-based language teaching. University of 
Hawai'iWorking Papers in ESL , 76(2), 35-49. 

Long, M. H., & Crookes, G. (1992). Three approaches to task-based syllabus design. 
TESOL Quarterly , 26( 1 ), 2 7-56. 

Long, M. H., & Crookes, G. (1993). Units of analysis in syllabus design: The case 
for task. In G. Crookes & S. M. Gass (Eds.), Tasks in a pedagogical context: 
Integrating theory’ and. practice (pp. 9-54). Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual 
Matters. 

Long, M. H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research and practice. 
In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second- 
language acquisition (pp. 15-41). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Nunan, D. (1989). Designing tasks for the communicative classroom. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Nunan, D. (1993). Task-based syllabus design: selecting, grading and sequencing 
tasks. In G. Crookes & S. Gass (Eds.), Tasks in a pedagogical context: 
Integrating theory and practice (pp. 55-68). Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual 
matters. 

Pica, T. (1994). Research on negotiation: what does it reveal about second language 
acquisition? Language Learning , 44( 3), 493-527. 

Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks 
for second language research and instruction. In G. Crookes & S. Gass (Eds.), 
Tasks in a pedagogical context: Integrating theory ? and practice (pp. 9-34). 
Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual Matters. 



0 

ERIC 



54 



Task-based Approach to the Teaching of the Korean Language 51 



Prabhu, N. S. (1984). Procedural syllabuses. In T. E. Read (Ed.), Trends in language 
syllabus design (pp. 272-280). Singapore: Singapore University Press/RELC. 

Prabhu, N. S. (1987). Second language pedagogy . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Robinson, P. (1998). State of the art: SLA theory and second language syllabus 
design. The Language Teacher , 22(4), 7-14. 

Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied 
Linguistics , 77(2), 17-46. 

Schmidt, R. (1993). Consciousness, learning and interlanguage pragmatics. In G. 
Kasper & S. Blum-Kulka (Eds.), Interlanguage pragmatics (pp. 21-42). New 
York: Oxford University Press. 

Schmidt, R. (1995). Consciousness and foreign language learning: A tutorial on the 
role of attention and awareness in learning. In R. Schmidt (Ed.), Attention and 
awareness in foreign language learning (pp. 1-63). Honolulu: University of 
Hawaii Press. 

Skehan, P. (1996a). A framework for the implementation of task-based instruction. 
Applied Linguistics, 77(1), 38-62. 

Skehan, P. (1996b). Second language acquisition research and task-based instruction. 
In J. Willis & D. Willis (Eds.), Challenge and change in language teaching (pp. 
17-30). Oxford: Heinemann ELT. 

Skehan, P. (1998a). A cognitive approach to language learning . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Skehan, P. (1998b). Task-based instruction. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 
18, 268-286. 

Willis, J. D. (1984). Specifying a task-based syllabus. In T. E. Read (Ed.), Trends in 
language syllabus design (pp. 281-309). Singapore: Singapore University 
Press/RELC. 

Willis, J. (1996). A framework for task-based learning . Harlow, England: Longman 
Addison-Wesley. 




55 



EFFECTS OF TASK COMPLEXITY ON L2 PRODUCTION 



Young-Geun Lee 

University of Hawaii at Manoa 



In recent second language acquisition (SLA) research, there have been claims 
that the use of various types of tasks can facilitate second language (L2) 
development. These claims have motivated a number of studies that can be divided 
into two groups: one focusing on the linguistic environment that tasks can provide 
learners with during the interaction between learners and/or between learners and the 
teacher, and the other focusing on the effects of task types of features on learner 
output. The former has attracted a number of studies on the so-called negotiation or 
conversational adjustment (Gass, 1997; Gass& Varonis, 1985, 1986; Long, 1980, 
1981, 1983a, 1983b, 1996; Mackey, 1999; Pica, 1987, 1994, 1996) while the latter 
has drawn studies examining the relationship between task types, task features, or 
task parameters/dimensions, and task performance in terms of accuracy, fluency, 
lexical variety and/or density, and syntactic complexity (Brown, 1991; Crookes, 
1989; Duff, 1986; Foster and Skehan, 1996; Manheimer, 1993; Ortega, 1999; 
Robinson, 1995; Robinson, Ting, & Urwin, 1995). 

In the meantime, some proposals have been made to use task as a unit of 
analysis in language teaching, i.e., task-based approaches to language teaching 
(Breen, 1984, 1987; Candlin, 1987; Long, 1985; Long and Crookes, 1992, 1993; 
Nunan, 1989; Prabhu, 1984, 1987; Skehan, 1996, 1998a, b). Among these, however, 
Long's and Skehan’ s share many things in common in terms of their 
psycholinguistic rationale based on SLA research, e.g., provision of acquisition-rich 
linguistic environment through (a) meaning-focused, or meaning primary, interaction 
leading to negotiation for meaning and/or elaborated input, and more feedback, (b) 
focus on form (Long, 1998; Long & Robinson, 1998), or ‘'manipulation of 
attentional focus” (Skehan, 1996), thus likely to produce interlanguage (IL) change 
and development, and (c) respecting an individual learner's learning process, 
associated with learnability and teachability issues (Pienemann, 1984, 1985, 1989). 
Both Long and Skehan oppose synthetic syllabus types and employ tasks as a non- 
linguistic unit of analysis. To Long and Skehan, tasks are purely meaning-focused 
activities, and not ‘structure-trapping’ activities in Skehan’s (1998b) term, in which 
tasks are used as a vehicle for grammar instruction as advocated by Ellis (1997; 
Fotos and Ellis, 1991, Loschky and Bley-Vroman (1993), and Nunan (1989). They 
both view language learning not as “a simple, linear, cumulative process” (Skehan, 
1996), but as a rather complex psyocholinguistic maneuver, which needs not only 
analysis of language as a chunk, but also an attentional focus on specific linguistic 



0 



54 Yottng-Geitn Lee 



forms in order to incorporate them into a learner’s EL system, in otherwise meaning- 
oriented communication. 

Long (1985, 1998) describes a number of steps in designing and implementing 
task-based language teaching (TBLT), i.e., task-based learner needs analysis, 
classifying target task types, deriving pedagogic tasks, sequencing to form a task- 
based syllabus, implementation, assessment, and program evaluation. Among them, 
the identification of objective criteria for sequencing pedagogic tasks and 
parameters/dimensions of task complexity and difficulty is considered essential in 
implementing TBLT (Long & Crookes, 1992; Robinson, 2001). While there have 
been various proposals for the criteria for grading and sequencing tasks, some 
researchers emphasized the importance of cognitive aspects of task. Robinson (2001, 
in press), for example, argues that task complexity, i.e., the cognitive demands of 
tasks, should be the sole basis of sequencing decisions in a task-based syllabus. He 
has also distinguished task complexity from both task difficulty, which is dependent 
on learner factors such as aptitude, confidence, and motivation, and task conditions, 
i.e., the interactive demands of tasks. 

There have been a number of studies in this line of research. They have 
examined the effects of differing degrees of task complexity on various measures of 
learner output, e.g., accuracy, fluency, lexical variety and/or density, and syntactic 
complexity. Task complexity in turn has been defined by various dimensions such as 
number of elements, here-and-now vs. there-and-then, planning time, reasoning 
demands, competing demands of tasks, prior knowledge, number of steps involved in 
the execution of tasks, number of parties involved, existence of a clear chronological 
sequence, number of actions occurred at the same time, similarity among elements to 
distinguish, etc. (Brindley, 1987; Brown, Anderson, Shillcock, & Yule, 1984; 
Candlin, 1987; Crookes, 1989; Foster & Skehan, 1996; Lee, 2000; Long, 1985; 
Ortega, 1999; Prabhu, 1987; Robinson, 1995, 2001; Robinson et al., 1995; Skehan, 
1998). 

Despite the growing number of studies on cognitively defined task complexity 
and its effects on task performance, more empirical research on existing and possible 
dimensions of task complexity need to be done for us to reach a rigid and safe 
ground on which sequencing decisions should be based. In the past, for example, the 
dimensions of task complexity have been operationalized as two-fold, e.g., existence 
or non-existence of a given dimension, using two versions of a task. What then 
would be needed here is a study that employs one or more tasks, each having more 
than two versions with differing degrees of any dimension(s). For instance, we can 
design three different versions of one task type, which are differentiated in terms of 
degrees of the given dimensions of task complexity, and then examine whether these 
three versions will lead to qualitatively different language from each other. If we can 
show such a relationship between the different versions and learner production not 
only for a single task type but also another one, we will be in a better position to 





Effects of Task Complexity on L2 Production 55 



propose the dimensions of task complexity as an essential basis for sequencing 
decisions in TBLT as Robinson has argued. 

THE STUDY 

The study reported in the remaining part of this paper constitutes an effort to 
investigate the effects of differing degrees of task complexity on learner production. 
In this study, particularly, the degrees of task complexity were set as three-fold. The 
study was conducted to answer two general questions: 

1 . Do differing degrees of task complexity affect the accuracy and complexity 
of oral L2 production? 

2. If yes, how different would accuracy and complexity be? 

Hypothesis 1: There will be no differences in the complexity of oral production on 
simple, complex, and very complex versions of a task. The complexity of oral 
production will be measured by the following: 

1 . words per C-unit (W/CU) 

2. inflectional suffixes per C-unit (IS/CU) 

3. clauses per C-unit (C/CU) 

4. coordination index (Cl), or the number of independent clause coordinations 
divided by the number of combined clauses (clauses minus sentences) 

Hypothesis 2: There will be no differences in the accuracy of oral production on 
simple, complex, and very complex versions of a task. The accuracy of oral 
production will be measured by the following: 

1 . error-free C-units ratio (EFCU/CU) 

2. error-free clauses ratio (EFC/C) 

3. correct particle use in obligatory and non-obligatory contexts (CorrPAR/CX) 

4. correct inflectional suffix use in obligatory and non-obligatory contexts 
(CorrSUF/CX) 

Participants and Research Design 

The participants in the study were three KFL learners who are or were enrolled 
in advanced KFL course at the University of Hawaii at Manoa (UHM) (see Table 1). 



Table 1: Participants' Bio-data 



ID 


Gender 


LI 


Ethnicity 


Academic Status (Major) 


PI 


M 


English 


Korean 


M.A. (Asian Studies) 





56 Young-Geun Lee 



P2 


F 


Japanese 


Japanese 


Ph.D. (Linguistics) 


P3 


M 


English 


Caucasian 


Ph.D. (History) 



The participants were asked to do two tasks, i.e., the three versions of the map 
task followed by the three versions of the car task, in the order given in Table 2. The 
sequences of the three versions of each task were counterbalanced to control for 
possible sequencing effects. 



Table 2 Sequence of tasks 





Man task 


Car task 


P 1 


acb 


bca 


P 2 


cba 


abc 


P 3 


bac 


Cab 



‘a’ stands for simple, V for complex, and ‘c’ for very complex versions of each task. 

Procedure 

Two tasks were used for the study: 

Map task 

In this task, the participants were presented with three folders, each containing a 
map of an area of Seoul, and were asked to give directions from Point A to Point B, 
marked on the map. The same map was used for all three versions of the task, but 
they differed in terms of the distance between point A and point B (short, longer, 
longest), the number of left/right turns (two, five, eight), the presence of the 
buildings which could be used as a reference (yes, yes but not always, yes but not 
always), presence of the need to cross the road (no, no, yes). The instructions were 
read in English to the participant by the researcher: 

“In each of these three folders, there is a map of an area of Seoul. Study the map 
carefully. Notice that there are two points, i.e.. Point A and Point B, on the map. 
Suppose that somebody asked you for directions from Point A, where you are, to 
Point B. Try to find the shortest way and include as much detail as you can, so that 
the person who asked will know exactly how to get there.” 

Car task 

In this task, the participants were again presented with three folders each 
containing four photographs showing the consecutive events leading up to a road 
accident involving model cars. They were then asked to describe how the accident 
happened. The three versions differ from each other in terms of the number and types 
of cars (two, three, and four; red, yellow, or blue; trucks, cabs, sedans, or vans), the 
number of pedestrians (zero, one, and two), the road conditions (three- and four-way 




59 



Effects of Task Complexity on L2 Production 5 7 



intersections), and the moving directions of cars (Table 3). The instructions were 
read in English to the participant by the researcher: 

“In each of these three folders, there are four photographs that reconstruct a car crash 
using model cars. Study the four pictures carefully. Then, act as if you are an eye 
witness and describe how the crash happened as clearly as you can, in other words, 
as if you were reporting the accident to the police. Remember to include as much 
detail as you can, so that the police will know exactly how the crash happened.” 



Table 3 Features of car task 





N of 
cars 


Types of cars 


N of 

pedestrians 


Road 

conditions 


Moving 
directions of 
cars 


Simple 

task 


2 


Red truck 
Orange taxi 


0 


3-way 

intersection 


L-turn 
Go straight 


Complex 

task 


3 


Yellow taxi 
Dark yellow taxi 
Red taxi 


1 


3-way 

intersection 


L-turn 

Stop, then Go 

straight 

L-turn 


Very 

complex 

task 


4 


Light blue van 
Blue jeep 

Blue taxi with stripes atop 
Dark blue taxi with stripes atop 


2 


4-way 

intersection 


L-turn 
L-turn, then 
Stop 
L-turn 
Go straight 



The three versions of each task were examined for their face validity before the 
study began. Three faculty members of the SLS Department, who are most 
knowledgeable on this topic, were asked to examine the three versions of each task 
in terms of their relative complexity or cognitive demands. 

Participant production was tape-recorded and transcribed. The tape-recording 
was conducted in an office at UHM. The researcher and a participant were seated at 
a table. Before starting each version of the task, participants were given two minutes 
for planning, and then, two more minutes for speaking. 

Data Analysis 

Data were coded by the researcher for eight different measures, as described 
above, i.e., the four accuracy and four complexity measures. Definitions of these 
measures are given below: 

C-unit or communication unit = one main, or independent clause, 
plus any subordinate clauses attached to or embedded in it (T-unit), 
or isolated phrase not accompanied by a verb, but which has 
communicative value (e.g., elliptical answers to questions). 




80 



58 Young-Geiin Lee 



Words = one of the eight categories provided by Sohn (1999, pp. 

203-4): noun, pronoun, numeral, verb, adjective, determiner, 
adverb, and particle. 

Inflectional suffixes in verbs and adjectives = non-terminal 
suffixes (subject honorific, tense/aspect, modal) plus enders 
(sentence enders and embedded-clause enders) 

Cl, or coordination index = the number of independent clause 
coordinations divided by the number of combined clauses (clauses 
minus sentences) 

A coding manual was prepared before the encoding procedure began. It should 
be noted, however, that accuracy is a matter of degree, particularly for the use of 
particle. In other words, there is no clear-cut division between correct and incorrect 
use of particles. Case particles, for example, are often omitted in various discourse 
contexts, especially in colloquial speech because they are “most easily predictable 
from the syntactic structure, word order, and the nature of the predicate used” (Sohn, 
1999, p. 327). That did make the analysis of data extremely difficult. Therefore, a 
rather loosened criterion was adopted for this study; that is, any use of particles was 
counted as correct provided it is not grammatically incorrect even if it is somewhat 
non-native -like or unnatural. 

Results 



Participant production was first analyzed in terms of complexity by counting 
numbers of W/CU, IS/CU, C/CU, Cl, on simple, complex, and very complex 
versions of both map and car tasks. The descriptive statistics for the complexity 
measures of the map and car tasks are shown in Tables 4 & 5, respectively. Tables 4 
& 5 show not only the means (M) and standard deviations (S) of the four complexity 
measures, but also those of C-unit, word, inflectional suffixes, and clauses. 



Table 4 Map task: Descriptive statistics for speaker production on simple, complex, 

and very complex versions (Complexity measures) 

C-unit Word Inf.Suf Clause W/CU IS/CU C/CU Cl (%) 

MSDMSDMSDM sdmsdmsdmsdmsd 

Simple 6 1 57.7 9.29 23.3 6.51 13.7 3.79 9.63 0.42 3.84 0.44 2.26 0.29 16.7 14.4 

Complex 7.67 2.08 79 11.5 28 7 19 5.57 10.5 1.33 3.67 0.14 2.47 0.35 12 11.8 

Very 20.3 9.07 191 49.8 77 29.1 44 15.5 9.93 1.94 3.86 0.33 2.22 0.22 18 10.1 




61 



20.3 9.07 191 49.8 



44 



Effects of Task Complexity on L2 Production 59 



Table 5 Car task: Descriptive statistics for speaker production on simple, complex, 
and very complex versions (Complexity measures) 





C-unit 


Word 


Inf.Suf 


Clause 


w/eu 


IS/CU 


C/CU 


Cl (%) 




M SD 


M 


SD 


M 


SD 


M 


SD 


M SD 


M 


SD 


M 


SD 


M 


SD 






















Simple 


5 0 


61.3 


13.3 


18.7 


1.53 


11.3 


2.08 


12.3 2.66 


3.73 


0.3 

1 


2.27 


0.42 


35.5 


15 


Complex 


8 3 


93.7 


21.2 


32 


1.73 


21 


3.61 


12.3 2.8 


4.42 


1.7 


2.78 


0.61 


21.4 


6.7 

8 


Very 


10.3 4 *° 

4— 


141 


52.1 


48 


10 


28 


9.64 


13.7 0.38 


5.01 


1.4 


2.75 


0.22 


14.2 


7.2 



Complexity of Oral Production 

Tables 4 & 5 show that the participants produced more language, in terms of C- 
units, words, inflectional suffixes, and clauses, in more complex versions of both the 
map and car tasks than on the simple versions. However, it is the car task that shows 
clearer differences in complexity measures among simple, complex, and very 
complex versions. Table 5 shows that the participants produced more inflectional 
suffixes per C-unit as the task complexity increased (3.73 vs. 4.42 vs. 5.01). Cl also 
indicates that more subordination was produced as the task complexity increased 
(35.5 % vs. 21.4 % vs. 14.2%). Although W/CU is the same for the simple and 
complex versions (12.3), the more complex version indicates a large increase (13.7). 
C/CU, on the other hand, shows that complex and very complex versions did not 
differ from each other (2.78 vs. 2.75) though they both elicited more clauses per C- 
unit than the simple version (2.27 vs. 2.78, or 2.75). Among these four measures, Cl 
appears to be the most sensitive measure of syntactic complexity of L2 Korean in 
this case although there was quite a bit of variability among participants on this 
measure as shown by standard deviation (15 vs. 6.78 vs. 7.2). 

On the other hand, Table 4 shows that such strong differences as in the car task 
did not appear in the map task. Unlike in the car task, the participants seemed to 
produce more complex language on the complex version as measured by words and 
clauses and by Cl, than on the simple or very complex versions. However, no clear 
pattern, e.g., more complex production on the more complex version of the task as in 
the car task, appeared though the production became longer on the more complex 
version. One thing to be noted here would be that there were large differences among 
participants in terms of the amount of word production shown by the standard 
deviation, particularly on the very complex version of both tasks (49.8 and 52.1). 
However, it can be explained by the fact that the number of participants was too 
small (N=3). 



er|c 



6.2 



60 Young-Geiiti Lee 



Accuracy of Oral Production 

Next, participant production was analyzed in terms of accuracy by counting 
error-free C-units and clauses, and correct use of particles and suffixes, on simple, 
complex, and very complex versions of both map and car tasks. The descriptive 
statistics for accuracy measures of the two tasks are shown in Tables 6 & 7. 

Table 6 Map task: Descriptive statistics for speaker production on simple, complex, 

and very complex versions (Accuracy measures) 

EFCU/CU(%) EFC/C(%) CorrPAR /CX(%) CorrSUF/CX(%) 





M 


SD 


M 


SD 


M 


SD 


M 


SD 


Simple 


73 


35.1 


84.3 


22.6 


90.5 


16.5 


98.9 


1.92 


Complex 


39.8 


21.8 


71.6 


11 


81 


17.2 


95.5 


4.1 


very complex 


52.5 


10.8 


73.9 


6.59 


87.8 


7.7 


97.9 


2.13 



Table 7 Car task: Descriptive statistics for speaker production on simple, complex, 

and very complex versions (Accuracy measures) 

EFCU/CU(%) EFC/C(%) CorrPAR/CXt%) CorrSUF/CX(%) 





M 


SD 


M 


SD 


M 


SD 


M 


SD 


Simple 


73.3 


11.5 


87.3 


8.21 


100 


0 


98.3 


2.89 


Complex 


77.8 


14.3 


92.1 


5.05 


95.7 


3.73 


99 


1.7 


very complex 


54 


11.2 


79.1 


3.76 


92.6 


2.78 


97.3 


2.59 



Table 6 shows that participant production was most accurate on the simple 
version and least accurate on the complex version of the map task, whether measured 
by error-free C-unit and clause, or by correct use of particles and suffixes. In other 
words, accuracy in the map task decreases in the order of simple, very complex, and 
complex versions. Similarly, Table 7 shows that participant production was most 
accurate on the complex version of the task when measured by error-free C-unit and 
clause, or by correct use of suffixes, and least accurate on the very complex version 
of the car task whether measured by error-free C-units and clauses, or by correct use 
of particles and suffixes, though the differences were small. In other words, accuracy 
in the car task appears to decrease in the order of complex, simple, and very complex 
versions. This result is quite different from that for complexity measures in the car 




63 



Effects of Task Complexity on L2 Production 61 



task, which showed clear differences among the versions, i.e., more complex 
production on more complex versions of the task. 

DISCUSSION 

Complexity of Oral Production in the Car Task 

The results show that differing degrees of task complexity did affect the 
complexity of oral production, but the differences were more clearly shown in the 
car task than in the map task. It should be noted, however, that due to the small 
number of participants (N=3), statistical analysis using, e.g., a repeated measures 
MANOVA, can not be done, so the following discussion and interpretation can only 
be made within that limit. In the car task, there were clear differences in the 
complexity of oral production on simple, complex, and very complex versions 
whether measured by inflectional suffixes per C-units or coordination index. More 
specifically, there was a clear tendency that more complex language in terms of 
inflectional suffixes and the coordination index was produced on the more complex 
tasks. In other words, as the cognitive demand of the task increases, participants did 
produce more morphosyntactically complex language. Therefore, hypotheses 1.2 and 
1.4 were disconfirmed. This can be seen as partial evidence for Robinson's (2001) 
claim that complex monologic tasks should elicit complex language. 

When measured by words per C-unit, on the other hand, there were differences 
between the complex and the very complex versions, but not between the simple and 
complex versions. Similarly, when measured by clauses per C-unit, there were 
differences between the simple and complex versions though the difference was 
small (around 0.5), but not much difference between the complex (2.78) and very 
complex (2.75) versions. Therefore, hypotheses 1.1 and 1.3 were partially 
disconfirmed. 

Complexity of Oral Production in the Map Task 

In the map task, on the other hand, there appears to be not much differences in 
complexity of oral production among the simple, complex, and very complex 
versions because differences, if any, were very small in number, e.g., less than 0.9 in 
frequency, less than 7 %. Therefore, for the map task, hypotheses LI through 1.4 
seemed to be confirmed. It should be noted that, from the retrospective interview 
with participants immediately after completing the tasks, the complex and the very 
complex versions were found to be more or less equally difficult. This might be 
confirmed by the fact that participants did produce the most complex language on the 
complex version of the map task as measured by words and clauses per C-unit, and 
coordination index. However, the differences seem to be too small to argue for the 
disconfirmation of Hypothesis 1 on the map task. 




64 



62 Young-Geun Lee 



However, it may be noted here that the three versions of the map task required 
the participants to follow a clear chronological sequence referring to individual 
actions, e.g., turn left/right, go straight, etc., whereas there was no such clear 
development in the more complex versions of the car task in which the picture was 
complicated by multiple actions and multiple actors at the same time, i.e., cars and 
pedestrians. Therefore, it seems that in order to for a task to be cognitively more 
difficult, multiple actions by multiple actors or elements should occur not in a clear 
chronological order. 

Accuracy of Oral Production in the Map Task 

Looking at the accuracy measures, we see a very different picture. In the map 
task first, the largest differences were between the complex, as the lowest, and 
simple, as the highest, versions when measured either by error-free C-unit and clause, 
or correct use of particle and suffix, whereas the accuracy measures on the very 
complex version were placed somewhere between those on the simple and complex 
versions. This means that hypotheses 2.1 through 2.4 were partially discontinued 
though the differences were small. However, it should be noted that the order is the 
opposite of that for complexity measures, i.e., more complex language on more 
complex versions of the task. In other words, participants produced the most accurate 
language on the simple version of the task and the least accurate language on the 
complex version though the differences were small (3-13 %) except when measured 
by error-free C-unit (33%). This appears to be a counter-evidence, in terms of 
accuracy, for Robinson’s (2001) claim that complex monologic tasks elicits more 
accurate production, relative to simpler tasks. However, it will still depend on the 
nature of the task complexity. It can also be noted here as described before in the 
Data Analysis section that the correct use of particles or suffixes did not seem to be a 
sensitive measure of accuracy of oral production of L2 Korean because there were 
very few differences measured by the two on the simple, complex, and very complex 
versions. 

Accuracy of Oral Production in the Car Task 

The car task, on the other hand, shows a quite different picture. The largest 
differences were between the very complex, as the lowest, and complex, as the 
highest, when measured either by error-free C-units and clauses, or correct use of 
suffixes. This means that participants produced the most accurate language on the 
complex version of the car task except when measured by the correct use of particles, 
and the least accurate language on the very complex version. Therefore, hypotheses 
2.5 through 2.8 were partially disconfirmed, but again, in a different way, i.e., the 
most accurate on the complex version, and the least accurate on the very complex 
version. Here again, the correct use of particles and suffixes did not seem to serve as 
a sensitive measure of accuracy of oral production of KFL. 




6 



5 



Effects of Task Complexity on L2 Production 63 



One thing to be mentioned here is that there could be constraints posed by the 
proficiency level of participants and the task complexity. The general criteria for 
participants were that a possible candidate should be proficient enough to complete 
the task even under lots of pressure imposed by task complexity, but at the same time, 
should not be proficient enough to finish the task without much difficulty. In other 
words, if anyone cannot finish the task due to lack of proficiency, or can complete 
the tasks without much difficulty, he or she cannot be a participant for the study. 
However, PI, the only heritage speaker among the three, turned out to be the latter 
case. He was so proficient that he could finish the task with relative ease. His verbal 
protocol right after completing the tasks proved that he had been able to handle the 
demands of the tasks without much difficulty. Results show that he, unlike the other 
two participants, produced the most complex language on the simple version of both 
tasks. 

As a brief summary, in the map task, the complexity measures did not show any 
significant differences on the simple, complex, and very complex versions in a 
systematic way whereas the four accuracy measures showed differences between the 
simple and complex versions in that the most accurate language was produced on the 
simple version of the task, and the least accurate on the complex version. In the car 
task, the complexity measures showed differences on the simple, complex, and very 
complex versions in a systematic way, i.e., more complex language on more 
complex versions of the task. Among these four measures, inflectional suffix and 
coordination index showed differences in the most systematic way, i.e., most 
complex language on the most complex version and least complex language on the 
least complex version. Coordination index, however, appears to be the most sensitive 
measure for complexity of oral production of L2 Korean. Accuracy measures for the 
car task also showed differences between the complex and very complex versions, 
but in a different way, i.e., the most accurate language on the complex version of the 
task, and the least accurate on the very complex version. 

CONCLUSIONS 

Limitations 

Most of all, it should be mentioned that this is a small-scale pilot study, which 
included only three participants, thus enabling no statistical analysis. Therefore, 
discussion and/or conclusion based on this study could be limited. Results also 
cannot be generalized beyond this study. 

Implications 

This study shows that differing degrees of task complexity did affect accuracy 
and complexity of oral production, but in different ways, i.e., more complex 
language produced on a more complex task and more accurate language on a simpler 
task. Thus, it partially confirms Robinson’s (2001) claims for the effects of complex 



64 Young- Geun Lee 



task on syntactic complexity of learner production but fails for those on accuracy of 
learner production. 

Although the three versions of the map task were examined for their face 
validity, it turned out that the complex version was seen as the most complex by two 
of the three participants. In other words, the learner' s actual perception of the 
cognitive demands of a task could be different from what the task designer might 
have expected. This suggests that relying on one dimension, e.g., number of elements 
as in this case, might not be sufficient for sequencing decisions. Accordingly, 
another dimensions like multiple actions by multiple elements occurred at the same 
time may have to be incorporated to increase the cognitive demands of a given task. 

It should be useful information for researchers or syllabus designers. 

Another implication for future research is that language-specific measures can 
be employed for the analysis of learner output depending on the nature of a given 
language. In this study, the number of inflectional suffixes proved as an effective 
measure for syntactic complexity in L2 Korean. 

Suggestions for Further Research 

In addition to the car task in this study, which proved to be promising, more task 
types should be sought for a future study of this kind. Accordingly, it should be of 
interest to know how the effects of a certain dimension(s) on learner output would be 
different across different task types. 

The combining effects of different dimensions also need to be investigated 
because the mechanism of their interaction with each other has not been much 
explored yet (see, however, Robinson, 2001, in which he distinguishes resource- 
directing from resource-depleting dimensions of task complexity and assigns them 
different roles). 

More participants will of course be needed to enable a statistical analysis. As 
mentioned above, language-specific measures for accuracy and/or syntactic 
complexity can also be tested for further research. Finally, the reliability of the 
coding for the accuracy and complexity measures need to be checked by multiple 
raters. 




67 



Effects of Task Complexity on L2 Production 65 



REFERENCES 

Breen, M. (1984). Process syllabuses for the language classroom. In C. J. Brumfit (Ed.), General English 
syllabus design (pp. 47-60). Oxford: Pergamon. 

Breen, M. (1987). Learner contribution to task design. In C. N. Candlin & D. F. Murphy (Eds.), Language 
learning tasks (Lancaster Practical Papers in English Language Education, Vol. 7) (pp. 23-46). 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 

Brindley, G. (1987). Factors affecting task difficulty. In N. D. (Ed.), Guidelines for The Development of 
Curriculum Resources : Adelaide National Curriculum Resource Centre. 

Brock, C., Crookes, G., Day, R., & Long, M. (1986). Differential effects of corrective feedback in native 
speaker-nonnative speaker conversation. In R. Day (Ed.), Talking to learn (pp. 229-236). 

Rowley, 

MA: Newbury House. 

Brown, G. (1995). Speakers , Listeners and Communication. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Brown, G., Anderson, A., Shillcock. R., & Yule, G. (1984). Teaching talk: Strategies for production and 
assessment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Brown. G., & Yule. G. (1983). Teaching the Spoken Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Brown, R. (1991). Group work, task difference, and second language acquisition. Applied Linguistics , If 
1 - 12 . 

Bygate, M. (1996). Effects of task repetition: Appraising the developing language of learners. In J. Willis 
& D. Willis (Eds.), Challenge and change in language teaching (pp. 136-146). London: 
Macmillan Heinemannn. 

Bygate, M. (1999a). Task as context for the framing and unframing of language. System, 27 , 33-48. 
Bygate, M. (1999b). Quality of language and purpose of task: patterns of learners' language on two oral 
communication tasks. Language Teaching Research , 5(3), 185-214. 

Candlin, C. N. (1987). Towards Task-based Language Learning. In C. N. Candlin & D. Murphy (Eds.), 
Language Learning Tasks (pp. 5-22). Englewood Cliffs. NJ: Prentice-Hall International. 
Crookes, G. (1986). Task classification: a cross-disciplinary’ review (Technical Report 4). Honolulu, HI: 
Center for Second Language Classroom Research. University of Hawaii at Manoa. 

Crookes, G. (1989). Planning and interlanguage variation. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 11(4), 
367-383. 

Crookes, G., & Gass, S. M. (Eds.). (1993). Tasks and language learning: Integrating theory and practice. 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 

Crookes, G., & Gass, S. M. (Eds.). (1993). Tasks in a pedagogical context: Integrating theory 
and practice. 

Clevedon. UK: Multilingual Matters. 

Duff, P. (1986). Another look at interlanguage talk: Taking task to task. In R. Day (Ed.), Talking to learn 
(pp. 147-181). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 

Ellis. R. (1987). Interlanguage variability in narrative discourse: Style shifting in the use of the past tense. 

Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 9, 12-20. 

Ellis, R. (1997). SLA research and language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Foster, P., & Skehan. P. (1996). The influence of planning and task type on second language performance. 

Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 18, 299-324. 

Fotos, S., & Ellis, R. (1991). Communicating about grammar: a task-based approach. TESOL Quarterly, 
25(4), 605-628. 

Gass, S. M. (1997). Input, interaction, and the second language learner. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Gass. S. M. & Varonis, E. M. (1985). Task variation and NNS/NNS negotiation of meaning. 

In S. M. Gass & C. G. Madden (Eds.), Input in second language acquisition (pp. 149-161). Rowley, MA: 
Newbury House. 




68 



66 Young-Geun Lee 



Gass, S. M. & Varonis, E. M. (1986). Sex differences in NNS/NNS interactions. In R. R. Day (Ed.), 

Talking to learn: Conversation in second language acquisition (pp. 327-451). Rowley, MA: 
Newbury House. 

Gass, S. M. & Varonis, E. M. (1994). Input, interaction, and second language production. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 16. 283-302. 

Lee, Y.-G. (2000). Effects of degrees of task complexity on L2 production. In S. Kang (Ed.), Korean 
Language in America 5. Monterey, CA: The American Association of Teachers of Korean. 
Long, M. H. (1980). Input, interaction , and second language acquisition. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation. University of California, Los Angeles. 

Long, M. H. (1981). Input, interaction, and second language acquisition. In H. Winitz (Ed.), Annals of the 
New York Academy of Sciences: Vol. 379. Native language and foreign language acquisition 
(pp. 259-278). New York: New York Academy of Sciences. 

Long, M. H. (1983a). Linguistic and conversational adjustments to nonnative speakers. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 5, 177-193. 

Long, M. H. (1983b). Native speaker non-native speaker interaction and the negotiation of 
comprehensible input. Applied Linguistics, 4, 126-141. 

Long, M. H. (1985). A role for instruction in second language acquisition: Task-based language teaching. 
In K. Hyltenstam & M. Pienemann (Eds.), Modelling and assessing second language 
acquisition 

(Vol. 18, pp. 77-99). Gevedon, Avon: Multilingual Matters Ltd. 

Long, M. H. (1989). Task, group, and task-group interactions. University’ of Hawaii Working Papers in 
ESL, 8(2). Honolulu: University of Hawaii, Department of English as a Second Language. 
Long, M. H. (1991). Measuring classroom language change. Handout. 

Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. 

In w. Ritchie & T. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of research on second language acquisition 
(pp. 413-468). New York: Academic. 

Long, M. H. (1998). Focus on form in task-based language teaching. University of Hawaii Working 
Papers in ESL 16(2), 35-49. 

Long, M. H., & Crookes, G. (1992). Three approaches to task-based syllabus design. TESOL Quarterly, 
26(1), 27-56. 

Long, M. H., & Crookes, G. (1993). Units of analysis in syllabus design: The case for task. In G. Crookes 
& S. M. Gass (Eds.), Tasks in a pedagogical context: Integrating theory’ and practice (pp. 9- 
54). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 

Long, M. H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research and practice. In C. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 15-41). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Loschky, L, & Bley-Vroman, R. (1993). Grammar and task-based methodology. In G. Crookes & S. M. 
Gass (Eds.), Tasks and language learning: Integrating theory’ and practice (pp. 123-167). 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters Ltd. 

Mackey, A. (1999). Input, interaction, and second language development. Studies in fSecond Language 
Acquisition, 21, 557-587. 

Manheimer, R. (1993). Close the task, improve the discourse. Estudios de Linguistica Aplicada, 17, 18-40. 
Nunan, D. (1989). Designing tasks for the communicative classroom. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Ortega, L (1999). Planning and focus on form in L2 oral performance. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 21, 109-148. 

Pica, T. (1987). Interlanguage adjustments as an outcome of NS-NNS negotiated interaction. Language 
Learning, 55(1), 45-73. 

Pica, T. (1994). Research on negotiation: what does it reveal about second language acquisition? 
Language Learning, 44(3), 493-527. 

Pica, T. (1996). Do second language learners need negotiation? International Re\’iew of Applied 



ERiC 



69 



Effects of Task Complexity on L2 Production 6 1 



Linguistics, 34{ 1), 1-21. 

Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language 
research and instruction. In G. Crookes & S. Gass (Eds.). Task-based learning in a second 
language (pp. 9-34). Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual Matters. 

Pienemann, M. (1984). Psychological constraints on the teachability of languages. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 6, 1 86-2 1 4. 



Pienemann, M. (1985). Leamability and syllabus construction. In K. Hyltenstam & M. Pienemann (Eds.), 
Modeling and assessing second language acquisition (pp. 23-75). Clevedon, Avon: 
Multilingual Matters. 

Pienemann, M. (1989). Is language teachable? Applied Linguistics, 10, 52-79. 

Prabhu, N. S. (1984). Procedural syllabuses. In T. E. Read (Ed.), Trends m language syllabus design (pp. 
272-280). Singapore: Singapore University Press/RELC. 

Prabhu, N. S. (1987). Second language pedagogy. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Robinson, P. (1995). Task complexity and second language narrative discourse. Language Learning, 
45(1), 99-140. 

Robinson, P. (1998). State of the art: SLA theory and second language syllabus design. The Language 
Teacher, 22(4), 7-14. 

Robinson, P. (2001). Task complexity, task difficulty and task production: Exploring interactions in a 
componential framework. Applied Linguistics, 22(1), 27-57. 

Robinson, P. Task complexity, cognitive resources and second language syllabus design. In P. Robinson 
(Ed.), Cognition and second language instruction . New York: Cambridge University Press. In 
press. 

Robinson, P., Ting, S., & Urwin, U. (1995). Investigating second language task complexity. RELC 
Journal , 25, 62-79. 

Skehan. P. (1996). A framework for the implementation of task-based instruction. Applied Linguistics, 
77(l),38-62. 

Skehan, P. (1998a). A rationale for task-based instruction & Implementing task-based instruction. In P. 
Skehan (Ed.), A cognitive approach to language learning (pp. 93-152). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Skehan, P. (1998b). Task-based instruction. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 18, 268-286. 

Skehan, P., & Foster. P. (1997). The influence of planning and post-task activities on accuracy and 
complexity in task-based learning. Language Teaching Research, 7(3). 

Sohn, H.-m. (1999). The Korean Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 



Recognition of English loanwords by learners of Korean 



InJung Cho 
Monash University 



1. Introduction 

English speaking learners of European languages can easily learn the vocabulary 
of the target languages using cognate words and loanwords between mother 
tongues and target languages (Webber 1978; Banta 1981; Howlett 1979; de 
Groot & Keizer 2000). Like other languages, the Korean language has adopted 
many words from English and the number of the loanwords has greatly increased 
as a result of accelerated global communication in the Internet era. 2J3HCH 5X1 
§311 contains 42,000 entries, §£& ^CHCHAt£j contains 20,000 entries and 
the Korean Ministry of Education identified about 3,000 commonly used 
loanwords in its publication entitled II-l 2j3H CH JdtX! § 311 (zMPI 2! 

3HCH) ’ in 1994. Although these entries include the loanwords from languages 
other than English, many of them can be considered as loanwords from English 
since they have been adopted through English. 

English loanwords in Korean have the potential of helping English-speaking 
learners to quickly expand the size of their Korean vocabulary. That is, the 
learners’ native language can give them a built-in lexicon of many of the high 
frequency words in Korean, such as tH— , OF 01 :^3 o, 3H Hi , rf — , All 01 LF, d| 
and EL 

However, learners of the Korean language do not seem to take advantage of 
these loanwords since Hangul, the Korean writing system, is completely 
different from the English alphabet. That is, English loanwords in Korean do not 
appear in the written form as loanwords to English-speaking learners. As a 
result, these learners seem to have difficulties in activating their top-down 
strategies in dealing with the loanwords. 

Furthermore, the recent trend of using English words indiscriminately in the 
media can add difficulty to the learning of Korean as shown in the examples 
below: 

[TV broadcasting, 01^3 1998] 

^7F ... 

S AH5*=§H AH ms S2F y AID. 

[Magazine, & 1998] 

1T0I 3Hnr s6FH 01 01 XI* D JEb *113 ¥3 A1^ & Ll^ 

- 0F7FSJ *113, E}S *113, 3S *113 - § *113 AFimS= 

OFOI^OID. SS& OH U A| St i£IE U^B ttSff 

aatss EhSOlUlb *113 ¥3. 



71 




70 InJung Cho 



When learners encounter English words used in Korean and they do not know 
that these are borrowed from English, the learners may experience more 
difficulty since these words are not listed in Korean dictionaries. 

The percentage of loanwords and English words used in the names of shops, 
products, and in the media, such as television, newspapers and magazines, is 
alarmingly high (0|§3 1998; T1S ^ 1998; 01 £1 g 1998). According to 0|g 
3 (1998), who studied the percentage of loanwords and English words in 
television program titles in 1997, 63.2 % included loanwords and/or English 
words (22.7 % were made of loandwords and/or English words only). 
Loanwords and/or English words were frequently used in actual television 
programs as well (0|§3 1998). 



Table 1: Frequency of loanwords and/or English words used in television 
programs 



Type of programs 


Length studied 


Approx, frequency of 
loanwords and/or English words 


News 


480 mins 


1,000 times 


Sports 


370 mins 


1,500 times 


Entertainment 


2,500 min 


1,500 times 


Education 


300 mins 


370 times 



Loanwords are also used quite heavily in the names of shops and products. For 
example, 58.9% of shop names included loanwords and/or English words in 
1997 (01 1998). 

The loanwords (and English words) not only can help learners to expand the 
size of their Korean vocabulary quickly but also can cause difficulty. In this 
respect, the teaching of loanwords (and English words) in Korean is very 
important, but the problem that is associated with it, as described above, has not 
to date received due attention. 

The purpose of this paper is to examine ways of helping English-speaking 
learners to activate the top-down processing strategies to tackle loanwords. To 
dais end, two experiments have been conducted. It has to be mentioned that this 
is a pilot study. 

2. Method 

2.1 Participants 





Recognition and Retention of English Loanwords by Learners of Korean 71 



Experiment 1: Thirteen participants took part: seven first- year students, four 
second- year students and two third- year students. The experiment was conducted 
in the 1 1th week of the first semester in 2001. By the time of the experiment, the 
first- year students did not have much difficulty in decoding Hangul. 

Experiment 2: Six participants took part: four second- year students and two 
third- year students. The experiment was conducted in the 12th week of the first 
semester in 2001. 



2.2 Materials & Procedure 

Experiment 1: The participants were given a vocabulary test which had 
twenty food-related words: ten Korean words and ten loanwords. All the words 
were mixed at random, and the participants were informed that all the words are 
related to food. 

When the participants finished the test, their answers were checked 
immediately to see if they left any loanwords unanswered. All the unanswered 
loanwords were marked, and the test sheets were returned to participants. They 
were told that the marked items were loanwords and to try to figure out their 
meanings. 

It has to be mentioned that there is a possibility that the participants had 
already known some of the loanwords before the test, but this factor is not 
important in our experiment. Because the experiment was to see whether or not 
their performance would improve when they were informed that some words 
were borrowed from English. 

Experiment 2: The participants were given a translation test which consisted 
of ten short sentences, of which five sentences had a loanword in them. In order 
to exclude the possible influence by different structural complexities, the 
loanword sentences were paired with non-loanword sentences of similar 
structure as shown below. 

J\ Ot* JHOIgJOiS. 

Ji AJBS 

The test procedure was the same as in the experiment 1. That is, when students 
left the loanwords sentences untranslated, they were told that those were 
loanwords and to try them again. 



2.3 Results 

Experiment 1: Most participants tended to do better when they were 
informed that certain words were loanwords as shown in the table 1 below. 




73 



72 InJung Cho 



Test 


When not informed 


When informed 


Correct answers 


7.23 


8.3 



Experiment 2: Three students got all the loanwords right at the first trial and 
one student could not figure out all of them. This student improved at the second 
trial but not the other two students who got three of them right at the first trial. 



Students 


When 

not informed 


When informed 


Total 


1 


5 


0 


5 


2 


5 


0 


5 


3 


0 


+2 


2 


4 


3 


0 


3 


5 


5 


0 


5 


6 


3 


0 


3 



2.4 Discussion 

The results of Experiment 1 and 2 show that students can benefit in dealing 
with loanwords if these words are marked in a way that shows they are 
loanwords. However, this extra information is not enough to tackle all the 
loanwords. Some loanwords seem to be more difficult than others as suggested 
by Kim (2000). In our experiments, most participants had difficulty with bH El 
(experiment 1) and 3 5 $8 01 £ (experiment 2). 

Informal interviews after the experiment revealed that most students used a 
‘sounding-out’ strategy when faced with a word which sounded like English. 
However, further research is necessary to investigate under which circumstances 
this strategy is utilized. 

3. Conclusion 

Although the results of this study can not be conclusive due to the small 
number of participants and test items, the study does show that learners can 
recognize loanwords better when they are provided with the information that the 
words are borrowed from English. Therefore, Korean learning materials could be 
designed in a way that learners can distinguish loanwords from native words and 
activate the top-down processing including the sounding-out strategy. One way 
of providing this information is to use a different font for loanwords. 




Recognition and Retention of English Loanwords by Learners of Korean 73 



However, this is not enough for learners to tackle some difficult loanwords. 
In order to solve this problem, we have to consider teaching loanwords at the 
early stage of learning which may also help them to expand the size of their 
vocabulary. However, it is very important that learners learn the rules or general 
patterns that apply when English is transliterated into Korean or when English is 
pronounced by Koreans following the Korean sound system. In other words, the 
learners have to learn to recognize loanwords on their own. Otherwise, they may 
not be able to understand loanwords, which are used by many Koreans but are 
not listed in Korean dictionaries. However, one needs to be careful not to 
encourage students to become dependent on using loanwords when equivalent 
Korean words are readily available. This choice of the words used could be 
important. 

As mentioned earlier, this study is a pilot study which requires further 
research. The future research may explore issues such as: 

• Easy vs. difficult loanwords. 

• Retention rate of easy vs. difficult loanwords. 

• Retention rate of loanwords vs. native words. 



Acknowledgements 

The author would to like to thank Douglas Ling for his invaluable comments 
and support. This work was supported by the Korea Research Foundation 
Overseas Korean Studies Grant (Grant No.: 00-C-06). 

References 

1998. £!rr.SX| g0^£| 2J BHCH A^g SEH. 8,2: 81-101. 

use, ss&j, oisxh. e. 1991. ^oichme. ahs : 

esse AK 

Alls- mEM 1995 . 21 EH 07 RJ! SEtL Alls mEA\ 1995 . 

01 i998.Sfi.Sfi ^0[2\ 2JBHCH A^g. 8, 2: 103-119. 

OISS. 1998. SS 2J BH CH Atg. 8,2:41-59. 

igg.2000. #-?.*!§:£ A|#B ^0|§. 

Banta, F. G. 1981. Teaching German vocabulary: the use of English cognates 
and common loan words. Modern Language Journal 65: 129-136. 
de Groot, A. M. B. and R. Keijzer. 2000. What is hard to learn is easy to forget: 
The roles of word concreteness, cognate status, and word frequency in 
foreign-language vocabulary learning and forgetting. Language 
Learning 50, 1: 1-56. 

Howlett, F. G. 1979. Words, words, more words. Canadian Modem Language 
Review 35: 636-653. 





74 InJung Cho 

Kim, Michael. 2000. Treatment of loan words in Korean proficiency tests. 
Korean Language in America 5: Proceedings of the Fifth National 
Conference of the American Association of Teachers of Korean (pp. 
249-256). 

Webber, N. E. Pictures and words as stimuli in learning foreign language 
responses. Journal of Psychology 98: 57-63. 




76 



Part IV 



Culture and Literature 



The Number Concept of Korean People 

Sunny Jung 

University / of California, Santa Barbara 



According to people’s customs and habits, they favor certain numbers and try to 
avoid others in ceremonies and everyday life. For Koreans, the most special number 
is "3". From the old times, 3 has been considered as an auspicious or lucky number 
and even the holiest of numbers. In this paper, I would like to examine why Koreans 
have regarded 3 as the best number through the yin and yang concept of Korea's 
founding Tangun myth. 

There are many examples to show how much Koreans favor 3 or trinity though 
not in the sense of the Christian doctrine (see below). A good example can be seen in 
the pre-iron age bowl, ’the three-footed pot’ shown on the last page. Originally, the 
three-footed pot was the treasure bowl which symbolized the nation. However, this 
three-footed treasure bowl changed its shape a little and became a bowl for burning 
incense in the Buddhist temple. A four-footed bowl can not stand on the uneven 
floor, but a three-footed bowl can on any uneven floor. That is the majesty of the 
number 3. 

The Korean writing system Hangul, one of the most scientific writing systems in 
the world, was created by the concept of Trinity: The harmony among Heaven(.), 

Earth( — ), and Human(l). 

Koreans’ predilection for the number 3 is also shown in the rhythms of the folk 
song, three lines of the unique Korean poetry "Sijo", 3 bows for the ancestor 
worship, the ginseng finder’s ritual of 3 sounds, 3-god temples, legends of the Cheju 
Island, native rituals of changing the sex of the fetus, many customs of fishing 
villages, shamanistic rituals and funeral ceremonies of villagers. 

In addition to the many examples of Korean culture that underly the number 3, 
as described above, The doubling of 3 can also be found in many examples. The 
number (33) of the students selected by the Civil Examination in the Koryo era, the 
number of the Boy Scout in the Shilla era, the number of the official merchants 
toward the end of the Yi dynasty, the number of the representatives of the March 1st 
Movement in 1919 against the Japanese are such, intriguing examples. 

The best example of this magic number 3 is seen in the Korean flag. The Korean 
flag, the symbol of the Republic of Korea, is called "T’aegukkT. The name was 
derived from the t'aeguk circle in the center. The t'aeguk circle stands for the eternal 
principle that everything in the universe is created and develops through the 
interaction between yin and yang; thus it symbolizes creation and development. 
When we draw the flag, the circle is placed exactly in the center of the flag, and its 
diameter is one half of the width of the flag. The "s" line dividing the circle begins at 




78 



78 Sunny Jnng 



the point where a diagonal line crossing the flag from the top left to the bottom right 
first meets the circumference of the circle, and ends at the point precisely opposite to 
it. Each curve of the V character should form half of the circumference of a smaller 
circle, the diameter of which is exactly half that of the big circle. 

The Korean concept of number 1 represents the quantity of 1, and at the same 
time it is a whole. It represents the Heaven. In the view of the yin and yang, 1 is the 
number not yet mixed or combined with any other numbers. It is the first pure yang 
number which is a masculine number. Also it is the first odd number, which means 
that everything comes out of 1. 

2 is the first number which is not 1, and it is the first yin even number. It is the 
pure number which is not combined or mixed with any other numbers. Also, 2 is the 
number that signifies a couple like yin and yang, Heaven and Earth, male and 
female; it also means contrast and concord. 

3 is the first number that is created and changed from the pure yang of 1 and 
the pure yin of 2. That is, it is the number which is finally perfected with the 
harmony of the yin and yang and which becomes complete, symbolizing perfection, 
tranquility, harmony, and change. Its beauty lies in the adding together of the 1 and 
the 2 to equal 3 without dividing the characters of 2 and without destroying the 
wholeness of 1. 



The native Korean word for 1 (”han") represents one , large , many, much , whole , 
middle of, high same , and wide. The origin of the word liana’ is ’sun' and light’. The 
number 2 symbolizes t wo, harmony , divide , go together , contrasty conflict , and 
subordinates. The origin of the word flul’ is ’moon’ or ’couple’ and represents the 
meaning mother’ or ’the earth’. The number 3 symbolizes three, live , life y perfection, 
creation , harmony ; and triangularity . The origin of the word ’set’ is ’between’, ’son’, 
and ’to live’. 

The reasons for the Koreans’ love for the number 3 can vary depending on 
people’s interpretations. Who is right and what might be plausible reasons? The 
possible reasons that might be considered are: 1) general human characteristics, 2) 
the influence of Confucianism or Taoism, 3) the influence of Buddhism, 4) the 
nature of the horse-riding people, and 5) the influence of shamanism. I will leave this 
fascinating topic for future research, however. What follows is the Korean version of 
my presentation. 




79 



The Number Concept of Korean People 79 



341 ^p7l]#}4l 



I. 44 

444 f-^o] S.^-( Bow-wow theory) °1 4 • #-lj 4 !!°ll 4 # S. 
# (Pooh-pooh theory)44!4, 2KYo-he _ ho theory) °] 4 # #4 H 
(Contact theory) °fl 4# 5)4444 444! 2 441 4~g-#2 l## 
! #-§-*114 S-Sl-71- 24 44.l> £E# 4444 44# 4-41 !## 4 4 
22 144 41314- #41 !#44 4l7llf- i##2 &4. °1 “D. 444 
!44 4 4! 43-2.44-71I 4 4 #2 .4 21 * 414 444 444, 440)1 
244! fs)r ^ t 144 44# 44# w4> 4-44, 4 7)1 t- 4)4 4 
4 4 .§.441 l## 1 4! 444 5)4 444. !#4 -3-2! #! 4 
4* 2! 4444 -41 4 41 4*11 14 144 2! 4 E 112 #444 

7|i wfl 4 *8444 “H!4 4. !#! 44444 4444 444 4 4 4 
a] p] «-4 4 44 444 #444. 444 24 44 #44 41 41 -a °1 *11 4 
4 #44, 44 #!1 44442 4 1 44. 

44 4 #4 44, 4444 44 44 #4 4 4 4 4 425.4 44 
41- 444 441-4 441 4 7 \ v \ o ] 404 # 44 #44 4#22 
#2# 44. 44 4441 2 44 Ai.44 4-^- 21 412.4 4^ 3.4 
#44 21444 4#1 4 442 444 is, is, £2 14 42114 
lsl-4 #4) 4444 ^4 lofl 444 4 4 442 411 1441 

5144 44. 41 -5-45444 ##4#°)14 12)153.4-! #444 444 
145=8 #4 ##4#4 #442 4! 411 411! 5)4! 41 44 
4 411 44124 44. 242s 1 #1 1244 241 444 # 
4 44 444 4! 4. 

II. 14 #4 4 #44 4-5-# 4 

#411 31 #42 ##4 44. 4411 344-1- #4! #422 
3144 7f#4 in 71.42 44 2 '. 4444 #41 4! 4111 4# 
#44 -f-4444 441 414 #7114 4444 4444 4#4 2! 

1 414444-. 3124 144-t #! 42! i## 3#22 4144 
424 #141 #44! # 7-11 4 4-41 #4-4-2, 1## 4 #1 7-11 
4 44 14 ehi#. 411 ?j Knout ‘4^-cf’i- *\] 4 442, #4 4- 

2 ###4 44. 2# #41! 4 4# 31 444 27I-& 144. 24 



1) Clark, Eschholz, & Rosa, Language, St. Martin's. 1977, pp.3-18 

2) Kil, Ok Yun, 3pakja. Video program, KBS, 1994 

SO 



80 Sunny Jung 



44 444SH4 -g-3} 4425 ^ 7 } 333143124, 4424 %-7.\ 

4 3331 -Sr 44 ? s v $]; 4 :n. St 4. StlHl 2-^4 1}7l3l4 333] 

4424, 191931 3144 4 ^£^-$13] 3.1 ^ ^1 ^7131S. 33314 314. 33 ^ 

44 4 31 44 444fe ^ 0 . 5 . ^V^Sla) ctje^ Aj-BJ-o] *)-§. 4 4 7 }^ 4 

St# 24 4 4 44 °1. 7 }c]sl-£ 3355 4 -§- 7)0] Qt}ji St 4. -g-Jgl-g- ll 4 
fe 3.3.7 4^r«- 44. tnjao. ^ <3=^1- #7 ] 31 Sl^4St 

4. 4^7} ^4- St # 44 t <2^4 4*4 e > ttcf. 1^4 f- 

44 4 2«flofl a]b 0 V 144 §1-0), A> 4444 *J-g- 4 trflfe tt Si 4 
2 44-4 4 2«11 4«B1- St 1 !. 2St 371^144 § 114451 , 3 

7-1 E] CHI A] 44 dVu)- 3I, 37]&HlAi A)- 7 1 2] 44 . 34 $,v^t- AlJi4fe 

StSl#4 4441 - 43 } o] £A)-el3i $144? 

4£St ^St-i: SS14-C- 3i4 44 4 444 2 -f}-St 4^4 4 
4St4. 444 1 ?! 441431 444 4 44 =l #4 441- 7l -5] 3i $lfe 4 
*4 44. 2 -S- 44 44 3 715. a|a )44 s! u l St St 422 314 
44 1°144 4°H A 1 444. 4 4 47> 4 14 £ t4 43143 4 4444 4 
444 ^ 4^44 31 -g-4, 44S1 44. 4-S-4- lf€ 

4. aeli 41 4 44 444 2 ] 44 <g 7|)4 1 - 4=4 

44^14 4 4 7B4 ^ 5 ^ 71 - Jg-g* 4444 . § 4 ^44 

44 ^2244 444 44 ^ 7]544. 444 444 4 71 ^. 43 ] 
T-lt IStSt St 1-4 444 ^44. 3x4^311-4 #4 44 4-^4 4 
4 SS 42 St4. 44n42i4 £4 41-t-4 4°H 44 4 7 B€43i 44SS. 
24 44 4443] 2:44 A 3 i 74 e> 3Z 4 ^ 0.4 25]4 444 314:4 
£44-2 U4444 ssi-4 444 444 31 ^44 444 4444^- 
44M4. 44 444 si*.- 4314, 2:71 71424 44 1471-1-31 *34 
4471-1-, 442 44 444-iHl 4=11 M s v 44$i24 $!**4-*4 41 1 
4 444 444. °14 4 44 7] £.401 51 52 m 4444 44 44 
244 m4.3) 

44314 4 7fl^i 444 1044 44 1244)3. 44-42 $124, 
44 4^3t#-i- 44 44 2 44144 44^4 44 7} 4 2 ± s . 

44 4444 o^Hr 5 ^ A i °\\ 3i -e-7-H- 44. 1244 1044 44 3t 
44 6044 4 44 4444, ^44 444 44 4444 7:144 44 
4 41-4 A ^2t 4 4 °! ^ 4^ 4 4 4. 4^4 ^4^ 

44 -§-4 4-2:4 442.4 I -24 4h°Ha15 < 3^1 oi* 

47-ls. 4 41-01 444-4-. 3IE-1J3L£ -§-4314 ^7fl4# 44471 444 



3) Encyclopedia Britannica, VII, 1980439-440 

4) 124 : -7:'ll:4 OT JS E4V* '# SIX % 103 }: VTSWillXcLm^M 



81 



The Number Concept of Korean People 81 



# 4*11# Jf#l ##■§- 44 7X4*### 5*3425. 4-14 o]?>41 
*1144# ### 411 ois|isH 0 > D J: 44. 3ze]4 4-2°ll## 4#4# 
3°14# #«fl 44 4# 41 #2l3ixl- sfiLJL 1044 12# af 444# 4 
## tflsf#S #3f °fl ##4#5. 44. 

4# 0-!?-# 34## #1 44# 445#-. 1 -€#14# #44 4€ 
°1 €##xl4# 441# 144# 44 4#* ##<# 4 ## ##xf 
&18; 4# ## §4. 4144 4# Jffi##l ## #41 4 €# 4# 

# of#o.5 31 7f#4 ##o)l cflsf#^- 4444. 025 *44# 

-¥•#44# 4# 3l €1 §14. o# #14, #4# f-°04# ##* # 
#44. 4444# 41 0# l#^# 4144# Afl#n #41-# #-# 
44 1-### 4## a# 4 #44# 4#-t 1##1 ##4xl #1°I4. 
0# 4## 4(^)2.s. if# 44. '¥1 4 S#1 4# #1 #4 4# € 
#5 #1-01 #-§-#1 #4# 4 2#-t 414 #44# §}4$4# 125 
^oi# at!: 44-# 1# #44. 24 44 4^441 ‘§14’# xfl## # 
#f-#l#- 1(H), 40*.), *(2SW #4. 3z#4 M# #4 44 4 #2.5. 

xf°l 4 4 # 41 xf## # 0 )] Efl^o.a.s. ft##cfS #ol Si# 444 
isfe ‘§144 #4 #2## §}#$4’# 425 04# ##xf sjcf 4 
44. it# ‘5441- 42 . 42(44 §•# jj£) 4 ##(44 .4: ) 41 of 

5 # 5 . ### #4 44’# S#l# ‘44’ ‘4#4’# SI #2 4225 
#### 4 4 4# ##xf 44 4414. 44 3? he# 4# ?\#1 41 X. 
1 # 1 - 0 ] €#5 ‘41 4 4 #44 44 44’# S4 25 ‘4 44’# 
S°14. 441 4#(^I'i)-c: 01 xfH#4. 

#444 oil# ll 4441# ‘4’# 444# 14 4# ‘€4,’ ‘24’ 

# #41 #42 44. °1# 41 #44x12 44, 4#, 42#, 4# 
14 444 441 4*1 4444. 44-4 -1 #xf# 44, a# 4 4 
41 €25 24 #5# 441 7f##4. 1# 44# #41 44# 4 
l#o)l Af-g.# #*flaf eh## 4442 4# #44. 14# 4 444 5 

4 11 of°. ^42 #4# <$ 0 . o^o] S44. 24 42# #°l2. 

5 i#l#l# ig Aff-o] Aj#ufcffe S°1 #4. 

#444 44 21 444# ‘I’l €44# 444 #oi4#.2# 4, 
244# SI 1444. 1°<H4# # 2# 44 xf of4 #a# ##c>i# 
#2# 1#°H #1# #44. 24 14 <4, 414 4, 444 14 4 
°1 1°1 444 44xf 44# #114 444 ### €2 44. 2 #25 
2# 24 #a}o| of 4 ## tB^# 0 } 33 -g. S444 14 4 2 

44 141 444x12. 44. 444 r.# Ixf# # 7* a# 14-8- 
24 1, x]# H 444 ##oi# -#- of efl 4# -1 4# #2# * 
1 S444 

o#a# 11 4 4# #5# 414 #41 114 i#:#'! 4444 4 





