
Introduction 

In a fourth grade classroom in the Pa¬ 
cific Northwest, a teacher and her students 
are reviewing one of the most infamous 
events in U.S. history: “The Trail of Tears,” 
the forced resettlement of the Cherokee 
people from Georgia to Oklahoma—known 
by the Cherokee as “nu na hi du na tlo hi 
lu i” or the “Trail Where They Cried.” After 
several teacher prompts, students cite the 
Indian Removal Act as the reason why the 
Cherokee were forced to move west of the 
Mississippi River. Seeking more informa¬ 
tion, Jeanette probes her students as she 
points to the Cherokee Nation’s ancestral 
homeland in parts of North Carolina, 
Georgia, Tennessee, and Alabama: 

Jeanette: And what was special about 
that land? There’s tons of land. What 
was so unique about that? Joel. 

Joel : If you dug, like, deep enough, you 
could find, like, gold? Like a gold mine? 

Jeanette: [They] discovered gold. 

Ashley: Is that, like, the only reason why 
they [the Cherokee] had to move? Just 
because they [European-Americans] 
wanted to be rich? 

Jeanette: That was why. 

Ashley: Well, that’s a dumb reason! 

Students: (laughing) 

Jeanette: I agree. 

Ashley’s blunt comment evoked student 


Michele R. Mason is a doctoral student 
and Gisela Ernst-Slavit is a professor 
in the College of Education 
at Washington State University-Vancouver, 
Vancouver, Washington. 


laughter and the mild agreement of her teach¬ 
er. The conversation continued with similar 
exchanges before students engaged in two 
culminating activities: (1) a written summary 
of The Trail of Tears and (2) a “pictograph 
expressing how the Cherokee felt.” 

During this 15-minute review one 
important learning objective was appar¬ 
ent: to have children empathize with the 
Cherokee Nation’s point of view. This was 
certainly accomplished as demonstrated 
by Ashley’s incredulous comment and by 
similar responses by her peers as discussed 
below. What was missing, however, was 
a space for children to critically analyze 
and problematize the basic cause of the 
displacement of the Cherokee. Jeanette, 
consciously or unconsciously, used ques¬ 
tions inviting feelings of empathy for the 
Other but missed the opportunity to fur¬ 
ther explore historical reasons for unjust 
treatment, such as land theft. 

The vignette above illustrates how 
Jeanette constructed—via language 
and representation—a way to interpret 
Western history, detached from a critical 
perspective. It is her speech that guides 
the discussion; her words and her silence 
frame and construct the “story” of The Trail 
of Tears. As Weedon (1987) explains, 

Language is the place where actual and 
possible forms of social organization and 
their likely social and political consequenc¬ 
es are defined and contested. Yet it is also 
the place where our sense of ourselves, our 
subjectivity, is constructed, (p. 21) 

The purpose of this article is to draw at¬ 
tention to the language used by fourth and 
fifth grade teachers during social studies 
instruction and to discuss the implications 
of how this language frames non-dominant 
groups, as in this case. Via the discussion of 


segments of instructional conversations, we 
point to the pervasive use of language that 
perpetuates stereotypes and biased repre¬ 
sentations of Native American history. 

To frame the analysis, we discuss 
three different perspectives. First, we sum¬ 
marize the literature on Otherness, par¬ 
ticularly, how the Other is constructed (1) 
through language, (2) in Western history, 
and (3) in classroom discourse. Second, 
we share information about the Critical 
Language Awareness movement rooted in 
the United Kingdom. This body of work is 
concerned with the relationship between 
language and social context, particularly 
educators’ awareness of how ideology and 
power structures inherent in language 
play out during daily school routines. 

In addition, we highlight the National 
Social Studies Standards’ focus on helping 
students construct a pluralist perspective 
based on diversity. We argue that by care¬ 
fully examining the talk that transpires 
in classroom discussions, we can have 
a window into how knowledge, identity, 
social positioning, and value systems are 
constructed by teachers and students. The 
paper ends with a list of specific suggestions 
for educators and teacher educators regard¬ 
ing language awareness, primary sources, 
and the importance of using balanced and 
comprehensive historical perspectives. 

How the Other Is Constructed 
through Language 

One way in which we use language to 
define and construct our world is in how 
we refer to people whom we perceive to 
be different from ourselves or the group 
with which we identify. Often we use a 
simple either-or dichotomy marked by 
the use of tale tell pronouns like we-they 


MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION 

IO 










Table 1 

Western Construction of the Other through History 

(summarized from McGrane, 1989) 


Historical Era 

General Focus 

Conception of the 
non-European Other 

Renaissance 

The Christian Church exerted 
power and control in all walks of 
life. Western civilization revolved 
around what the church consid¬ 
ered good and proper actions, 
thoughts, knowledge, etc. Groups 
outside the Christian Church 
were viewed in relation to Chris¬ 
tianity: already saved, could be 
converted (and hence saved - the 
potential Christian), or beyond all 
hope of salvation. 

♦ The non-European Other as 
non-Christian Other was seen 
as being under the direct con¬ 
trol of Satan and original sin. 

♦ “Ot/ier-as-Child” 

♦ Other as Savage (barbarian) 

Enlightenment 

Acquiring and developing knowl¬ 
edge about everything became 
the dominant driving and orga¬ 
nizational force behind Western 
civilization. A dichotomy existed 
by which people were categorized 
as those who were enlightened 
or knowledgeable (civilized) vs. 
those who were ignorant or su¬ 
perstitious (primitive). 

♦ The Other as Savage giving 
way to the Domesticated Other 

♦ The non-European Other 
was constructed as ignorant, 
superstitious, unenlightened, 
uncivilized, and primitive. 

19th Century 

Western scientific thought and 
organized conceptualizations 
of time rose to the foreground. 
Geology, anthropology, and evo¬ 
lution became influential in their 
depiction of all things in relation 
to great expanses of time. 

♦ The non-European Other was 
viewed as primitive in compari¬ 
son to Western civilization but 
evolutionarily positive - like 
ourselves in an earlier (primi¬ 
tive) era. 

♦ The non-European Other was 
no longer viewed as outside of 
humanity but as a living fossil 
of unrecorded European history 
(prehistoric). 

Early 20th Century 

The effects of anthropological 
research and thought are felt in 
that culture is now used to ex¬ 
plain and describe the differences 
noticed in the Other. 

♦ The non-European Other is 
thought of as simply being dif¬ 
ferent because of culture. 


or us-them (Eriksson & Aronsson, 2005). 
This positioning of identity and noticing of 
difference, or otherness, is well established 
(Davies & Harre, 1990; Gudykunst, 2004; 
Gutierrez & Orellana, 2006; Rogoff, 2003; 
Sampson, 2008,1993; Sollors, 1986; Ting- 
Toomey, 1993). As Yep (1998) comments 
on his own experience: 

For many Euro Americans, I am “a per¬ 
son of color.” This view of marginality, of 
“ otherness ,” is one of isolation, invisibility, 
alienation, and deprivation. Otherness 
represents the undesirable, degraded, 
exiled, suppressed, deviant, disen¬ 
franchised, and incongruous ele¬ 
ments of the “ideal order.” (emphasis 
added; p. 83) 

Being labeled, treated, or talked about 
as Other is to be excluded from something. 
The Other can be as exotic as a Finn liv¬ 
ing in Peru, as fantastic as Paul Bunyan 
and Babe the Blue Ox, or as mundane as 
a comparison of physical attributes, choice 
of attire, or regional dialect. It is important 
to realize that in the United States, as well 
as in many other English-speaking parts 
of the world, power rests in the hands of 
the dominant group: White, middle-class, 
heterosexual, and usually male (McCarthy, 
1996). Everyone else becomes the Other — 
and a more exotic Other the further they are 
perceived to be from the dominant norm. 

Cultures and groups identify and 
use norms, or what groups consider to be 
normal, in order to construct, maintain, 
and differentiate their identity from other 
groups and/or to exclude outsiders or Oth¬ 
ers. Often such norms are so ingrained 
in a group, so taken for granted, that a 
group considers the norms to be obvious to 
any normal person (Verkuyten, 2001). In 
effect, it is as if the group’s point of view 
is invisible to the group itself. The group 
believes its perspective is objective —a 
kind of “God’s-eye view from Nowhere” 
(Sampson, 2008,1993, p. 84)—and fails to 
recognize that its perspective is only one 
among many equally valid viewpoints. 

How the Other Is Constructed 
in Western History 

The construction of the Other can be 
traced back through the history of West¬ 
ern civilization. McGrane (1989) provides 
a compelling account beginning with the 
Renaissance and continuing through the 
twentieth century (see Table 1). In his book 
McGrane discusses how the Other was 
constructed and reconstructed as Western 
societal focus and identity shifted: from out¬ 
side of Christianity—to outside of civilized 
or enlightened people—to living outside of 
time. As the reader will notice, this analysis 


is not new; other historians and anthropolo¬ 
gists have arrived at similar conclusions 
(see, for example, Geertz, 1973; Greenblatt, 
1991; Rogoff, 2003; Wolf, 1982). 

How the Other is Constructed 
in Classroom Discourse 

Recent studies by Eriksson and Arons¬ 
son (2005), Palfreyman (2005), and Yoon 
(2008) point to the insidious construction 
of difference or otherness in classrooms 
by teachers who seem unaware of how 
their language use contributes to such 
constructions. For example, in their study 
of booktalk sessions in a Swedish elemen¬ 
tary school, Eriksson and Aronsson (2005) 
found that teachers implicitly or explicitly 
talked about “us Swedish children” when 
discussing books set in environments for¬ 


eign to the students (p. 719). Otherness, 
in this case, was accomplished by fore¬ 
grounding differences, setting up a series 
of contrasts between us and them. 

Classroom discussions, particularly 
teacher talk, influence and shape the be¬ 
liefs, ideas, values, and understandings of 
students. According to Cazden (1988), “[w]e 
have to consider how the words spoken in 
classrooms affect the outcomes of educa¬ 
tion: how observable classroom discourse 
affects the unobservable thought processes 
of each of the participants, and thereby the 
nature of what all students learn” (p. 99). 
In other words, children from traditionally 
underrepresented groups may feel very 
disconnected from a discussion of American 
history if they do not see a link to their own 
story. Adrienne Rich captures the over¬ 
whelming feeling of distress that narratives 


FALL 2010 














like this one have on students in a powerful 
quote: “When someone with the authority of 
a teacher, say, describes the world and you 
are not in it, there is a moment of psychic 
disequilibrium, as if you looked into a mir¬ 
ror and saw nothing” (Rich, 1986, p. 119). 

By carefully examining the talk that 
transpires in classrooms, we can have 
a window into how knowledge, identity, 
social positioning, and value systems are 
constructed by teachers and students. 
These constructions, fortunately or unfor¬ 
tunately, can become powerful pillars upon 
which societal norms are built. Bourdieu 
(1977) makes clear his belief that schools 
actually reproduce societal norms, values, 
and conditions by inculcating in students 
the ideologies embraced by members of 
the dominant group—usually in charge of 
education. In today’s society 

power is predominantly exercised through 
the generation of consent rather than 
through coercion, through ideology rather 
than through physical force, through the in¬ 
culcation of self-disciplining practices rather 
than through the breaking of skulls.... 

It is an age in which the production and 
reproduction of the social order depend 
increasingly upon practices and processes 
of a broadly cultural nature. Part of this de¬ 
velopment is an enhanced role for language 
in the exercise of power: it is mainly in dis¬ 
course that consent is achieved, ideologies 
are transmitted, and practices, meanings, 
values and identities are taught and learnt. 
(Fairclough, 1995, p. 219) 

This vital role of language in issues of 
power, equity, and societal construction 
lead us to Critical Language Awareness, 
an approach that looks at teachers’ lan¬ 
guage through a critical lens. 

Critical Language Awareness 

The Language Awareness (LA) move¬ 
ment has its roots in the United Kingdom 
beginning in the early 1980s (Andrews, 
2007; Granville, 2003; Janks, 2000). In its 
most basic form, “[language awareness 
refers to the development... of an enhanced 
consciousness of and sensitivity to the forms 
and functions of language” (Carter, 2003, p. 
64). Over the years two distinct foci have 
developed under the language awareness 
umbrella: Teacher Language Awareness 
(TLA) and Critical Language Awareness 
(CLA; for a partial review, see Svalberg, 
2007). In this article, we will limit our dis¬ 
cussion to Critical Language Awareness. 

Critical Language Awareness is pri¬ 
marily concerned with the relationship 
between language and social context. 
Proponents believe that “language use is 
not neutral” (Carter, 2003, p. 64) and that 
the “nontransparent aspects” of language 


influence and are in turn influenced by: (1) 
representations and positioning of identity, 
(2) society, (3) politics, (4) relationships of 
power, and (5) ideologies constructed by 
and conveyed through language (Bolitho, et 
al., 2003; Carter, 2003; Clark, Fairclough, 
Ivanic, & Martin-Jones, 1991; Fairclough, 
1992; Janks & Ivanic, 1992). This under¬ 
standing of language has implications for 
teacher education and practice. 

Teachers who embrace CLA: (1) ac¬ 
knowledge the implicit and explicit ideolo¬ 
gies and power structures inherent in lan¬ 
guage, (2) understand that the use of such 
language, even unintentionally, can and does 
legitimate and reproduce social inequalities, 
and (3) strive to become agents of long¬ 
term change in society (Clark, Fairclough, 
Ivanic, & Martin-Jones, 1990). Teachers 
who demonstrate CLA are not only cognizant 
of the ideologies that shape language but 
are also aware of and exercise great care 
in their own use of language (Clark, et al., 
1990). Consider the words of Lake (1990), a 
member of the Cherokee and Seneca tribes, 
to the teacher of his son, Wind-Wolf: ‘What 
you say and what you do in the classroom, 
what you teach and how you teach it, and 
what you don’t say and don’t teach will have 
significant effect on the potential success or 
failure of my child” (p. 53). 

Critical Language Awareness is a 
melding of philosophy, ideology, knowl¬ 
edge, skill, and self-awareness in the criti¬ 
cally conscious practice and sustained use 
of language in the every day routines of 
school—including the teaching of content- 
area material (Clark, et al., 1990; Clark & 
Ivanic, 1999). 

... [G] iven that power relations work increas¬ 
ingly at an implicit level through language, 
and given that language practices are 
increasingly targets for intervention and 
control, a critical awareness of language 
is a prerequisite for effective citizenship, 
and a democratic entitlement, (emphasis 
added; Fairclough, 1995, p. 222) 

Within this context, one of the most recogniz¬ 
able areas of education for citizenship and 
democracy is in the field of social studies. 

National Social Studies Standards 

Multicultural education goals and 
social studies standards in the U.S. try to 
address the need to mitigate and transform 
perceptions and constructions of otherness 
by educating students to be “‘student-citi¬ 
zens,’ young people who will soon assume 
the role of citizen” with global and plural¬ 
ist perspectives (National Council for the 
Social Studies, n.d.-b, para. 25). 

Students should be helped to construct a 
pluralist perspective based on diversity. 


This perspective involves respect for dif¬ 
ferences of opinion and preference; of race, 
religion, and gender; of class and ethnicity; 
and of culture in general. This construction 
should be based on the realization that dif¬ 
ferences exist among individuals and the 
conviction that this diversity can be posi¬ 
tive and socially enriching. Students need 
to learn that the existence of cultural and 
philosophical differences are not ‘problems’ 
to be solved; rather, they are healthy and 
desirable qualities of democratic commu¬ 
nity life. (National Council for the Social 
Studies, n.d.-b, para. 30) 

If the “primary purpose of social stud¬ 
ies is to help young people develop the 
ability to make informed and reasoned 
decisions for the public good as citizens of 
a culturally diverse, democratic society in 
an interdependent world” (National Council 
for the Social Studies, n.d.-a, para. 4), then 
we must provide students with diverse 
perspectives, resources, and opportunities 
to critically discuss the trajectory of differ¬ 
ent cultures and groups not as representa¬ 
tives of “dead and buried” cultures (e.g., as 
if Native Americans were extinct), or as 
unskilled laborers (e.g., “new” immigrants), 
or as undesirable settlers (e.g., the Chinese 
Exclusion Act). Students benefit from learn¬ 
ing about different cultures and groups not 
merely as part of a chronological history of 
the United States through statistics and 
charts but as the stories of different groups 
of people—past and present—including 
conflicting accounts of their trajectories. 

While in recent years textbooks and 
curricula have been deliberate in updating 
materials to avoid stereotyping and the 
construction of otherness, not all educators 
have been able to make that shift dur¬ 
ing classroom discussions (see Eriksson 
& Aronsson, 2005; Hollingworth, 2009; 
Palfreyman, 2005; Yoon, 2008). Using the 
combined lenses of the construction of the 
Other, Critical Language Awareness, and 
social studies goals, the following analysis 
seeks to address the following questions: 
What is the nature of the interaction in 
three upper elementary classrooms dur¬ 
ing discussions of Native Americans? How 
are teachers in these classrooms using 
language to refer to Native Americans 
during social studies instruction? What 
opportunities were given to students to 
critically explore the historical treatment 
of Native Americans? 

Context of the Study 

This work is part of a larger ethno¬ 
graphic (see Hornberger in Cumming, et 
al., 1994), sociolinguistic (Bloome & Clark, 
2006; Erickson, 2006; Green & Wallat, 
1981) and multi-site (Eisenhart, 2001) 


MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION 

I 1 



study that sought to unpack the different 
language registers (a variety of a language 
used for a specific purpose in a particular 
context) used by teachers during content- 
area instruction in fourth and fifth grade 
classrooms in southwest Washington 
(Ernst-Slavit, Mason, & Wenger, 2009). 

Each participating classroom includ¬ 
ed at least five English language learners 
of varying levels of English proficiency. 
Participating teachers had at least five 
years of teaching experience, as well as 
advanced specialization in English as a 
Second Language (ESL) education, and 
were highly regarded by teachers and ad¬ 
ministrators. (See Table 2 for additional 
information about the teachers in this 
study. All participant and location names 
are pseudonyms.) 

One or both authors observed content- 
area instruction over the course of one 
week. Each set of classroom observations 
ranged from 16-22 hours. Data collected 
included video and audio recordings, field 
notes, still photographs, teacher interviews, 
and pertinent written materials, such as 
handouts, worksheets, and student work. 

For this article we focus on segments 
collected in one fifth grade and two fourth 
grade classrooms during social studies 
instruction. The topics centered on Native 
Americans: (1) the formation of colonies in 
the New World and the relationship between 
colonists and the Native Americans; (2) the 
role of Sacagawea in the Lewis and Clark 
Expedition; and (3) the experience of the 
Cherokee Nation on the Trail of Tears. 

Examples of the Other 
in Social Studies Classrooms 

We ask the reader to consider the 
depictions of Native Americans as the 
Other constructed by 4 th and 5 th grade 
students and their teachers in the follow¬ 
ing segments. How are members of the 
non-dominant culture represented? How 
are students encouraged to think, feel, and 
talk about Native Americans? How is the 
impact of one group’s actions on another 
discussed or avoided? 


‘‘Hostile Savages” 

Constructing the Other as Uncivilized 
But Potentially Useful Trading Partners 

In the following segment, Kirsten is 
continuing a colonial era social studies unit, 
in which teams of student colonists would 
eventually apply for a New World colony 
charter from the King of England, repre¬ 
sented by the male teacher in the adjoining 
classroom. Students, in four-to-five member 
teams, each have specific tasks to complete 
as explained in a teacher-created handout. 
In an attempt to make the project more au¬ 
thentic, all students were required to select 
and use an English name. Additionally, the 
text of the handout itself was printed in a 
cursive font, reminiscent of handwriting of a 
bygone day. Here, Kirsten is reading aloud 
from a section of the handout titled “Task 
One: Political Structure.” 

Segment 1 

Kirsten-. There must be adequate protec¬ 
tion for the inhabitants from attack by 
hostile savages, but you will also have to 
oversee friendly trade with the natives to 
ensure their proper treatment. We want 
the Indians to help us and not be our 
enemies. What will you do to make this 
happen? You will need to address that in 
your paper. Are you going to have Native 
Americans around you? If so, are they 
going to be friendly or not? 

Take a moment to count the number 
of different nouns used to refer to Na¬ 
tive Americans (e.g., savages, Indians). 
Consider the connotations of the words 
selected and what the implications of those 
words suggest. 

The use of “hostile savages” con¬ 
structs Native Americans as dangerous, 
unpredictable, and uncivilized Others. The 
phrase “friendly trade with the natives” 
views the Other from a commercial or 
capitalistic perspective. Native Americans 
may have something needed (i.e., a useful 
commodity) or may want to trade for things 
they want. The use of the phrase “proper 
treatment” constructs the Other as a pow¬ 
erless child in need of protection. Finally, 
an unrealistic dichotomy is established by 


the words “friendly or not.” Relationships 
between diverse groups of people and na¬ 
tions rarely distill down to such simplistic 
either-or dichotomies. Such depictions do 
not convey the reality that diverse peoples 
must consciously and diligently work to 
understand and value one another. 

What may not be apparent in this colo¬ 
nial project is what has been excluded as a 
choice. Students only had the opportunity 
to approach this historical moment in the 
role of European colonizers. It was not an 
option for students to represent a tribe or 
sovereign nation of Native Americans. Once 
again, this absence represents a missed op¬ 
portunity for students to fully explore more 
complicated historical events and in doing 
so, continue to develop complex understand¬ 
ings of social interaction between groups. 

Finally, the teacher attempts to make 
the project authentic by recreating the 
conditions and language of the Colonial 
era. However, there was no evidence that 
the language used to describe Native 
Americans was problematized or that the 
perspectives and ideologies of the coloniz¬ 
ers were critically explored, an observation 
particularly puzzling in a school with a 
Native American name. 

“Do You Remember What a Slave Is?” 
Constructing Sacagawea 
as a Serviceable Other 

During the week of observation in 
Keely’s classroom, she and her students 
started a new unit on the Lewis and Clark 
Expedition. The excerpts below are part of 
a longer instructional conversation focus¬ 
ing on the status of Sacagawea as a slave, 
while at the same time highlighting the 
pivotal role she played in the survival of 
the Expedition. While drawing a previ¬ 
ously traced image of Sacagawea, Keely 
introduced this important figure in U.S. 
history in an almost storylike manner. 

Segment 2 

Keely: His wife served as a translator. Not 
only that, Sacajawea helped (beginning to 
trace over the light pencil already on the 
butcher paper—forming the garment worn 


Table 2 

Information on Participating Teachers and Schools 

Teacher 

Degree 

Specialization 

Years of 
Experience 

Current Position 

School 

District 

Jeanette 

Master’s 

Degree 

Completed ESL 
coursework 

10 years 

Mainstream teacher 

4th grade 

Cedar Woods 

Primary School 

Misty Forest 

School District 

Kirsten 

Master’s 

Degree 

Completed ESL 
coursework 

24 years 

Mainstream teacher 

5th grade 

Tomanawas 
Elementary School 

Mountain Meadow 

School District 

Keely 

Master’s 

Degree 

Completed ESL 
coursework 

6 years 

Mainstream teacher 

4th grade 

Larkspur 

Elementary School 

Mountain Meadow 

School District 


FALL 2010 

I 3 

















by Sacajawea)—everyone find food and 
survive the winters. She showed them how 
they could capture food, how they could 
fish, and the berries they could eat— 

Joel'. She was very smart. 

Keely: She was very smart. She played a 
very important role in the expedition. 

* * * * 

Keely. Sacagawea... was a Shoshone, 
Native American girl and she was taken 
from her family one day, um, during a raid 
by another tribe who were stealing their 
horses. So, at 16, actually she was 14 at 
the time, she was kidnapped by another 
tribe and taken. And she became a slave 
for that other tribe. Do you remember 
what a slave is? 

Students'. Yah. 

Keely. Okay. What’s a slave? 

Ashley. Someone who, uh (many hands 
raised). 

Keely. Uh, Max? 

Max: Someone that, uh, um, works for 
another person and [xxx]. 

Keely: Yah. Um, were they usually treated 
really nicely? 

Students: No. 

Keely : No, not usually. 

Joe: Sometimes they were though. 

Keely: [xxx] times they were. So, at 14 she 
was taken and her job as a slave was to sew 
clothing for other N ative American women 
in the tribe. That was her job. Well, when 
she got a little older, the chief of that tribe 
decided to sell her or trade her for goods to 
Charbonneau, the fur trader. 

* * * * 

Keely: She helped them locate food—roots 
along the way: special roots that they could 
use as medicine. William Clark served as 
the doctor on the trail, so William Clark 
and Sacajawea teamed up a lot, because 
she was able to show him roots and things 
that they could use as medication to treat 
people who got ill along the trail. 

* * * * 

Keely: So, one of the jobs, we know that 
she helped find food. She also served as a 
translator, because she could communi¬ 
cate with the Native Americans. She, uh, 
when she was doing her sewing for the 
other tribe, she was [xxx] beading [xxx] 
clothes, where they take the little beads 
and [xxx] looked really nice. 

After briefly mentioning Sacagawea’s 
baby, Jean Baptiste or Pompe, the lesson 
continues with an extended description of 
the contributions and characteristics of an¬ 
other member of the expedition, Seaman, 
a Newfoundland dog. It was unfortunate 


that Sacagawea, the slave upon whom the 
expedition depended for food, medicine, 
seasonal survival skills, and communica¬ 
tion skills, and Seaman, the dog, were pre¬ 
sented as almost equally useful members 
of the Expedition. 

In looking at the segment above 
we see a large list of ways in which Sa¬ 
cagawea was an asset to the Expedition. 
Taken together, they construct an image 
of Sacagawea as what Sampson (2008, 
1993) refers to as a “serviceable” Other, an 
Other “constructed so as to be of service to 
the dominant groups’ own needs, values, 
interests and points of view” (p. 4). 

A brief discussion of Sacagawea’s status 
as a slave also occurs. The teacher asks her 
students to recall what they know about 
slaves. Students respond with an incom¬ 
plete and inaccurate depiction of a slave as 
someone who “works for another person” 
and who may or may not be treated well. 
Rather than clarifying or expanding upon 
this understanding, the teacher continues 
with the story of Sacagawea. The opportu¬ 
nity to hold a critical discussion of how a 
person was transformed into a commodity, 
to be purchased and sold, was lost. Addition¬ 
ally, as a slave woman used to service “the 
needs and desires of.. .men,” Sacagawea was 
constructed as man’s Other, “serviceable to 
man” (Sampson, 2008,1993, p. 6). 

“Would that be lllegalToday?” 

Constructing the Other as a Pitiable , 
Conquered People without Rights 

The next segment occurs a few minutes 
following the opening vignette. Jeanette is 
reviewing the forced resettlement of the 
Cherokee people from the southeastern 
portion of the U.S. to the Louisiana Terri¬ 
tory (the Trail of Tears). 

Segment 3 

Jeanette: What were they [the Cherokee] 
promised when they moved west of the 
Mississippi? 

Diana: It was land. 

Jeanette: They were promised free land, 
weren’t they? They were promised land. 
Give up your land here, and we’re gunna 
give you some land over there. Okay... 

Do you think they were very happy about 
that? 

Students: No. 

Jeanette: Give up your house here ...give 
up your house here and everything you 
know here, because we said so. 

Arthur: Huh No way (loud voice). 

Marisol: [xxx] kind of mean. 

❖ * * * 


Jeanette: Jenny had a really good question 
and I don’t think a lot of us heard it. 

Jenny: Wouldn’t it be, like, a crime, if, 
like, they [the European-Americans] 
made them [the Cherokee] move all the 
way over there and then they promised 
them a whole bunch of stuff that they 
never gave? 

Samantha: Actually—yah. 

Adrian: You should go to jail for it. 

Students: (multiple overlapping com¬ 
ments, then hands beginning to raise.) 

Jeanette: What do you think, Mark? 

Mark: Would that be illegal today if they 
did that? 

Jeanette: Well, I would like to think so... 
Unfortunately, governments do things, 
ours and others, do things that maybe 
people think are wrong or that maybe 
some people think are okay ... and you 
have to look inside you when you’re decid¬ 
ing what’s right or what’s wrong—what 
you would think. What do we think about 
this particular .... 

Students: Wrong. Cruel (loud voices). 

Jeanette: I agree. Okay. Shhhh. What 
kinds of feelings do you think the Chero¬ 
kee were having as they were making 
their thousand-mile trek on foot—because 
no cars—and they get to the end and 
there’s nuthin’? I want to hear more than 
just “sad.” I want more than one-word an¬ 
swers here. How do we think they felt? 

In the first section of the transcript, 
Jeanette encourages her students to con¬ 
sider the feelings of the Cherokee when 
they were forced to leave their home ter¬ 
ritories. Students respond by expressing 
their moral outrage at the treatment of 
the Cherokee in two ways. First, students 
respond emotionally—empathetically—as 
prompted by their teacher’s request. Later, 
students begin to question the legality of 
the actions committed by the European- 
Americans and in that way go beyond just 
an affective response. By emphasizing 
and insisting upon an emotional response 
(i.e., pity) to the Cherokee’s treatment, 
the opportunity to explore deeper, critical 
understandings of history, informed by 
diverse perspectives, was missed. 

While expressing empathy is valuable 
in exploring and creating relationships 
between differing groups of people, by con¬ 
centrating on the Cherokee’s feelings, the 
teacher’s repeated requests for an emotional 
response prevented a deeper discussion 
about the critical issues surrounding the 
Trail of Tears. In addition, by presenting 
the Cherokee as subject to the laws of the 
European-American leaders but without 
enforced rights under those same laws, the 


MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION 

14 



review of this event portrayed the Cherokee 
as a conquered people, as weak and pitiable 
Others (Eriksson & Aronsson, 2005). 

This identity was reinforced by call¬ 
ing upon students to imagine how the 
Cherokee felt—to feel sorry for or pity 
them because of what happened to them. 
What happened and accountability for 
what happened were wholly disconnected 
from a recognizable, identifiable, concrete 
source (e.g., Andrew Jackson, United 
States). With hindsight, it is easy to claim 
the moral high ground and denounce the 
actions of our European-American ances¬ 
tors while simultaneously constructing 
ourselves as “caring and empathizing” 
(Eriksson & Aronsson, p. 735). 

Conclusions 

By attempting to present the his¬ 
torical treatment of Native Americans as 
a story well-told, but without providing 
opportunities to critically analyze such 
treatment, educators may in fact be mask¬ 
ing dominant ideologies and contributing 
to the reproduction of societal norms. In 
contrast to the stated goals of social stud¬ 
ies standards, students are denied the 
opportunity to wrestle with the difficult 
topics that would develop their critical 
consciousness (Freire, 1970,1993) and help 
them become ethical and moral beings in 
an interconnected world. 

Instead, the classroom discussions 
we have presented explore history from a 
safe moral distance across time, obscuring 
the culpability of our European-American 
ancestors and the role each of us has in 
current social justice issues. 

If U.S. educators are truly committed 
to nurturing a “pluralist perspective based 
on diversity” in students (National Council 
for the Social Studies, n.d.-b, para. 30), 
then contrary to the beliefs of some educa¬ 
tors (Hollingworth, 2009), it is never too 
early to begin exploring complex and multi¬ 
faceted issues with students (Morgan, 
2009). As the transcript segments illus¬ 
trated, we clearly have a lot of work ahead 
of us. Not even teachers with specialized 
linguistic and cultural preparation (i.e., 
English language learner coursework and 
certification) are immune to the implicit 
nature of ideologies cunningly entwined 
in the language of the classroom. 

Suggestions for Practice 
Analyzing Teacher Talk 

As educators we can improve our 
teaching by analyzing our language via the 
use of video recordings. Video recordings 
can be done by simply placing a camcorder 
in a corner of the classroom. To avoid stu¬ 


dents getting distracted by the camcorder, 
start the camcorder before students enter 
the classroom and turn it off once students 
leave. We suggest having the camcorder 
in the classroom for a few days before the 
actual videotaping begins. 

When viewing classroom videos, focus on 
different aspects of language use, such as: 

(a) How are whole-class discussions 
constructed (e.g., Are students chal¬ 
lenged to think about, construct, de¬ 
fend, and revise their own ideas)? 

(b) What kinds of questions are asked 
(e.g., display, requiring a brief right- 
or-wrong answer; open-ended, which 
allow students to provide extended 
and personalized responses)? 

(c) Is sufficient wait-time provided 
for students’ thinking after a ques¬ 
tion is raised? In our observations 
of classrooms, the average wait time 
after a question is between one and 
two seconds. 

(d) What kind of feedback is provided? 
For example, are we responding 
to students’ questions with evalu¬ 
ative replies (e.g., “great,” “right,” 
“excellent,” or “not really,” “no, not 
quite,” “almost”), which can limit 
student thinking instead of prompt¬ 
ing students to support their answers 
logically (e.g., “Can you give us an 
example?” or “Why do you think 
that?”) or request further clarification 


(e.g., “Tell me more.” or “What do you 
mean by_?”). 

(e) How are we referring to individuals, 
groups and cultures different than our 
own? Are we using words like those or 
these to refer to different groups? Are 
we othering groups by using the us 
-them dichotomy as in the Eriksson 
and Aronsson study (2005)? 

There are many other aspects to observe 
when viewing tapes of our teaching such 
as, are we calling on boys and girls equally? 
Are we giving all our students a chance to 
speak? Are we encouraging students to ask 
questions? To lead the discussion? How are 
we bringing in different perspectives? (For 
additional information about discussions 
in content-area classrooms, see Flynn, 
2009; Salinas, Franquiz, & Guberman, 
2006; Zwiers, 2008.) 

Using Primary Sources 

Primary sources include artifacts, 
authentic documents, photos, recordings, 
transcripts of interviews, or other sources 
of information created during or close to 
the event or time period studied. In today’s 
electronic era, primary sources can be 
retrieved from digital collections, often 
containing substantial historical works. 
See for example, the Library of Congress 
(http://www.loc.gov/library/libarch-digital. 
html), university data centers such as the 
Labriola National American Indian Cen- 


© Carlocmbank.com 








,kj nAfff*. i t I- 11 l 'a VV't'-j i'. \!|A {£ •.sj.-’ t-i* 

‘Well, they look pretty undocumented fo me. 


Cartoon by J. B. Handelsman, reprinted with permission. 


FALL 2010 

15 












cagtecartoons.com 



'THE iW TH£y'RTE BUILPING A WALL &CAUSE TOO WAN 1 / OP 05 &JTTR ILLEGALLY 
ANP WON'T LEARN THEM? LANGUAGE Of? A6£|MILATE INTO THEIR CULTURE..." 


Cartoon by Jeff Parker, reprinted with permission 


ter at Arizona State University (http://lib. 
asu.edu/labriola), and Native American 
archives such as the Cherokee Nation 
(http://www.cherokee.org/Culture/His- 
tory/TOT/Cat/Default.aspx). 

It is important to realize that twenti¬ 
eth-century history can be studied using 
primary sources. As with topics such as im¬ 
migration, World War II, and the Korean 
and Vietnamese Wars, Native American 
historical and current events can be ex¬ 
plored via the knowledge and experiences 
of community or family members who lived 
through those times. Through exposure 
to and analysis of oral history interviews, 
video memoirs, and face-to-face interviews, 
students learn to ask meaningful ques¬ 
tions, draw conclusions, and reflect on pos¬ 
sible solutions and consequences. Primary 
sources allow history to come alive. 

Using Contrapuntal Pedagogy 

Contrapuntal pedagogy involves 
reading and accessing mainstream and 
non-mainstream texts (e.g., films, novels, 
poems, plays, newspaper reports) so that 
students have the opportunity to compare 
and contrast diverse perspectives, as well as 
realize how mainstream literature creates 
particular narratives of a society’s history 
(Singh & Greenlaw, 1998). By using con¬ 
trapuntal pedagogy teachers and students 
engage in inquiry and critique about how co¬ 
lonialism and imperialism have historically 
shaped and continue to shape mainstream 
knowledge about Native Americans. 

This pedagogical practice creates 
space for the knowledge and perspectives 
of marginalized people to be present. 
It allows for diverse perspectives to be 
critiqued, compared, contrasted, and con¬ 
structed in the classroom (DeJaeghere, 
2009). One simple but effective example 
is the use of political cartoons, such as the 
two included with this article. 

Providing Balanced and Comprehensive 
Historical Perspectives 

Use timelines or graphic organizers 
to provide historical perspectives, to illus¬ 
trate how cultures are born, evolve, and 
overlap in relation to other cultures in the 
same region or across the globe. This kind 
of comprehensive historical perspective will 
help students understand that life in the 
Americas did not begin when the first Euro¬ 
peans arrived but that there were a myriad 
of cultures already well established with 
rich and ancient histories (Good, 2009). 

The story line in most school textbooks 
places Native Americans in the early his¬ 
tory of colonial times, yet does not discuss 
their lives before Columbus. Most text¬ 


books do not discuss where Native Ameri¬ 
cans lived, how their political structures 
worked, how they built their homes... nor 
how and what they hunted and gathered 
(Hawkins, 2002, p. 16). 

In addition, timelines that extend 
from the past to the present day will as¬ 
sist students in debunking the notion that 
Native Americans are historical artifacts 
no longer present in our nation. It will 
also allow them to critically analyze the 
trajectory of different tribes in relation to 
issues and events (e.g., pilgrims, colonies, 
westward expansion, establishment of 
reservations, tribal sovereignty, hunting 
and fishing rights) and conflicts. 


As Macedo stated so eloquently, “one 
cannot teach conflict as if, all of a sudden, 
it fell from the sky. The conflict must be 
anchored in those competing histories and 
ideologies that generate the conflict in the 
first place” (Freire, 1970, 1993, p. 24). 

Teaching and Learning 
Critical Language Awareness 

Teacher educators can enhance their 
preservice and inservice courses by teaching 
CLA. A focus on CLA starts with an acknowl¬ 
edgement of the political and social nature of 
language. In today’s global village, a critical 
awareness of the role that language plays 


Table 3 

Elements to Include in a Critical Language Awareness Course 

(quoted from Clark, et al., 1991, pp. 48-49) 

Issue 

Sub-Issue 

1. Social awareness 
of discourse 

(a) How particular instances of spoken and written discourse are 
shaped by, and help shape, their social context. 

(b) How such instances both affect relations of power and 
dominance and contribute to their reproduction or transformation. 

(c) How the specific linguistic choices which speakers and writers 
can make can be significant in these terms, (p. 48) 

2. Critical awareness 
of diversity 

(a) Why some languages, or language varieties, are valued more 
highly than others and seen as more legitimate for prestigious 
sorts of purpose. 

(b) How current valuations of varieties, including the standard, 
have come about historically, (p. 49) 

3. Consciousness of, and 
practice for, change 

(a) How change in language results from social struggles and 
changing power relations. 

(b) What possibilities exist for change in current circumstances 
and what constraints there are. 

(c) How purposeful language practices can be oriented to 
achieving change, (p. 49) 


MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION 

16 








































in classrooms is a sine qua non not only for 
better understanding the students we teach 
but, more importantly, to avoid marginal¬ 
izing their cultures and languages. 

Clark, Fairclough, Ivanic, and Martin- 
Jones (1991) suggest three important areas 
to explore in teacher education courses: 
social awareness of discourse, critical 
awareness of diversity, and consciousness 
of, and practice for, change (pp. 48-49). 
Table 3 includes examples of specific ques¬ 
tions to address when dealing with each of 
the three subtopics. 

References 

Andrews, S. (2007). Teacher language awareness. 

New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Bloome, D., & Clark, C. (2006). Discourse-in¬ 
use. In J. L. Green, G. Camilli, P. B. Elmore, 
W.. A. Skukauskaite, & E. Grace (Eds.), 
Handbook of complementary methods in 
education research (pp. 227-241). Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Bolitho, R., Carter, R., Hughes, R., Ivanic, R., 
Masuhara, H., & Tomlinson, B. (2003). Ten 
questions about language awareness. ELT 
Journal, 57(3), 251-259. 

Bourdieu, P., & Passeron, J.-C. (1977). Repro¬ 
duction in education, society and culture (R. 
Nice & L. J. D. Wacquant, Trans. 2nd ed.). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Carter, R. (2003). Language awareness. ELT 
Journal, 57(1), 64-65. 

Cazden, C. B. (1988). Classroom discourse: The 
language of teaching and learning. Ports¬ 
mouth, NH: Heinemann. 

Clark, R., Fairclough, N., Ivanic, R., & Mar- 
tin-Jones, M. (1990). Critical language 
awareness. Part I: A critical review of three 
current approaches to language awareness. 
Language and Education, 4(4), 249-260. 
Clark, R., Fairclough, N., Ivanic, R., & Martin- 
Jones, M. (1991). Critical language aware¬ 
ness. Part II: Towards critical alternatives. 
Language and Education, 5(1), 41-54. 

Clark, R., & Ivanic, R. (1999). Raising critical aware¬ 
ness of language: A curriculum aim for the new 
millennium. Language Awareness, 8(2), 63-70. 
Cumming, A., Tarone, E., Cohen, A. D., Connor, 
U., Spada, N., Hornberger, N. H., et al. (1994). 
Alternatives in TESOL research: Descriptive, 
interpretive, and ideological orientations. 
TESOL Quarterly, 28(4), 673-703. 

Davies, B., & Harre, R. (1990). Positioning: The 
discursive production of selves. Journal for 
the Theory of Social Behaviour, 20(1), 43-63. 
DeJaeghere, J. G. (2009). Critical citizenship 
education for multicultural societies. Revista 
Interamericana de Educacion para la Democ- 
racia / Interamerican Journal of Education 
for Democracy, 2(2), 223-236. 

Eisenhart, M. (2001). Changing conceptions of 
culture and ethnographic methodology: Re¬ 
cent thematic shifts and their implications 
for research on teaching. In V. P. Richardson 
(Ed.), The Handbook of Research on Teaching 
(4th ed., pp. 209-225). Washington, DC: Amer¬ 
ican Educational Research Association. 
Erickson, F. (2006). Definition and analysis of 
data from videotape: Some research proce¬ 


dures and their rationales. In J. L. Green, G. 
Camilli, P. B. Elmore, W. A. Skukauskaite, & 
E. Grace (Eds.), Handbook of complementry 
methods in education research (pp. 177-191). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Eriksson, K., & Aronsson, K. (2005). “We’re really 
lucky) Co-creating ‘us’ and the ‘other’ in school 
booktalk. Discourse & Society, 16(5), 719-738. 

Ernst-Slavit, G., Mason, M. R., & Wenger, K. J. 
(2009). Academic language, casual vocabulary, 
and “tricky” words: Implications for English 
Language Learners. Paper presented at the 
Annual Meeting of AERA, San Diego, CA. 

Fairclough, N. (1995). Critical discourse analy¬ 
sis: The critical study of language. Harlow, 
UK: Longman. 

Fairclough, N. (Ed.). (1992). Critical language 
awareness. New York: Longman. 

Flynn, K. (2009). Toward democratic discourse: 
Scaffolding student-led discussions in the 
social studies. Teachers College Record, 
111(8), 2021-2054. 

Freire, P. (1970, 1993). Pedagogy of the op¬ 
pressed (M. B. Ramos, Trans. 30th Anniver¬ 
sary ed.). New York: Continuum. 

Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures: 
Selected essays. New York: Basic Books. 

Good, A. (2009). Framing American Indians 
as the “First Americans”: Using critical 
multiculturalism to trouble the normative 
American story. Social Studies Research and 
Practice, 4(2), 49-66. 

Granville, S. (2003). Contests over meaning 
in a South African classroom: Introducing 
Critical Language Awareness in a climate 
of social change and cultural diversity. Lan¬ 
guage and Education, 17(1), 1-20. 

Green, J. L., & Wallat, C. (1981). Mapping 
instructional conversations: A sociolin- 
guistic ethnography. In J. L. Green & C. 
Wallt (Eds.), Ethnography and language in 
educational settings (Vol. V, pp. 161-205). 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Greenblatt, S. (1991). Marvelous possessions: 
The wonder of the New World. Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press. 

Gudykunst, W. B. (2004). Bridging differences: 
Effective intergroup communication (4th ed.). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Gutierrez, K. D., & Orellana, M. F. (2006). The 
“problem” of English learners: Constructing 
genres of difference. Research in the Teach¬ 
ing of English, 40(4), 502-507. 

Hawkins, J. M. (2002). The pit boss: A new 
Native American stereotype? Multicultural 
Education, 9(4), 15-17. 

Hollingworth, L. (2009). Complicated conversations: 
Exploring race and ideology in an elementary 
classroom. Urban Education, 44(1), 30-58. 

Janks, H. (2000). Domination, access, diversity 
and design: A synthesis for critical literacy edu¬ 
cation. Educational Review, 52(2), 175-186. 

Janks, H., & Ivanic, R. (1992). CLA and eman¬ 
cipatory discourse. In N. Fairclough (Ed.), 
Critical language awareness (pp. 305-331). 
New York: Longman. 

Lake [Medicine Grizzlybear], R. (1990). An Indian 
father’s plea. Teacher Magazine, 2, 48-53. 

McCarthy, C. (1996). Rethinking liberal and 
radical perspectives on racial inequality in 
schooling: Making the case for nonsynchrony. 
In P. Leistyna, A. Woodrum & S. A. Sherblom 


(Eds.), Breaking free: The transformative 
power of critical pedagogy (pp. 149-166). Cam¬ 
bridge, MA: Harvard Educational Review. 

McGrane, B. (1989). Beyond anthropology: 
Society and the other. New York: Columbia 
University Press. 

Morgan, H. (2009). What every teacher needs 
to know to teach Native American students. 
Multicultural Education, 16(4), 10-12. 

National Council for the Social Studies. (n.d.-a). Cur¬ 
riculum standards for social studies: Executive 
summary. Waldorf, MD: NCSS. Retrieved from 
www.socialstudies.org/standards/strands 

National Council for the Social Studies, (n.d.-b). 
Curriculum standards for social studies: Intro¬ 
duction. Waldorf, MD: NCSS. Retrieved from 
www.socialstudies.org/standards/strands 

Palfreyman, D. (2005). Othering in an English 
language program. TESOL Quarterly, 39(2), 
211-233. 

Rich, A. (1986). Blood, bread and poetry. New 
York: W.W. Norton. 

Rogoff, B. (2003). The cultural nature of human devel¬ 
opment. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Salinas, C., Franquiz, M. E., & Guberman, S. 
(2006). Introducing historical thinking to 
second language learners: Exploring what 
students know and what they want to know. 
The Social Studies, 97(5), 203-207. 

Sampson, E. E. (2008, 1993). Celebrating the 
other: A dialogic account of human nature. 
Chagrin Fall, OH: Taos Institute. 

Singh, M. G., & Greenlaw, J. (1998). Postco¬ 
lonial theory in the literature classroom: 
Contrapuntal readings. Theory into Practice, 
38(3), 193-202. 

Sollors, W. (1986). The invention of otherness: 
The creation of “immigrant” and “indig¬ 
enous” identities. In J. Cazemajou (Ed.), 
L’immigration Europeenne aux Etats-Unis 
(1880-1910) (pp. 69-82). Talence, France: 
Presses Universitaires de Bordeaux. 

Svalberg, A. M.-L. (2007). Language awareness 
and language learning. Language Teaching, 
40(1), 287-308. 

Ting-Toomey, S. (1993). Communicative resource¬ 
fulness: An identity negotiation perspective. In 
R. L. Wiseman & J. Koester (Eds.), Intercul- 
tural communication competence (Vol. 17, pp. 
72-111). Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 

Verkuyten, M. (2001). ‘Abnormalization’ of 
ethnic minorities in conversation. British 
Journal of Social Psychology, 40, 257-278. 

Weedon, C. (1987). Feminist practice and poststruc¬ 
turalist theory. New York: Basil Blackwell. 

Wolf, E. R. (1982). Europe and the people with¬ 
out history. Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press. 

Yep, G. A. (1998). My three cultures: Navigating 
the multicultural identity landscape. In J. N. 
Martin, T. K. Nakayama & L. A. Flores (Eds.), 
Readings in cultural contexts (pp. 79-85). 
Mountain View, CA: Mayfield Publishing. 

Yoon, B. (2008). Uninvited guests: The influence 
of teachers’ roles and pedagogies on the posi¬ 
tioning of English language learners in the 
regular classroom. American Educational 
Research Journal, 45(2), 495-522. 

Zwiers, J. (2008). Building academic language: 
Essential practices for content classrooms. 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 


FALL 2010 

I 7 



