DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 477 555 



FL 027 727 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Christianson, Darcy 

Language Use in Multiethnic Literature For Young Adults. 

2002-10-24 

19p. 

Reports - Research (143) 

EDRS Price MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

^Adolescent Literature; American Indians; Asian Americans; 
Blacks; ^Childrens Literature; Code Switching (Language); 
^Cultural Pluralism; Cultural Relevance; Dialects; Elementary 
Secondary Education; Hispanic Americans; ^Language Usage; 
Linguistic Borrowing; Syntax 



ABSTRACT 

This study analyzed ethnic authenticity with regard to 
language use in 16 books for children and young adults used in Central 
Michigan University’s English 582 course, "Cultural Pluralism in Children and 
Young Adult Literature." Four ethnic groups were included: Native American, 
African American, Asian American, and Hispanic American. To evaluate 
authenticity, the study used Gottlieb-Crowell ’ s framework and examined the 
ethnic background of the author and inclusion of ethnically representative 
linguistic elements (the borrowing of lexical items from the native ethnic 
languages and the use of dialect patterns, both syntactic and lexical) . 
Results indicate that there are distinctive patterns for dialogue and 
narrative language use in multicultural children’s and young adults’ 
literature related to ethnic groups. Analysis of the 16 books found 11 
language use categories: informative, dialogue, standard English, eye- 
dialect, slang, proper nouns, common nouns, code switching interlanguage, 
glossary, and summary. In Native American texts, summaries of passages or the 
culture in general were typically provided. African American books typically 
used dialects, or eye-dialects and slang. Asian American stories presented 
interlanguage patterns. Hispanic American books generally used full lexical 
and syntactic code switching. A table demonstrates the books’ receptive 
language use by ethnic group. The list of books is appended. (Contains 27 
references.) (SM) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 






\ 












r- 

r- 



Q 



W 



Language Use in Multiethnic Literature For Young Adults 
Darcy Christianson 



October 24, 2002 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

10} This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



been granted Bt 

1 



ERIC 



2 



Language Use in Multiethnic Literature For Young Adults 



Introduction 

The use of multicultural literature in school reading programs has been shown to enhance the 
student’s awareness for other cultures and to contribute to overall competence in all areas of 
language arts and reading comprehension (Florez et a., 1986, Rosberg, 1995, Hopkins and Tastad, 
1997, Hansen-Krening and Mizokawa, 1997, Reid and Twardosz, 2000, Pirofski, 2001). These 
findings suggest that including multicultural children’s literature in classes can be a meaningful 
way to introduce young children to other cultures and languages, while at the same time, raising 
their awareness of and interest in their own culture and first language. Such benefits, it would 
seem would be related to the variety of languages and language types included in the literature 
chosen. Yet few studies specifically address linguistic elements as part of determining the 
authenticity of multicultural literature and as part of understanding how ethnic groups are 
represented through the language they may or may not be shown to use in the literature. This 
paper begins to address this gap by analyzing ethnic authenticity with regard to language use in 
16 children and young adult literature books used in Central Michigan University’s English 582 
“Cultural Pluralism in Children and Young Adult Literature” course. Four ethnic groups were 
analyzed: Native America, African-American, Asian American and Latin, (for list of books see 
Appendix A). 

In Using Multicultural Literature in the K-8 Classroom (1997), Harris discusses various issues 
in using multiethnic literature in the K-8 classroom. The issues include selection of readings, the 
depiction of Blacks, Puerto Ricans, Asian-Pacific Americans, Mexican Americans, Native 
Americans and the development of multicultural perspectives in reading. Among the most 
important features she mentions is the portrayal of ethnic authenticity in the literature to prevent 




3 



1 



and/or discourage social stereotyping. However, her study of authenticity neglects to mention 
linguistic or language issues and the book’s review of language-related features, such as dialect, 
is quite limited, with linguistic issues found only in reference to African-American dialect and 
Mexican-American bilingualism. Further, Harris discusses only how language is perceived in 
the specific multiethnic book to which it pertains, rather than as a general issue related to our 
understanding of and learning about the relationship between language and ethnic identity. 

In 1 995, Caryl Gottlieb-Crowell reviewed a collection of books that, according to her, 
“present a vision of a linguistically rich world where language difference is a resource, not an 
obstacle” (228). Selecting books with authentic images of different cultures and multiple 
language uses, she considers how words in native languages are integrated into the English texts 
to tell the stories of the people who speak those languages. In addition, to evaluate the reliability 
of authentic portrayal, she asked, “is the author or illustrator a member of this cultural-linguistic 
group or does that person have other qualifications that enhance his or her ability to accurately 
represent the culture?” (229). Gottlieb-Crowell also mentions code-switching, a distinctive 
characteristics of bilingual communities, as an authentic way to represent languages and cultures 
and suggests various books that do so, and she mentions dual-language texts in English and 
Spanish as well as those that include ethnic languages through cultural traditions and stories. 
Methodology 

To evaluate authenticity, I used Gottlieb-Crowell’ s framework and examined the ethnic 
background of the author and the inclusion of ethnically representative linguistic elements: the 
borrowing of lexical items from the native ethnic languages and the use of dialect patterns, both 
syntactic and lexical. Results suggest that there are distinctive patterns for dialogue and 




4 



2 



narrative language use in multicultural literature for children and young adults that are related to 
ethnic groups. 

Analysis of the 16 books resulted in the following eleven language use categories: 

Informative, Dialogue, Standard English, Eye-Dialect, Slang, Proper Nouns, Common Nouns, 
Code-switching, Interlanguage, Glossary, and Summary. Of these, two are genre issues: 
Informative, which implies that the purpose of the text is informative, usually tells the reader 
about an ethnic group’s history, while Dialogue is used to present character’s language within 
the experiences of a story (narrative genre). Standard English, Eye-Dialect, and/or Slang 
categories are language-use categories found within Informative and Narrative texts and 
Dialogues. 

As defined by Katie Wales (1989), Standard English is the model used “for educated written 
usage throughout the British Isles and even beyond, and it is that variety which is the basis of 
modern grammars of English” (429). As a generalized written form of English, Standard English 
in a text would represent mainstream rather than ethnically-representative language and values. 
Eye-Dialect is “the use of non-standard spelling in literature to suggest non-standard 
pronunciation” (167), and Slang is the “popularly used individual vocabulary by different social 
groups” (423). Proper and Common Noun categories identify lexical items used and/or 
borrowed from the culture that the story represents. The Code-switching and Interlanguage 
categories are defined as types of language use patterns that occurred in the character’s dialogue. 
While Code-switching refers to the “shifting adopted by speakers between one variety or dialect 
or language and another” (Wales, 73), Interlanguage refers to the “language system composed of 
numerous elements, created by the language learner, and not the least of which are elements 




5 



3 



from the NL and the TL” (Gass and Selinker, 1994, 1 1). Each text was also analyzed for 
whether or not it included a glossary of terms or a summary of the language, culture, and/or story. 
Results and Analysis 

The following table demonstrates the books’ respective language use by ethnic group. The 
sixteen books were analyzed for each of the eleven categories. 




6 



4 



Table. 1 Ethnic Group Language Use (See Appendix A for book reference) 



N=16 


Native American 


African American 


Asian American 


Latino 


Informational 


NAl 


AFAl 




LAI 


Dialogue 


NA2, NA3, 


AFA2, AFA3, 


ASAl, ASA2, 


LA2, LA3, 




NA4 


AFA4 


ASA3, ASA4 


LA4 


Standard English 


NA1,NA2, 


AFAl, AFA2, 


ASAl, ASA2, 


LAI, LA2, 


(predominant) 


NA3, NA4 


AFA3 


ASA3, ASA4 


LA3, LA4 


Eye-Dialect 




AFA2, AFA4 






Slang 




AFA3 






Proper Noun 


NA1,NA2, 


AFAl 


ASAl, ASA2, 


LA1,LA2, 




NA3, NA4 




ASA3, ASA4 


LA3, LA4 


Common Noun 


NA1,NA3 ^ 


AFAl 


ASAl, ASA2, 


LA1,LA3, 








ASA4 


LA4 


Code-switching 






ASAl 


LA2, LA3, 










LA4 


Inerlanguage 


NA3 




ASAl, ASA3, 










ASA4 




Glossary 


NA3 






LA3, LA4 


Summary 


NA2,NA3, 


AFA4 


ASA3, ASA4 


LA3 




NA4 









AsTable 1 indicates, there are differences in the author’s use of ethnically representing the 
language. The following discusses the usage in individual texts. 




5 



Of the four Native American books, a writer of Native American heritage had written three: 

(1 ) Bury Mv Heart at Wounded Knee: An Indian History of the American West , (2) In Search of 
April Raintree . and (14) Bird Girl and the Man who Followed the Sun: An Athabaskan Indian 
Legend from Alaska . Bury Mv Heart at Wounded Knee: An Indian History of the American 
West discusses aspects of the history between the Native Americans and the settlers of the 
United Sates of America, particularly of the post-civil war, westward movement era and the first 
Battle of Wounded Knee. This book’s intent is to share information rather than to narrate 
characters’ experiences or feelings, and as a result, there is no dialogue, and the ethnically 
representative language use consists only of anglicized tribal names and people, such as “Sioux,” 
“Cheyenne,” and “Arapaho.” 

In Search of April Raintree . a story of a Metis child and her experience growing up in the 
1960 and 70’s in and out of Canadian foster homes and boarding schools, is written in Standard 
English exclusively. However, the author does include some understanding of language variety, 
although the varieties are developmentally used rather than ethnically. Throughout the story, 
April receives letters from her sister Cheryl as they are growing up, and these letters reflect a 
child’s developmental learning of written English. For example, in the first letters Cheryl sends, 
she refers to April as “apple” (32). 

The story Bird Girl and the Man who Followed the Sun: An Athabaskan Indian Legend from 
Alaska, about two children who want to live fee, focuses on a specific Athabaskan clan group, 
Gwich’in, and includes Athabaskan character names. For example, the main character’s name 
“Daagoo” is Gwich’in for “ptarmigan.” However, no other language related to Native 
Americans is used. 




6 



A Native American story not written by a Native American is Racing the Sun . This story is 
about Brandon, a 12-year-old boy, who struggles with growing up as an American Indian. The 
book provides examples of Navajo language in the introductory summary, uses Navajo syntax in 
the dialogues and throughout the narration, and provides definitions of lexical items in the 
glossary. For example, the author includes descriptions of phonemes, such as the “slashed L”, 
for the th sound in hataalii, also printed as hataathlii in the narration, and defined as a ‘singer’ in 
the glossary. However, with the exception of Brandon’s grandfather, who spoke at an 
interlanguage level, the syntax in the story is in Standard English. 

Of these four Native American stories, three included a summary of the historical aspects of 
the events told and/or language usages applied. This pattern, evident with the these Native 
American texts, may aid the writer in explaining the story’s implication with regard to the 
particular Native American tribe’s culture, thereby giving the story more meaning and purpose. 

For the African-American books, all the authors were African American. Now Is Your Time! 
presented a history of African-American experiences in the Americas. This book was 
informative and did not use dialogue. Its African language was limited to proper nouns such as 
“Griots,” (African storytellers) (2) and “Abd al-Rahman Ibrahima,” who was one of the first 
slaves (11). 

The Watsons Go to Birmingham - 1963, a story of a first generation Southern-Black 
American family’s experience living in the north, uses a white Standard English for most of the 
dialogue and narration; however, a Southern dialect is also very evident in the book. The use of 
dialect is related to geographic location of the characters. For example, the mother switches 
between her Southern and Northern dialect usages. In the north, the mother says, “Bryon 
Watson, you take off that hat and get over here right this minute!” (87), with full Standard 




9 



1 



English syntax and spelling. In the south, she states, “soon’s he gets up? Awww, Momma...” 
(161); the abbreviated syntax and spelling of “soon’s” reflect a non-standard use. 

The story Slam! , which is a bout a 17 year-old African-American student, Greg Harris, who 
dreams of becoming a professional basketball player, uses current (Manhattan) slang and in- 
group terms, such as, “out with my boy” in “I was out with my boy. Ice.” (92), and “dig” in “I 
dig your game but I don’t dig your attitude” (137). 

The Well , about an African American family living in the South during the late 1930’s, uses 
rich southern dialect terms. For example, characters frequently use “ain’t” for isn’t, “y’all” for 
you all, and “ma/pa” for mom and pop, and neglect and change the vowel sounds in “to” (f), 
“about” (‘bout), and “sir” (sur). However, there are no distinctions made between Southern 
Black dialect and Southern White dialect. 

The use of writing dialects for African-American characters occurred frequently and seems to 
be a characteristic pattern of these African-American stories, and it may be representative of 
African-American culture in general. Lisa W. Nikola (1995) discusses various ways in which 
the language of African-Americans is expressed in contemporary picture books texts as well. 

For example, in studying the variety of influences on African-American language (e.g. regional 
dialect and major musical and literary genres indicative of the African-American community), 
she found that the predominant form of expression associated with African-American folklore is 
regional dialect. She concludes that African-American language is not only diverse and 
multifaceted but may be the most diverse, rich and complex, language in the United States. The 
variety of language use is also true of the four African-American texts in this study; Eye-Dialect 
and Slang were evident in three of the four African-American texts. 




10 



8 



In the Asian-American group, all of the authors are Asian-American. If It Hadn’t Been For 
Yoon Jun was about an adopted Korean girl, April, and her experience in high school when a 
new Korean boy, Yoon Jun, arrives. April’s dialogue consists of a Standard English. However, 
Yoon Jun’s dialogue was that of a Korean-English interlanguage, exampling syntax such as the 
non-standard “don’t” in “She don’t snore or anything,” and the absence of the “be” verb in “best 
jobs all in Seoul” (101). Also included are some Korean proper nouns, such as “Kimchee,” a 
traditional Korean dish. However, no articles were missing; a well-known problem of Asian- 
English interlanguage patterns. 

The story Journey to Topaz: A Story of the Japanese-American Evacuation is about a 
Japanese-American family living during World War II in detention camps in the Untied States. 
The author uses a Standard English throughout the story but occasionally includes Japanese 
words such as “Jan Ken Po” (rock, paper, scissors) and “zoris” (shoes) (79) in the dialogues and 
narration. 

The stories Dragon’s Gate and Ribbons , written by Lawrence Yep, both included summaries 
of the research conducted to ensure the story’s authenticity. Dragon’s Gate , about a Chinese boy. 
Otter, and his experience working on the San Francisco Railroad uses a Standard English in 
Roman type for the dialogue of the Chinese as well as for the White speakers. However, 
italicized words are used to represent a broken-English interlanguage. For example. Otter’s 
Uncle Foxfire’s language, a mix of Chinese and English, is presented in italic and involves non- 
standard syntactic patterns: particularly omissions of auxiliary verbs, such as “You sure boy? If I 
listen your mother long ago, I never leave Three Willows” (35). 

The story Ribbons , about the relationship between a young Chinese American teenager, 

Robin, and her Chinese Grandmother, is exclusively presented in a Standard English; however. 




11 



9 



Robin’s grandmother occasionally “muttered something in Chinese” (129). This suggests some 
level of interlanguage, but no samples are actually included. The only Chinese word integrated 
into the narration is “paw paw,” maternal Chinese grandmother. 

Of these four Asian-American stories, three included awareness of an interlanguage, 
suggestion that interlanguage patterns are common portrayals of Asian American characters. In 
addition, two of the three stories’ interlanguage use was by older generation speakers, for whom 
the first language would be that of their native Asian culture (i.e., they are not likely to be fully 
competent in English as a second or foreign language), and If It Hadn’t Been For Yoon Jun 
includes a character who is a transfer student from Korea. Such a preponderance of non-native 
speaker’s language suggests that interlanguage patterns are an almost stereotypically 
characteristic of a foreign student, as well as of older Asian- Americans. 

Latino authors wrote all four of the Latino books. The book Coming to America: The 
Mexican-American Experience told of the long history of Mexican- Americans. Like the other 
history narratives, the book is written in a Standard English, and it makes limited use of 
Mexican-Spanish language. The genre of the book is informative: to tell readers about 
Mexican-American history. However, it does include some Mexican-Spanish nouns for names, 
places, and holidays, such as “Cinco De Mayo,” for the fifth of May a traditional Mexican 
holiday celebrating the Mexican defeat of the French in Mexico City in 1862. 

Felita, about a young Puerto Rican girl and her experiences moving between neighborhoods 
in a New York suburb, uses a Standard English for the dialogue used by the young girl, her 
brothers, and friends, as well as for narration. The mother also shown using Standard English; 
however, her language is frequently represented through both English and Spanish versions. For 
example she asked, “Felita, pero que pas? What happened?” (37), suggesting that the mother 




12 



10 



actually speaks in Spanish and English, with the English version given as a translation for 
English readers. Surprisingly, the grandmother’s dialogue is written only in a Standard English 
even though the book states that she spoke no English (55). The older generation’s heavy 
reliance on Spanish in this book suggests that Felita is actually bilingual. Unfortunately, the 
book neither shows nor addresses the issues that Felita might face in being bilingual, nor does it 
give any sample of what her interlanguage use might be like. 

The story When I Was Puerto Rican told of the author’s experiences growing up in Puerto 
Rico and in the United Sates. Standard English is predominant in the narration; however, the 
author does include both Puerto Rican and Standard English usages throughout the story, with a 
glossary of the Puerto Rican terms at the end and/or an explanation of them in the narration. For 
example, the author says, “What a jibara,” to herself, about herself, in the text, and then defines 
“jibara” in the next paragraph: “In Santurce a jibara was something no one wanted to be” (39). 
The glossary then defined ‘jibara’ as a “rural Puerto Rican with distinctive dialect and customs” 
(237). This use of Spanish terms helps the reader experience and understand how language 
differences, in the lexical items included but even more in the cultural values they signify, are 
part of the author’s multiethnic experience. 

Taking Sides , a story about a Mexican-American boy, Lincoln, who struggles with moving to 
a new junior high school and maintain his position and dream of becoming a basketball player, 
contains both Standard English and Spanish in the dialogues of Lincoln, his mother, and his best 
friend, Tony, all of whom are Mexican-American. For example, Lincon’s mother askes “Que te 
paso en la piema? What happened to your leg?” (29). In addition to Lincoln’s code-switching 
between Spanish and English, he was also a student studying both languages (13), and his 
Spanish was “getting worse and worse” (34). This leaves the reader to assume that Lincoln is 




13 



11 



enrolled in a bilingual program at his new school and the Spanish was his mother’s first language. 
It also raises the reader’s awareness of the difficulty involved in maintaining two languages and 
the potential loss as one becomes more dominant. 

The primary language pattern evident in these four Latino young adult stories is that of code- 
switching between Spanish or Puerto Rican and English languages. In each story, at least one of 
the characters is capable of speaking in two languages. In Felita, it is the mother, although we 
can assume that Felita would also be able to speak Spanish. In When I Was Puerto Rican , the 
author, who tells her own story, frequently includes lexical items from her native language, even 
though the book is primarily written for an English audience and so written in Standard English. 
Taking Sides shows that not only was Lincoln capable of understanding his mother, who is 
bilingual, but that he is also a student studying both languages therefore letting readers assume 
that he was bilingual, and that Spanish was his first language. The use of both English and 
Spanish in these books further suggests that such bilingualism is a common characteristic in 
Latino culture. 

Discussion and Conclusion 

The language patterns found in the four groups of multicultural texts - Native American, 
African American, Asian American, and Latino - are important to understanding the way 
children’s literature represents the language-related values and cultures of ethnic groups. 
Identifying these language patterns can be used to suggest ways of using multicultural children’s 
literature meaningfully, to appropriately introduce young children to other cultures through 
language, while, at the same time, raising their awareness of and interest in their own culture and 
first language. In the Native American texts, summaries of the passages or the culture in 
general were typically provided, giving the reader a better understanding of a cultural content for 




14 



12 



what would follow. The African-American books typically used dialects, or Eye-Dialects and 
Slang in the dialogues, which suggest language characteristics associated with African-American 
culture. Asian- American stories presented Interlanguage patterns in the character’s dialogues, 
typically with them speaking in what mainstream English speakers might call “broken English.” 
However, of three Asian- American books that showed interlanguage use, two included an older 
generation, non-native English speaker, further suggesting that generational differences is a part 
of a cultural progression in acquiring Standard English. In the Latino books, the texts generally 
used full lexical and syntactic code-switching in the dialogues, suggesting the use of Spanish in 
Latino families and culture. 

The study of such categories and classification or language use in texts is an attempt to begin 
to understand the way language patterns appear in samples of multiethnic literature. However 
stereotypic some may be, the patterns are evident and different for each culture. Further study 
could examine more texts to see if the patterns uncovered in this study are indicative of ethnic 
literature generally, or if the patterns represent recent changes that could suggest an increasing 
awareness of differences in language use. In addition, a study could focus on the authenticity 
and language patterns of children’s picture books with respect to ethnic groups; dialect and 
specific language use may be more evident in these brief stories for children than in the 
adolescent literature studied for this paper. Picture books could also offer an opportunity to 
examine the visual cues of the illustrations, which sometime incorporate language, and always 
carry semiotic meaning, as another textual device that allows the representation of cultural 
difference and values. 




15 



13 



Works Cited 



Brown, Dee. Bury My Heart At Wounded Knee: An Indian History of the American West . 

New York: Henry Holt and Co. Inc. 1970. 

Culleton, Beatrice. In Search of April Raintree . Winnipeg: Peguis Publisher. 1983. 

Curtis, Chirostopher Paul. The Watsons Go to Brimingham - 1963 . New York: A 
Yearling Book. 1995. 

Florez, Viola and Hadaway, Nancy L. Bridging Linguistic and Cultural Differences 

through Reading: Multiethnic Literature in the Classroom. (ERIC DOC. NO. 278 959) 
1986. 1-15. 

Gass, Susan and Larry Selinker. Second Language Acquisition: An Introductory Course . 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 1993. 

Gottlieb-Crowell, Caryl. Talking about Books: Celebrating Linguistic Diyersity. 

Language Arts . 75:3 March 1998. 228-35. 

Hansen-Krening, Nancy and Mizokawa, Doanld T. Exploring Ethnic-specific literature: A 
unity of Parents, Families, and Educators. Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy . 

41 :3 Noyember 1997. 180-189. 

Harris, Violet, J. Using Multiethnic Literature in the K-8 Classroom . Norwood, MA: 
Christopher-Gordon Publishers, Inc. 1 997. 

Hopkins, Dee and Tastad, Shirley A. Censoring by Omission: Has the United States 
Progressed in Promoting Diyersity through Children’s Books? Youth Seryices in 
Libraries . Summer 1 997. 399-404. 

Lee, Marie G. If It Hadn’t Been For Yoon Jun . New York: Ayon Books Inc. 1995. 

Martinez, Elizabeth Coonrod. Coming to America: The Mexican-American Experience . 
Brookfield, CN: Press. 1995. 

Mohr, Nocholasa, Ulus. By Cruz, Ray, coyer art Mujica, Rick. Felita . New York: A Yearling 
Book. 1990. 

Myers, Walter Dean. Now Is Your Time! New York: Harper Trophy. 1991. 

Myers, Walter Dean. Slam! New York: Scholastic Inc. 1996. 

Nikola, Lisa, W. Varied Voices; Representation of African-American language in 
Children’s’ Picture Books. New Adyocate . 8:4 Fall 1995. 223-43. 




14 



Priofsz, Kira Isak. Multicultural Literature and the Children's Literary Canon. 

Multicultural Pavilion: Education Research Room . 2001 . October 2002 

<http://curry.edschool.virginia.edu/centers/multicultural/papers/literature.html> 

Pitts, Paul. Racing the Sun . New York: Avon Books Inc. 1988. 

Reid, Kathie and Twardosz, Sandra. Preschoolers' Language During Use of Multiethnic 
Books in Daycare. (ERIC DOC. NO. 443 081) 2000. 1-8. 

Rosberg, Merilee. Exploring Language Through Multicultural Literature. (ERIC DOC. 
NO. 389 175) 1995. 1-16. 

Santiago, Esmeralda. When I Was Puerto Rican . New York: First Vintage Books Edition. 
1994. 

Soto Gary. Taking Sides . Orlando, FL: Harcourt Brace and Company. 1991. 

Taylor, Mildred D. The Well . New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. 1995. 

Uchida, Toshiko, illus. Carrick, Donald. Journey to Topaz: A Story of the Japanese- 
American Evacuation . Berkeley: Creative Arts Book Company. 1985. 

Wales, Katie. A Dictionary of Stylistics . New York: Longman. 1989. 

Wallis, Velma, illus. Grant, Jim. Bird Girl and the Man who Followed the Sun: An 
Athabaska Indian Legend from Alaska . New York: Harper Perennial. 1997. 

Yep, Lawrence. Dragon’s Gate . New York: Harper Trophy. 1995. 

Yep, Lawrence. Ribbons . New York: The Putnam and Grosset Group. 1996. 




17 



15 



Appendix A 



NAI 

Brown, Dee. Bury Mv Heart At Wounded Knee: An Indian History of the American West . New York: Henry Holt and Co. Inc. 
1970. 

This length book discuses aspects of the history between the Native Americans and the settlers of the Untied States of America, 
particularly of the post-civil war., westward movement era and the first Battle of Wounded Knee. This book’s intent is to share 
information rather than narrate an experience or feelings. As a result, the language consists only of tribunal names and people, 
e.g. “Sioux,” “Cheyenne,” and “Arapaho”. 

NA2 

Culleton, Beatrice. In Search of April Raintree . Winnipeg: Peguis Publisher. 1983. 

This is a story of a Metis child and her experience growing up in the I960 and 70’s in and out of American foster homes and 
boarding schools. The story is written in Standard English. However, throughout the story, April received letters from her sister 
Cheryl as they are growing up, and these letters reflect a child’s developmental learning of English. For example, in the first 
letters Cheryl sends, she refers to April as “apple” (32). 

AFA2 

Curtis, Chi rostopher Paul. The Watsons Go to Brimin&ham - 1963 . New York: A Yearling Book. 1995. 

This story of a first generation Southern-Black American family’s experience living in the north generally uses white Standard 
English; however, a southern dialect is also very evident. For example, the mother switches between her southern and northern 
usages. While in the north, the mother said “Bryon Watson, you take off that hat and get over here right this minute!” (87), and, 
while in the south, she states, “Soon’s he gets up? Awww, Mommma...” (161). 

ASA I 

Lee, Marie G. If It Hadn’t Been For Yoon Jun . New York: Avon Books Inc. 1995. 

This is a story of an adopted Korean girl, April and her experience in high school when a new Korean boy, Yoon Jun, arrives. 
April’s dialogue consists of Standard English. However, Yoon Jun’s dialogue is that of a Korean-English interlanguagc, with 
phrases such as “She don’t snore or anything,” and “best jobs all in Seoul” (1 01). Also included are some Korean nouns, such as 
“Kimchee,” a traditional Korean dish. 

LAI 

Martinez, Elizabeth Coonrod. Comine to America: The Mexican-American Experience . Brookfield, CN: Press. 1995. 

This book tells of the long history of Mexican Americans. It is an informative book and makes limited use of Mexican-Spanish 
language. However, it does include names, places, and holidays such as “Cinco De Mayo,” for the fifth of May, a traditional 
Mexican holiday celebrating the Mexican defeat of the French in Mexico City in 1862. 



LA2 

Mohr, Nocholasa, lllus. By Cruz, Ray, cover art Mujica, Rick. Felita. New York; A Yearling Book. 1990. 

fhis story is about Felita, a young Puerto Rican girl, and her experiences moving between neighborhoods in a New York suburb. 
The dialogue mostly consists of Standard English used by the young girl, her brothers and friends. However the mother switched 
between English and Spanish, and interestingly, the grandmother’s dialogue was written in Standard English even though she 
apparently spoke no F^nglish, leaving the reader to assume that Felita may actually be bilingual (55). 

AFAl 

Myers, Walter Dean. Now Is Your Time! New York: Harper Trophy. 1991. 

This book presents a history of African-American experiences in the Americas. This book is informative but docs not use 
dialogue. Its African language is limited to proper nouns such as “Griots,” (African storytellers) (2) and “Abd al-Rahman 
Ibrahima,” who was one of the first slaves (II). 

AFA3 

Myers, Walter Dean. Slam! New York: Scholastic Inc. 1996. 

Greg Harris, a 1 7-ycar-old African-American student, dreams of becoming a professional basketball player. This story uses 
current (Manhattan) slang and in-group terms, such as, “I was out with my boy. Ice” (92), and “I dig your game but I don’t dig 
your attitude” (137). 




18 



NA3 

Pitts, Paul. Racing the Sun . New York: Avon Books Inc. 1988. 



In this story a 12-year-old boy, Brandon, struggles with growing up as an American Indian. The use of Navajo language appears 
in the introductory summary of Native American languages, dialogues, throughout the narration, and in the glossary. For 
example, the author provides descriptions of phonemes, such as the ‘‘slashed L”, for the th sound in hataalii, also printed as 
hataathlii in the narration, and defined as a ‘singer’ in the glossary. With the exception of Brandon’s grandfather, who spoke at 
an interlanguage level, the syntax in the story is in Standard English. 

LA3 

Santiago, Esmeralda. When 1 Was Puerto Rican . New York: First Vintage Books Edition. 1994. 

This story tells of the author’s experiences growing up in Puerto Rico and in the United Stales. Standard English is 
predominantly used for the narration; however, the author includes both Puerto Rican and Standard English usages throughout 
the story, with a glossary of the Puerto Rican terms at the end and/or explanations of them in the narration. For example, the 
author says “What ajibara,” to herself, about herself, in the text, and then defines “jibara” in the net paragraph: “In Sanlurcc a 
jibara was something no one wanted to be” (39). 

LA4 

Soto Gary. Taking Sides . Orlando, FL: Harcourt Brace and Company. 1991. 

A Mexican- American boy, Lincoln struggles with moving to anew junior high school and maintain his position and dream of 
being a basketball player. The dialogue by Lincoln, his mother, and his best friend, Tony, all of whom are Mexican-American, is 
a mix between a Standard English and Spanish. For example, Lincoln’s mother askes “Que le paso en la pierna? What happened 
to your leg?” (29). 

AFA4 

Taylor, Mildred D. The Well . New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. 1995. 

This is a story about an African American family living in the South during the late 1930’s. Rich Southern variations of an eye 
dialect are included. For example, characters frequently use “ain’t” for isn’t, “y’all” for you all, and “ma/pa” for mom and pop, 
and the neglected nasal phonemes and vowel sounds in ”to” (f), “about” (‘bout), and “sir” (sur) are also common. However, 
there arc no distinctions made between Southern Black dialect and Southern White dialect. 

ASA2 

Uchida, Toshiko, illus. Garrick, Donald. Journey to Topaz: A Story of the Japanese- American Evacuatmn . Berkeley: Creative 
Arts Book Company. 1985. 

This story is about a Japanese- American family during World War 11 in the United Stales detention camps. The author uses 
Standard English throughout the story but occasionally includes Japanese words such as “Jan Ken Po” (rock, paper, scissors) and 
“zoris” (shoes) (79) in the dialogues and narration. 

NA4 

Wallis, Velma, illus. Grant, Jim. Bird Girl and the Man who Followed the Sun: An Athabaska Indian Legend from Alaska . 

New York: Harper Perennial. 1997. 

This Indian story focuses on specific Athabaskan clans group, Gwich’in, and two children who want to live fee. The story is 
focuses exclusively on Athabaskan characters and culture, but very little Native American language is include except for the 
names of the tribal clans and few characters. For example, the main character’s name “Daagoo” is Gwich’in for ‘ptarmigan’. 

ASA3 

Yep, Lawrence. Dragon’s Gate . New York: Harper Trophy. 1995. 

This is a story about a Chinese boy’s. Otter, experience working on the San Francisco railroad. 1 hroughout the story. Standard 
English, in Roman type, was used for the dialogue of the Chinese and the White speakers while italicized words are use to 
represent the brokcn-English interlanguage. For example. Otter’s Uncle Foxfire’s language, a mix of Chinese and English, was 
presented in italic: “ You sure boy? If I listen your mother long ago, I never leave Three Willow ” (34). 

ASA4 

Yep, Lawrence. Ribbons . New York: The Putnam and Grosset Group. 1996. 

This story focuses on the relationship between a young Chinese-American teenager, Robin, and her Chinese Grandmother. The 
dialogue is presented exclusively as Standard English; however, Robin’s grandmother occasionally “mutters something in 
Chinese” (129), suggesting some level of interlanguage. The only Chinese word integrated into the narration is “paw paw,” or 
maternal Chinese grandmother. 




19 



VjL D<^7 




L/.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 







I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title: | 


Loivyaj* ys«. U+«f«K>r« fir 


Author(s): 




Corporate Source; 


Publication Date: 

10-2M-02 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents 
announced in the monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Educstion (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, 
reproduced paper copy, and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source 
of each document, and. If reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign 
at the bottom of the page. 



The sample sticker shown below will be The sample slicker shown below will be The sample slicker shown below will be 

affixed to all Level 1 documents affixed to all Level 2A documents affixed to all Level 2B documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE. AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY, 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 










- -Je 










_ -- -- 


TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


1 




2A 




2B 


Level 1 

or 


Level 2A 

□ 


Level 2B 

□ 


Check here for Level 1 release, permitting 
reproduction and dissemination in microfiche or 
other ERIC archival media (e.g., electronic) and 


Check here for Level 2A release, perrrntting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche and in electronic media for 
ERIC archival collection subscribers only 


Check here for Level 2B release, perrrutting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche only 



paper copy. 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce is granted, but no box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1. 



/ hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 
to satisfv information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 


Signature: "V y| / 

DiMAj 


Printed Name/Position/Title: 

Derev 6MUsTie^>«>M 


Organ! zatiorVAddres^ ■ 


Telephone:^ « 

oAu% 


FAX: 




E-Mail Address; 





O 

ERIC 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 



If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, 
please provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is 
publicly available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are 
significantly more stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 




IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 



ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 
4483-A Forbes Boulevard 
Lanham, Maryland 20706 



Telephone: 
Toll Free: 
FAX: 
e-mail: 
WWW: 



301-552-4200 

800-799-3742 

301-552-4700 

ericfac(Sinet.ed.gov 

http://ericfacllity.org 



EFF-088 (Rev. 2/2001) 




