DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 403 948 



JC 970 111 



TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



Metropolitan Community Colleges, Exploring America's 
Communities, Progress Report, 

Metropolitan Community Colleges of Kansas City, 

Mo, 

American Association of Community Colleges, 
Washington, DC,; National Endowment for the 
Humanities (NFAH) , Washington, D,C. 

Jan 97 

6p , ; In: National Conference on American Pluralism 
and Identity Program Book (New Orleans, LA, January 
18-19, 1997); see JC 970 087. 

Reports - Descriptive (141) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

^American Studies; ^Community Colleges; ,v Cultural 
Pluralism; Discussion; ^Humanities; Multicultural 
Education; Program Descriptions; Two Year Colleges; 
*Uni ted States History; ^United States Literature 
Metropolitan Community Colleges MO 



ABSTRACT 

In 1996, the Metropolitan Community Colleges 
(Missouri) participated in the American Association of Community 
Colleges' Exploring America's Communities project, which works to 
strengthen the teaching and learning of American history, literature, 
and culture at U.S. community colleges. The colleges' team formulated 
a humanities course exploring the "American experience" to address a 
perceived lack of coursework dealing with American pluralism and 
identity. Since the team felt that the Midwest represented a 
microcosm of the larger issue, the course attempted to narrow its 
scope by focusing on diversity in the Midwest. The faculty selected a 
core history text that addressed multicultural issues to use as a 
background for the course. The text was supplemented with literary 
texts from Native American, African American, Asian American, 
Hispanic, and European writers. The course was team taught by four 
instructors who attended each class; one instructor presented 
material while the others added their own commentary. The program's 
main obstacle was the campuses' own lack of diversity, and budgetary 
constraints have raised questions about the course's future. 
Throughout much of the course, the instructors focused on the 
differences among the various groups studied. However, in the last 
few weeks, they focused sharply on the commonalties. On the final, 
students responded to commonalties in a surprising and encouraging 
manner. (HAA) 



* k * k * * * * * k * k * * * * * * k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. * 

* k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k k 



ED 40 



Metropolitan Community Colleges 
Exploring America’s Communities Progress Report 

Metropolitan Community Colleges of Kansas City 



U.8. DEPARTMENT OP EDUCATION j 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION | 

CENTER (ERIC) ! 

ttWh.s document ha a been reproduced as 
'received trom the person or organization 
originating it 

□ Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality. 



• Points ot view or opinions Stated in thia docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or policy. 



“PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

J. Gol'lat tscheck 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC).” 



In: National Conference on American Pluralism and Identity Program Book 
(New Orleans, LA, January 18-19, 1997) 



£ 



BEST 



COP 



ERLC 



2 




BLUE SPRINGS/INDEPENDENCE CAMPUSES OF THE METROPOLITAN COMMUNITY COLLEGES 



tUhere a Smart Suture TSeglns 

I. DESCRIPTION OF COLLEGE. The Metropolitan Community Colleges of 
Kansas City Missouri represents a four-campus system spread 
throughout the greater Kansas city area. The campuses include Blue 
Springs/Independence in the east, Longview in the south, Maple 
Woods in the north, and Penn Valley in the center of town. The 
current District was established in 1964. Overall the District 
serves almost 18,000 students, day and night, full-time and part- 
time. Each campus .reflects demographics of its location, for 
students prefer to attend college near their home. Consequently, 
Penn Valley, located in the heart of Kansas City, attracts a much 
more diverse student population than do the other campuses , 
although Longview, due to the shifting demographics of the south 
Kansas city area, is beginning to serve a more diverse student 
population. Blue Springs/Independence and Maple Woods' student 
bodies are 96 to 98% white. Almost two-thirds of the students are 
female and the average student age is 29 with the median age 24. 

II. GOALS OF ACTION PLAN: Our team formulated the course Humanities 
161: Exploring the American Experience to address a perceived lack 
of curriculum dealing with American pluralism and identity. While 
individual instructors had addressed diversity issues in their 
classes, our college had no institutional recognition of emerging 
diversity in the form of regular course offerings, and courses such 




Blue Springs Campus • 1501 West Jefferson Street. Blue Springs, MO 64015 • Phone (816) 655-6050 • Fax 655-6014 
Independence Campus • 20301 E. M-78 Highway. Independence. MO 64057 • Phone (816) 220-6550 • Fax 220-651 1 

An Equal Opportunity/Affirmatlve Action Employer 



as Women's Literature and African-American Literature or African- 
American History were tied more into the field of study than into 
a general study of pluralism. Our course attempted to narrow its 
scope by focusing on pluralism in the Midwest. Since we felt that 
the Midwest and Kansas City itself represented a microcosm of the 
larger issue, since it was a diverse metropolitan community that 
featured pockets of ethnicity and urban development surrounded by 
rural areas. In short, we felt that the area reflected the American 
movement from agricultural to urbanized society and the movements 
of multicultural groups that accompanied it. 

III. WHAT WE ACCOMPLISHED: Our faculty selected a core history text 
to address multiculturalism which we planned to use as a background 
for the course. After much thought, we chose Ronald Takaki's A 
Different Mirror and supplemented it with literary texts reflecting 
the groups we wished to address. For the Native American segment of 
the course, we chose Momaday's The Way to Rainy Mountain, at the 
suggestion of Lawana Trout. For the African American portion, we 
chose Hughes' Not Without Laughter; for the Asian American section, 
Kingston's Woman Warrior, and for the Hispanic portion, Cisneros' 
Woman Hollering Creek and Other Stories. 

-We also felt that any course that dealt with the American 
multicultural experience in the Midwest could not overlook the 
contributions of European settlers, so we included a segment that 
featured Cather's My Antonia to present diversity among the white 
settlers also. 

Our team consisted of four instructors, one from History, and the 
others from English, and each attended each class. One instructor 




would present material and the others would punctuate the material 
with commentary involving the other members of the team and the 
class as well. Interruption was viewed not as rudeness but as 
spontaneous involvement, and the class never seemed confused as to 
which teacher was expert in which segment. Sharing the ideas of the 
instructors with the students was vital to our course's success. 

IV. OBSTACLES: The obstacles to the course were expected. The 
campus where the course was taught was not especially diverse. The 
gender makeup reflected that of the District as a whole, but there 
were no African-Americans in the class, one Asian American and 
several Hispanic-Americans . Since the class pretty much reflected 
the makeup of students at that campus, we expected more difficulty 
than we actually experienced. All members of the team were white 
also, but we brought in guest speakers from other colleges who 
shared their experiences as members of the groups we studied and 
added a valuable dimension to our endeavor. 

V. WHAT IS LEFT TO DO: The class was designed to be telecast after 
one semester of classroom presentation, and the team is still 
investigating how that can best be done. We fear that presenting 
the class as a telecourse on four campuses will compromise the 
spontaneity of the class as well as the interaction between teacher 
and teacher and teacher and student that we found so critical to 
the course's success. We probably will not be able to offer the 
course in its present form again due to budgetary constraints so we 
must find a solution to the dilemma. 



0 

ERLC 



5 



VI. HOW WE ADDRESSED ISSUES OF DIVERSITY AND PLURALISM: Throughout 
much of the course, we focused on the differences among the various 
groups we studied, but in the last few weeks we focused sharply on 
the commonalities all groups shared. Our final exam was an in-class 
essay, open book, that addressed this very issue, and the responses 
were encouraging and, in some ways, surprising in terms of how the 
students saw the commonalities. One outstanding student showed how 
all Americans value family, safety, and freedom, an approach that 
showed that our students were assimilating material well and 
redefining the issues in creative ways. 




fflMm 




U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 


<1 


m 


Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 


ERIC 


1 - v- ■* 


* f 







TO m ll| 



NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASIS 




This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)” form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release 
form (either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 



