DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 431 324 



FL 025 872 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Pally, Marcia 

Sustained Content-Based Teaching for Academic Skills 
Development in ESL/EFL. 

1999-00-00 

23p . ; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Teachers 
of English to Speakers of Other Languages (33rd, New York, 
NY, March 9-13, 1999) . 

Reports - Research (143) -- Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 
MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

College Students; Cultural Differences; Educational Needs; 

* English for Academic Purposes; *English (Second Language) ; 
Higher Education; Language Patterns; * Persuasive Discourse; 
*Rhetoric; Second Language Instruction; Student Attitudes 
*Content Area Teaching 



ABSTRACT 



This paper discusses the rationale for using sustained 
content-based instruction (CBI) to teach English for academic purposes to 
non- native speakers, drawing on recent research and theory and on both 
personal experience and a small-scale study of college students. Discussion 
begins with a look at college and graduate students' needs for both language 
skills and skills in argumentation, particularly in the conventions of 
Anglo-American rhetoric. Topics addressed here include cultural, political, 
and psycho- social questions about English language hegemony and the question 
of who should learn these rhetorical conventions. Literature on sustained CBI 
is then reviewed, offering support for it from experience with student 
frustration, research on its effectiveness, and interviews with students who 
had studied English in sustained CBI classes. In the interviews, students 
noted benefits in content-area expertise and learning motivation. Several 
sustained CBI courses developed by the author are described briefly, with 
course outlines appended. Contains 30 references. (MSE) 



***************************************************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 



ED 431 324 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 



Marcia Pally 



\ 



This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 



(YVirotc^ Pol l^j 



□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



New York University 



* Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



mp28@is.nyn.edu 



( 212 ) 663 9624 



Sustained Content-Based Teaching 



for Academic Skills Development in ESL/EFL 



Marcia Pally, Ed.D. 



Q 1999 



Definition: sustained content-based instruction (CBI) . Classes in which students 
practice English language skills in the process of studying one subject area over 
time, often for a semester, just as students in content classes do. These skills include 
reading, writing, speaking, listening, and grammatical forms, and any sub-skills 
needed to do these, such as note-taking, research etc. This content may center on 
one text or it may rely on many texts (book chapter, periodical literature, Internet 
sources etc. ) each one illuminating one aspect of a central subject. 

Key to sustained CBI is the idea that students learn skills because they need 
'' them for the immediate, pressing job of grasping the content. Language teachers 
. provide a "scaffold"— to borrow horn Vygotsky— to help them do so. 

h Though content-based instruction has been used extensively in language 




o 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 
2 




classes, "sustained" content-based classes are relatively new in that they are not 
language classes linked to "sister" content classes, but rather language classes 
themselves which simulate a college class and also provide explicit instruction in 
language and academic skills. 

Intro 

I became interested in content-based language teaching when I had the 
strange experience of not understanding essays written in English, my native 
language. These essays were written by NNS graduate students who had high 
TOEFL scores, whose English language skills were advanced enough to gain them 
entrance into a prestigious urban university, and who were expected to perform 
alongside native speakers in their graduate programs. And yet I could not follow 
their work. These student-writers were not lacking in vocabulary or sentence-level 
accuracy for the most part, nor did they fail to use appropriate cohering devices. In 
fact, they sometimes overused them. But something did not "track." 

Student Needs: The skills of argumentation 

That "something" turned out to be the way argumentation is made in English. 
I mean "argumentation" in the broadest sense, "a coherent series of statements 
leading from a premise to a conclusion" and "the act or process of forming reasons 
and drawing conclusions, and applying them to a case in discussion" (Webster's, 



1989). Argumentation is involved in the range of academic/professional tasks, from 
lecture comprehension to research, and to all genres of written and oral presentation. 
Understanding it and being able to make it are among the fundamental needs of all 
students and professionals in an English-language setting. 

Argumentation in English requires that students be able to: 1 ) grasp the claims 
or perspectives of what they read and hear; 2) understand the methods of proof and 
evidence used to support those claims/perspectives; 3) question or challenge both 
claims and support; 4)synthesize claims and support from a range of courses; and 
5)present their own positions or perspectives using appropriate 
academic/professional rhetorical conventions. 

Yet, argumentation and rhetorical conventions vary among languages, 
(sub)cultures, and discourse communities. The study of contrastive rhetoric and 
genre analysis finds that many cultures do not use the so-called "linear" analysis that 
I just described, with its distinctions between theses and their proofs and, as Fox 
notes, with "directness, to precise relationships between verbs and their subjects, to 
clear and relatively obvious transitions, to announcement of intent and summary 
statements" (Fox, 1994, p. 20, see also Fox, 1996). Rather, they rely on indirection, 
elaboration of rhetorical flourishes, received wisdom, contextualization of issues (in 
contrast to under-the-microscope analysis) and collectivist notions fo evidence. As a 




3 



result, there was a gap between the strategies my students were using and the 
strategies common m English. As Ann Johns writes, "because some of our students 
do not share academic genre knowledge with their instructors, or with other readers 
and writers, they face considerable obstacles. It is these obstacles that we [ESL 
teachers] should attempt to face" (Johns, 1997, p. 37). 

Listening to my students' oral presentations, I found much the same. The 
exposition of claim-and-support was diffuse. The use of emphasis, tone, register, 
pragmatic strategies such as time and conversation management, and other devices 
that roughly parallel the cohering and cohesive tactics of writing nevertheless did 
not make their presentations cohere. 

In sum, it was difficult for me-and the content-class teachers of these 
students— to grasp the student’s ideas, and so it was difficult to appreciate them. 
Their academic/professional progress was hobbled because, simply put, it was 
difficult to see how smart they were. If graduate students already accepted into 
degree programs were writing and speaking at odds with English language norms, 
how were younger students or those still in ESL programs communicating? Perhaps 
not as well as they could be. 

Two Notes on Anglo-American Argumentation: Hegemony and Student 



Populations: 



Before going on, I’d like to make two points: one about teaching the 
conventions of Anglo-American argumentation and second about who should learn 
them. Teaching Anglo-American conventions of argument raises cultural, political, 
and psycho-social questions about English-language hegemony worldwide and its 
gatekeeper role in the advancement of ESL/EFL students (Al-Abed Al-Haq & 
Ahmed, 1994; Benesch, 1993a, 1993b; Freire, 1974; Freire & Macedo, 1987; 
Homberger & Ricento, 1996; Tollefson, 1991). The students whose papers I read 
had many important insights and ways to express them— why should they have to 
learn my Anglo-American ways? And what knowledge are we losing by limiting 
ourselves to those conventions? Yet at least at present, ESL/EFL students who 
communicate with the "mainstream" English-speaking world— to succeed in or 
challenge it — benefit from knowing this kind of argumentation. It is, so to speak, an 
arrow worth having in one’s quiver. So I’d like to continue on the idea that at 
present, for students who want or need to learn mainstream English argumentation, 
it is worth teaching well. Learning it well may even raise students' awareness of the 
culture-bound nature of expression. 

To the second point: Who should learn it? So far, I have been stressing the 
needs of students in or bound for college/professional training. But, as Lisa Delpit 
points out, knowing these conventions of argument is also useful to all students who 



want to understand the factors that affect their lives— from student loans to health 



insurance— especially to students who did not learn Western protocols of power at 
home. Delpit writes, "If you are not already a participant in the culture of power, 
being told explicitly the rules of that culture makes acquiring power easier" (Delpit, 
1991, p. 486),and "to act as if power doesn't exist is to ensure that the power status 
quo remains the same" (p. 496). 

There is much more to be said on both these issues, but given the time I’d like 
to get back to issues raised specifically by sustained CBI. 

Rationale for Sustained CBI 

After the experiences with these students, I began looking at the literature 
where I found echoes of my experiences with them. Leki & Carson for example 
(1994, 1997), found that ESL classes often asked for personal reaction papers but 
did not often require “text responsible” writing where students are responsible for 
demonstrating that they have learned an area of content-a skill basic in all 
academic/professional work. Research by Chitrapu (1996), Kasper (1995/1996; 

1997 and Smoke (1998) showed a gap between the skills taught in ESL programs 
and those needed by students in academic/professional settings. It seemed that if 

language emanates from, context-as Bakhtin, Vygotsky, Krashen, research on 
schema, and communicative language theorists all have claimed— then we were not 




6 



providing the context for full development of this sort of English. 

Students, like most people, learn something when they have to. When 
something must get done, they learn what they need to do it. The question was, what 
context or situation could be created in the classroom in which students would "have 
to" do various academic/professional jobs and so learn the skills necessary to do 
them. 

I began thinking about how NS students learn these academic skills. When 
they get good academic preparation, they learn those skills through taking content 
classes. [And when they don’t get good preparation, they often end up in remedial 
classes, sometimes along with ESL students.] It is in their content classes that, in 
order to learn the content-to acquire content area expertise — students develop 
academic skills. They gather information from print, oral, and electronic sources; 
draw out the central points of that information; discuss, synthesize and question that 
information; become familiar with the argumentations and rhetorical conventions of 
a discipline; and write over a period of time long enough so that both ideas and 
prose may be revised. Later, they apply those skills to other, new content areas. 

And so 1 thought, if NS learn academic skills through content classes— in 
other words, through sustained study of a subject area— ESL/EFL students may 
benefit from a similar approach. Moreover, since college and professional programs 



o 

ERLC 



7 



expect students to have these skills, ESL/EFL students may benefit from practicing 
them before they must perform commensurately with NS peers. In their 1996 survey 
of the requirements of 900 university classes, Ferris and Tagg found — perhaps not 
surprisingly- that ESL students benefitted from learning in their ESL classes the 
skills specific to mainstream ones. Without sustained study there is little 
information for students to accrue, compare, contrast, question or synthesize into 
support for claims of their own. 

In other words, simulating a college/professional class-with all its reading, 
writing and speaking requirements — is at least one context in which students can 
learn the skills needed in college/professional settings. This is what we call 
sustained CB1. 

As in other- academic/professional classes, students might be passionately or 
mildly interested in the subject of a course; others might be taking the class only 
because they have to. If course content is a subject generally familiar to educated 
people, the information itself will be useful. But whatever the subject, students who 
learn it will also learn academic skills in the process. And these skills will help 
students grapple with future academic/professional demands. These skills are what 
Widdowson and John Flowerdew have called “transferable” language 
knowledge-the ways information is organized and the ways argument is made in 




8 



English that undergirds the discipline-specific genre conventions which students 
may later learn in content classes. Importantly, language teachers can help students 
acquire these skills before they must improvise on their own in content classes. 
Support for Sustained CBI: Student Frustrations 

In any case, such was my hypothesis after pondering the essays I could not 
understand. But more than my own guesses, it was the frustrations of the students 
themselves that pointed me towards sustained CBI. They complamed they had never 
been asked to do— or been helped to do— what their university classes now 
demanded of them. Though most had read ESL/EFL textbooks and newspaper 
articles, they had been asked only to answer general "reading comprehension" 
questions but not to extract the line of argumentation. Most had been asked to 
prepare personal reaction papers or oral presentations, but none had been required 
to produce “text responsible” work, master the content, its vocabulary, forms, 
registers, methods of proof. None had followed a subject long enough to synthesize 
information, question data or present written or oral argumentation of their own. 
Support for Sustained CBI: The literature 

Support for sustained CBI comes from several areas of second language 
acquisition research. A few brief examples: Merrill Swain began advocating 
“pushed output” in the mid- 19080s— that is, oral and written presentation that is just 



a bit closer to authentic academic work than students are used to producing. 
Cummins (1981) notes that language learners cannot acquire from non-academic 
language use what he calls cognitive academic learning proficiency (CALPs). 
Academic skills must be practiced in students' second language. In sum, if students 
want to develop academic skills, then they must be given real academic tasks on 
which to practice them. Leki and Carson (1997) recommend that ESL/EFL curricula 
avoid "the grab bag of supposedly high-interest readings with attendant assignments 
pulled from different topics every week or two" and that they focus instead on "in- 
depth treatments of subject matter" (p. 64). From their experience developing EFL 
classes, Fredrickson, Hagedom and Reed (1991) suggest a paradigm for what this 
"in-depth treatment” might be: 1) students study one subject through the term; 2) the 
language and content increases in sophistication such that comprehension of later 
material depends on a grasp of earlier material; 3) students become familiar with the 
vocabulary and rhetorical devices of the discipline; and 4) students are encouraged 
to develop theory by assessing how well existing theories account for data. 

Similarly, Kutz, Groden and Zamel suggest, "a coherent framework of knowledge, 
focusing on a particular topic" (Kutz, Groden, & Zamel, 1993, p. 85) to help 
students develop a "voice" in their writing. Both text analysis research (Bardovi- 
Harlig, 1990; Connor, 1994; Connor & Fanner, 1990; Schneider & Connor, 1991) 




10 



and genre studies suggest that students practice in their ESL classes the conventions 
of argumentation that they will need in other academic/professional settings-both to 
use those conventions and understand the socio-political structures they represent 
(Cope and Kalantzis, 1993; Gosden, 1992; Hammond, Wickert, Bums, Joyce & 
Miller, 1992; Strong & Candlin, 1993). It is the Australian genre researchers who 
have stressed studying rhetorical conventions to understand their biases and socio- 
political uses. 

In her 1997 studies of ESL college students, Kasper found that students who 
had been in sustained content courses had higher pass rates into mainstream English 
and higher graduation records. 

Support for Sustained CBI: Student Interviews 

Finally, I’d like to read some interview material with students who studied in 
sustained CBI classes. In 1997, 1 conducted a series of open-ended and directed 
interviews with such students. One of their key points was the importance of gaining 
content-area expertise. This expertise gave them more information for developing 
their ideas (in discussion and writing), familiarity with rhetorical conventions, and 
more confidence in their grasp of both infonnation and forms. Carina: "If you read 
about something different every week or few weeks, you just have to force yourself 
to find something to write. ... I need to read more, more back information." The 



o 

ERIC 



12 



directed interviews echoed these comments. Yoshio: "In the other class we just read 
and react: what do I think? But in this class we have to analyze the author's opinion 
and we feedback the analyzing to our writing... I didn't like analyzing other writing 
but if we cannot analyze other writing, we cannot organize our writing." 

Students also remarked on content area expertise in their comments on two of 
the most persistently difficult challenges facing ESL/EFL students: exemplification 
and questioning material written by “authoritative experts.” Carina: "If you know 
n more, you can write more and you are not writing the same thing all over... It's hard 

to be tough and say something if you can't support it." 

A secondary benefit of sustained CBI was motivation. Pierre: "It's much more 
interesting to learn one thing... instead of trying to study everything and in fact study 
nothing... You read a lot of stuff, a lot of general opinion, but in the end you have 
nothing... In most cases, as a student, my brain would go away because my attention 
would be caught by something else. But in this course, we have to be very careful, 
to keep concentrating on what we study. This is very helpful, really. It's much more 
interesting to learn really one thing.” Soo added: “Students are not children so they 
want some useful knowledge, not just English. English and good text, specific 
idea... So we— the students— talked about this class. It's very useful because we can 
study writing, we can study listening..., we can study reading and also speaking- 

12 

O 

ERIC 



13 



four-everything. One package.” 

These interviews suggest that expertise cannot be faked. Students know when 
they have read enough about a subject to compare material, synthesize it, challenge 
it, and use it as a basis for ideas of their own. 

Conclusion: 

Indeed, if we as ESL/EFL teachers do not provide sustained content and yet 
ask our students for academic performance, we are asking them to do something 
without the tools to do it. We force them to rely on personal experience and opinion, 
and while these are important, they are not sufficient. Formulating educated ideas, 
backing them up, and well-placed skepticism stem from extensive, precise reading 
and writing on a topic. 

Absent adequate practice in these skills, students lack a full "scaffold" 
(Vygotsky, 1962) to academic study and the workplace, to advance up its ladders or 
to challenge them. Those who have friends or family that can help with these skills 
(or who can pay for assistance), will learn them. Students who don't have as much 
help— who often "are not already a participant in the culture of power" — as Delpit 
says (1991 , p. 486)— may find it harder to learn them or gain the leg-up into and over 
the "power" cultures that these skills introduce. 

Challenges for the Sustained CBI Teacher: 




13 

14 



Sustained CBI raises some questions for ESL/EFL teachers, notably: 
choosing a subject that will provide academic rigor but also interest students with 
varied backgrounds and goals; determining the appropriate level of discipline- 
specific language and forms so that the content remains academically demanding but 
so that much of the language, forms and skills will be useful in other settings; and 
lastly gaining enough expertise in the content area to teach it. 

The rest of the panel will address these issues. I would just like to mention a 
little bit of what I’ve done. The sustained CBI courses that I’ve developed include: 

1 ) Society & Cinema-about the assumptions and irritations of society that are 
reflected in film; 2) Language Acquisition, about how adults learn a second 
language, with an emphasis on contrastive rhetoric; 3) Aspects of Psychology; and 
4) a course called The American Mind, about the underlying strains of American 
culture, such as the contradiction between individualism and strong adherence to 
group identities, or the historical need for immigration and suspicion of it. Each 
course requires analysis and synthesis of readings from books and periodicals, 
discussion, oral presentation and academic paper writing. I have taught each at the 
intennediate through the advanced level, the lower levels reading much of the same 
material, but more slowly and with more instructional support. 

As an example of the skills taught and the integration of skills into course 

14 

0 

ERIC 



15 



content, I’ve provided a copy of the Table of Contents for materials from the 
Aspects of Psychology and Society & Cinema courses. 



Dr. Marcia Pally 



CINEMA & SOCIETY 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


TABLE OF CONTENTS: CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS 


Introduction to the Teacher 


Chapter Critical Thinking Skills 


Ch.l Start Trek: An 
Introduction to Film 
Criticism 


Ch.l: find the central idea(s) of a 
paragraph 

identify transition sentences 
find intro, middle & conclusion of a 
text 

definition of main idea 
identify main idea of a text 
brainstorming 

write a main idea for your paper 
find the central idea(s) of each 
paragraph in your writing 


Ch.2 "A Mirror to Nature" 


Ch.2 find the main points of the middle 
of a text 

develop a preliminary outline of a 
text 

find the main idea, intro, middle 
and conclusion of your paper 

find the main points of the middle 
in your paper 

develop a preliminary outline of 
your paper 


Ch.3 Author! Author!: 

Narrative and Script 


Ch.3 find the main & supporting points of 
a text 

find the evidence (examples, quotes, 
data) 

develop an outline of a text 
develop an outline of your writing 


Ch.4 A Star is Born: 
Character and 
Performance 


Ch.4 implied points in a text 

how to use an outline (Ch.3) as a 
basis for summary writing 
develop an outline and summary of a 
text 

develop an outline and summary of 
your and/or a classmate's writing 



Screening English: Studying Movies for Reading, Writing and Critical Thinking 
by Marcia Pally, 1997, Burgess Press. 



1.7 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Cinema & Society 



TABLE OF CONTENTS (cont.) TABLE OF CONTENTS: CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS 



Ch.5 how to question or disagree with a 
text 

develop a question- outline 
(Q-outline ) 

develop a Q-outline for your own 
writing 

Ch.6 Play It Again Sam: Ch.6 practice with the Q-outliixa: 

Dialogue & Soundtrack "refute opposing opinion" strategies 

use "refute opposing opinion" 
strategies in your writing 

develop a Q-outline for a partner's 
writing 

revise your paper using your 

partner's Q-outline as a guide 

Ch.7 more practice with: Q-outlines, 
refute opposing opinion, and 
revision 



Ch.8 The Last Picture Show 
Putting It Together 



Ch.8 organizing a complete paper 
introductions , 
conclusions , 
transitions 

expanding your main idea 
support for expanded main idea 
draft writing 



Ch.7 Dressed to Kill: 
Sets and Costumes 



Ch.5 Wait Until Dark: 
Camera and Light 



Appendices : 

Glossary of Film Terms 

Suggested Supplemental 
Films 

Supplemental Readings on 
American Culture 



Key to Chapter Outlines 



P C ST COPY AVAILABLf 



R speeds of PsycIwU^ 

TABLE OF 



CONTENTS 

Content: 


Academic Skills: 


Preface: 


* how the book is organized and how to use it 


Chapter 1: 
Consciousness 


reading: 

* find the main idea of each paragraph 

* find and chart key terms 

* developing private dictionaries 

* find and chart rhetorical conventions (strategies of 

definition, comparison, contrast, exemplification, etc.) 

* find the main idea of an article or chapter 

* identify kinds of main ideas (describe, persuade, etc.) 
writing: 

* answering definition questions 

* answering reading comprehension questions 

* brainstorming 

* writing a main idea for your paper 

* writing assignments for papers or essay exams 

-introduction to types of papers 


Chapter 2: Thought and 
Language 


reading: 

* find the introduction, middle and conclusion of a reading 

* find main & supporting points of the “middle” of a reading 

* find evidence of the “middle” (examples, data, etc.) 

* find and chart transition sentences 

* develop an outline of a reading 

—outlines, note-taking, and research 
writing: 

* answering short answer questions (exam taking) 

* developing an outline for your paper/essay 

* writing assignments (for papers or essay exam writing) 
—definition essay: brainstorm, main idea, 

and outline (claim and support) 

- explanation essay: brainstorm, main idea, 
and outline (claim and support) 


o 

ERIC 


19 



Chapter 3: Motivation 
and Emotion 



Chapter 4: Human 

Development 



Chapter 5: Personality 



O 

ERLC 



reading: 

* variations on the classic outline: 

--different sequences for main points, supporting points 
and evidence (inductive, deductive, etc ) 

—implied points 
writing: 

* answering application questions (exam taking) 

* summary writing: using your outline to write a summary 

* paraphrasing 

* writing assignments 

— summary writing and paraphrasing 

— argument essay: brainstorm, main idea, 

and outline (claim and support) 

— persuasive essay: brainstorm, main idea, outline 

* citations and bibliographies 

reading: 

* note when readings/sources disagree 

* identify rhetorical conventions that show disagreement 

* note when you disagree with a reading 

* challenging/questioning a reading (the question-outline) 

writing: 

* practice definition, short answer and application questions 

* writing assignments (papers and essay exams) 

—the compare/contrast essay: brainstorm, main idea, 
and outline (claim and support) 

—synthesizing texts and summarizing contrasting texts 

reading: 

* questioning readings & “refute opposing opinion” strategies 

writing: 

* practice defmition, short answer and application questions 

* writing assignments (papers and essay exams) 

— “refute opposing opinion” strategies: brainstorm, 
main idea and outline (claim & support) 

* peer editing and revision 

—using the question-outline with a partner’s paper 




Chapter 6: Social Consolidation of Skills: 

Psychology Reading: 

* key terms 

* outlining, note-taking 

* questioning/challenging readings 

Writing: 

Exam Questions: 

* definition 

* short answer 

* application 

Assignments for research papers or essay exams 

* brainstorm 

* main idea 

* outline (claim & support) 

* summary/paraphrasing 

* synthesizing readings 

* compare/contrast strategies 

* refute opposing opinion strategic 

* peer editing and revision 



Glossary 



Index 




21 



References: 



Al-Abed Al-Haq, F., & Ahmed, A. (1994). Discourse problems in argumentative writing. World 
Englishes. 13 (3), 307-323. 

Bardovi-Harlig, K.( 1990). Pragmatic word order in English composition. In U. Connor & A. M. Johns 

(Eds ), Coherence: Research and pedagogical perspectives (pp. 43-66). Alexandria, VA: TESOL 

Benesch, S. (1993a). Critical thinking: A learning process for democracy. TESOL Quarterly, 27 (3). 545- 
548. 

Benesch, S (1993b). ESL, ideology, and the politics of pragmatism. TESOL Quarterly. 27 (4). 705-717. 

Chitrapu, D. (1996). Case studies of non-native graduate students' research writing in the disciplines. 
Dissertation Abstracts International. 57 (10). 244 A. 

Connor. U. (1996). Contrastive rhetoric. Cambrige, U.K.: Cambridge University press. 

Connor, U., &Farmer, M. (1990). Teaching topical structure analysis as a revision strategy. In B. Kroll 
(Ed ). Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 129-135). New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (1993). The power of literacy and the literacy of power In B. Cope & M 
Kalantzis (Eds ), The powers of literacy: A genre approach to teaching writing (pp. 63-89). 

Pittsburgh, PA: Pittsburgh University Press. 

Cummins, J. (1981). The role of primary language development in promoting educational success for 
language minority students. In California State Department of Education (Ed ), Schooling and 
language minority students . Los Angeles: Evaluation, Dissemination, and Assessment Center. 

Delpit, L. (1991). The silenced dialogue. Power and pedagogy in educating other people's children. In M. 
Minami & B. Kennedy (Eds ), Language issues in literacy and bilingual/multicultural education (pp. 
483-502). Cambridge, MA: Harvard Educational Review. 

Freire, P. (1974). Pedagogy of the oppressed . New York: Seabury. Freire, P., & Macedo, D. (1987). 

Literacy: Reading the word and the world . South Hadley, MA: Bergin and Garvey. 

Freire, P., & Macedo, D. (1987). Literacy: Reading the word and the world . South Hadley, MA: Bergin 
and Garvey. 

Fox, H. (1994). Listening to the world: Cultural issues in academic writing . Urbana, IL. National Council 
of Teachers of English. 

Fox, H. (1996). "And never the twain shall meet": International students writing for a U S. university 
audience. ERIC Document 300540. 

Fredrickson, T., Hagedorn, J., & Reed, H. (1991). The content-based curriculum at ITM/MUCIA. Cross 
Currents . 18(2). 200-205.. 

0 




22 



Gosden, H. (1992).. Discourse functions of marked theme in scientific research articles. English for 
Specific Purposes. 11 . 207-224, 

Hammond, J., Wickert, R., Burns, A., Joyce, H., & Miller, A. (1992). The pedagogical relations between 
adult ESL and adult literacy . Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia. 

Hornberger, N., & Ricento, T. (Eds ). (1996). Language planning and policy [Special issue], TESOL 
Quarterly, 30 (3). 

Johns, A. (1997). Text, role, and context: Developing academic literacies . New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Kasper, L. (1995/1996). Using discipline-based texts to boost college ESL reading instruction. Journal of 
Adolescent and Adult Literacy, 39, 298-206. 

Kasper, L. 1997. The impact of content-based instructional programs on the academic progress of ESL 
students English for Specific Purposes 16 (4). 309-320. 

Kutz, E., Groden, S., & Zamel, V. (1993). The discovery of competence: Teaching and learning with 
diverse student writers . Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook. 

Leki, L, & Carson, J. (1994). Students' Perceptions of EAP Writing Instruction and Writing Needs across 
the Disciplines. TESOL Quarterly, 28 (1). 81-101. 

Leki, I., & Carson, J. (1997), "Completely different worlds: EAP and the writing experiences of ESL 
students in university courses. TESOL Quarterly.3 1 (1). 39-69. 

Pally, M. (1997). Critical Thinking in ESL: An argument for sustained content. Journal of Second 
Language Writing. 6 (3). 293-31 1. 

Pally, M. (May, 1998). Film studies drive literacy development for ESL university students. Journal of 
Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 41 (8), 620-628. 

Schneider, M. & Connor, U. (1991). Topical structure in ESL essays: Not all topics are equal. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 12 , 41 1-427.. 

Smoke, T. (Ed ). (1998). Adult ESL: Politics, pedagogy, and participation in classroom and community 
programs . Mahwah, NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Strong, R., & Candlin, C. (1993). Forward. In P. Hagan, S. Hood, E. Jackson, M. Jones, H. Joyce, & M. 
Manidis, Certificate in spoken and written English (2nd. ed ). Syndey, Australia: New South Wales 
Adult Migrant English Service & National Centre for English Language Teaching and Research. 

Tollefson, J. (1991). Planning language, planning inequality: Language policy in the community . New 
York: Longman. 

Vygotsky, L. (1962). Thought and language . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 



O 

ERIC 



23 




• | trb U^~ ( T 

& i. o x 

® 

U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 

National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 




I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title: C<3r\ -feA-f-— (dt&a&d T €&olaA^. /<£- D "€d&ldp /n g/j/ 

in e£t/£f* L ..-o ’ 



Author(s): 



'flr^OL QQ (pa/oers ? S — • /t/C' IF /I/0 t LofQS TTf TS 

neseAreo els specify'. 



Publication Date: 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy,, 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 1 documents 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 2A documents 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 2B documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

r <f 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE, AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY, 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 










J* 

c3> 


TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

1 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

2A 




J 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

2B 



Level 1 



t 




•f 



Level 2A 



□ 



Level 2B 

t 




Check here for Level 1 release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche or other ERIC archival 
media (e.g.,. electronic) and paper copy. 



Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche and in electronic media 
for ERIC archival collection subscribers only 



Check here for Level 2B release, permitting 
reproduction and dissemination in microfiche only 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce is granted, but no box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 



Sign 

here,-* 

please 

O 



ERIC 



I hereby grant to the Educationel Resources informetion Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce end disseminate this document 
es indicated ebove. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other then ERIC employees end its system 
contractors requires permission from the copyright holder Exception is mede for non-profit reproduction by libraries end other service agencies 
to satisfy informetion needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries . 



Signature: 




AlAtdJLs 



Organ! 



'Address: 










'21m l u-dfS> i<-7 ^ 

w TJU&orn 

A I /N ^ l \ l / v / i y J A J / A » n 







Printed Name/P os ition/Title: 



/nAM/A PA LL i dDWAdr Ass r ■ pf 6 R 

/Telephone: t j O S)/ n / / FAX: 






E-Mail Adi 

mt> 3 l 



/lyu- 



Date: 



ed u. 






(over) 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 



Publisher/Distributor: 



Address: 



Price: 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse 

OUR NEW ADDRESS AS OF SEPTEMBER 1, 1998 
Center for Applied Linguistics 
4646 40th Street NW 
Washington DC 20016-1859 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 




aa , “ *'*'i 

MREVIOUS VERSIONS OF THIS FORM ARE OBSOLETE. 



