The Impact of the Shortage of Special Educators of Color on the 
Overrepresentation of Students of Color in Special Education 



Margaret Ellmer 
March 2, 2010 




Ellmer 2 



Abstract 

While disproportionate representation of students of color has been extensively 
documented, an understanding of the factors contributing to this phenomenon is limited. 
The purpose of this paper is to explore existing literature on the premise that a current 
shortage of special educators of color impacts this overrepresentation. 

Since the problem of the disproportionalityy of students of color in special 
education programs was first denounced more than forty years ago, only intermittent 
attention has been given to the problem. Overrepresentation is usually estimated by 
contrasting the proportion of a school’s population with the representation of the same 
group in a special education program. In the United States African American, Latino 
Americans and Native Americans are represented in special education at a level greater 
than their proportionality of the total school population. Teachers of color represent only 
one-tenth of the teaching force, while students of color make up one-third of the total 
student population. The shortage is especially evident in fields such as bilingual and 
special education. 

The problems of the overrepresentation of students of color in special education 
and the shortage of teachers of color in the field appear to be closely intertwined. 
Currently, programs across the nation are being implemented which may prove beneficial 
in reducing the representation of students of color in special education as well as 
increasing the pool of special educators of color. Only by targeting both issues will 



improvement be shown. 




Ellmer 3 



Introduction 

Overrepresentation can be defined as the identification and placement of students 
from a certain ethnicity in a special education program at a rate greater than the 
percentage the ethnicity is represented in the general student population (Meyer and 
Patton, 2001). Disproportionate representation has been identified for more than forty 
years and continues to be problematic for states and school districts across the country. 
Historically African American, Latino and Native American students have been over 
identified in the areas of mild mental disabilities, and emotional/behavioral disabilities 
(Meyer and Patton, 2001). 

Students of color are often represented in special education programs in 
disproportionate numbers with overrepresentation. Teachers of color are also 
disproportionately represented as special educators, but are underrepresented. According 
to the Presidential Commission on Excellence in Special Education (2002) in 1993-1994 
children who were black made up 16 percent of the public school population while only 
nine percent of the teaching force was black. The superintendent of schools in Austin, 
Texas, Dr. Paschal Forgione, reports that while the Hispanic student population there has 
continued to grow, three-fourths of new teacher hires were Anglo. Dr. Forgione 
expresses a desire to “match the demographics of our student population with that of our 
teaching population - or at least get a little closer” ( Rodriguez, 2000). 

Both issues are important in providing the best learning experience possible for 
students of color. While researchers have looked extensively at the problem of 
overrepresentation, intervention has been at best intermittent. Likewise, the issue of a 




Ellmer 4 



shortage of teachers of color has been identified with few solutions proposed. Could a 
connection between the two issues provide an impetus for designing and implementing 
solutions? 



Methods 

A review of literature, both current and historical was undertaken to locate 
information pertaining to the questions posed. Data was located on the degree of 
overrepresentation of students of color in special education programs. Likewise, data 
was obtained regarding shortages of special educators of color. Information on the 
impact of the shortage of special educators of color on the overrepresentation of students 
of color in special education programs was limited to anecdotal evidence. 

The lack of availability of objective data on the question of the impact teacher 
shortage has on initial student placement and continuation in special education programs 
suggests a need for further study. It might be helpful to investigate the connection 
between the two by considering the perceptions of special educators about teaching and 
learning, behavioral issues, academic interventions and assessment. Breaking down the 
results of such an assessment based on the ethnicity of the educator and the ethnicity of 
the students they teach may further our understanding of how individual perceptions 
impact special education placement. With permission from the National Center for 
Culturally Responsive Educational Systems (NCCRESTt) the publication Equity in 
Special Education Placement: A School Self-Assessment possibly may be used as an 
measurement tool (Richards, Artiles, Klinger, and Brown, 2005). 




Ellmer 5 



Results 

What has been determined is that African Americans, Latinos and Native 
Americans are represented in numbers larger than their percentage of the general school 
population. According to the U.S. Department of Education African-Americans 
accounted for 16% of the student population; however, African-Americans represented 
32%, or double the current representation, of students with mental disabilities in special 
education (Thompson, 2007) 

Special education teachers are required to take courses in their field and to hold 
certification in the category matching the needs of the students they teach. A study of 
teachers in California demonstrated problems with these requirements. In 2003-04, there 
were more than 48,000 special education teachers with 13% not fully licensed (compared 
with 7% in general education). The rate of special educators not fully licensed rose to 
47% among first- and second- year teachers as compared with general educators (The 
Center for the Future of Teaching and Learning, 2004). The United States Department of 
Education discovered that nationwide more than 12,000 special education jobs were 
unfilled with 10% of special education teachers lacking special education expertise 
(Rotherham, 2003). 

Discussion 

History of Overrepresentation 

Lloyd Dunn (1968) first identified the issue of the overrepresentation of 
minorities in special education in the article Special education for the mildly retarded — is 




Ellmer 6 



much of it justifiable ? which was printed in Exceptional Children in 1968. The article 
raised the question of whether students from minority groups were overrepresented in 
special education programs. Dunn stated that it is “unethical to label minority group 
children as mentally retarded when they are disruptive in school, when they are slow 
learners, and especially when they obtain IQ scores in the 60s” (Dunn, 1968). Dunn’s 
article was extremely timely, and in the years that followed, parents of minorities 
challenged special education placement of their children in the court system. This 
translated into The Education for all Handicapped Children Act of 1975 (Public Law 94- 
142) which is now known as Individuals with Disabilities Improvement Act or IDEA). 
Dunn was interviewed in 1983, after the implementation of Public Law 94-142 regarding 
the impact on the issue of minority representation in special education. He stated that 
while minority representation in programs for the mentally retarded had decreased, a new 
category for students with learning disabilities had taken its place and that these students 
were now placed in the mainstream, but “fished out once or twice a day and placed in an 
aquarium (resource room)” both for tutoring and to provide relief for the regular teacher 
and his or her more able students” (Dunn, 1983). Dunn also stated that research at the 
time showed that this was no more helpful to students than the previous model. Dunn felt 
strongly that “full responsibility for the so-called mildly retarded/leaming disabled, who 
are often disruptive males, should rest with regular and remedial educators who will need 
to do a better job than they have in the past of individualizing instruction for these pupils” 
(Dunn, 1983). In successive years, the problem of overrepresentation of African 
Americans in Special Education has grown to include students from other minority 
groups sometimes called culturally and linguistically diverse (CLD). The term “culturally 




Ellmer 7 



and linguistically diverse” is used to refer to students from racial/ethnic minority groups 
and linguistic minority groups. While there is no denial that some students of color do 
need the services offered by special educators, the issue bears continuous research and 
effort to insure that representation is equitable. The disproportionately large numbers of 
students from minority groups are placed in special education suggests that teachers find 
“something wrong with the child” that special education might be able to “fix” (Meyer 
and Patton, 2001). Research continues to be conducted in order to determine underlying 
causes. There is a growing body of research that focuses on many reasons for the 
overrepresentation that are “outside the learner” and may contribute to the continued 
overrepresentation as well as highlighting some possible solutions (Meyer and Patton, 
2001 ). 

There are concerns that once students are placed in special education, they usually 
remain in that placement. The National Education Association feels that students in 
special education programs unnecessarily often encounter a limited, less rigorous 
curriculum, have diminished expectations leading to lower expectations academically, 
have less access to academically able peers, are racially separated and stigmatized 
socially (National Education Association, 2008). 

A Shortage of Special Educators of Color 
The President’s Commission on Special Education issued a report in 2002 that 
addressed the shortage of special educators. One problem was that although there have 
always been shortages of qualified special educators, IDEA was not been designed to 
help alleviate the shortage. Because adequate steps were not taken to improve teacher 




Ellmer 8 



education programs, teachers were not being trained in scientifically based teaching 
practices (President's Commission on Excellence in Special Education, 2002 ). 

Because the commission recognized that students are more diverse in “ability, 
culture, language, and learning needs”, an emphasis must be placed on recruiting and 
retaining special educators who “represent the diversity of the children in the classroom” 
(President's Commission on Excellence in Special Education, 2002 ). The student 
population throughout the nation increasingly is more diverse, yet the proportion of 
minority teachers continues to decrease. In 1993-1994 children who are African 
American made up 16 percent of the public school population, but only nine percent of 
the teaching force consisted of educators who are African American. (President's 
Commission on Excellence i n Special Education, 2002) The Commission is concerned 
that not enough people from minority backgrounds, especially men, are entering the 
profession of educating children. Children benefit from having teachers that include 
individuals from their own ethnic and cultural backgrounds. The representation of role 
models for children is an important function of educators. The commission reported that 
they were “disturbed that although the diversity of children will continue, the prospects 
that teachers will be largely white, middle class, female and monolingual will continue” 
(President's Commission on Excellence in Special Education, 2002) . A statement by 
the National Education Association supports the belief that all teachers need to be taught 
diversity. With that said, the NEA also believes that “having someone that looks like 
them and that can relate to them culturally instills in each child that education is 
important to everyone. . . .regardless of your background, you can be respected and 
accomplish many things” (Thompson, 2007). 




Ellmer 9 



Does the Shortage Impact Overrepresentation? 

Students of color all too often end up in special education programs because 
teachers do not know how to relate to minority students. Research conducted by the 
NEA finds that African Americans who are thought to have challenging behaviors are 
referred more often than white students for programs for students with emotional 
disabilities. It was also found that Native American students qualify for special education 
services at a rate twice that of the general student population. English-language learners 
tend to receive special education services in schools where there are relatively small ELL 
populations (National Education Association, 2008). 

Not only do teachers of color give minority students an opportunity to be 
understood, they help open lines of communication between white and minority teachers. 
One teacher reports that a fellow white teacher told her that there “was no one she could 
turn to for help in relating to her minority students” (Thompson, 2007). Studies show 
that about one in five students have a parent who was born outside the United States. 
Therefore, a minority teacher may be asked to sit in on conferences with either the 
student or parent, or even speak to the child about a specific issue (Thompson, 2007). 

The Council for Exceptional Children (CEC) recognizes the connection between 
the issues. A position paper states “A continuing shortage of special education teachers, 
coupled with a shortage of regular education teachers who are adequately trained to work 
with students with disabilities, hinders the educational achievement of students with 




Ellmer 10 



disabilities under the current IDEA system” (Council for Exceptional Children, 2007). 
To address the issues CEC calls for professional development of prospective and current 
special and regular educators to include the needs of students with disabilities. A major 
focus of CEC’s teacher recruitment program is to attract teachers from diverse 
backgrounds. Not only can special educators provide culturally comfortable 
relationships, they are able to provide the special instruction students need. In addition, 
special educators of color can help others understand the “cultural dimensions of student 
behavior” (Council for Exceptional Children, 2010). 

Recommendations 

Current Strategies and Proposals for Addressing Problems 

The National Center for Culturally Responsive Educational Systems (NCCRESt) 
provides technical assistance to help alleviate discrepancies in achievement in education 
due to cultural bias. They propose the development of culturally responsive educational 
systems that are based on the theory that all students can excel academically when their 
culture, language, heritage and experiences are valued and they have access to high 
quality teachers, programs and resources. A culturally responsive system benefits all 
children by providing them with a variety of experiences. Children are given a sense of 
belonging while their lives are enriched and their uniqueness is validated (Klingner, 
Artiles, & Kozleski, 2005). 

The Alliance Project at Vanderbilt’s Peabody College of Education is designed to 
address the problem of the shortage of special education teachers. The Alliance has 
secured more than 6 million dollars to enable them to work with historically black 




Ellmer 11 



institutions and schools as well as tribal schools to mentor faculty members, address 
issues related to accreditation, and curriculum for multicultural education, and to develop 
seminars related to teaching culturally and linguistically diverse students with disabilities 
(Shaw, 1999). 

The Council for Exceptional Children along with the National Clearinghouse on 
Professions has designed programs to attract and retain special education teachers by 
producing public service announcements and brochures to attempt to attract potential 
educators from college age students as well as those who are contemplating career 
changes. The Council for Exceptional Children is also supporting an effort to align IDEA 
with No Child Left Behind (NCLB) in order to provide “highly qualified” teachers for 
students with disabilities , to streamline Personnel Preparation programs and to encourage 
the training of both special and regular education teachers to work with students with 
disabilities (Council for Exceptional Children, 2007). 

Across the country, individual school districts and states are designing and 
implementing programs to attract and retain minority teachers. In Kansas, minority 
teacher candidates and paraprofessionals who want to become special educators receive 
financial support. Officials there have also found that new teacher attrition could be 
reduced if teacher candidates had more time in the classroom with master teachers before 
becoming independent. In Georgia, several school districts sponsor on-site day care for 
children of special educators and also provide close-circuit cameras to allow teachers to 
check on their children during the day. Many states forgive student loans for those who 
teach in critical shortage areas (Chaika, 2006). Another recommendation worth 
considering is the administration of a survey or interest inventory which might be given 




Ellmer 12 



to students interested in entering the field of education in order to possibly attract future 
special educators. 

The overrepresentation of students of color in special education programs has been 
well documented for more than 40 years. Although some steps have been taken to 
address the disproportionality, the dilemma continues to affect children across our nation. 
The shortage of special educators of color has also been well documented with programs 
being designed and implemented to alleviate the discrepancy. Perhaps by delving into 
the correlation between the two issues a better understanding of how to address the 
problem can be revealed. 




Ellmer 13 



References 

Center for the Future of Teaching and Learning (2004) Special education - not so special 
for some qualified teachers in short supply for special education students. Retrieved 
from http : // w w w . cftl . org/centervie w s/augu s t04 . html 

Chaika, G. (2006). The Teacher shortage: apply, please!. Retrieved from 
http ://www .educationworld.com/a_admin/admin/admin 155. shtml 

Council for Exceptional Children (2007) CEC identifies critical issues facing specicd 
education. Retrieved from http://www.cec.sped.org/AM/Template.cfm7Section 
=Search&TEMPLATE=/CM/ContentDisplay.cfm&CONTENTID=8598 

Council for Exceptional Children (2010) Shortage of teachers from diverse groups. 
Retrieved from http://www.cec.sped.org/Content/NavigationMenu/ 
AboutCEC/Diversity/Diversitylnitiatives/TeacherShortage/default.htm 

Dunn, L.M. (1983, February 23). This week's citation classic. Retrieved from 
http://www.garfield.library.upenn.edu/classicsl983/A1983QB29800001.pdf 

Dunn, L.M. (1968). Special education for the mildly retarded — is much of it 
justifiable!. Exceptional Children, 35, 5-22. 

Klingner, J.K., Artiles, A.J., & Kozleski, E.Z. (2005). Addressing the disproportionate 
representation of culturally and linguistically diverse students in special 
education through culturally responsive educational systems. Education Policy 
Analysis Archives, 13(38), Retrieved from http://www.nccrest.org/PDFs/ 
core_principles_EP A A . 

Meyer, G., & Patton, J.M. (2001). The Nexus of race, disability, and 

overrepresentation. Brief discussions of critical issues in urban education. 

Retrieved from http://www.urbanschools.org/pdf/race 

National Education Association (2008) Disproportionallv: inappropriate identification 
of culturally and linguistically diverse children. Retrieved from 
http://www.nea.org/assets/docs/mf_PB02_Disproportionality.pdf 

President's Commission on Excellence in Special Education (2002) A new era: 




Ellmer 14 



revitalizing special education for children and their families. Retrieved from 
http://www.ed.gov/inits/commissionsboards/whspecialeducation/ 

Richards, H.V., Artiles, A.}., Klinger, }. and Brown, A. (2005) Equity in special 

education placement: a school self-assessment. Retrieved from http://www.Nccrest 
. org/publications/as sessment .TOOL.formB .pdf ?v_document_name=As sessment+Tool 
+form+B 

Rodriguez, V.J. (2000). Minority teacher shortage plagues region, nation. SEDL Letter , 
Retrieved from http://www.sedl.Org/pubs/sedletter/vl2n02/7.html 

Rotherham, A.J. (2003, April 15). The Wrong teacher shortage. Blueprint Magazine , 
Retrieved from http://www.ppionline.org/ppi_ci.cfm?knlgAreaID=l lO&subsec 
ID=135&contentID=25 1498 

Shaw, P. (1999, April 12). Special kids need specicd teachers; this project helps. 
Retrieved from http://www.vanderbilt.edu/News/register/Aprill9_99/teachers.htm 

Thompson, M. (2007). The Effects of minority teachers. Social and Cultured 
Foundations of American Education. Retrieved from http://en.wikibooks.org 
/wiki/Social and Cultural Foundations of American Education/Second Edition 




