DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 403 939 



JC 970 102 



TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



Harrisburg Area Community College, Exploring 
America's Communities. Progress Report. 

Harrisburg Area Community Coll., Pa. 

American Association of Community Colleges, 
Washington, DC. ; National Endowment for the 
Humanities (NFAH) , Washington, D.C. 

Jan 97 

7p . ; In: National Conference on American Pluralism 
and Identity Program Book (New Orleans, LA, January 
18-19, 1997); see JC 970 087. 

Reports - Descriptive (141) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

’‘'Community Colleges; ’'Cultural Pluralism; 
Interdisciplinary Approach; Learning Activities; 
*Li terature ; Multicultural Education; Program 
Descriptions; Seminars; Two Year Colleges 
Harrisburg Area Community College PA 



ABSTRACT 

In 1996, Harrisburg Area Community College 
(Pennsylvania) participated in the American Association of Community 
Colleges' Exploring America's Communities project, works to 
strengthen the teaching and learning of American history, literature, 
and culture at U.S. community colleges. The project's primary goal 
was to bring English teachers together for meetings every three weeks 
to discuss the writings of African Americans, Latinos, Native 
Americans, women, and others. The discussions emphasized the social 
elements that unite Americans. Other elements of the program's 
implementation included seminars, content speakers, readings, 
vi doeconf erences , meetings, and course outline and syllabus reviews. 
Accomplishments were as follows: (1) a mul i tcul tural reader was 

selected for English instructors; (2) discussion meetings were 
organized for fall 1996; (3) a videoconference was held; (4) grant 
activities were published in newsletters; (5) reports were made 
campus wide; (6) a mentor visited the college; (7) a novel was 
selected for future meetings; and (8) the faculty discussed an 
article called "Finding Ourselves in Mul ticul tural i sm. " Obstacles 
that the program faced included finding that one of the novels on the 
group's reading list was out of print and a lack of time. Faculty and 
students still need to continue the conversations, plan for a seminar 
leader or videoconference, discuss assignments, consider giving a 
teacher release time to oversee the project in the future, and 
continue to report progress to appropriate campus bodies. (HAA) 



* it * * * * * * * * * * Vc * it * * it * x it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 

* * it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it 



ED 403 939 



Harrisburg Area Community College 
Exploring America’s Communities 
Progress Report 



In: National Conference on American Pluralism and Identity Program Book 
(New Orleans, LA, January 18-19, 1997) 



cA 

o 

£ 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office o< Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

J^This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it 

□ Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality. 

• Points of view or opinions slated in this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERt position or policy 



:ERJC 



“PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

J. Gollattscheck 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



2 




harrisburg area community college 

ONE HACC DRIVE / HARRISBURG. PENNSYLVANIA 1711 0-2999 

ACCOMPLISHMENTS 

1 . A multi-cultural reader was selected for adjunct English. 

101 Instructors. 

2. Discussion meetings were set up for Fall, 1996. 

From 10-15 adjunct and full-time faculty met. About 
three meetings were held. 

3. A videoconference was held in November on African Americans 
and the Publishing world, sponsored by the college president. 

4. Grant activities were published in the Grants Newsletter 
as well as the campus newsletter. 

5. Reports were made to Director of Institutional Diversity, 

the Institutional Diversity Task Force, and the Communications 
and the Arts Division. 

6. Dr. Kathy Fedorko, mentor visited the college on October 2 
from 9 a.m. until 5 p.m. She met with the Director of In- 
stitutional Diversity, Chair of the College Task Force on 
Diversity, Dean of the C&A Division, and an adjunct instructor 
of English. She also attended the second meeting in our 
series of conversations on pluralism. 

7. A novel was selected . Spring, 1997 meetings. Lakota Woma n , 
a national best seller by Mary Crow Dog. 

8. The group discussed the article "I Am The Canon: Finding 

3 

COMMUNICATIONS AND THE ARTS DIVISION • (717) 780-2420 




harrisburg area community collage 

ONE HACC DRIVE /'HARRISBURG. PENNSYLVANIA 17110-2999 



Ourselves in Multiculturalism, " by Patrick Shannon. 

In our discussions we discussed different assignments. We discussed 
student reactions and student learning. Our discussion went very 
well. Each participant was enthusiastic about discussing the material. 
Student response for the most part was favorable. The project had 
a very successful beginning. We worked on every item in our action 
plan . 

OBSTACLES 

Obstacles have been very few. The only one I can think of was 
the novel Jasmine which we originally planned to read was out of 
print. We can always use more time. The meetings were held at 3 in 
the afternoon. Those who attended enjoyed the discussion even though 
some meetings lasted beyond 4:30. Since diversity is a college goal, 
there is much support throughout the college community from the pres- 
ident's office on down. 

REMAINING WORK 

We still need to continue our conversations, plan for a seminar 

l 

leader or videoconference, discuss Lakota Woman , discuss assignments, 
consider publishing student essays and assignments, consider offering 
an adjunct teacher release time oversee the project in the future, and 
continue to report progress to appropriate campus bodies. 

4 



COMMUNICATIONS AND THE ARTS DIVISION • (717) 7802420 




harrisburg area community college 

ONE HACC DRIVE / HARRISBURG, PENNSYLVANIA 171 10-2999 



EXPLORING AMERICA'S COMMUNITIES: IN QUEST OF COMMON GROUND 

Progress Report 



ERIC 



Harrisburg Area Community College, established February 14, 

1964, was the first community college in Pennsylvania. The college 
is a multi-campus college that offers programs and courses at three 
campuses: the Wildwood Campus in Harrisburg, the Lancaster Campus, 
and the Lebanon Campus. Courses are also offered at the Gettysburg 
Center and additional locations throughout southcentral Pennsylvania 
The college with its three campuses is located in southcentral Penn- 
sylvania. The college has 10,719 credit students (Fall, 1996) and 
17,749 students in non-credit programs (Fall, 1995). The multi- 
campus college serves an area that includes Cumberland, Dauphin, 
Perry, Lancaster, Lebanon, York and Adams counties. The population 
total from these counties should come close to one million people. 
Harrisburg Area Community College is well known throughout the area 
for low cost quality education. 

The college is "dedicated to delivering superior educational 
value characterized by learning-centered teaching and continuous 
instructional enhancement and innovation in bur multi-campus environ 
ment that is accessible, affordable, and well maintained." (College 
Catalog) The college recently received a national award for its 
diversity initiatives. g 

COMMUNICATIONS AND THE ARTS DIVISION • (717) 7802420 




harrisburg area community college 

ONE HACC DRIVE / HARRISBURG. PENNSYLVANIA 17110-2999 

The college serves a diverse student population. 

ACTION PLAN PRIMARY GOALS 

The two year project is to bring English teachers together for 
meetings every three weeks during the regular semesters. The goal 
is to discuss the writings of African Americans, Latinos, Native 
Americans, women and others. The emphasis is to be on what holds 
Americans together. Seminar speakers and readings will focus on 
content literature. The attention will be more on what is being read, 
rather than arguments for diversity. At least two content speakers of 
formal videoconferences are to be planned for each year. The meetings 
will function to clarify the goals and the direction of the English 
101-102 sequence, bring adjunct and full-time faculty together, and 
enhance faculty understanding of diverse literatures. A multi-cul- 
tural text is to be selected for adjunct English. 101 teachers for 
Fall, 1996. Appropriate meetings with Campus leaders in Diversity 
Initiatives were planned. Course outlines and syllabi were reviewed 
and appropriate changes are to be made. The primary goal is to en- 
hance and improve instruction through discussions on American plur- 
alism and identity. 



6 



COMMUNICATIONS AND THE ARTS DIVISION • (717) 780-2420 




harrisburg area community callage 

ONE HACC DRIVE / HARRISBURG, PENNSYLVANIA 1 7 1 10-2999 



REACTIONS 

The conversations on: What does it mean to be an American ? 

What divides us ? What brings us together ? What do we have in common 
among students and colleagues were lively and yet serious. The dis- 
cussions were engaging and intellectually stimulating. Eyes were 
opened to the different struggles and dreams of a diverse people. 
Students were able to see others and their struggles. I beleive that 
the college community is made stronger because we are able to see 
how much is held in common with others from differing backgrounds. 

The conversations allow us to feel a sense of pride and respect for 
the experiences of others. It makes compassion and empathy possible. 
Those with privilege and those without privilege will not always 
come together, but breaking the silence and discussing the issues 
that seem to separate us often works to bring us together. The dia- 
log has been fruitful and must continue. 




NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASTS 




This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)” form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release 
form (either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 



ERIC 



