International Journal of Language Studies 

Volume 8, Number 3, July 2014, pp. 107-116; DOI: 10.13140/2.1.2463.8086 


The bilingual self or selves? 1 

Mohammad Ali Salmani Nodoushan, IECF, Iran 
Jesus Garcia Laborda, Universidad de Alcala, Spain 

A concise but strong review of the literature on bilinguals’ perception of 
'self' led to the question of whether bilinguals perceive themselves as 
different or the same people when they function in different languages. 
183 participants (N =183] randomly assigned to two half-groups took 
both the English and Persian versions of the Self Concept Scale (SCS] in 
two counter-balanced administration sessions with a time interval of 3 
weeks. Results, after data analysis using descriptive and inferential 
statistics, indicated that Iranian-Americans have a more realistic self 
concept when they function in English than when they function in 
Persian. Their average self concepts in English and Persian do not 
match. Moreover, the female Iranian-American shows a larger 
discrepancy in her English and Persian self concepts than her male 
counterpart. This indicates that females are more open to alienation 
than males. The results of this study lend empirical support to claims 
made by previous researchers that bilinguals have a kind of split 
personality. After the filed study, it was concluded that a bilingual is not 
a unique person who assumes different identities when he functions in 
the different languages he knows, but that a bilingual possess two 
different 'guises' or ‘selves' which are language-specific and are used in 
accordance with the language the bilingual speaks at any given point in 
time. 

Keywords: Bilingualism; Mercenary Relativism; Split Personality; Linguistic 
Schizophrenia; Multilingualism 

1. Introduction 

Man has not always been monolingual. Nowadays, it is quite easy to find many 
people who know more than one language. In some places, there are people 
who can speak several languages just like native speakers. This has resulted in 
many psycholinguists wondering whether bilinguals and multilinguals feel 


1 Reprinted from Salmani Nodoushan, M. A. [2013], The bilingual self or selves? 
Annals of"l Decembrie 1918" University of Alba Iulia - Philology, 14{ 2], 503-510. 


ISSN: 2157-4898; EISSN: 2157-4901 

©2014 IJLS; Printed in the USA by Lulu Press Inc. 





108 


M. A. Salmani Nodoushan & J. Garcia Laborda 


like different people when speaking different languages (Pavlenko, 2006], It is 
not known whether bilinguals and multilinguals are perceived as different 
people or the same individual by their interlocutors. Nor is it known if they 
behave differently when they speak different languages, and if so, what causes 
these differences. 

These questions are quite often asked in debates about bilingualism and 
multilingualism, but they have rarely been raised in the literature in the field 
(Grosjean, 1982; Heinz, 2001; Pavlenko, 2006], Although these questions may 
look naive and simplistic, some people have taken them as far as to claim that 
even when an individual functions in the same language, they perform as 
different identities. Doctors in a hospital, for example, do not function in their 
native language as they would do when they engage in casual conversation in 
supermarkets. Changing registers, contexts, interlocutors, or interactional 
aims will definitely leave a great impact on the language forms people choose 
to use. If anything, monolingualism is in essence a dynamic phenomenon 
(Pavlenko, 2006], Even within the limits of his native language, the individual 
continuously acquires novel linguistic repertoires and behaves and feels 
differently (moves between the selves] when he talks to his parents versus his 
children. 

The important question to be asked is, therefore, whether 
bilinguals/multilinguals see themselves as different people when using 
different languages. This paper will try to shed some light on this issue, and 
will seek to answer the question. In the rest of this paper, the term 
bilingualism is used as a cover term for both bilingualism as well as 
multilingualism. By the same token, the term bilingual will also include 
multilinguals. 

2. Background 

It may be relieving to some people to assume that the study of bilingual and 
multilingual selves is not worth the time and energy scholars would like to 
invest in them. On the contrary, there may be some other people who might 
want to claim that the notion of the existence of bilingual/multilingual selves 
is short-sighted, and to argue that the bilingual/multilingual is at best a 
unique self who assumes bilingual/multilingual identities. 

Pavlenko (2006] argues that this is misleading and reductionist for at least 
two reasons. On the one hand, taking such a position is in effect claiming that 
‘self-perception' is equal to ‘performance’, or that 'self' is equal to 'identity' 
which even the layman knows is not. The arguer who takes these terms to be 
tantamount is, as Pavlenko (2006] puts it, deeply discomforted with focusing 
on something as intangible as 'feeling like a different person' and prefers 
'objective' identity performance data (conversations, texts, task performance] 


International Journal of Language Studies, 8(3], 107-116 


109 


over ‘subjective' self perception data’ (p. 1], On the other hand, mistaking 
'identity' for 'self' is problematic in that it frames bilingualism or 
multilingualism as an extended version of monolingualism instead of taking it 
as a phenomenon in its own right — a unique psycholinguistic phenomenon 
(Pavlenko, 2006], 

This claim as to the distinction between bilingual/multilingual ‘selves' versus 
'identities' receives further support and credence if one notices what lies 
behind the acquisition of a new register in a first language. The child has 
already acquired the phonological, lexical, and morphosyntactic components 
of the language. As such, acquiring a new register is not tantamount to 
acquiring a new phonological, lexical, and morphosyntactic system. Rather, 
the acquisition of the register is facilitated by the phonological, lexical, and 
morphosyntactic overlaps (Pavlenko, 2002], 

The learning of a new language, however, means the learning of a new 
linguistic system altogether, especially when the language being learnt is 
'typologically' different from the native language of the learner. It may even 
require that the learner face new and unfamiliar surroundings (Pavlenko, 
2002], When the learner is well beyond the age of puberty (i.e., in late 
bilingualism or multilingualism], these differences become even more 
pronounced. Perhaps this is because of the fact that in late bilingualism or 
multilingualism, the "speakers are socialized into their respective languages 
at distinct points in their lives, childhood versus adulthood, and in distinct 
sociocultural environments" (Pavlenko, 2006, p. 2], 

Perhaps one of the pioneers in the field of bilingual studies is Auer (1998] 
who noticed that, in bilingual communities, changes in behavior, be it verbal 
and nonverbal, are tolerated and are readily taken for granted provided that 
they are accompanied by a change in language. When using two dialects of the 
same language, the language boundaries are often blurred. Auer (1988] 
further noticed that in monolingual communities with a strict localized 
culture, people who know more than one language are at times perceived as 
people with two conflicting characters by their clan members. In the 1930s, 
Nazi scholars in Germany took it for granted that a person was, no doubt, 
Jewish if he spoke two languages or more (Henss, 1931], Henss also noticed 
that Nazis wrongly labeled bilinguals as inferior since their pathological inner 
split, in their struggle for becoming one, resulted in the deterioration of their 
intellects and morality. Bilingualism was a demerit. A bilingual was 
considered as a person who had some sort of bilinguality of feelings, and was 
expected to switch social values and moral principles as he switched 
languages (Sander, 1934], This was taken too far to even claim that the 
bilingual was like a soldier of fortune or a mercenary who accomplishes his 
missions without being emotionally involved in the action being performed, a 


110 


M. A. Salmani Nodoushan & J. Garcia Laborda 


person who drops social values, principle, and ethics as he switches the 
language. Early on, in North America such apparently less racist but clearly as 
hurting professional terms as 'anomie', 'alienation', ‘social isolation', ‘nervous 
strain', 'cognitive dissonance’, and 'acculturation' were coined to ease the overt 
sarcasm in the term inferior (Bossard, 1945; Child, 1943; Schumann, 1978; 
Spoerl, 1943], 

The upsurge of migration between countries in the second half of the 20 th 
century resulted in the revival of ethnic consciousness and brought about a 
greater degree of social tolerance and understanding. The benefits of 
bilingualism found some room to show up. Nevertheless, bilingualism, in 
many countries and especially in those with local static cultures, is still 
considered as a problem of two incompatible identities — one that can be 
termed 'linguistic schizophrenia’ (Pavlenko, 2006], 

Alder [1977], in an exposition that can be considered as the treaties on 
bilingualism, warned that "bilingualism can lead to split personality and, at 
worst, to schizophrenia" (p. 40], Along the same lines, Clarke [1976] likened 
overseas students in the USA to schizophrenic patients who find themselves 
in a state of limbo and between the familiar traditional world of their origin 
and the modern world of the USA, to which he referred as the 'clash of 
consciousness'. Even in the 1990s, some scholars persisted in using the term 
'schizophrenia' as the metaphor for bilingualism in their discussion of the 
problems brought on by cognitive, linguistic, cultural dissonance, and culture 
shock (Amati-Mehler, Argentieri & Canestri, 1993], In political discourse, too, 
the same metaphor is occasionally used. The British Home Secretary in 2002, 
for instance, remarked that the use of English — rather than the native 
language of the target community — in Asian British households would help 
'overcome the schizophrenia which bedevils generational relationships' in 
immigrant families. 

The use of the term schizophrenia with positive overtones is sometimes seen 
in bilinguals' own reflections (Kellman, 2000; Todorov; 1985; Todorov, 1994], 
Translingual writers often notice that the same story written in different 
languages may sound differently. For instance, Pavlenko [2006] recounts the 
story of a childhood French-English bilingual named Julian Green [1941], who 
recalled that his memoir took a whole different shape when he decided to 
write about his early years in English rather than French. Green (1941] 
argued that the pattern of disclosures and omissions, the rhythm, the choice 
of words and details, and his stance in his memoir varied between the two 
languages even when the subject remained the same: 

New trains of thought were started in my mind, new associations of 
ideas were formed. There was so little resemblance between what 1 
wrote in English and what I had already written in French that it might 


International Journal of Language Studies, 8(3], 107-116 


111 


almost be doubted that the same person was the author of these two 
pieces of work (Green, 1941, p. 62, cited in Pavlenko, 2006, P. 4], 

Todorov (1985, 1994] narrated a similar experience. He lived in France for 18 
years and then went back to Bulgaria to lecture for a group of intellectuals 
who could not understand him. He had to choose between denying his 
Bulgarian origin and go on lecturing as a French intellectual or denying his 18 
years of thinking as a French intellectual and recourse to his Bulgarian habits. 
Finding himself paralyzed in describing this situation, Todorov appealed to 
Bakhtin's (1981] notions of 'dialogism' and 'polyphony' that refer to the 
"presence of several independent and often conflicting voices within a single 
text" (Pavlenko, 2006, P. 4], Other scholar who noticed the duality embedded 
in bilingualism were Beaujour (1989], Besemeres (2002], De Courtivron 
(2003], Kellman (2003], Pavlenko (2001, 2004], Perez Firmat (2003], 
Stroinska (2003], Valenta (1991], and Hoffman (1989], They used a wealth of 
terms to refer to this dual feeling; they include "tongue snatching, border 
crossing, borrowing, bigamy, betrayal, bifurcation, fragmentation, multiplicity, 
split, gap, alienation, dislocation, and double vision" (Pavlenko, 2006, P. 5], 
These are metaphors that convey 

... an array of emotions: guilt over linguistic and ethnic disloyalties, 
insecurity over the legitimacy of a newly learned language, anxiety 
about the lack of wholesome oneness, angst over the inability to bring 
together one's incommensurable worlds, and sadness and confusion 
caused by seeing oneself as divided, a self-in-between, a self in need of 
translation (Pavlenko, 2006, P. 5], 

The literature reviewed up to here leads to the question of whether the scope 
of inquiry in bilingualism can be expanded from the qualitative introspections 
of translingual writers, immigrants, and expatriates on their own experiences 
to data-driven quantitative findings of empirical research. As such, the 
present study was conducted with the aim of providing empirical support for 
introspective claims made by the cited bilingual writers in relation to the dual 
inner self of bilinguals. 

3. Method 
3.1. Participants 

183 Iranian American (IV=183] participated in this study. They all belonged in 
the upper-middle socio-economic class. Their age range was between 21 and 
56. They had all spent almost the first half of their lives in Iran followed by the 
second half in the USA. 96 of them were male (n=96] and 87 were female 
(n= 87], 


112 


M. A. Salmani Nodoushan & J. Garcia Laborda 


3.2. Instrumentation 

To gauge the participants' self concept, both the English and the Persian 
versions of the Self Concept Scale (SCS] developed by Rogers (1961] were 
used. This scale consists of 25 Likert-type items. The respondents were 
expected to respond to the two forms of the questionnaire in each of the 
English and Persian versions. Form A asks the respondents to rate their own 
25 attributes on a Likert scale of 1 to 7. Form B asks the respondents to rate 
the same 25 characteristics on the same Likert scale of 1 to 7 for the kind of 
person they would like to be. Items 4, 12, 15, 16, 19, 21, 22, and 23 on the 
scale require reverse scoring. Item 25 has been reproduced here as an 
example: 

Item 25: Selfish 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Humble 

To see whether each respondent's self-concept is normal, the scores of that 
participant on both forms should be subtracted from each other so that the 
distance for each item is calculated. The resulting distance values should then 
be squared and summed. The square root of the sum should then be 
calculated. If the result is between 0 and 7, the self concept of the participant 
is normal. However, if the result is 7+, the self concept is not normal; the 
higher the score, the greater the discrepancy between actual self concept and 
ideal self concept. 

3.3. Procedure 

The participants were randomly assigned into two half-groups. A counter- 
balanced design was used for the administration of the Persian and English 
versions of the questionnaire. The first half group received the English version 
followed by the Persian version. The second half group received the Persian 
version followed by the English version. There was a three week interval 
between the two administrations. The design has been schematically 
represented in figure 1. 



Figure 1. Schematic representation of the counter-balanced design of scale 
administration. 


4. Results and discussion 

The first step in data analysis was to identify the self-concept scores for the 






International Journal of Language Studies, 8(3], 107-116 


113 


participants. The distances between item scores on forms A and B of the 
questionnaire in both the English and the Persian versions were computed, 
squared and summed. The square root of the sum was then calculated and 
divided by N. This afforded in the self-concept ‘reference’ scores that are 
displayed in table 1. 

Table 1 


Self-Concept Scores for Male and Female Iranian-Americans in English and 
Persian 




Self Concept Score 

N 

Persian Version 

English Version 

Female Iranian-Americans 

87 

62.0053 

3.2120 

Male Iranian-Americans 

96 

74.5764 

3.1735 

All Iranian-Americans 

183 

68.6000 

3.1918 


As Table 1 shows, there is a huge discrepancy between the real and the ideal 
self-concepts of all Iranian-Americans in the Persian version of SCS (x = 68.6], 
The self-concept score for the same people in the English version (x = 3.19] 
indicates that Iranian-Americans have a more realistic understanding of 
themselves. When it comes to the male participants, the same result is 
observed again. Taking the two forms in the Persian version, Iranian- 
American males revealed a great discrepancy between their real and ideals 
selves (x = 74.57], However, when taking the two forms in the English version, 
there was no discrepancy; the real and the ideal selves matched (x = 3.17], 
The same was observed for females taking the Persian version (x = 62] and 
the English version (x = 3.21], 

To see if the real self concept of Iranian-Americans in Persian matches theirs 
in English, the same procedure was followed. The distances between their self 
concept scores on forms A from both the English and the Persian versions 
(i.e., the forms which measured real self concepts] were computed, squared 
and summed, and then the square root of the result was divided by N. Table 2 
displays the results of this analysis. 

Table 2 

Real Self-Concept Scores for Male and Female Iranian-Americans in English and 


Persian 


All 

Male 

Female 

Self-Concept Match Score 

73.7070 

49.51 

100.4009 


As table 2 indicates, there is a statistically significant difference between the 
real self concepts of Iranian-Americans when they function in two languages 
(x = 73.70], This indicates that performing in a second language is similar to 







114 


M. A. Salmani Nodoushan & J. Garcia Laborda 


assuming a new self. As for the males, the self concept score is 49.51; the self 
concept score for females is 100.40. This shows that males are more resistant 
to personality change than female. This is perhaps due to the stronger 
emotional stability of men which blocks acculturation more than it does in 
relation to females. 

5. Conclusion 

All in all, the results of this study lend empirical support to claims made by 
Beaujour (1989], Besemeres [2002], De Courtivron [2003], Hoffman [1989], 
Kellman (2003], Pavlenko (1998, 2001, 2004], Perez Firmat (2003], Stroinska 
(2003], and Valenta (1991] that bilinguals have a kind of split personality. It 
seems, based on the empirical evidence from this study, that a bilingual is not 
a unique person who assumes different identities when he functions in the 
different languages he knows. Rather, the bilingual possess two different 
guises or selves which are language-specific and are used in accordance to the 
language the bilingual speaks at any given point in time. 


The Authors 

Mohammad Ali Salmani-Nodoushan (Email: dr.nodoushan@gmail.com l is an 
assistant professor of TEFL and researcher at the Iran Encyclopedia Compiling 
Foundation, Iran. His research interests include language testing in general, and 
testing English for Specific Purposes, Computer Adaptive Testing, and 
Performance Assessment in particular. He is currently a member of the 
editorial board of The Asian EFL Journal, The Linguistics Journal and i-manager's 
Journal of Educational Technology. He also edits The International Journal of 
Language Studies ( 1JLS) . 

Jesus Garcia Laborda (Email: iesus.garcialaborda@uah.es ] is an associate 
professor at Universidad de Alcala (Madrid, Spain], Dr Garcia Laborda has a 
PhD in English Philology and an EdD in Language Education. His current 
research covers many areas of computer implementations for language 
learning and testing along with ESP and teacher training: (i] especial 
applications of low stakes online testing, especially focused to the Spanish 
University Entrance Examination for concepts such as washback, test design, 
beliefs, emotions, etc. This also includes the study of interface and computer 
architecture in other languages and their evaluation and assessment; (ii] The 
development of Socio constructivism approaches to computer assisted 
language learning, which applies ideas of Vygotsky to the development of 
speaking and listening skills in computer based scenarios; iii] it includes 
practical applications of mobile learning for commercial purposes to help to 
introduce a computer based test in high stakes exams as DELE (Spanish] or the 


International Journal of Language Studies, 8(3], 107-116 


115 


Spanish University Entrance Examination (English, French, German; (iv] the 
implications of implementing such test in teacher training along with more 
traditional approaches to teacher education and their development of both 
cognitive and computer skills. 


References 

Adler, K. (1977], Collective and individual bilingualism: A sociolinguistic study. 
Hamburg: Helmut Buske Verlag. 

Auer, P. (ed.]. (1998], Code-switching in conversation: Language, interaction, 
and identity. New York: Routledge. 

Bakhtin, M. (1981], The dialogic imagination: Four essays by M. Bakhtin. 
Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. 

Besemeres, M. (2002], Translating one’s self: Language and selfhood in cross- 
cultural autobiography. Bern: Peter Lang. 

Bossard, J. (1945], The bilingual as a person-linguistic identification with 
status. American Sociological Review, 10[ 6], 699-709. 

Child, I. (1943], Italian or American? The second generation in conflict. New 
Haven: Yale University Press. 

De Courtivron, I. (2003], Introduction. In I. De Courtivron (Ed.], Lives in 
translation: Bilingual writers on identity and Creativity, (pp. 1-9], New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Green, J. (1993], An experiment in English. In J. Green (Ed.], The apprentice 
writer, (pp. 47-62], New York: Marion Boyars. 

Grosjean, F. (1982], Life with two languages: An introduction to bilingualism. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Heinz, B. (2001], 'Fish in the river': Experiences of bilingual bicultural 
speakers. Multilingua, 20(1], 85-108. 

Henss, W. (1931], Zweisprachigkeit als padagogisches problem. 
Ethnopolitischer Almanach, 2, 47-55. 

Hoffman, E. (1989], Lost in translation. A life in a new language. New York: 
Penguin Books. 

Kellman, S. (2000], Preface. In S. Kellman (Ed.], Switching languages: 
Translingual writers reflect on their craft, (pp. ix-xix]. Lincoln/London: 
University of Nebraska Press. 

Kellman, S. (ed.]. (2003], Switching languages: Translingual writers reflect on 


116 


M. A. Salmani Nodoushan & J. Garcia Laborda 


their craft. Lincoln/London: University of Nebraska Press. 

Pavlenko, A. (2001] 'In the world of the tradition, I was unimagined': 
Negotiation of identities in cross-cultural autobiographies. The 
International Journal of Bilingualism, 5(3], 317-44. 

Pavlenko, A. (2004], 'The making of an American': Negotiation of identities at 
the turn of the twentieth century. In A. Pavlenko & A. Blackledge (Eds.], 
Negotiation of identities in multilingual contexts, (pp. 34-67], Clevedon, 
UK: Multilingual Matters. 

Pavlenko, A. (ed.]. (2006], Bilingual minds: Emotional experience, expression 
and representation. Toronto: Multilingual Matters Ltd. 

Perez Firmat, G. (2003], Tongue ties: Logo-eroticism in Anglo-Hispanic 
literature. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Rogers, C. (1961). On becoming a person. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. 

Ross, M., Xun, W.Q.E., & Wilson, A. (2002], Language and the bicultural self. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(8], 1040-150. 

Sander, F. (1934], Seelische struktur und sprache: Strukturpsychologisches 
zum zweitsprachenproblem. Neue Psychologische Studien, 12, 59-76. 

Schumann, J. H. (1978], The acculturation model for second language 
acquisition. In R. C. Gingras (Ed.], Second language acquisition and 
foreign language learning, (pp. 27-50], Washington, D.C.: Center for 
Applied Linguistics. 

Spoerl, D. (1943], Bilinguality and emotional adjustment. Journal of Abnormal 
and Social Psychology, 38, 35-57. 

Stroinska, M. (2003], The role of language in the re-construction of identity in 
exile. In M. Stroinska & V. Cecchetto (Eds.], Exile, language, and identity 
(pp. 95-109], Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang. 

Todorov, T. (1985], Bilinguisme, dialogisme, et schizophre'nie. In A. Bennani, 
A. Bounfour, F. Cheng, E., Formentelli, J. Hassoun, A. Khatibi, A. Kilito, A. 
Meddeb & T. Todorov (Eds.], Du bilinguisme, (pp. 11-26], Paris: Denoel. 

Todorov, T. (1994], Dialogism and schizophrenia. In A. Arteaga (Ed.], An other 
tongue: Nation and ethnicity in the linguistic borderlands, (pp. 203-214], 
Durham & London: Duke University Press. 

Valenta, E. (1991], Doubled selves and fractured childhoods: A study of the recit 
d'enfance in Nathalie Sarraute, Agota Kristof and Claude Esteban. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York. 


