DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 309 900 



RC 017 181 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

SPONS AGENCY 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Austin, Gregory A., Ed. 
Prevention Research Update Number 2. 
Northwest Regional Educational Lab., Portland, 
Or eg. 

Department of Education, Washington, DC. 
88 

31p.; For update number 1, see ED 304 600. 
Information Analyses (070) ~ Reference Materials - 
Bibliographies (131) 

MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

Alcohol Abuse; *Alcohol Education; ^American Indians; 
Annotated Bibliographies; -Cultural Influences; Drug 
Abuse; *Drug Education; Elementary Secondary 
Education; Literature Reviews; Marijuana; ^Research; 
Socioeconomic Influences; * Substance Abuse; Youth 
Problems 

*Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 

This quarterly publication is prepared by the Western 
Center for Drug-Free Schools and Communities, and summarizes recent 
research on adolescent drug abuse and its prevention. This issue 
abstracts and reviews the implications of new research dealing with 
substance abuse among minority youth, specifically Native Americans. 
The goal is to help bridge the communications gap between 
researchers, practitioners, and the general population by 
disseminating research in an accessible manner and providing an 
introductory overview. The overview of the abstracted documents 
discusses minority youth as an at-risk population. The research 
uniformly demonstrates that substance abuse is widely prevalent among 
Native American adolescents and even younger children. Alcohol is by 
far the most widely abused drug among all age groups, with marijuana 
the next most popular substance for abuse. It is evident that drug 
prevention programs developed for mainstream youth have had little 
impact on minorities and that any prevention efforts must overcome 
several cultural and socioeconomic barriers. Various cultural factors 
have been studied as being important in increasing the possibility of 
substance abuse among American Indians. The overview calls for 
education and intervention programs, suggesting that work be directed 
toward reducing the number of factors that put Indian youth at risk. 
The overview is followed by 20 abstracts of published research from 
1985 to 1988 arranged alphabetically by author. The document also 
contains ii2 references. (TES) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the orig:^,nal document. 



pi 



Prevention Research Update 



Number Two / Winter 1988 




Western Center for Drug-Free Schools and Communities 




H 
00 

mi 
O 

;■• '-n •" "-'■Si 



Northwest R^ional Educational Laboratoiy 
101 S.W. Main Street, Suite 500 
Portland, Oregon 97204 



U S. OEPAftTMENT OF EDUCATION 

OHcfi Of EducafKinat Resear. h arxj .mprovemen? 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES (NFORMATlON 
CENTER (ERIC) 

^This document has t>een reproduced as 
received frcm ihe person or orgamxaiion 
oriQtnatmg ii 

r Minor change s have oecn made lo improve 
reproduction qucility 



• Po»r»tSO' i^ie^ o» jpinrons staled in IhiSdOCu 

menf do nof necessanly -^epreseni offictai 
OER) position or pohcy 



'•PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)/' 



Acknowledgements: 

The editor gratefully acknowledges tho assistance of 
Dr. Fred Beauvais and Dr. Steven Schinke. 



This publication is based on v;ork sponsored wholly or in part by the U. S. Department of 
Education under Cooperative Agreement Number S188A80003. The content of this publication 
does not necessarily reflect the views of the Department or any other agency of the U. S. 
Government. 



ERLC 



Prevention Research Update 

No. 2 /Winter 1988 



Prevention Research Update is a quarteriy current awareness service, prepared 
by the Western Center for Drug-Free Schcois and Communities, which 
summarizes recent research on adolescent drug abuse and its prevention. Each 
issue abstracts and reviews the implications of new research dealing with a major 
topic of concern in the field, placing the new information in the context of past 
findings. The goal is to help Luldge the communications gap between the 
researcher, the practitioner, and the general population by disseminating research 
findings in an accessible manner and providing an introductory review of their 
significance. Abstracts are arranged alphabetically by first author's last name. 
Preceding the abstracts is an overview discussion. References to all documents 
cited are located following the abstracts. Copies are available from all the Western 
Center sites, which also maintain reprints of the articles summarized. 

Gregory A. Austin, Editor 



Western Center for Drug-Free Schools and Communities 

Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory 
101 S.W. Main Street. Suite 500 
Portland, Oregon 97204 
(503) 275-9500 

Center for the Advancement of Pacific Education 
1164 Bishop Street, Suite 1409 
Honolulu, Hawaii 96813 
(808) 533-1748 

Far West Laboratory for Research and Development 

1800 Folsom Street 
San Francisco, California 94103 
(415) 565-3000 

SWRL Educational Research and Development 
4665 Lampson Avenue 
Los Alamitos, California 90720 
(213) 598-7661 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 1 
SUBSTANCE ABUSE AMONG MINORITY YOUTH: NATIVE AMERICANS 



INTRODUGTION 

This Is the first of several issues of the Western 
Center Prevention Research Update which will abstract 
and review recent research on minority and other youth 
at high risk of substance abuse. This issue addresses 
the problem in general and then focuses specifically on 
Native Americans. 

Several changes in the Update forn^t have been 
made to improve the publication's utility. First, all 
studies that are abstracted are identified in the Overview 
by an asterisk (*). Second, in the References, citations 
to the abstracted studies have also been included and 
identified by an asterisk. Following the references, there 
is a list of the institutional affiliations of the first authors of 
the abstracted studies and the addresses of other 
institutional information sources. 

OVERVIEW 

RISK FACTORS . As discussed in Prevention 
Research Update #1, it has been argued that prevention 
efforts would be more effective, and would make more 
efficient use of scarce resources, if they were primarily 
targeted at high-risk ar ' heavy-using populations. 
Underlying this argument is the assumption that 
indfviduals at elevated risk of becoming substance 
abusers are distinct from those at low risk by some 
characteristic(s). Many of the initiatives of the war on 
drugs are targeted at identifying and reducing those 
factors that place people at risk. In 1987, the federal 
Office of Substance Abuse Prevention (OSAP) awarded 
131 grants to develop community-based substance 
abuse prevention programs directed at groups of high- 
risk youths. Researchers are equally concerned with 
Identifying and fostering the protective factors that 
reduce risk (Wells 1988). However, we still know very 
little about how to identify youth who are potentially at 
risk so that they can be targeted for intervention. We 
know even less about protective factors, especially why 
some youths from high-risk environments fail to develop 
substance abuse problems. 

Progress is beginning in this area. It would appear 
that alcohol and other drug abusers "may share a 
number of common characteristics, perhaps pointing to 
a common basis for the vulnerability" (Tarter 1988:77). 
Several variables that have predictive value have been 
successfully identified. These include aggressive and 
antisocial behavior, lack of interpersonal and social 
skills, poor classroom achievement, and poor and 
inconsistent family management practices (Hawkins, 
LIshner, and Catalano 1985). Population groups of 



yoirths that have been shown to be at high risk include 
ths economically disadvantaged, school dropouts, 
children of alcoholics and other substance abusers, the 
physically disabled, abused or neglected children, the 
mentally ill and suickJal, pregnant teenagers, the 
homeless and runaways, arxi Juvenile delinquents. 
Protective factors may include the ability to stand away 
from a iroubled parent, a strong self-concept and 
internal locus of control, skepticism about the parental 
worid view, and at least one good parental relationship 
(Mclntyre and White 1988). 

Bell (1988*) has devised a multivariate analysis 
strategy to identify more systematically high-risk 
individuals located In high-risk areas. He stresses that 
different types of programs may be more suitable in one 
situation, location, or population than in another. By 
defining and estimating risk as a probability, better 
program targeting can be achieved. Tarter (1988) has 
developed a Diathesis-Stress Model which depicts some 
of the key environmental factors that can attenuate or 
exacerbate the vulnerability to a particular degree of risk. 

Evidence that there are numerous pathways to 
substance use and abuse has led to the development of 
a risk-factor approach, which hypothesizes that with 
increased exposure to those factors known to be 
associated with drug use, there is an increased chance 
of drug use or abuse occurring, even when a single 
factor by itself may not be a powerful predictor. Bry, 
McKeon, and Pandina (1982) reported that the total 
number of vulnerability characteristics was more 
important than the specific type of risk factors in 
predicting cigarette, alcohol, and cannabis use. 
Newcomb, Maddahian et al. (1987*y found that 
adolescent drug use and abuse is lircarly related to a 
unit-weighted, summed index of 12 risk factors. (See 
also Bry 1983; Newcomb. Maddahian. and Bcntler 1986. 
Tarter 1988.) 

MINORITY YOUTH. The largest single population 
which is at risk consists of ethnic and racial minority 
youth. They experience higher rates than the general 
population of those factors known to be associated with 
drug abuse (e.g.. population growth, poverty, schocrf 
failure, family problems, and involvement in the criminal 
Justice and social welfare systems). They are also more 
likely to come from families or environments with high 
rates of drug abuse. Epidemiologic survey data indicate 
that racial/ethnic minorities are overrepresented in 
treatment programs and in drug-related emergency 
hospital admissions, and that minority drug abuse, 
especially of hard drugs, is increasing. Minority youth 



Prevention Researcli Update No. 2/page 2 



thus have a greater chance of residing under conditions 
that are conducive to promoting abuse, as predicted by 
the risk-factor approach. Adding urgency to the 
problem, they are one of the fastest grov^ing segments 
of the American population (Hanson 1985:101; Tucker 
1985:1022-1 023; Trimble, Padilla, and Bell 1987*:ix; 
Wright and Watts 1988*). 

Unfortunately, there is a relative lack of drug research 
specifically on minorities and even less on minority 
youth (Austin, Johnson et al. 1978; Hanson 1985; 
liyama, Nishi, and Johnson 1976; Trimble, Padilla, and 
Bell 1987*; Tucker 1985; Welte and Barnes 1987*; 
Wright and Watts 1988*). Much of what has been 
written is subjective and anecdotal. The empirical 
evidence has been largely limited to simple racial 
comparisons. lnte;pretations or theoretical 
generalizations that take into consideration the special 
circumstances of minorities and that could guide 
treatment and prevention have been lacking or not 
convincing (Austin, Johnson et al. 1978; Tucker 
1985:1032). Furthermore, our knowledge of prevention 
and treatment lags far behind our knowledge of 
epidemiology (Hanson 1985; Tucker 1985; Globetti 
1988*; Schinke. Palleja et al. 1988*). Schaps, Dibartdo 
et al. (1981), reviewing 127 drug prevention program 
evaluations conducted between 1968 and 1977, found 
tha* nearly 70 percent failed to specify race or ethnicity 
and only three programs served populations with more 
than 50 percent minority. 

It Is evident that prevention programs developed for 
mainstream youth have had little impact on minorities 
and that preventi' n efforts have to overcome several 
barriers if any success is to be achieved. First, most 
prevention efforts are school based and do not reach the 
high number of school dropouts among ethnic 
minorities. Since most drug surveys are school based, 
this high dropout rate also limits our knowledge and 
understanding of minority youth drug use (Welte and 
Barnes 1987*; Beauvais and Getting 1988*). 

Second, although the literature stresses that 
community involvement is critical to effective prevention 
among minority youth, there is often a relative lack of 
community resources on which to draw (Globetti 
1988*: 125; Wright and Watts 1988*). 

ThJrd, adolescent as well as adult minoifty drug users 
are often isolated from the rest of society by cultural, 
linguistic, and even geographic barriers. The values and 
language of mainstream prevention programs are often 
not relevant or meaningful to them, nor Is the approach 
applicable to their situation. 

Fourth, the views of mainstream society are often 
Influenced by prejudicial, inaccurate, or stereotypical 
perceptions Many "common-sense" notions of high 
levels of drinking and drug taking among minority group 



members are difficult to maintain: many minority groups 
consume less alcohol aiuJ certain drugs than do Whites 
(Welte and Barnes 1987*; Beschner and Friedman 
1985). As Wright and Watts (1988*) further point out in 
regard to alcohol, using drugs, being a minority, and 
being young are three dimensions viewed by the larger 
society with mixed, sometimes hostile and fearful, 
reactions. 

Fifth, despite the common problems experienced by 
all minority youth, there are important differences 
between and within the major ethnic and racial groups, 
as discussed below. 

Minorities are a diverse population with unique 
characteristics and prevention needs. Varied patterns 
exist in the type, prevalence, and severity of substance 
use; in the sociocultural context in which drugs are 
used; in the attitudes towards their use; and in the drug- 
rejated problems experienced. As a result, different 
minority populations, and even subpopulations, require 
different prevention and treatment approaches (Hanson 
1985; Kosten, Rounsaville, and Kleber 1985; Schinke, 
Palleja et al. 1988*:12; Trimble, Padilla, and Bell 1987*; 
Welte and Barnes 1987*). The iitorature on alcoholism 
treatment cleariy indicates that specific programming is 
needed for minority clients (Maypole and Anderson 
1986/87:62). As Tucker (1985:1022) observes: The 
demand for special attention [for minorities] is based on 
the recognition tnat the distinctive circumstances of 
particular ethnic groups...are bound to have implications 
.or both the type of substance abuse problems faced 
and the means for addressing such difficulties." But 
these circumstances and implications require much 
further research. 

Various researchers have reported ethnic-racial 
differences that are important to understanding 
substance use and to developing appropriate treatment 
and prevention programs. For example, compared with 
Whites, Black and Hispanic adolescents are much more 
likely to be involved with heroin and cocaine and to be 
less involved in nonopiate multiple drug use (Beschner 
and Friedman 1985: 973-974, 979-980.) Many past 
surveys of drinking among youth have had few 
minorities In their samples, but it appears that Black and 
Hispanic youth drink less than Whites, and Native 
Americans have the highest consumption of all (e.g., 
Zucker and Harford 1983). Among the studies 
abstracted here, Welte and Barnes (1987*) found that 
cultural background exerted a strong influence on 
alcohol use among New York state youth, with American 
Indians reporting the highest rates of alcohol use and 
Blacks reporting the lowest. Further, although Blacks 
and Hispanics reported lower rates of consumption than 
Whites, all minority groups experienced more drinking 
problems, indicating that drinking problems are more 



6 



Prevention Resoarch Update No. 2/page 3 



easily acquired among lower socioeconomic status 
groups. Newcomb, Maddahian et al. (1987*) and 
Maddahian. Newcomb. and Bentler (1988*) found 
significant ethnic differences in adolescent use of all 
substances, except for hard drugs, and in the 
association between current level of substance use and 
respondents* intention to use. Furthermore, although 
their research indicated that reducing the expressed 
intention to use drugs reduced future drug use to some 
extent for all ethnic groups, there were differences 
between groups and drugs. (See also Maddahian, 
Newcomb, and Bentler 1985; Newcomb and Bentler 
1986; Newcomb, Maddahian, and Bentler 1986.) 

Prevention programs and materials must be culturally 
appropriate and relevant, recognizing and addressing 
not only the differences between the minority and 
mainstream populations, but also those within minority 
subpopulations. Substance-abuse professionals must 
strive to develop an appropriate style, manner, and 
content of communication (verbal and nonverbal) for 
targeted groups (Cunningham 1988). Gilchrist, Schinke 
et al. (1987*:871) further warn that "prevention methods 
that emphasize stereotypic, narrowly culture-specific 
reasons for drug use may perpetuate overfy simplistic 
myths about the problem." Regarding Hispanics, 
Blacl<s, and Native Americans, Schinke, Palleja et al. 
(1988*:12) observe: "Because these youth reside largely 
in defined neighborhoods, barrios, or on 
reser,/ations...culturally tailored prevention interve^itions 
hold particular promise." Holiday (1983) has 
emphasized the necessity of incorporating social and 
cultural considerations within a developmental 
framework as a heuristic model for implementing 
prevention programs among minority groups. However, 
to date, no such model exists (Wright and Watts 1988; 
Globetti 1988:125). The Journal of Drug Issues devoted 
its Winter 1988 issue to the problem of alcohol use 
among minority youth. A recurrent theme of the articles 
in this volume was that "a systematic and 
comprehensive examination of alcoholism among 
minority youth is difficult at this time because of (1) the 
paucrcy of empirical research on these populations and 
(2) the lack of theoretical models that iaks into account 
cultural factors in analyzing, treating, and preventing 
alcohol abuse" (Wright and Watts 1S88*:4). Globetti 
(1988*) observed that both epWemiaogical and 
prevention research on alcohol are limited in ti^at they 
either treat minority youth as a homogeneous group or 
apply a White, middle-class curriculum to prevention 
activity. He concludes that educational curricula derived 
from the developmental and the sociocultural models 
appear most applicable to minorities. Similar 
observations were found throughout the literature 
reviewed. 



Finally, we cannot come to grips with the substance 
abuse problems among minority youth without seriously 
attempting to alleviate the poverty, education, life 
condition, and the other sociocultural problems tK^t put 
them in such high risk. But Hanson (1985:127) also 
observes that even if the problem of substance abuse 
cannot be totally solved until these f^arsh coiiditions are 
Improved, "more urxlerstanding of the situation and 
worid views of minority group members, as these relate 
especially to the meaning they attach to drug use and 
abuse and treatment, can lead to more effective 
treatment and even prevention of drug abuse." (See 
also Tucker 1985:1025.) 

More detailed findings regarding Native Americans 
are reported below; findings regarding other minority 
groups will be reported in the forthcoming issues. 

NATIVE AMERICANS: 
NATURE AND EXTENT OF THE PROBLEM 

Of all American populations, none appears to be 
more at risk than Native American youth. Pinto (1973) 
characterized alcohol and other drug abuse among 
them as a growing crisis and "a major national scandal." 
Since then, the problem has escalated significantly, 
particulariy in regard to illicit drugs, about which Pinto 
had little to say. There is a large and growing body of 
research indicating that compared with other population 
groups as a whole, Native Americans exhibit the greatest 
overall use of psychoactive substances. The U.S. Indian 
Health Service (IHS) has called substance abuse the 
number one health problem among American Indians 
and in 1986 launched an intensive, community-based 
prevention initiative. That year. Congress included a 
mandate for increased prevention activities on behalf of 
Native Americans in the Anti-Drug Abuse Act, As 
Bernard McColgan, at the Office of Substance Abus'^ 
Prevention, has summarized it, Ihe dimensions of the 
substance abuse epidemic and its associated societal 
costs [among Native American youth] are appalling" 
(quotation in Moore 1988; Tucker 1985:1022; 
Vanderwagen, Mason, and Owan 1987). 

As with other minority groups, there are tremendous 
gaps in our knowledge of the extent and nature of the 
problem. Much of the evidence collected in the 1970s 
was pooriy documented and varied widely in results 
(Beauvais, Getting, and Edwards 1985*:210; Leiand 
1980; May 1982). Trimble, Padilla, and Bell (1987*:5) 
characterize the research conducted as of 1983 as 
lacking In detail, inconclusive, and inadequate for either 
theoretical or practical purposes. Compounding this 
problem are the many stereotypes surrounding Indian 
drug use, particulariy In regard to alcohol. 

Most research to date has concerned alcohol use 
among adult males living on reservations in the 



ERLC 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 4 



southwest. There are much fewer studies on 
adolescents (male and female), on use In urban settings, 
and on illicit arxi street drugs (Trimble. Padllla, and Bell 
1987:2-5; DInges, Trimble, and Hollenbeck 1979; 
Okwumabua and Dury.9a 1987*; Welbe! 1982:350; 
Welbel-Oriando 1984). We also know very little about 
the evolution, operation, and effectiveness of prevention 
and treatment programs. Furthennore. what we do 
know is not easily generallzaWe from tribe to tribe. There 
are 481 tribal groups throughout the country, each vy^h 
different circumstances and situations. The lack of 
research on nonreservalion youth is especially 
problematic since fully one-ha!f of Indian people now live 
In cities. Not only do they have unique patterns and 
problems surrounding use, but the high mobility 
between reservations and cities may be an important 
factor In the supply of drugs (Beauvais 1988). (See also: 
Mail and McDonald 1980; Willi^ams 1985.) 

Fortunately, since 1980. recognition of the problem of 
Indian adolescent drug use has resulted in more and 
better research being undertaken, and our knowledge 
has grown appreciably. Several ongoing projects are 
helping to define the nature and extent of the problem 
more cle-^riy, to identify contributing factors, and to 
develop culturally sensitive and appropriate prevention 
approaches. The oldest (since 1975) and most 
extensive study, and the source of much of the 
epidemiological information about Indian adolescents, is 
the ongoing research at the Uni>/ersity of Colorado by 
E.R. Getting, Fred B: uuvais, Ruth Edwards, and 
colleagues. Another major projoct, more prevention 
oriented, has been conducted in the Pacific Northwest 
by a team including Steven Schinke, Lewayne Gilchrist, 
and Joseph Trimble. 

The evidence uniformly demonstrates that substance 
abuse is widely prevalent among Native American 
adolescents and even younger children, although 
important intertribal variations do exist. Rates of use for 
almost all drugs, but especially alcohol, marijuana, and 
inhaianis, have been consistently higher among 
American Indian youth than non-Indian youth, and, until 
recently, have steadily increased (Umbert 1988; May 
1988*:188; Weibel-OriarxJo 1984:319; Beauvals. Getting, 
and Edwards 1985; Query 1985; Wingert and Frfield 
1985:1580;). 

For example. Getting. Seauvals et a!. (1983) found 
that more than a third of Indian adolescents In grades 7- 
12 used marijuana and alcohol regularly, compared with 
only 5 percent regular users among non-!ndlans. In 
eight categories of drugs other than alcohol, rates of use 
were higher arnong Indian than non-Indian youth. Their 
data also indicate far less gender differences among 
Indians than non-Indians. Lifetime prevalence of 
alcohol, marijuana, and inhalants increasetJ quite sharply 



between 1975 and 1981, followed by a general decline 
through 1985. This decline they believe is related to the 
same broad societal forces that have been producing a 
decline In adolescent drug use in the general population. 
However, their most recent surveys suggest that this 
decline nnay have stabilized, with some increase 
possible evWent (Beauvals, Getting et al. in press). 
Gverall. they estimate that 50 percent of Indian youth are 
at some risk due to their substance abuse. Since the 
survey was school-based, overall rates were probably 
even higher (Beauvals, Getting, and Edwards 1985). 

In other findings, IHS data indicate that Indian youths 
aged 10-18 years comprise 34 percent of adolescent 
detoxification program admisiiions in the Minneapolis 
area (Moore 1988). In the Pacific Northwest, weekly use 
of drugs other than alcohol was, reported by 27 percent 
of Indian adolescents, but only 8 percent of non-Indian 
adoloscents; 38 percent and 13 percent, respectively, 
reported weekly alcohol intoxication (Schinke, Bebel et 
al. 1988*:516). In California, Newcomb. Maddahian et 
al. (1987*) found that American Indian adolescents 
reported more frequent use of alcohol, cigarettes, 
cannabis, cocaine, and nard drugs than did Asians, 
Blacks, Hispanics, or Whites. In one of the few studies 
to deal specifically with urban Indians, Gkwumabua and 
Duryea (1987*) found lifetime prevalence rates of 79 
percent for alcohol, 80 percent for marijuana, and 44 
percent for sniffing solvents. 

Evidence also Indicates that use begins at a very 
eariy age and that the age of initiation has been steadily 
declining (Beauvals and LeBoueff 1985; Getting, 
Beauvals et al. 1983; Weibel-Griando 1984:327). The 
IHS has reported that Indian youth often begin using 
alcohol, marijuana, and inhalants between the ages of 1 1 
and 13 (Moore 1988). This is supported by the research 
of Gkwumabua and Duryea (1987*) and Beauvals and 
Getting (1988*). 

(See also: Cockerham 1977; Cockerham, Forslund, 
and Raboln 1976; Heidenreich 1976; Lobb and Watts 
[forthcoming]; May 1982; McBridge and Page 1980; 
Strimbu, Schoenfeldt, and Southern 1973.) 

Regarding specific drugs, the research indicates the 
following: 

ALCGHGL USE. American Indian alcohol use is a 
persistent, complex phenomenon which has reached 
epklemic proportions (Trimble, Padllla, and Bell 1987*; 
Williams 1985). Alcohol is by far the most widely abused 
drug among all age groups. The overall rate of 
alcoholism is two to three times the national average 
(Yates 1987:1136). For all alcohol-related causes of 
death, the Indian age-adjusted mortality rates are higher 
than for the nation as a whole (Podolsky 1986/87:7). 
The IHS has estimated that significant drinking problems 
are experienced by as many as 50 percent of the 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 5 



population of some reservations and has called it their 
single most significant problem (Carpenter, Lyons, arxi 
Miller 1985*:300). 

Among American Indian youth, research has 
consistently found widespread and often heavy and 
rapid consumption, at rates higher than non-Indian 
populations and with fewer gender differences. The 
majority of all youth of most tribes (56-89 psrcent) report 
experimentation with alcohol (May 1S86*:188), and 
heavy drinking has been called the main reason that one 
in two Indian students never finish high school (Trimble, 
Padllla, and Bell 1987*:3). More specifically, a 1987 
Indian Health Service survey indicated that in 1985. 78 
percent of 7th-12th grader's liad used alcohol, compared 
with only 57 percent of non-Indians in the same grades. 
Heavy alcohol use was reported by 2.2 percent, 
compared with 0.2 percent in 1975 (Moore 1988). The 
government estimates that drinking problems are 
experienced by 42 percent of adolescent males and 31 
percent of females (Laign 1988). Almost 92 percent of 
children in the Wind River Reservation reported trying 
alcohol and 80 percent considered themselves regular 
drinkers. Gender differences in levels of drinking did not 
seem to be significant. Drinking alcohol was the most 
frequently cited source of trouble; nevertheless, 56 
percent of youths said they approved of it (Cockerham 
1975). Query (1985) found that Indian,. youth were 
overrepresented ten-fold in one North Dakota state 
alcoholism treatment unit. In the Pacific Northwest, 
v/eekly alcohol intoxication has been reported by 38 
percent of Indian youth, compared with 13 percent of 
non-Indians (Schike. Bebel et al. 1988*:516). 

Among the youth studied by Getting, Beauvais and 
colleagues, 35 percent of Indians, compared with 21 
percent of non-Indians, reported getting drunk at least 
once every two months by the time they were high 
school seriiors. Furthermore, the proportion who had 
gotten high or drunk during the last two months was 
higher still: 67 percant of Indians vs 45 percent of non- 
Indians. Almost half (46 percent) had been drunk 
enough to stagger, fall, or Wack om, compared with 
about a quarter of non-Indians (Getting, Edwards et al. 
1980; Getting, Beauvais et al. 1980). Among a later 
sample of 1400 American Indian youth, 82 percent 
reported having used alcohol at least once, compared 
with 66 percent of non-Indian youth sampled. In 
addition, 50 percent of Indians reported that they had 
used alcohol in the recent past, comparod with 27 
percent of non-Indians. Much of the Indian drinking 
again appeared to be heavy, with incidents of blackouts 
and extremely d?unk behavior (Beauvais and LeBoueff 
1985:147- 149). 

Youth surveys that include various ethnic groups 
conslstendy find that drinking levels and problems are 



higher among Indians than among other groups. In a 
large national sur/ey of alcohol use among White, 
Hispanic, Asian, Indian, and Black youths conducted in 
1974 by J.V. Rachal, abstinent giris generally 
outnumbered abstinent boys in all five groups, but 
among the Indian sample the absta^->ing male-to-female 
ratio was greatest and the ratio of male-to-female heavy 
drinkers was smallest. Among those adolescent girls 
who dkJ drink, heavy drinking was most prevalent 
among Indians. In New Yori< state, Weite and Barnes 
(1987*) found that a higher proportion of Indian youth 
were heavy drinkers than were other ethnic groups. 
Similar results are reported by Newcomb. Maddahian et 
al. 1987*. 

Another consistent finding is that alcohol use among 
Indians begins very eariy. In a survey of 20 Indian 
communities, 32.4 percent of adults reported beginning 
alcohol use between the ages of 11 and 15 (Moss and 
Janzen 1980:30). In another survey, 68.8 percent of 
adult Indians reported that they had begun drinking 
between ages 13 and 16 (GIsen and Baffi 1982). 
Cockerham (1975) found that children in the Wind River 
Reservation began drinking by age 13; Oeiilng and 
Goldstein (1979) reported that 12 percent of Indian 
youths regulariy drank some alcoholic beverage by their 
9th birthday. In a study of seven different reservations, 
over 33 percent of youth between age 9 and 12 reported 
alcohol use (Beauvais and LaOoueff 1985). 

(See also: Beiser and Att' ,ve 1982; Holmgren, 
Fitzgerald, and Carman 19c^; McDiarmid 1983; 
Halloway 1966; Swanson, Bratrude, and Brown 1971; 
Topper 1974; Vanderwagen, Mason, and Owan 1987:18- 
19; and Williams 1983.) 

MARIJUANA USE. Marijuana is the next most 
popular drug after alcohoi. May (1986*:188) estimated 
that about half (41-62 percent) of Native American 
youths have tried marijuana use, compared with less 
than half (28-50 percent) of other youths, although there 
is wkle intertribal variation. Lifetime prevalence rates of 
70-80 percent have recently been reported. 

Among the rural high school and middle school 
students surveyed In 1975 by Winfree and Griffiths 
(1983), 50 percent of Indians had tried marijuana, 
compared with only 27 percent of non-Indians. In 
addition, 28 percent of Indians were occasional and 
regular users, compared with 11 percent of Whites. 
They also began using eariler than Whites, with use 
increasing with age. Beauvais. Getting, and Edwards 
(1985*) found that lifetime prevalence for marijuana use 
In 1982-83 was more than double that of non-Indians 
(about 70 percent vs 25 percent), approaching the level 
of alcohol (see also Getting, Beauvais. and Velarde 
1982). In the urtDan sample sun/eyed by Gkwumabua 
and Duryea (1987*), lifetime prevalence was actually 



ERIC D 



Prevention Research Update No, 2/page 6 



higher for marijuana than alcohol (80 percent vs 79 
percent). In the IHS survey, 59 percent of 7-1 2th graders 
in 1985 reported inarljuana use, compared with 24 
percent for non-Indian youths (Moore 1988). 

i NHALAhfr USE. A major threat Is posed by the 
growth In popularity of Inhalants (gasoline, paint thinner), 
especially among the youngest drug users (McBridge 
and Page 1980; WeibetOrfando 1984:320,- Young 
1987*). Because of their ready availability, Inhalants are 
likely to be the first drugs to be abused by young people 
who are at risk. Native American youth are consistently 
reported to have one of the highest prevalence rates for 
Inhalants, with estimated ranges of 17 to 22 percent, 
compared with 9 to 11 percent of non-Indian youths 
(Wingert arxJ Fifield 1935; May 1986*:188). In the late 
1970s, Irxiian youth were already estimated to be two-to 
three-times as likely to b^ involved with inhalants than 
the general population (Getting and Goldstein 1979). 

The longitudinal studies of Beauvais and colleages 
have enabled them to trace trends in inhalant use over a 
decade. Between 1975 and 1983, a rapid increase In use 
from 15 to 32 percent occurred among Indian youths, 
whereas among non-Indians prevalence was much 
lower and did not show a similar increase over time 
(Beauvais, Getting, and Edwards (1985*). After 1983, 
the trend was reversed and use of Inhalants decreased 
until 1985, but in 1985 a higher rate of recent use still 
existed among both 8th- and 12th-grade Indians than 
among non-Indians. The greatest increase in use 
occurred between ages 11 and 13. Although use then 
dropped off with age, the level of continuing use was 
much higher among Indian than non-Indian youth 
(Beauvais and Getting 1988*). Furthermore, their latest 
research indicates a slight increase again in 1986-1987 
(Beauvais, Getting et al. in press). (See also: Beauvais, 
Getting, and Edwards 1985a; Kaufman 1973; 
Schottstaedt and BJori< 1977.) 

This high prevalence rate is of particular concern 
because youth who begin drug use with inhalants are 
more likely to continue serious levels of drug 
involvement than those whose first drug is marijuana or 
alcohol (Crider and Rouse 1988:2). Research on 
Inhalant uswrs in general has detemilned that "at every 
age, inhalant use marks a very high general level of drug 
Involvement for that age group and suggests potentially 
serious emotional and/or social adjustment difficulties" 
(Getting, Edwards, and Beauvais 1988:197). 

OTHER DRUG USE. There is much less use of other 
Illicit drugs besides marijuana and inhalants (May 
1986*:188; Weibei-Griando 1984). The next drug in 
popularity appears to be stimulants (Beauvais and 
LaBoueff 1985:150; Beauvais, Getting et al. In press.) 
Perhaps reflecting this, Blnlon, Miller et al. (1988*) found 
a paucity of use rationales for illicit drugs other than 



ERLC 



marijuana and inhalants among Indian youths. 
However, this may Just mean that Indian youth have not 
yet developed a lore about what these drugs mean 
(Beauvais 1988). Nevertheless, Getting and Beauvais 
have demonstrated that, compared with the general 
population surveyed In the National High School Senior 
Dmg Survey (Johnston, Bachnwn, and O'Malley 1987), 
Indians consistently report higher lifetime prevalence 
and cun-ent use In all drug categories, with the notable 
exception of cocaine. 

ETIGLOGY, Trimble, Padilla, and Bell (1987*:5) 
observe that Ihere are no universal and all- 
encompassing explanations for drug and alcohol abuse 
among American Indians, much less for developmental 
life stages within a group.' The etiology is complex and 
multifactorial, and no consensus has emerged. To what 
extent do the same factors Influence both 'Indian and 
non-Indian youth? Blnlon, Miller et al. (1988*) found 
differences in the reasons for using specific drugs given 
by Indian and non-Indian 8th graders. Winfree and 
Griffiths (1983) determined that the variables that reveal 
the most about marijuana use among White youth 
revealed the least about it among Native Americans, and 
vice versa. Whereas marijuana use was related to libera! 
attitudes among Whites, it was not among Indians. 

Despite such differences in specifics, overall the 
evidence Indicates that many etiological influences are 
the same for Indians and non-Indians and that "high 
levels of drug and alcohol use are not the result of 
anything inherent in Indian tradition" (Beauvais and 
LaBoueff 1985:155; Query 1985:489, 495; quotation by 
Gilchrist, Schinke et al. 1987*:871-872). Among the 
implicated factors are peer group encouragement, 
laissez-faire childrearing practices, conflicts between 
cultural kieats and behavioral realities, parental and 
community attitudes about alcohol and ottier drug use. 
and concomitant adult-use models-all of which have 
been shown to be associated with substance abuse In 
other populations as well (Weibei-Griando 1984:313). 

What most cleariy accounts for this high abuse level 
are not differences In kind or In the etiological process 
itself but differences in the number and degree of 
etiological influences and risk factors experienced. As 
Newcomb, Maddahlan et al. (1987*) found, it would 
appear that the more frequent drug use among 
American Indian adolescents than among Asians, 
Blacks, Hlspanlcs, or Whites Is largely due to their being 
exposed to significantly more risk factors. Thus, the 
etiological research on Native American youth supports 
the risk-factors approach. This may explain the 
observation made by Welte and Barnes (1987*:334) that 
"heavy drinking among American Indian youth is difficult 
to explain In terms of poverty or threats to cultural 
Wentity because dr'nking among Hispanic and Black 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 7 



youth Is not unusually high. Some circumstances 
unique to American Indians must be used as 
explanations," That unique circumstance may be the 
sum total of risk factors that they experience. 

This situation Is a result of the persistent and deep 
soclocultural and economic problems of Indian life In the 
United States. More than any other population group, 
Indian youth face greater uncertainty and Integration 
problems and suffer more severely from such 
substance-related problems as poverty, poor school 
adjustment and failure, unemployment, antisocial 
behavior, criminal arrest. Increased morbidity and 
mortality, lack of opportunity, feelings of uncertainty, 
hopelessness, and despair, and family breakdown 
(Beauval-, and LaBoueff 1985; Edwards and Edwards 
1988*:ir5; Jones-Saumty, Hochaus, and I'elner 1983; 
May 1J86*; Schinke, Botvin 1988*:87; McBride and 
Page 1980:480; Malons 1985; Getting, Beauvals et al. 
1983; Getting, Beauvals, and Edwards 1988*; Trimble 
1984; Weibel-Oriando 1984; WInfree and Griffiths 1983). 
The Native American "Is the most severely 
disadvantaged population within the United States" and 
In their adolescence they are profoundly alienated and 
depressed, with high emotional disorder rates, Including 
delinquency, learning and behavior problems, and 
suicide (Yates 1987:1 135-1 136). 

Three specific factors have been identified as being 
especially Important In Increasing the possibility of 
substance abuse among Indians. The first Is a sense of 
cultural dislocation or lack of Integration Into either 
traditional Indian or modern American IKe. As Trimble, 
Padilla, and Bell (1987*:2) observe, "Indians persist both 
as heterogeneous cultural groups and as a separate 
segment of American society" (see also May 1986^.192). 
The role of Integration and acculturation needs further 
Investigation. Getting and Beauvals (1982) observed the 
highest levels of use among those who were most 
closely Identified Vifith non-Indian values (acculturated) 
and the lowest levels among those who expressed an 
ability to adapt comfortably both Indian and non-Indian 
values (biculturated). May (1982) found evidence 
indicating that youths from well-Integrated tribes In 
which cultural IdentKlcatlon was strong were less apt to 
abuse substances. Involvement In Indian culture would 
appear to be a protective factor. 

Second, there Is a lack of clear-cut sanctions against 
use among Native Americans (Getting. Beauvals, and 
Edwards 1988*; Schinke. Botvin et al. 1988*:87). 
Growing up In an environment In which substance 
abuse, partlculariy of alcohol, among adults Is 
normative, Indian youth may not regard it as deviant but 
as a sign of adulthood (Edwards and Edwards 1988.105, 
Schinke, Bebel et al. 1&88*:516). Regarding alcohol, 
Leiand (1980) has stressed the need to look at the 



association between the children's attitudes and 
behaviors and their parents' consumption, Weibel and 
WIsner (1980) detennlned that there Is a statistically 
significant relationship between high levels of drinking In 
the family of origin and alcohol abuse In later life (Weibel 
1982:350). However, In another study Weibel found 
relatively little drinking In the childhood homes of later 
heavy drinkers, apparently because they were raised by 
grandparents (Weibel- Griando 1986/87:11). (Gn adults 
as role models, see also Swanson, Bratrude and Brown 
1971; Query 1985.) 

Third, a number of researchers on Native American 
youths have found strong peer-group support for drug 
use, which has also been shown to be an Important, if 
not the primary. Influence on dmg use among American 
youth In general (Cockerham, Forslund and Raboln 
1976; McBridge and Page 1980; Getting and Goldstein 
1979; Vanderwagen, Mason, and Owan 1987:19). 
Carpenter, Lyons, and Miller (1985*:300) observe that 
"rapki alcohol consumption Is normative among Indian 
drinkers and this pattern extends to adolescents, who 
begin to drink In peer groups where drinking Is not only 
sanctioned but expected." Getting. Beauvals, and 
Edwards (1988*) measured "extremely high" 
relationships between peer associations and alcohol 
Involvement. Beauvals and LaBoueff (1985:153) 
characterize the problem regarding drugs as a dual 
condition of having both many peers who encourage 
use and many others who do not stop someone from 
using. For marijuana, WInfree and Griffiths (1983) found 
tliat perceptions of the extent of peer use was the 
primary influence. In fact, Weibel-Griando (1984:320- 
321) concluded that "peer attitudes, modeling by 
siblings, and peer acceptance are probably the greatest 
determinants of [drug] use among younger (Native 
American] populations." Among both Indian and non- 
Indian youth. Getting and Beauvals (1986) have 
proposed that, although a very wWe range of soda! and 
psychological factors make a child susceptible to drug 
Involvement. smaW groups of peers ("peer clusters") have 
the strongest Influence on use decisions. 

Other strong Influences that have been Identified are: 
(1) the lack of stability of the home and family (Garcla- 
Mason 1985; Longclaws, Barnes et al. 1980; Getting, 
Beauvals, and Edwards 1 988*; Red Horse 1 980; 
Swanson, Bratrude. and Brown 1971; Thongs 1980); 
and (2) the exorbitant amounts of free time that 
reservation Indians experience, with drugs being used as 
a way to cope with boredom (Edwards and Edwards 
1988*:105; Binlon, Miller et al. 1988*). 

For Inhalant use partlculariy, the Isolation and 
adversity of Indian life may play an especially significant 
role. Nationally, the highest prevalence of Inhalant use Is 
found ir relatively Isolated communities such as Indian 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 8 



reservations or small Hispanic communities (Crider and 
Rouse 1988:2). Inhalants 'appear to be used more oHon 
In enclaves of disadvantaged populations where the j Is 
a large degree of physical and social Isolation" (Beauvals 
and Getting 1988a:30). WIngert and FifJeld (1985) found 
that Indian Inhalant users were less homogeneous In 
social, academic, and behavioral characteristics than 
other substance-abuse groups among Indians. 

PREVENTION. The dearth of research on substance 
abuse among Indian adolescents extends to the area of 
prevention. In large part because not much effort has 
been directed toward prevention among this population. 
The call for the Inclusion of alcohoJ and drug education 
In Indian schools has been relatively recent (National 
Indian Health Board 1982). According to Vanderwagen, 
Mason, and Owan (1987:19), the chance for exposure 
to alcohol education or good coping-skills courses Is hit 
or miss." Every state-run Indian school has different 
requirements. Peer counseling, training, and 
Intervention projects are "few and poorly funded," and 
schools have widely disparate policies for dealing with 
the problems, have different definitions of what 
constitutes alcohol and substance abuse, and lack 
trained personnel. (See also: U.S. Bureau of Indian 
Affairs 1982.) 

Are the same programs equally effective for irxJlans 
as for Whites? Based on i983 data, Trimble, Padilla, and 
Bell (1987*:5) concluded: "While some of the 
educational efforts are demonstrating effectiveness 
among non-Indian youth, there Is little evkJence that 
educational strategies are effective with Indian youth 
regardless of tribal affiliation or residential status (I.e., 
urban, reservation, or rural)." Similarly, May (1936*:187) 
warns that "programs suited for other populations In ♦he 
United States are not Immedlaiely applicable to most 
Indian groups." 

Gh/en the rich variety of Native American cultures, 
how do we target specific needs and patterns for 
different tribes? May (1986*:187) observes that 
"programs designed for cne tribe or group of tribes may 
have limited relevance for other tribes." It Is also 
uncertain that techniques effective among adults will 
also be effective among youths. In an Intergenerational 
study of drinking patterns among the White Mountain 
Apache, Everett (1972) found distinct differences 
between adults and youths, with very little mixing of the 
groups, suggesting that Intervention strategies that may 
work for mature Indians may not work for youth. 

Most in need of research and development are 
theoretically and culturally sound Intervention programs 
(Gilchrist, Schlnke et at. 1987*:870; Schinke, Botvin et al. 
1988*:87). To overlook the special culture and 
associated Wentit/ needs of Indians or other minorities Is 
to court failure." Qiiory (1985:500) warns. At the North 



Dakota hospital studied by Query (1985). positive 
treatment outcome was much stronger for Whites than 
Indians, raising questions about the effectiveness of the 
program for both populations. Laign (1988) observes 
that "conventional treatment methods have failed 
miserably for Native Americans." probably because they 
are a communal people and mainstream methods focus 
on the individual. Winfree and Griffiths (1983) suggest 
that, given the endemic family problems and negative 
attitudes toward "white-marfs law" that exist, prevention 
programs designed for the general population that 
include pro-law information and stress the family may 
have only limited success among Indians. Beauvals and 
LaBoueff (1985:169) further admonish that 
"Interventions... must be congruent with the cun-ent 
movement tov/ard [Indian] self-determination. Externally 
imposed solutions, at a minimum, will not wori< and 
probably will only add to the sense of failure experienced 
by Indian people." 

In several studies. Gilchrist and Schlnke have 
stressed the value of skills training for achieving 
bicultural competence to offset the pressures toward 
substance abuse. Bicultural competence, they argue, 
allows Native American pupils to integrate majority 
culture values, norms, and behaviors without losing their 
kJentification with and respect for traditional Native 
American values. This view Is supported by an Getting 
and Beauvals* (1932) finding that biculturated Indian 
youth showed the least substance abuse. Schlnke. 
Bebel et al. (1988*) found modest support for skills 
intervention among a sample of 61 youths (see also 
Schinke. Palleja et al. 1988*). Schlnke. Botvin et al. 
(1988*) reported that, among 137 American-Indian 
adolescents, those who received prevention Intervention 
based on bicultural competence skills concepts 
improved more than nonintervention controls. 
Surprisingly, although Gilchrist. Schlnke et al. (1987*) 
found positive effects from a culturally-tailored skills 
enhancement program, the program did not affect self- 
esteem, probably because the measure used was too 
generic. May (1986*: 192) also emphasizes the need for 
a soclal-leaming model that builds self-esteem and 
coping skills. 

On the community level, given the lack of use 
sanctions that have been found, it Is essential to foster 
an understanding that abuse Is a problem and to Involve 
the community In Its elimination or reduction (Beauvals 
and LaBoueff 1985; Carpenter. Lyons, and Miller 
1985:308; Vanden/vagen, Mason, and Owan 1987:67. 88- 
91). BInlon. Miller et al. (1988*) stress that a combined 
effort by community organizations Is needed to offset 
the positive experiences associated with drug use 
among adolescents. Beauvals and LaBoueff (1985:159) 
write: "The goal of an intervention effort aimed at 



ERLC 



^2 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 9 



community values is to create an observable ethic which 
encompasses the community's stance on drug and 
alcohol use. Furthennore, such an effort must make 
clear what the acceptable options are for the individual 
within the community." Given the etiological role of free- 
time and boredom, It has been frequently recommended 
that this approach should include the development of 
chemical-free, planned, and structured aUemative youth 
activities, such as recreation or community service 
(Vanderwagen. Mason, and Owan 1987:19). (On 
community approaches, see also McDiarmkJ 1983; 
Edwards and Edwards 1988.) 

Getting, Beauvais, and Edwards (1988*) detennined 
that among Indian youth heavy alcohol users differed 
from nonusers on a spectrum of family and school 
problems, and on the number of peers encouraging use, 
but not on any personality dimensions. This would lend 
credence to the importance of focusing prevention 
efforts on the family and community rather than the 
individual. 

Finally, given the evidence of the very young age of 
initiation, there is a universal call for early intervention 
(Getting, Beauvais, and Edwards 1988*; Maddahian, 
Newcomb, and Bentler 1988*). Gkwumabua and 
Duryea (1987*) recommend that programs be targeted 
at reducing initiation among children rather than at 
reducing actual use among older users. 

SUMMARY 

It is increasingly evident that effective prevention 
programs must focus on those factors that place 
individuals and groups at risk for substance abuse as 
well as those factors that "innoculate" people against the 
pressures to abuse drugs. In light of the evidence in 
support of the risk-factors approach, we must seek to 
reduce the total number of factors that place youths at 
risk, particularly family, community, and other 
environmental factors. At the same time, we need to 
know far more about protective factors and how they 
can be promoted. What is also evWent Is that prevention 
efforts must be sensitive to cultural differences and to 
the special traditions artd needs of particular ethnic and 
racial groups. There do appear to be similar risk factors 
that are common, in varying degrees, within all groups, 
but programs to reduce the influence of these factors 
need to be made culturally specific. 



ERLC 



13 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/pag3 10 



ABSTRACTS 

Beauvais, Fred; Getting, E.R.; and Edv^rds, R.W. 1985. 
TRENDS IN DRUG USE OF INDIAN ADOLESCENTS 
UVING ON RESERVATIONS: 1975-1983. American 
Journal of Dpjq and Alcohol Abuse 1 1 (3/4):209-229. 17 
refs. 

From 1975 through 1983, anonymous surveys on 
drug use were administered to more than 10,000 7th- 
12th grade students In Indian reservation schools 
representing 30 tribes. The results, believed to be 
reasonably representative of Indian youth living on 
reservations, were compapxJ with those of National 
Institute for Drug Abuse's National Household Drug 
Survey. 

Findings. From 1975 through 1981 there were six 
years of Increasing drug involvement among Indian 
youth, with the exception of hallucinogens, sedatives, 
and tranquilizers. After 1981 there occurred a slight 
drop In lifetime prevalence for most drugs except 
inhalants and a considerable drop In stimulant arid 
sedative use. Current use figures showed the same 
trend, with increasing current use through 1981 followed 
by a slight drop. 

Lifetime prevalence for most drugs was higher than 
that for non-Indian youth throughout this period, and 
rates for alcohol, marijuana, and inhalants, the most 
frequently tried drugs, were particulariy higher. More 
than a fourth reported getting high or drunk at least once 
during the two months prior to the survey. 

Lifetime prevalence for marijuana was more than 
double that of non-Indian youth, approaching The level of 
alcohol. In one school grade, more youth had tried 
marijuana than alcohol. LifetLme use was reported by 74 
percent In 1980-81, compared with 41 percent in 1975, 
"an almost incredible increase." Of those trying it, 80 
percent continued use. 

Lifetime inhalant use had increased gradually from 15 
percent to 32 percent between 1975 and 1983. Not only 
was there a high lifetime prevalence but 27 percent of 
those who had tried Inhalants continued to use them, a 
phenomenon which may be unique to Indian youth. 
Among non-Indians, use prevalence was much lower 
and did not show a similar increase over time. There 
was no difference between Indian males and females In 
either lifetime prevalence or recent use, whereas non- 
Irxiian males used Inhalants more often than fenwles. 
There was also a decreasing age curve: recent use 
decreased as age Increased, indicating Inhalants were 
especially popular among young students. The lack of 
any decrease In inhalant use after 1981 may reflect Its 
endemic nature. 

Analysis of patterns of drug use, In which youth were 
classifiod according to number, type, and depth of 



involvement with drugs In eight categories, showed a 
similar trend, with sharp increases until 1981 and then a 
drop In all but one of the more serious drug use types, 
the one Including Inhalants. 

Overall, 53 percent of Indian youth were classified as 
"at risk from their drug Involvement," compared with 35 
percent of non-Indian youth. 

Conclusions, The signs of improvement after 1981 
can be cause for optimism. Nationally, there has also 
been a decline In drug use since 1981, possibly due to 
changes In those broad psychosocial forces which 
shape arug use. These forces may be extending even to 
remote reservation areas. 

However, about half are now at some risk due to their 
drug and alcohol use. Reasons for this high level of 
drug use among Indian youth probably relate to the 
severely detrimental conditions on reservations: 
unemployment, prejudice, poverty, and a generally 
disheartening outlook about the future. 

Beauvais, Fred, and Oetting, E.R. 1988. INDIAN YOUTH 
AND INHALANTS: AN UPDATE. In: Crider, Raquel, and 
Rouse, B., eds. Epidemiology of Inhalant Abuse: An 
Update. NIDA Research Monograph 85. Washington, 
D.O*.: GPO. DHHS Pub (ADM)88.1577. pp. 34-48. 18 
refs. 

In an update of the 1983 survey conducted by 
Beauvais, Oetting, and Edwards (1985-see above), data 
were examined from over 12,000 students living on 
reservations in 1985. For this analysis, only results were 
examined for 12th, 8th, and 4th-6th graders. Of primary 
Interest were the 12th graders, who were compared with 
the high school seniors surveyed by NIDA's National 
High School Seniors Survey. Because there is a 
relatively high dropout rate among Indian youth, which 
might make the Inhalant use rates reported artificially 
low, the Indian 8th graders were compared with a 
sample of non-Indian 8th graders who have been 
surveyed by the authors since 1 981 . 

Findings. Since the 1983 survey, there had been a 
decrease In lifetime inhalant use among 12th graders, 
and a slighter decrease for 8th graders. Levels of 
inhalant use were still comparati>/ely high. At both age 
levels, Indian youth had consistently higher rates of 
lifetime Inhalant experimentation than non-Indian youth; 
for seniors, nearJy 2.5 times as high. However, in 1985, 
the gap lessened considerably. 

Recent use was generally much lower than lifetime 
use. Less than 15 percent of 8th graders and 4 percent 
of seniors were using Inhalants In the past month in the 
last period of the survey (1984-85). If a youth had not 
used In the past month, he or she was probably not at 
much risk. However, Indians still reported higher levels 



ERLC 



Prevention Researc:! Update No. 2/page 11 



of recent use than non-Indians and recent use had not 
declined like lifetime use, especially among 8th graders. 

The age pattern indicated that such use by Indian 
youth begins when they are very young-the 
predisposing factors are well in place by the 4th and 5th 
grades. 

Among both Indians and non-Indians, inhalants were 
more likely to be used by younger students, with use 
dropping off with age. The average age or initiation was 
11.92, compared with 12.25 for marijuana and 12.56 for 
first getting drunk. The greatest increase of use 
occun-ed between 11 and 13 years. If inhalant use had 
not occurred by age 13, it likely never would, in marked 
contrast to the pattern for marijuana and alcohol. About 
15 percent of 4th-eth graders had already had some 
experience with Inhalants. Use at the eariier ages 
appeared to have consistently increased from 1980 to 
1985. This may have been due to a "ripple effect" in 
which the radical Increases in use among 12th graders 
up to 1980 and among 8th graders up to 1982 were now 
occurring among elementary students. As use declines 
among older children, it is likely that it will also ripple 
downward. 

Rates of use for 8th-grade females were still neariy 
the same as males, but among seniors there was a 
distinct lower lifetime prevalence rate reported by 
females than males, probably because female users had 
dropped out of school by that time or because females 
reduced their use very quickly after 8th grade. 

Conclusions/Implications. There is some basis for 
the perception that Indian youth are more susceptible to 
Inhalant use than their non-indian peers. The decrease 
in lifetime prevalence for inhalants is encouraging and 
consistent with the Ynportant decreases found for 
alcohol and marijuana through 1983, and smaller 
decreases for six other drugs, found by Beauvais, 
Getting, and Edwards (1985). This may reflect the 
genera) shift toward lower drug use found by the 
national survey of high school seniors. But the higher 
rate of recent use among both 8th- and lath-grade 
Indians than among non-Indians is cause for concern. 
Given the evidence for an eariier initiation in use for 
Inhalants than for other drugs, prevention efforts need to 
start at an eariy age. There is also a significant number 
of school dropouts who are likely to be chronic Inhalant 
users. Finally, prevention efforts need to take into 
consWeration the larger number of female users. 
Bell, Ralph. 1988. USING THE CONCEPT OF RISK TO 
PLAN DRUG USE INTERVENTION PROGRAMS. Journal 
of Drug Education 18(2):135-142. 

Risk can be defined as the probability of an event 
(including drug use) occumng In a population of Interest. 
If drug prevention and intervention programs are to be 
successful, they must be targeted at high-risk population 



groups. It has been speculated that one reason for the 
failure of substance abuse education programs has been 
the failure to direct them at the con-ect target 
populations. It Is also Important to target the proper 
populations to ensure the most efficacious use of money 
during a period of declining resources. These problems 
might be avoklabie if programs were directed at high- 
risk groups. A two-step, multilevel, multivariate analysis 
strategy Is presented to estimate high-risk population 
groups in high-risk geographic areas. Its successful use 
could result In better data for decision makers to make 
Informed Judgments about developing Intervention 
programs. This method will help kJentrfy high-risk 
IndivWuals located In high-risk areas In a systematic 
manner, so that decision makers can strategically locate 
programs where they will be most effective. It may be 
that different types of programs are more suitable in one 
situation or location or population than in another. 
Although the concept of risk is not new, it has seldom 
been defined in terms of the probability of using drugs. 
By defining and estimating risk as a probability and 
subsequently a log-odds ratio, a better understanding of 
program targeting can be achieved, 

Blnion, Arnold; Miller, C. D.; Beauvais, F.; Oetting, E.R. 
1988. RATIONALES FOR THE USE OF ALCOHOL, 
MARIJUANA. AND OTHER DRUGS BY EIGHTH-GRADE 
NATIVE AMERICAN AND ANGLO YOUTH. Internationa! 
Journal of the Addictions 23(1):47-64. 17 refs. 

Rationales for alcohol, marijuana, and other drug use 
were examined among 25,000 8th-grade Indian and non- 
Indian students who voluntarily responded to a self-help 
drug use survey administered during the 1983-1984 
academic year. The Indian students were from two 
reservations in the western United States and non- 
Indians from three small rural towns. 

Rationales on the survey were developed, a priori, to 
sample four main areas: social situations, independence, 
dealing with emotion, and feeling drugged. Thirteen 
rationales were generated from these four main groups. 
The rationales contained 34 Justrflcation items, with two 
or three items per rationale. Internal consistency 
reliabilities for the 13 rationales ranged from .72 to .86 for 
Indians and from .74 to .90 for non-Indians. 

Findings. There were important differences In the 
reasons for drug use given by Indian and non-Indian 8th 
graders. These reasons differed according to the drugs 
used and ethnic group membership. Differences were 
found between reservation Indian and rural non-Indian 
rationales for alcohdi marijuana, and other drug use. A 
majority of both Indian and non-Indian 8th graders 
Indicated that they used drugs to enhance altered and 
pleasant affective states, for excitement, for parties, to 
be with friends, to relax, and to handle negative affective 



ERLC 



15 



Prevention Resr^rrch Update Ho. 2/pase 12 



states Including worries and nervousne^ss. Indian youth 
also used drugs to cope with boredom. Surprisingly, 
unlike non-Indian youth, there was a paucity of 
rationales for the use of drugs other than alcohol and 
marijuana by Indian students. It was unde)ar what 
rationales are used bv those wl20 use other d ^ This 
suggests that Indian youth may not have dr da 
coherent cognitive framework that justifies this ^Uar 
deviant behavior. The interrelationships between the$e 
rationales produce a situation where powerful pos'rtive 
and negative reinforcements are simultaneously present. 

Conclusion^. Interventions will have to be impactful 
and pervasive In order to counter the many positive and 
negative rationales associated with drug use. They will 
have to produce positive affective states, facilitate social 
interactions to fulfill the developmental needs of young 
adolescents, and enable the young adolescent to cope 
In constructive ways with negative affective states. 
Interventions will have to be multifaceted and Include: (a) 
group and individual approaches; (b) social skills 
training and opportunities to be with other youth in a 
social setting; (c) training to cope with anxiety, 
nervousness, and anger; and (d) support systems for 
dealing with feelings of being unloved, unwanted, and 
loneiy. It would also appear that the combined efforts of 
families, schools, churches, social agencies, and other 
programs will be required in order to offset the positive 
experiences associated with drug use among 8th 
graders. 

Carpenter, Richard; Lyons, C.A.; and Miller, VV.R. 1985. 
PEER-MANAGED SELF-CONTROL PROGRAM FOR 
PREVENTION OF ALCOHOL ABUSE IN AMERICAN 
INDIAN HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS: A PILOT 
EVALUATION STUDY. International Journal of the 
Addictions 20(2):299-310. 34 refs. 

A peer-managed self-control program as a secondary 
prevention intervention to teach responsible drinking 
was pilot tested with 30 American Indian teenagers from 
13 tribes attending a single high school who were 
assessed at high risk because of staff-perceived 
emerging drinking problem. Students were randomly 
assigned to one of three treatment groups IncorpoiBting 
combinations of self-monitoring, peer-assisted self- 
control training, and alcohol education. Each group yyas 
assisted by two peer counselors. Follovyups were 
conducted at 4, 9, and 12 months posttreatment. The 
three treatment groups were compared using one-way 
analyses of variance, including age, alcohol knowledge, 
self-esteem, and attitudes toward abstinence. Sblf- 
report data were corroborated by breath tests and 
official records. 

Fin<jlng§, Significant decreases were observed in 
quantity and frequency of drinking and In peak Wood 



alcohol levels. These improvements were maintained at 
all posttreatment fdlowups through month 12. No 
differences among the treatment groups were found, 
i.Tdlcaling that minimal and full program Interventions 
had comparable effects. 

Conclusions. Although the data have shortcomings 
(they are based primarily on seif-reports and a small 
sample), they provide encouragement for further 
exploration of the behavioral self-control preventive 
Intervention model. Further consWentlon of the model 
is merited for several reasons: (1) Programs are most 
often directed toward those v/ho already drink, and who 
are unlikely to respond to methods emphasizing a 
disease model or advising permanent abstinence. (2) 
The present approach, focused ou self-control, provides 
specific guidelines and procedures for achieving goals 
of responsible drinking. (3) Self-control training appears 
to be effective when offered in educational, c6lf-heip, or 
other cost-effective Intervention formats that are highly 
amenable to prevention applications. Important factors 
in successful implementation include careful training and 
selection of peer counselors, on-going program 
evaluation, and participation of the whole community 
and school administrators. 

Edwards, E. Daniel, and Edwards, M.E. 1988. 
ALCOHOUSM PREVENTION,n-REATMENT AND 
NATIVE AMERICAN YOUTH: A COMMUNITY 
APPROACH. Journal of Drug Issues 18(10): 103-1 15. 12 
refs. 

The serious problem of drinking in pre-adolescent 
and adolescent Indian youth is examined in the light of 
specific community contexts; poor socioeconomic 
conditions; family, school, and peer-group pressure; 
alienation; and personal adjustment problems. 
Community approaches for combating problems of 
alcohol abuse among Native American youths should 
involve adolescents, their families, and informal and 
formal organizations in both primary and secondary 
prevention programs. Primary prevention interventions 
promote alternative activities to drinking and emphasize 
positive feelings of self-esteem and identity. Secondary 
prevention alcoholism programs provide information 
regarding alcohol while encouraging responsible 
decision nnaklng regarding drinking behaviors. 

Task groups can be used to reinforce and support 
secondary prevention programs. They can assist 
adolescents who have had some experience with 
drinking behaviors to learn more about the influence 
alcohol has on their total functioning and can provide 
them with skills to make responsible decisions regarding 
drinking behaviors. Such groups could also be 
Important In meeting treatment needs and In effectively 
establishing and reinforcing tribal and Indian values 



16 



Prevention Researcti Update No. 2/page 13 



systems related to alcohol. Research suggests that 
family communication and community-based 
approaches that deal with the unique contextual 
framework of the particular area are helpful In 
engendering individual, group, and societal pride. 

Proposed methodologies Include community-specific 
questionnaires, which are developed with Input from 
adult tribal members, mental health agencies, 
community institutions, and tribal govemnr;ental 
agencies. The results of the questionnaires are 
subsequently tabulated. Interpreted, and reported back 
to the community. 

The Ignacio, Colorado, Indian Youth "Drug Busters" 
and the Chevak Village Youth Association of Alaska are 
two organizations that have effectively appiied task 
group concepts In specific communities; the 
Intermountain Intertribal project combined peer-group 
and educational counseling with a community focus. 

Gilchrist, Lewayne D.; Schlnke, S.; Trimble, J.E.; and 
Cvetovich, G.T. 1987. SKILLS ENHANCEMENT TO 
PREVENT SUBSTANCE ABUSE AMONG AMERICAN 
INDIAN ADOLESCENTS. International Journal of the 
Addictions 22(9):869-879. 42 refs 

The use of skills enhancement with American Indian 
youth has seldom been evaluated, although literature in 
several r as supports the use of a skills enhancement 
model for helping Indian youth delay the onset of 
substance use, minimize the extent of their use, and 
reduce the chances of permanent disability as a 
consequence of use. A culturally tailored 10-session 
skills enhancement program was provided between 
1984 and 1985 to 102 Indian youth (mean age =11. 34; 49 
percent female) living In seven urban and rural sites In 
the Pacific Northwest. Subjects completed screening for 
demographic information and current substance use, 
including alcohol, marijuana, tobacco, and inhalants. 
Subjects were randomly assigned by site to Inten/entlon 
or control conditions. Demographic and baseline drug- 
use data for the three intervention sites and the four 
control sites (one urban and two rural) were 
comparable. Subjects at the experimental sites received 
ten 60>minute skills enhancement training sessions. 
Preventive Intervention was delivered by a two-person 
team consisting of one Indian research staff member 
and selected Indigenous teachers, school counselors, 
and drug and alcohol treatment staff members. Pretest, 
posttest. and six-month follow-up measures quantified 
variables in self-esteem, drug knowledge and attitudes, 
and interpersonal behavior. 

Fi ndirias. At six-month followup, Inten/entlon 
condition subjects had better knowledge of drug effects, 
better interpersonal skills for managing pressures to use 
drugs, and lower rates of alcond. marijuana, and 



ERLC 



Inhalant use, compv'^red with test-only control condition 
subjects. Inten/entlon condition subjects were less likely 
to label or consWer themselves users of these 
substances. Consumer satisfaction feedback regarding 
the program's sensitivity to American Indian culture, 
Immediate applicability to life, and prevention 
effectiveness also supported the value of the skills 
enhancement approach. However, no differences 
between the inten/entlon and control groups were found 
for self-esteem or for drug attitudes. 

Two possibilities may explain the program's 
unexpected failure to affect self-esteem scores: (1) for 
Indian youth, the methods reduced substance abuse 
through some other pathway than Increasing self- 
efficacy and self-esteem; or (2) more likely, the measure 
of self-esteem In the study was too generic to pick up 
changes in self-efficacy and substance-abuse-specrfic 
self-esteem that dkl occur. 

Conclusions. Conclusions are limited because of the 
small sample size and short follow-up period, but data 
indicate that this approach can delay onset of substance 
abuse in some Indian adolescents. Program planners 
and prevention researchers can build on this data in 
developing skills-based substance abuse prevention 
programs (Alaska, the Southwest, and other areas of 
high Indian population are recommended). Longitudinal 
data and larger sample are noeded in future research. 

Globetti. Gerald. 1988. ALCOHOL EDUCATION 
PROGRAMS AND MINORITY YOUTH. Journal of Drug 
Issues 18(1):115-129. 81 refs. 

School alcohol-education strategies and the unique 
problems that arise in their implementation among 
minority youth are discussed. Research relative to the 
drinking behavior of minority youth, as well as alcohol- 
abuse prevention programs for these youth, has been 
largely neglected. Moreover, the existing data on both 
of these subjects are limited in that they either treat 
minority youth as a homogeneous entity or apply a 
White middle-class curriculum to prevention activity. 
Examination of four existent alcohol education 
strategies-fear, cognitive, developmental, and 
soclocultural-reveals the inadequate attention given to 
the factors that contribute to alcohol problems. 

Directed research on abuse In minority youth has 
been Impeded by a wkle variety of problems: dated, 
counteractant reactions (e.g., the "forbidden fruit" 
syndrome) arising from use of fear strategies; faulty 
decisions based on misconceptions and assumptions; 
lack of empirical data and funding* the unavailability of 
evaluative methodology to validate program 
effectiveness; underestimation of exigent environmental 
factors; difficulty of assessing the long-temi effects of 
con'ective soclocultural approaches; misdirected 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 14 



conceptual models; and misguided perspectives that 
treat the nnatrbc of social problems as a homologous, 
mondithic whole. 

Curricula derived from the developmental and the 
soclocultural models appear most applicable to 
minorities. More attention must be pakJ to the 
psychological realities that emerge from the culture- 
specific patterns of maladjustment In minority youth. 
Alcohd prevention strategies must be coordinated with 
the Implementation of community strategies and 
activities designed to alleviate concomitant, malignant 
social conditions. Demonstrations of strategic efficacy 
must be achieved rf support is to be n^intained. 

Maddahian, Ebrahim; Newcomb, M,D.; and Bentler, P.M. 
1988. ADOLESCENT DRUG USb AND INTENTION TO 
USE DRUGS: CONCURRENT AND LONGITUDINAL 
ANALYSES OF FOUR ETHNIC GROUPS. Addictive 
Behaviors 13:19M95. 8 refs. 

Concurrent, longitudinal analyses were used to 
correlate associations between "intention to use" and 
"use" of cigarettes, cannabis, alcohol, nonprescription 
drugs, and hard drugs among a sample of White (64 
percent), Hispanic (13 percent). Black (15 percent), and 
Asian (8 percent) adolescents (n=847) in 11 schools in 
Los Angeles County. Although ethnic differences in 
substance use are well documented, little attention has 
been given to explaining these differences In terms o^ 
cognitive factors such as intention. Assuming that both 
ethnicity and Intention are value-related individual 
attributes, one can expect differences among ethnic 
groups on their intention to use substances. To this end. 
mean differences between ethnic groups were examined 
on their reported Intentions, current use. and future of 
drugs. 

Findings. There were significant differences for 
intention to use cigarettes and hard drugs. Black 
students had a higher intention to smoke cigarettes than 
either Whites or Asians. Hispanics had more intention to 
smoke cigarettes than either Whites or Asians. 
Hispanics had more intention to smoke cigarettes thian 
Asians. Whites reported a higher level of intention to use 
hard drugs than Asians. 

Significant and consistent relationships between 
cun-ent level of use and intention of use were found for 
all ethnic groups, except among Asians, for hard drugs. 
However, these measures varied consWeraWy among 
ethnic groups, with a range from .17 for Blacks on use of 
nonprescription medications to .69 for Hispanics on 
alcohol consumption. There was a higher association 
between intention to smoke cigarettes and smoking 
behavior for Hispanics compared to Blacks. This pattern 
was also evident for alcohol, cannabis, and non- 
prescription m'edications. Whites showed the same 



pattern as Hispanics when compared with Blacks, 
except for cigarettes. 

The degree of association between Intention and use, 
as well as ethnic differences, gradually decreased over 
time. 

Partlalling out th-^ effects of previous experimentation 
decreased the contribution of Intention as a predictor of 
future drug use to a nonsignificant level for Hispanics. to 
a moderate degree for Black and Asians, and remained 
significant for Whites, particularly for cigarettes and hard 
drugs. 

Conclusions. The findings support the importance of 
attitudes and cognitive factors as a first place for 
prevention programs and early drug education, 
especially for Blacks and Hispanics on smoking 
cigarettes. The evidence that Initial differences between 
ethnic groups decreases over time supports the 
importance of including family, background variables, 
cultural, and ethnic values In the early stages of drug 
prevention programs. It is possible that as students 
mature in high school niany will join the mainstream of 
the society In terms of their norms and values, and thus 
ethnic differences may decrease. Weaker associations 
between measures of intention and use for Hispanics. 
compared with stronger relationships for other groups, is 
an Indication of ethnic differences in factors influencing 
adolescents' drug use patterns. While reducing intention 
to use drugs will reduce future drug use to some extent 
for all ethnic groups, for Hispanics other alternative 
strategies may be more effective. 

May, Philip. 1986. ALCOHOL AND DRUG MISUSE 
PREVENTION PROGRAMS FOR AMERICAN INDIANS: 
NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES. Journal of Studies on 
Alcohol 47(3):187-195. 63 refs. 

General statistics indicate that alcohol and drug use 
vary tremendously from one tribe to the next. Many 
local officials, however, are not aware of the extent of the 
problem. There is^^n overwhelming need to define the 
nature of the problem accurately with regard to specific 
risk In populations and subpopulations for effective 
intervention. Alcohol-related morbkiity and mortality 
statistics indicate that the consequences of acute 
misuse among young Indians, which ranges from 
episodic to prealcoholic, takes a greater toll in death and 
injury than does chronic misuse. Regarding 
susceptibility, the evidence Indicates that lack of 
adequate social and personal skills increases the 
likelihood of eventual alcohol and substance misuse, 
particularly in adolescence and the early twenties. 

Because of the unique social and cultural 
circumstances in which many Indians live, an aggressive 
series of programs needs to be launched. The current 
status in nriany communities dictates Intervention at 



1G 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 15 



three levels. First, high mortality arxl morbidity rates 
must be reduced through creative and innovative 
Intervention with the social and physical environment. 
Alcohol legalization and other issues are discussed as 
distinct possibilities. Second, educational programs are 
needed to elevate the knowledge of American Indian 
communities about alcohol and drug misuse. Education 
should be specifically oriented to improving ability to 
deal with early developmental problems that might lead 
to misuse. Third, American Indian rehabiliiation 
programs need to be provided with more resources and 
need to be carried out more effectively. Increased use 
of both traditional tribal strenglhii and modem treatment 
modalities is promising. Rehabilitation programs may be 
even more important in the future if mortality reduction 
programs are successful. 

The major target of the educational programs should 
be youth. Furthermore, because Indian alcohol and drug 
misuse Is related to uncertainty and integration 
problems, 'a major, if not the dominant, component of 
the youth-oriented prevention programs should 
emphasize a social learning model that builds self- 
esteem and coping skills in individuals and their peer 
groups. Using various techniques such as peer 
participation and value reinforcement, the goal of these 
programs must be the building of self-esteem and 
confidence while imparting alcohol and drug 
information" (p. 192). However, before these programs 
can be effective, the community as a whole must be 
educated to overcome their conservatism and sensitivity 
to this issue. 

Newcomb, Michael D.; Maddahian, E.; Skager, R.; and 
Benller, P.M. 1987. SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND 
PSYCHOSOCIAL RISK FACTORS AMONG 
TEENAGERS: ASSOCIATIONS WITH SEX, AGE, 
ETHNICITY, AND TYPE OF SCHOOL American Journal 
of Drup and Alcohol Abuse 13(4):41 3-433. 34 refs. 

Evidence indicating that there are numerous 
pathways to substance use has led several researchers 
to propose a risk-factor approach that hypothesizes that 
with increased exposure to those factors or influences 
known to promote or generate drug use, there is an 
increased chance of drug use or abuse occuning. 
Conversely, exposure to few risk factors should 
decrease the prot)abiltty of drug Involvement. The 
number of risk factors should be monotonlcally, perhaps 
linearly, related to the likelihood of substance initiation 
and involvement. 

To evaluate this model, 12 risk factor variables were 
selected and tested on data obtained from 7th-, 9th-, and 
llth-grade students (n=2,926) in the Ventura County 
(California) School District. Differential exposure to and 
impact of risk factors on drug-taking behaviors were 



tested for differences by sex, age, ethnicity, and type of 
school attending. The 12 factors were selected on the 
basis of a review of the literature and previous research 
conducted on drug use which kJentified them as 
significant antecedents to drug use initiation or 
increased drug involvement. In developing the risk 
factor index, each factor was detemdined to be 
associated independently with drug use. These factors 
were: 

eariy alcohol intoxication 
perceived adult drug use 
perceived peer approval of drug use 
perceived parent approval of drug use 
absence Tnm school 
poor acadomi:) achievement 
distrust of teacher drug knowledge 
distrust of parent drug knowledge 
low educational aspirations 
little religious commitment 
emotional distress 
dissatisfaction with life 

Findings. The 12 variables explained ovor 50 percent 
of the variance in a measure of general drug use, but 
lacked effectiveness in accounting for different types of 
drugs. A unit-weighted, summed index of risk factors 
was lineariy related to use and abuse (heavy use) of 
cigarettes, alcohol, cannabis, cocaine, hard drugs, and a 
composite substance-use score. 

Patterns of Use. For the sample as a whole, the most 
widely tried substance was alcohol (77 percent) and the 
least was cocaine (14 percent). Males reported greater 
use of cannabis, alcohol, and drug use in general than 
females, who reported more cigarette use. All 
substances, except hard drugs, differ significantly in use 
by ethnic group, with the differences falling into a 
general pattern of American Indians and "Other" ethnics 
reporting the most frequent use of drugs, followed by 
Whites, Blacks, Hispanics, and Asians. Significant mean 
differences were found for all substances except alcohol 
by school type, with continuation school students 
reporting higher frequency of use of all drugs except 
alcohol. 

Patterns of Risk Factors. There was no significant 
difference on the risk-factor index by gender; the 
number of risk factors Increased signrficantiy by grade 
level; American Indian and "Others" were exposed to 
significantly more risk factors than other ethnic groups; 
and students In continuation school had a significantly 
higher risk factor. 

Association Between Risk Factors and Substance 
Use. The risk factor index was not equally effective at 
accounting for different types of drugs: it v^s most 
strongly related to alcohol and cannabis use; least 
strongly to cocaine. The only significant gender 



ERLC 



Prevention Research Update No, 2/page 16 



difference was a larger risk-factor correlation on cocaine 
use among n^les than femaies. The oniy significant 
differences by grade were significantly lower correlations 
between risk factors and cannabis use and cocaine use 
among 7th-grade students than 9th or 1 lth. Regarding 
ethnicity, there was no differential Impact of risk fectors 
on cigarettes, alcohol, or hard drugs. There were 
significantiy smaller correlations between cannabis and 
the risk-factor Index for Asians compared with American 
Indians. Whites, or "Others." Asians had a smaller 
correlation with cocaine use than Hispanics, White, or 
"Others." Whites had a significantly larger correlation 
with composite substance use than Asians or Hispanic^. 
All correlations for the continuation students were larger 
than regular-school students. 

Risk-Factor Associations. Dichotomizing between 
abstainers/occasional users and abusers, for all 
substances, showed a marked increase of abuse by 
Increasing number of risk factors. The index was 
strongly related to the frequency of heavy use or 
substance abuse. Seventy-one percent of those with 
seven or more risk factors abused at least one 
substance; they were from four to six times more likely 
to be substance abusers (depending upon the specific 
drug) than the general sample. 

Conclusions/Implications. The results of this study 
provide further evidence for the usefulness of the risk- 
factor approach. The stud/s examination of four 
demographic characteristics found important status 
group differences in regard to drug use levels, exposure 
to risk factors, and the impact of this exposure on drug- 
taking behaviors. 

Oetting. E.R.; Beauvais, F.; and Edwards. R. 1988. 
ALCOHOL AND INDIAN YOUTH: SOCIAL AND 
PSYCHOLOGICAL CORREUTES AND PREVENTION. 
Journal of Drug Issues 18(1):87-101. 33 refs. 

In an examination of psychosocial correlates of 
heavy drinking and their Implications for prevention, 
young Native American heavy alcohol users (ages 12- 
16) were matched with non-users. Two subsamples 
were idemified, one male and one female, from alcohol- 
using youth In a total sample of 1.772 Indian youth living 
on reservations. The sample was taken from 1985-86 
anonymous surveys that were administered to 7th- 
through I2th-grade American youth In 20 different 
schools on four Indian reservations. 

Findings. Alcohol users did not have more emotional 
problems, did not experience less alienation, or did not 
feel less self-confident or less socially accepted than 
non-users, but they did use other drugs and were more 
deviant. Alcohol users came more often from broken 
families, felt less family caring and had fewer family 
sanctions against substance abuse, had poorer school 



ERLC 



adjustment, had less hope for the future, and had more 
friends who encouraged alcohol and drug use. 

Use of alcohol and other drugs was "inextricably 
linked...suggesting that there are common dynamics 
underiylng the use of all substances" and that prevention 
programs aimed at only alcohol use or other drug use 
would be incomplete. 

Conclusions. Preventive programs should start very 
eariy and should focus on increasing family strength, 
improving school adjustment, providing opportunities for 
the future, breaking up deviant peer clusters, ano 
building peer clusters that discourage alcohol and drug 
use. Most important, programs must take into account 
ihe youth's peer clusters, A "Just Say No" approach will 
wori< only if it influences the Internal norms of the peer 
cluster and does not imply that adults are "pushing- 
drugs on kids. 

Programs that are based on increasing young 
people's identification with Indian culture could have 
some effect, but peer cluster theory suggests that they 
will have to somehow stop the formation of alcohol- 
using or otherwise deviant peer clusters and encourage 
the formation of peer clusters that provide strong 
sanctions against use. Such an approach has been 
lacking in "cultural" programs. 

Programs based on the following "good ideas" will 
fail: simple self-esteem improvement; alcohol is used as 
a substitute for social acceptance; alcohol is taken by 
depressed, anxious, or othenwise emotionally disturbed 
youth; use of "socially acceptable" people to reach 
deviant youth; use of cultural ceremonies but do not 
change peer clusters; and providing recreational or 
social activities that do not completely exclude alcohol. 

Okwumabua, Jebose 0.. and Duryea, E.J. 1987. AGE 
OF ONSET. PERIODS OF RISK, AND PAHERNS OF 
PROGRESSION IN DRUG USE AMONG AMERICAN 
INDIAN HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS. International 
Joumal of the Addictions 22 (12): 1269- 1276. 13 refs. 

A sample of 277 .Native American students (grades 7 
to 12) was surveyed to examine the age of onset, 
pattems of progression, and periods of risk for drug use. 
Drawn from various tribes (including 19 Pueblo tribes, 
Navajo. Jicarilla, Mescalero Apache, and others), they 
attended a Native American boarding school located in a 
major metropolitan city In the Southwest. There were 
approximately the same number of nriales and females, 
and ages ranged from 11 to 1 9 years. The school was 
known for its respect for, and participation In, Native 
American tradition and ritual. Data were collected in the 
fall of 1985 via a teacher-administered, voluntary self- 
report questionnaire that included demographic and 
drug-use information. 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 17 



findings. Of the total sample, 81 percent reported 
having tried cigarettes, 79 percent drinking alcohol, 80 
percent smoking marijuana, 44 percent sniffing solvents, 
and 7 percent using cocaine. About 19 percent reported 
never having tried any of these five drugs. 

The period between ages 10 and 13 Is related to 
Initiation of drug use. Many began smoking cigarettes 
and marijuana, drinking alcohol, sniffing solvents, and 
using cocaine as eariy as 10 years of age. The period of 
risk for onset of marijuana was ages 10-14; solvent 
sniffing, 10-13; cocaine, 13-15. 

Patterns of progression In drug use corroborated 
conclusions from previous studies which proposed that 
patterns of drug use among adolescents generally follow 
a specific path and sequence. There was a sequential 
progression with chronological development from 
"quasNegal" (cigarettes) to a combination of "quasi- 
legal" and Illicit drug experimentation (alcohol and 
marijuana) and then progressing to harder Illegal drugs 
(cocaine). This is consistent with the pattern found In 
the mainstream adolescent population, though different 
data may be available in which no such progression 
exists. 

Conclusions. Caution must be exercised In 
extrapolating the findings to the general Native American 
population because of the small sample size, the urban 
location, and the self-report format. 

The findings suggest that prevention of eariy 
Involvement with "quasi-legal" drugs may be efficacious 
in reducing the probability of future use. Drug- 
prevention-education programs should be targeted at 
reducing the risk of beginning the use of drugs rather 
than at reducing actual use among older users. 

Schinke. Steven; Bebel, M.Y.; Oriandl, M.A.; and Sotvin, 
G.J. 1988. PREVENTION STRATEGIES FOR 
VULNERABLE PUPILS: SCHOOL SOCIAL WORK 
PRACTICES TO PREVENT SUBSTANCE ABUSE. Urban 
Education 22(4) :51 0-5 19, January. 13 refs. 

Drawing on original data and other research on 
tobacco and drug use, this article describes how school 
social wori<ers may execute preventive Interventions with 
vulnerable pupils. 

The tobacco-use attitudes and practices of 5th- and 
6th-grade students from blue-collar families In western 
Washington schools were tested and sampled 
(n= 1,281). Pupils were randomly divWed by school Into 
skills, discussion, and control conditions. All youths 
were posttested, then retested semiannually for two 
years. Pupils In the skills Intervention groups showed 
lower rates of smoking at 6-, 12-, 18-, and 24-month 
follow-ups than did pupils In the other groups. Across 
conditions, semiannual measurements showed rising 
tobacco use. Results Indicated that school social 



wori<ers can design. Implement, and evaluate preventive 
Interventions aimed at reducing the onset of smoked 
and smokeless toljacco use. 

The vulnerability of Native American youth to drug 
use Is Illustrated by surveys taken In the Pacific 
Northwest. This data Indicate that 38 percent of Indian 
and 13 percent of non-Indian youth become Intoxicated 
with alcohol weekly; 27 percent and 8 percent, 
respectively, are weekly dnug users. The effectiveness of 
prevention intervention based on a bicultural 
competence model was tested among 61 Native 
American pupils. Bicultural competence allows pupils to 
Integrate majority culture values, norms, and behaviors 
without losing their Wentificatlon with and respect for 
traditional values. Those randomly assigned to the 
Intervention condition were taught problem-solving, 
communication, and social support competence skills 
by Native American and majority culture social workers. 
At the six-month follow-up, the treatment group had 
higher scores than the no-Intervention control group on 
the drug knowledge measure and on ratings of self- 
control, alternative suggestions, and assertiveness, and 
reported less use of smoked and smokeless tobacco, 
alcohol, marijuana, and inhalants during the previous 14 
days. 

Conclusions. Results of the reported studies 
modestly support skills intervention. Indications are that 
leader-modeled strategies based on cognitive and 
behavioral methodology may have Increased 
effectiveness in the future activities and priorities of 
school social workers. 

Schinke, Steven P.; Botvin, G.J.; Trimble, J.E.; Oriandl, 
M.A.; Gilchrist, L.D.; and Locklear, V.S. 1988. 
PREVENTING SUBSTANCE ABUSE AMONG 
AMERICAN-INDIAN ADOLESCENTS: A BICULTURAL 
COMPETENCE SKILLS APPROACH. Journal of 
Counseling Psychology 35 (1):87-90. 33 refs. 

More than other Americans, Indian and Alaska-Native 
children and adults suffer from such substance-related 
problems as school-failure, antisocial behavior, 
unemployment, criminal arrest, and Increased morbidity 
and mortality. However, there are significant gaps In the 
science of preventing substance abuse In American- 
Indian adolescents. An Intervention approach to 
preventing tobacco, alcohol, and other drug abuse with 
young American-Indian people based on bicultural 
theory and social learning principles was tested. 

Subjects were 137 American-Indian adolescents from 
two western Washington Reservation sites. Before, 
Immediately following, and six-months after subjects 
received Intervention, all of the subjects completed four 
measures: a knowledge test, attitude scale, Interactive 
behavior test, and substance-user reports. After 



ERLC 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 18 



pretesting, subjects were randomiy divided by 
reservation site into prevention condition (PC) and 
control conditions (CC). PC subjects participaved in 10 
group intervention sessions to ieam biculturai 
competence skills, while subjects assigned to the control 
condition received no preventive intervention. PC 
subjects were Instructed in and practiced 
communication, coping, and discrimination skills. 

Findings. The data lent modest support to a 
bicultural competence skills intervention approach for 
preventing substance abuse among American-Indian 
youth. Within a controlled design, American-Lidlan 
youths who received such skills-based preventive 
intervention showed greater posttest and follow-up 
improvements than did American-Indian youths in a non- 
intervention control condition on measures of 
substance-related knowledge, attitudes, and interactive 
abilities, and on self-reported rates of tobacco, alcohol, 
and drugs use. 

Conclusions. The data must be interpreted 
cautiouslv. since substance-use rates n^ay be biased. 
The absence of a placebo or comparison control 
condition further precludes definitive conclusions about 
the efficacy of bicuiiurai competence skills intervention. 
Nonetheless, the study represents a -^'oneer step toward 
testing bicukural competence approaches to preventive 
Intervention. 

Schlnke, Steven; Palleja, J.; Schilling, R.; Moncher, M.; 
Oriarxll; M.; and Botvin, G. 1988. PREVENTING 
SUBSTANCE ABUSE AMONG MINORITY GROUP 
ADOLESCENTS: APPLICATIONS OF RISK-BASED 
INTERVENTIONS. Practice Applicat.ons 4(4):1-16. 56 
refs. 

One of the significant gaps in substance abuse 
prevention is the lack of guidelines for intervention 
design, targeting, and delivery with ethnic-racial minority 
populations, particularly adolescents. Part of the 
problem is the absence of appropriate terminologies for 
at-risk adolescents. New definitions are offered to 
Improve the precision of intervention development and 
outcome research, drawing on evklence from minority 
adolescents. Not only are many of these youth at risk for 
substance abuse, but they are also unden'esearched. 

The traditional definition of prevention In terms of 
primary, secondary, and tertiary are inadequate for 
prevention efforts with ethnic-racial minority 
adolescents. They represent conflicting concepts and 
fail to guide cun-ent programs, research, and policy, and 
Imply a generic epidemiologic justification which does 
not account for cultural and racial differences In 
populations at risk. 

Gordin has suggested new definitions of intervention 
levels: universal (i.e., desirable for everybody); selective 



(I.e.. recommended only when the Indlvkiual Is a 
member of a population subgroup at above-average 
risk); and indicated (i.e., advisable only for persons who 
manifest a risk factor and are more likely than not to 
experience problems without intervention). Indicated 
preventic : interventions are called for when members of 
the target client, patient, or subject group are found to 
actually manifest precursor signs of the objective for 
prevention intervention. 

American Indian adolescents are an example of this 
level of prevention. Research strongly points to a 
precocious onset of and subsequent dependence on 
alcohol and psychoactive substances among American 
Indian people in many tribes. This technique was tested 
on 61 adolescents who were taught problem-solving, 
communication, and social support competence skills 
by indigenous Native American health educators using a 
bicultural model (Schlnke, Bebel et al. ,1988). At 
followup, the intervention group reported less substance 
abuse than the control group. 

Despite the success of the indicated biculture 
technique among Native American youths, the outcome 
effects were necessarily moderated by the highly 
specific nature of the indicated prevention intervention. 
The bicultural competenc^^ .^odel, for example, is most 
applicable to Native American adolescents and may not 
be applicable at all to other ethnic-racial American 
groups." The specificity of indicated efforts may restrict 
their generalizability and may insidiously label a group 
as in need of special intervention. Nevertheless, 
culturally-tailored preventive interventions hold particular 
promise for ethnic minorities because they experience 
vastly different problems than the general population 
and reside largely in defined areas. 

Trimble, Joseph E.; Padilla, A.; and Bell, C. 1987. DRUG 
ABUSE AMONG ETHNIC MINORITIES. NIDA Office of 
Science Monograph. Washington, D.C.: GPO. DHHS 
Pub (ADM)87-1474. 156 refs. 

Data presented at a 1983 meeting to review research 
on drug use and prevention among ethnic minorities, 
sponsored by the National Institute on Drug Abuse, are 
sumn^arized. The report focuses on four ethnic groups: 
Blacks, Native Americans. Asian and Pacific Americans, 
and Hispanic Americans. Characteristics of each group 
are Wentified, followed by a synthesis of major findings 
In each coinmunity. This summary foc'jses on the 
information as it relates to minorities In general and 
Native American youth in particular. 

"Only limited information Is available on the 
prevalence of drug abuse among ethnic minority 
populations, as well as etloioglc and developmental 
factors that may play a ro!e In determining their 
vulnerability to drug use" (p. r). This scarcity of 



ERLC 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 19 



Information Is particularly of concern since 
epldemidoglcai survey data indicate that Blacks and 
Hispanlcs are oven'epresented in alcohol and drug 
treatment programs and drug-related emergency 
hospital admissions, as well as In selected criminal 
Justice actions. Furthermore, the data indicate an 
Increasing trend In minority drug abuse. 

There Is a need for more cun'ent and systematic data 
In all areas of epidemiology, treatment, and prevention. 
At best, current Information Is uneven. All researchers 
emphasize the need for more culturally sensitive designs 
and nneasures beyond "Nvhite" versus "nonwhite" 
comparisons. Despite the diversity among these 
groups, "repeated identification of certain core problems 
associated with integration into majority Westem culture 
helps to Indicate research needs." "Further, the presures 
of acculturation In changing environmental contexts may 
predispose Individuals of varying ages and 
socioeconomic statuses to drug abuse in previously 
unconsidered ways" (p. 1). 

American Indians. Although alcohol and other drug 
abuse Is believed to be a significant problem among 
American Indians, very little is known about its correlates 
or consequences. Despite important work that has been 
done, several critical gaps In our knowledge make it 
extremely difficult to assess the validity of the competing 
explanations of Indian substance abuse and efforts to 
prevent It. There is a sIgnKicant lack of studies in an 
urban setting. Most of the information we do have deals 
with the Southwest and the Navajo only. We also know 
far more about males than females, about adults than 
youths. The "significant lack of specific studies on 
alcohol and drug abuse among Indian adolescents 
extends to the area of substance abuse prevention." 
Many programs are still in stages of development. 
"While some of the educational efforts are demonstrating 
effectiveness among non-Indian youth, there is little 
evidence that educational strategies are effective with 
Indian youth regardless of tribal affiliation or resWentlal 
status." 

The available material Is marked by a lack of detail 
and Inconclusiveness that precludes its use as evWence 
bearing upon the relationships between substance 
abuse, treatment outcome, psychosocial problems, and 
tribal background. In addition to being Inadequate for 
theoretical purposes, the available material is also 
Inadequate for practical purposes. There have been no 
published accounts of Indian alcoholism treatment 
programs that would permit other Indian groups 
establishing new programs to learn from the successes 
and failures of their predecessors" (p. 5). 

Summan/ and Conclusion. "At present our 
knowledge of the drug and alcohol use and abuse 
patterns among American's ethnic minority populations 



ERLC 



is at best spotty. Much of what we know is limited to 
epidemiologic studies am.cng youth primarily at the 
adolescent stage of development. Little or no 
Infonratlon exists describing and documenting the use 
and abuse pattems among ethnic minority adults, 
elderiy, refugees, homeless, pregnant women and 
families as a unit. Yet what we do know provides us with 
a portrait of a very serious and complex set of problems" 
(p. 35). 

The following research questions represent some of 
the fundamental areas that need immediate action: 

- Which drugs are most likely to be used at which 
ages and under which social circumstances? 

- Within an ethnic group, what are the subgroups 
most at risk and to what extent? 

- More attention needs to be paW toward 
distinguishing ethnic groups and subgroups in 
future studies. 

- What psychological characteristics are associated 
with drug abuse? 

- Alternative measures that are sensitive to cultural 
differences must be developed to assess the 
extent and kinds of abuse. 

- The efficacy of treatment and prevention 
strategies with regard to specific taiget 
populations needs to be determined. 

- To what extent are available prevention 
techniques differentially effective among different 
age groups? 

- What treatment modalities are available? 

Watts, Thonr^s D., arvj Lewis, Ronald G. 1988. 
ALCOHOUSM AND NATIVE AMERICAN YOUTH: AN 
OVERVIEW. Journal of Drug Issues 18(1):69-86, Winter. 
63 refs. 

The problem of alcoholism among NatH/e American 
youth is examined from a historical perspective, 
highlighting the diverse patterns in traditional and 
ccfitemporary life which have contributed to this 
ongoing and growing problem. This complex problem 
involves cultural, environmental, economic, and many 
other elements, all best understood in historical context 
A Native American "community" is difficult to maintain 
alongside the "corporatizatlon" of tribes and the infusion 
of government monies and programs. U.S. government 
policy, carried on In lieu of attentive obsen^tion of 
cultural, social, and religious differences, has remained 
myopically unaware of the intensity and complexity of 
the problem, which appears to have no one, single, 
concise answer or explanation. Dynamic local 
community involvement is called for here, as well as a 
"small is beautiful" theme for both economic and social 
policies pertaining to Native Americans. This addresses 
the problem at the local or community level, 



'■'3 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 20 



encouraging mediating structures for a total effort on 
local community ground. 

Welte. J.W.. and Barnes, G.M. 1987. ALCOHOL USE 
AMONG ADOLESCENT MINORITY GROUPS. Journal of 
Studies on Alcohol 48(4):329^. 31 refs. 

Past surveys of minority youth drinking behaviors 
generally have not supported the notion that heavy use 
Is more common among them than Whites, but in many 
of these studies there were few minorities. A New Yori< 
state study of the drinking patterns of 27.335 Tth-grade 
through 12th-gradA students looked at ethnic differences 
In how often youth drink, how much they drink, the link 
between drinking and social problems, and the link 
between drinking and drug use. Cultural background 
was found to exert strong influences on how youth drink 
and use drugs, but many "common-sense notions" 
about minority drinking were found to be "difficult to 
maintain." Among American Indian adolescents, a high 
proportion were heavy drinkers and drug users. 
Hispanic and White students had intenmedlate ieveis of 
heavy drinking and drug use. Male Oriental students 
were heavy drinkers, yet female Oriental students were 
light drinkers. Black students used alcohol and drugs 
less than these other groups. These low drinking 
estimates for Black and Hispanic youth may be affected 
by the school dropout rate in these populations. 

The heavy drinking among American Indian youth is 
difficult to explain In terms of poverty or threats to 
cultural Wentity because drinking among Hispanic and 
Black youths was not unusually high. Therefore, some 
circumstances unique to American Indians must be 
responsible. 

In all groups, the prevalence of alcohol use was 
related to heavy alcohol use and heavy alcohol use was 
accompanied by heavy drug use In the same proportion. 

Although not all minority groups drank more than 
Whites, all did experience more drinking problems when 
the amount consumed was held constant. This supports 
the generalization that drinking problems are more easily 
acquired among lower socioeconomic status groups. 
This shows that factors beyond mere consumption 
contribute to alcohol-roiated problems. 

Wright, Roosevelt, and Watts, T.D. 1988. ALCOHOL AND 
MINORITYYOUTH. Journal of Drug issues 18(1):1-6. 15 
refs. 

In an Introduction to a special Issues of the Journal of 
Drug Issues on minority youth and alcohol, the paucity 
of relevant research Is stressed. This special Issue 
examines pertinent sociological perspectives and the 
available data. The three "loaded" nouns of the title are 
key concerns that must be intensively and holisticaliy 
addressed before the problem can be understood. 



Minority youth who use (or abuse) alcohol deal with 
three realities: using "alcohol," being "minority," and 
being young ("youth"). All three dimensions are viewed 
by the larger society with mixed-sometlmes hostile, 
sometimes fearful-reactions. With minority youth we 
see the disproportionate occun'ence of rapid population 
growth, poverty, school dropouts, criminal justice 
system clients, and social welfare system clients. We 
cannot examine alcoholism among minority youth 
without seriously coming to grips with poverty, 
education, and life condition. More defined data 
directed toward the explication of sociological and 
cultural background and motivational factors must be 
combined with appropriate theoretical modds before 
these urgent concerns may be property addressed. 

Young, T.J. 1987. INHALANT USE AMONG AMERICAN 
INDIAN YOUTH. Child Psychiatry and Human 
Development 18(10):36-46. 56 refs. 

According to the U.S. Indian Health Sen/ice, 
substance abuse is the most urgent health problem 
facing American Indians. Inhalants are among the first 
drugs used by Indian youth, with first use occurring at 
approximately the same time as the onset of cigarette 
smoking. Although prevalence rates vary among Indian 
subpopulations, Indian youth generally have much 
higher rates of inhalant use than non-Indian youth. 
Furthermore, while other drugs are showing a downward 
trend among Indian youth. Inhalant use Is Increasing 
slightly. This paper examines this phenomena by 
reviewing related epidemiological, social, and clinical 
Issues. 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 21 



REFERENCES 
* = Abstracted Documents 



Austin, Gregory; Johnson, B.; Carroll, E.; and Lettleri, 
D., eds. 1978. Drugs and Minorities. NIDA 
Research Issues Series 21. Washington, D.C.: 
GPO. DHEWPub (ADM)78-507. 

Beauvals, Fred. 1988. Porsonal communication. 

Beauvals, Fred, and LaBoueff, S. 1985. Drug and alcohol 
abuse Intervention in American Indian 
communities. International Journal of the 
Addictions 20(1):139-171. 

^Beauvals, Fred, and Getting, E.R. 1988. Inhalant abuse 
by young children. In: Crider, Raquei, and Rouse, 
B., eds. Epidemiology of Inhalant Abuse: An 
Update. NIDA Research Monograph 85. 
Washington, D.C.: GPO. DHHS Pub (ADM)88- 
1577. pp. 30-33. 

*Beauvais, Fred; Getting, E.R.; and Edwards, R.W. :985. 
Trends in drug use of Indian adolescents Irving on 
reservations, 1975-1983. American Journal of 
Drug and Alcohol Abuse 1 1 (3/4):209- 230. 

Beauvals, Fred; Getting, E.R.; and Edwards, R.W. 1985a. 
Trends In the use of Inhalants among American 
Indian adolescents. White Cloud Journal 3:3'^^. 

Beauvals, Fred; Getting, E.R.; Wolf, W.; and Edwards, R. 
In press. American Indian youth and drugs: 197C- 

1987. A Continuing problem. American Journal of 
Public Health. 

Beiser, M., and Attneave, C.L 1982. Mental disorders 
among Native American children: Rates and risl< 
periods for entering treatment. American Journal 
of Psychiatry 1 39: 1 93-1 98. 

*Bell, Ralph. 1988. Using the concept of risk to plan drug 
use intervention programs. Journal of Drug 
Education ^8{^y^35-^42. 

Beschner, George M., and Friedman, A.S. 1935. 
Treatment of adolescent drug abusers. 
International Journal of the Addictions 
20(6/7):971-993. 

*Blnlon, Arnold; Miller, C. D.; Beauvals, F.; Getting, E.R. 

1988. Rationales for the use of alcohol, marijuana, 



and other drugs by eighth-grade Native American 
and Anglo youth. International Journal of the 
Addictions 23(1):47-64. 

Bry, B.H.; McKeon, P.; and Pandina, R.J. 1982. Extent of 
drug use as a function of a number of risk factors. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology 91 :273-279. 

Bry, B.H. 1983. Predicting drug abuse: Review and 
reformulation. International Journal of the 
Addictions 18:223-233. 

^Carpenter, Richard; Lyons, C.A.; and Miller, W.R. 1985. 
Peer-managed self-control program for prevention 
of alcohol abuse in American Indian high school 
students: A pilot evaluation study. International 
Journal of the Addictions 20(2):299-31 0. 

Cockerham» W.C. 1975. Drinking attitudes and practices 
among Wind River Reservation Indian youth. 
Quarterly Journal of Studies on Alcohol 36(3) :321 • 
326. 

Cockerham, W.C. 1977. Patterns of alcohol and multiple 
drug use among n ^\ White and American Indian 
adolescents. '^al Journal of the 

Addictions V i . . 

Cockerham, W.C; For> ^, w*.ri.; and Roboin, R.M. 
1976. Dr\ jse among White and American high 
school youth. Internettional Journal of the 
Addictions U{2):209'285. 

CrkJer, Raquei, and Rouse, B.. eds. Epidemiology of 
Inhalant AJbuse: An Update. NIDA Research 
Monograph 85. Washington, D.C.: GPG. DHHS 
Pub(ADM)88-1577. 

Cunningiiam, Michael. 1988. Prevention of alcohol 
problems among ethnics of color. In: EMT Group, 
eds. Mobilizing Communities: Strategies for 
Alcohol Abuse Prevention In Ethnic Minority 
Comjnuni^les. Proceedings of a Conference 
sponsored by ihe California Dept. of Alcohol and 
Drug Programs, December 1-2, 1987. 
Sacramento, CA: EMT Group, pp. 10-15. 

Dlnges, N.G.; Trimble, J.E.; and HollenbtH:k, A.R. 1979. 
American Indian adolescent socialization: A 
review of the literature. Journal of Adolescence 
2:259-296. 



EMC 



prevention Research Update No. 2/page 22 



♦Edwards. E. Daniel, and Edwards, ME. 1988. 
Alcoholism prevention/treatment and Native 
American youth: A community approach. Journal 
of Drug Issues 18(10):103-115. 

Everett, M.W. 1972. White Mountain Apache inter- 
generational problem drinl<ing. Paper presented 
at the Annual Meeting of the American 
Anthropological Association. Toronto. Cited 
Weibel1982. 

Garcla-Mason, V. 1985. 'Relationship of Drug Use and 
Self- Concept Among Am&rican Indian Youth." 
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. University of New 
Mexico, Albuquerque. 

*Gilchrist, Lewayne D.; Schinke, S.; Trimble, J.E.; and 
Cvetovich, G.T. 1987. Skills enhancement to 
prevent substance abuse among American Indian 
adolescents. International Journal of the 
Addictions 22(9):869-879. 

*Globetti. Gerald. 1988. Alcohol education programs 
and minority youth. Journal of Drug Issues 
1 8(1 ):1 15-129. 

Goldstein. G.; Getting, E.R.; Edwards, R.; and Garcla- 
Mason, V. 1979. Drug use among Native 
American young adults. International Journal of 
the Addictions 14(6):855-860. 

Halloway. R. 1966. Drinking among Indian Youth. 
Manitoba: The Alcohol Education Service. 

Hanson. B. 1985. DnJg treatment effectiveness: The case 
of racial and ethnic minorities In America-Some 
research questions and proposals. International 
Journal of the Addictions 20:99-1 37. 

Hawkins, J.D.; Ushner, D.; and Cataiano, R. 1985. 
Childhood predictors and the prevention of 
adolescent substance abuse. In: Jones. C.J., and 
Battjes, R.J., eds. Etiology of Drug Abuse: 
Implications for Prevention. NIDA Research 
Monograph 66. Washington. D C: GPO. DHHS 
Pub (ADM)85-13?S. pp. 75-125. 

Heidenreich, L :976. Alcohcfl and drug use and abus* 
among Indian-Americans: A revlev/ of issues and 
sources. Journal of Drug Issues 6(3):256-272. 

Holllday, B. 1985. Making the best of a bad skuation: 
Pragmatic planning for P^^iH' '*.ohd prevention 
In the 1980s. In: Watts. T.. Wright. R.. eds. 



Black Alcoholism: Toward a Comprehensive 
Understanding. Springfield: Charies C. Thomas, 
pp. 152-161. 

Holmgren. C; Fit2geraid. B.J.; and Carman. R.S. 1983. 
Alienation and alcohol use by American Indian 
and Caucasian high school students. »oumal of 
Social Psychology 1 30:1 39-1 40. 

liyama, P.; Nishi, M.S.; and Johnson. B. 1976. Drug Usa 
and Abuse among U.S. Minorities. New Yori<: 
Praeger. 

Johnston, Uoyd; O'Mailey, P.; and Bachn^n. J. 1987. 
National Trends in Drug Use and Related Factors 
among American High School Students and 
Young Adults. DHHS Pub (ADM)87-1 535. 
Washington, D.C.: GPO. 

Jones-Saumty, D.; Hochhaus, R. Dru; and Zeiner, A. 
1983. Psychological factors of familial alcoholism 
in American Indians anu Caucasians. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology 39:783- 790. 

Kaufman, A. 197-'^ '^^asoiine sniffing among children In a 
Pueblo ino. \ village. Pediatrics 51 (6):1060-1064. 

Kosten, T.R.; Rounsaviile, B.J.; and Kleber, H.D. 1985. 
Ethnic and gender differences among opiate 
addicts. International Journai of the Addictions 
20:1143-1162. 

Laign, Jeffrey. 1988. Alcoholism dovastates Native tribes. 
U.S. Journal of Drug Alcohol Depandents 1 2(9):1 . 
12-13. Sept. 

Larrbert, Dow. 1988. "American Indian adolescents: Risk 
factors for alcohol and drug abuse." Paper 
presented at the 10th Annual Conference of 
Substance Abuse Librarians and information 
Specialists. Seattle. Washington. October 17-20. 

Leiand. J. 1980. Nat^'^ American drug use: A rcvfew of 
the literature. *>: Mail, P.D., and McDonald, D.R.. 
eds. Tulapai to Tokay: A Bibliography ot Alcohol 
Use and Abuse among Native Americans of North 
America. New Haven: Human Relations Area 
Files. 

Lewis, Ronald G 1982. Alcoholism and the Native 
American-A review of the literature. In: National 
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. 
Alcohol and He?^*h Monograph 4. Special 
Populations Issues. Wasfilngton. D.C.: GPO. 



ERLC 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 23 



Uban. QB.. and Smart. R.G. 1982. Drinking and drug 
use among Ontario Indian students. Drug and 
Alcohol Dependence 9:161- 172. 

Lobb. Michael L, and Watts, T.D., eds. [forthcoming]. 
Native American Youth and Alcohol: An Annotated 
Bibliography and Literature Review. Westport. Ct.: 
Greenwood Press, forthcoming May 1989. 

Longclaws, L; Barnes, G.E.; Grieve, L; and Dumoff, R. 
1980. Alcohol and drug use among the 
Brokenhead Ojibwa. Journal of Studies on 
Alcohol 4^{^):2^-36. 

McBrlde, Duane C. and Page J.B. 1980. Adolescent 
Indian substance abuse: Ecological and 
sociocultural factors. Youth and Society 
11(4):475-492. 

McDiarmid, G.W. 1983. Community and competence: A 
study of an indigenous primary prevention 
organization in an Alaskan village. White Cloud 
'ourna/ 3(1 ):53-74. 

Molntyre. Kevin, and White. D. 1988. "Building an 
information network on high risk youth." Paper 
presented at the 10th Annual Conference of 
Substance Abuse Librarians and Information 
Specialists, Searde. Washington, October 17-20. 

Maddahian. Ebrahim; Newcomb, M.D.; and Bentler, P.M. 
1985. Single and multiple patterns of adolescent 
substance use: Longitudinal comparisons of four 
ethnic groups. Journal of Drug Education 15:311- 
326. 

*Maddahian, Ebrahim; Newcomb. M.D.; Bentler, P.M. 
1988. Adolescent drug use and intention to use 
drugs: Concurrent and longitudinal analyses of 
four eth.nic groups. Addictive Behaviors 13:191- 
195. 

Mail, P.D., and McDonald, D.R., eds. 1980. Tulapal to 
Tokay: A Bibliography of Alcohol Use and Abuse 
among Native Americans of North America. New 
Haven: Human Relations Area Files. 

Malone, I.E. 1985. Report of the Secretary's Task Force 
on Black and Minority Health: Vol. 1. Executf\/e 
Summary. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Print ,ig Office No. ^37 637/QL3. 



ERLC 



Manson, S.M. 1982. New Directions In Prevention 
among American Indian and Alaska Native 
Communities. Portland, OR: Oregon Health 
Sciences University. 

Manson, S.M.; latum, E.; and Dinges. N.G. 1982. 
Prevention research among r»merican Indian and 
Alaska Native communities. In: Manson, S.M. ed. 
New Directions In Prevention among American 
Indian and Alaska Native Communities. Portland. 
OR: Oregon Health Sciences University. 

May, Philip A. 1982. Substance abuse and American 
Indians: Prevalence and susceptibility. 
International Journal of the Al ctions 17:1185- 
1209. 

*May, Philip. 1986. Alcohol and drug misuse prevention 
programs for American Indians: Needs and 
opportunities. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 
47(3):187-195. 

Maypole. Donald, and Anderson. R.. 1986/87. 
Alcoholism programs serving minorities. 
Administrative issues. Alcohol Health and 
Research World 1 1 (2):62-65. 

Moore. Dorothy. 1988. Reducing alcohol and drug use 
among Native American youth. ADAMHA News, 
June, pp. 2-3. Reprinted in Prevention Pipeline 
1(5):6-7. July/Augl988. 

Moss, F.E., ano Janzen, F.V. 1980. Types of Drinkers in 
Indian Communities." Salt Lake City: University of 
Utah, Western Region Alcoholism Training Center, 
(cited by Vandervyagen, Mason, and Owan 1987) 

National Indian Health Board. 1984. Alcoholism/drug 
abuse bill stresses prevention among Indian 
youth. NIHB Health Reports 3(13-14):7-8, 10. 

Newcomb, Michael D.. and Bentler. P.M. 1986. 
Substance abuse and ethnicity: Differential impact 
of peer and adult models. Journal of Psychology 
120:83-95. 

Newcomb, Michael D.; Maddahian, E.; and Bentler. P.M. 
1986. Risk factors for drug use among 
adolescents: Concurrent and longitudinal 
analyses. American Journal of Public Health 
6:525-531. 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 24 



*Newcomb, Michael D.; Maddahlan, E.; Sager. R.; 
Bentler, P.M. 1987. Substance abuse and 
psychosoctel risk factors among teenagers: 
Associations with sex, age. ethnicity, and type of 
school. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol 
Abuse ^3{4yA^3-A33. 

Getting, E.R., and Beauvais, F. 1986. Peer cluster theory, 
socialization characteristics and adolescent drug 
use: A path analysis. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology 34:205-2 1 3. 

*Oetting, E.R.; Beauvais, F.; and Edwards, R. 1988. 
Alcohol and Indian youth: Social and 
psychological correlates and prevention. Journal 
of Drug Issues 18(1):87-101. 

Getting. E.R.; Beauvais. F.; and Velarde. J. 1982. 
Marijuana use by reservation Native American 
youth. Listening Post (Indian Health Service) 
4(3):25-28. 

Getting. E.R.; Beauvais. F.; Edward-, .i., Velarde, J.; and 
Goldstein, G. 1980. Drug Use among American 
Indian Youth. Fort Collins. CG: Colorado State 
Ur"*ersity. Western Behavioral Studies. 

Getting, E.R.; Beauvais. F.; Edwards. R.; Waters. M.; 
Velarde, J.; and Goldstein, G. 1983. Drug Use 
among Native American Youth: Summary of 
Findings. 1975>1981. Fort Collins. CG: Colorado 
State University. 

Getting. E.R.; Edwards. R.; Goldstein, G.S., and Garcia- 
.Mason, V. 1980. Drug use among adolescents of 
five southwestern Native American tribes. 
International Journal of the Addictions 15(3):449- 
455. 

Getting. E.R.; Edwards, R.; and Beauvais. F. 1988. Social 
and psychological factors underiying inhalant 
abuse. In: Crkier, Raquel, and Rouse, B., eds. 
Epidemiology of Inhalant Abuse: An Update. NIDA 
Research Monograph 85. Washington, D.C.: 
GPG. DHHS Pub (ADM)88-1577. pp. 172-203. 

Getting, E.R., and Goldstein, G.S. 1979. Drug use among 
Native American adolescents. In: Beschner, G.M., 
and Friednrwn. A.S. eds. Youth Drug Abuse: 
Problems, Issues, and Treatments. Lexington, 
MA: Lexington Books, pp. 409-441. 



*GI<wunwbua. Jebose G., and Duryea. E.J. 1987. Age of 
onset, periods of risl<, and patterns of progression 
in drug use among American Indian high school 
students. International Journal of the Addictions 
22(12):1269-1276. 

GIsen, LK., and Baffi, C.R. 1982. A descriptive analysis 
of drug and alcohol use among selected Native 
American high school students. Journal of Drug 
Education ^2{2):97-^0^. 

Pinto, Leonard J. 1973. Alcohol and drug use among 
Native American youth on reservations: A growing 
crisis. In: National Commission on 
Marijuana and Drug Abuse. Drug 
Use In America: Problem In Perspective. 
Appendix. Vol. 1: Patterns And Consequences. 
Washington. D.C.: GPG. pp. 1 157-1 178. 

Podolsky, Doug. 1986/87. NIAAA minority research 
activities. Alcohol Health and Research World 
11(2):5.7, Winter. 

Query. J.M.N. 1985. Comparative admission and follow- 
up study of American Indians and Whites in a 
youth chemical depDndency unit on the North 
Central Plains. International Journal of the 
Addictions 20:489-502. 

Rachal. J.V.; Maisto, S.A.; Guess. LL; and Hubbard, 
R.L 1982. Alcohol use among youth. In: National 
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. 
Alcohol Consumption and Related Problems. 
Alcohol and Health Monograph 1. DHHS Pub 
(ADM)82- 1190. Washington. D.C.: GPG. pp. 55- 
95. 

Red Horse, T. 1980. American Indian family: Research 
perspectives. In: Hoffman, F., ed. The American 
Indian Family: Strengths and Stresses. 
Proceedings of the Conference on Research 
Issues. Isleta. New Mexico: American Indian 
Social and Research and Development 
Associates 1980. pp. 1-11. (cited by 
Vanderwagen. Mason, arid Owan 1987) 

Schaps, E.; DiBartolo. R.; Moskowitz, J.; Palley, C; and 
Churgin, S. 1981. Prinwry prevention evaluation 
research: A review of 127 impact studies. Journal 
of Drug Issues ^^:^7'A3. 



ERIC 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 25 



*Schinke, Steven; Bebel, M.Y.; Oriandi, M.A.; and Botvin, 
GJ. 1988. Provention strategies for vulnerable 
pupils: School social work practices to prevent 
substance abuse. Urban Education 22(4):510-519, 
January. 

*Schinke, Steven; Botvfn, G.J.; Trimble, J.E.; Oriandi, 
M.A.; Gilchrist. LD.; and Locklear, V.S. 1988. 
Preventing substance abuse among American- 
indian adolescents: A bicultural competence skills 
approach. Journal of Counseling Psychology 
35(1):87-90. 

Schinke, Steven; Gilchrist, L; Schilling, R.; Walker, R.; 
Kirkham, M.; Bobo, J.; Trimble, J.; Cvetkovich, F.; 
and Richardson, S. 1985. Strategies for 
preventing substance abuse with American Indian 
youth. White Cloud Journal 3 (Reprint):? pages. 

Schinke, Steven; Gilchrist, L; Schilling, R.; Walker, R.; 
Locklear, V.; Bobo, J.; Maxwell, J.; Trimble, J.; 
Cvetkovich. G.T. 1986. Issues and strategies for 
research on the prevention of substance abuse 
among American Indian youth. Journal of Social 
Sen/ice Research 9. 

Schinke, Steven; Gilchrist, LD.; Schilling, R.F.; Walker. 
R.D.; Locklear. V.S.; and Kitajima. E. 1986a. 
Smokeless tobacco use among Native American 
adolescents. New England Journal of Medicine 
314:1051-1052. 

*Schinke, Steven; Palleja, J.; Schilling. R.; Moncher, M.; 
Oriandi; M.; and Botvin. G. 1988. Preventing 
substance abuse among minority group 
adolescents: Applications of risk-based 
interventions. Practice Applications 4(4): 1-1 6. 

Schinke, Steven; Schilling, R.; Gilchrist. LD.; Barth, R.P.; 
Bobo. J.K.; Trimble, J.E.; and Cvetkovich, G.T. 
1985. Preventing substance abuse with American 
Iridian youth. Social Casework: The Journal of 
Contemporary Social Work 66:21 3-217. 

Schottstaedt, M., and Bjork, T. 1977. Inhalant abuse In 
an Indian boarding school. American Journal of 
Psychiatry 1 34(1 1 ) : 1 290- 1 293. 

Schuckit, M. 1985. Studies of populations at high risk for 
alcoholism. Psychiatric Developments 3:31-63. 



ERLC 



Strimbu, J.L; Schoenfeldt, L.F.; and Southern, S.O. 
1973. Drug usage in college students as a 
function of racial classification and m.inority group 
status. Research In Higher Education 1 :263-372. 

Swanson, D.W.; Bratrude, A.; and Brown, E.M. 1971. 
Alcohol abuse in a population of Indian children. 
Diseases of the Nen/ous System 32(1 2):835-842. 

Tarter, Ralph E. 1988. The high-risk paradigm in alcohol 
and drug abuse research. In: Pickens, Roy W., 
and Svikis, D.S., eds. Biological Vulnerability to 
Drug Abuse. NIDA Research Monograph 88. 
Washington, D.C.: GPO. DHHS Pub (ADM)88- 
1590. pp. 73-86. 

Thomas, R. 1980. Overview. In: Hoffman, F., ed. The 
American Indian Family: Strengths and Stresses. 
Proceedings of the Conference on Research 
Issues. Isleta, New Mexico: American Indian 
Social and Research and Development 
Associates 1980. pp. 116-119. (cited by 
Vanderwagen, Mason, and Owan 1987) 

Topper, M.D. 1974. Drinking habits, culture change, 
sociability, and Navajo "adolescents." Addictive 
Disease ^{^0):97'^^6. 

Trimble. Joseph E. 1984. Drug abuse prevention 
research needs among American Indians and 
Alaska Natives. White Cloud Journal 3 (3):22-34. 

*Trimble, Joseph E.; Padilla, A.; and Bell, C. 1987. Drug 
Abuse Among Ethnic Minorities. NIDA OfTrce of 
Science Monograph. Washington, D.C.: GPO. 
DHHS Pub(ADM)87-1474. 

Tucker, M.B. 1985. U.S. ethnic minorities and drug 
abuse: An assessment of the science and 
practice. International Journal of the Addictions 
20:1021-1047. 

U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs. 1982. Alcohol and Drug 
Abuse in BIA Schools. Washington, D.C.: the 
Bureau, Office of Inc^ian Education Progranfis. 

U.S. Dept. Health and Human Services. Indian Health 
Service. (Sur>/ey of substance abuse among 
Native Americans). 1987. 

U.S. Indian Health Service. Program Statistics Branch. 
1987. Indian Health Service Chart Series Book. 
Rockville, Md.: Department of health and Human 
Services. 



''3 



Prevention Research Update No. 2/page 26 



Vanderwagen. Craig; Mason. R.D.; and Owan. T.C., eds. 
1987. IHS Alcoholism/Substance Abuse 
Prevention Initiative, Background, Plenary 
Session, and Action Plan. U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Sen/ices, Indian Health 
Service. 

*Watts, Thomas D., and Lewis, Ronald G. 1988. 
Alcoholism and Natrve American youth: An 
overview. Journal of Drug Issues 18(1):69-86, 
Winter. 

Welbel, Joan. 1982. American Indians, urbanization, and 
alcohol: A developing urban Indian drinking ethos. 
In: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism. Alcohol and Health Monograph 4: 
Special Population Issues. Washington, D.C.: 
GPO. pp. 331-358. 

Weibel. Joan, and Weisner, T. 1980. The Ethnography of 
Rural and Urban Indian Drinking Practices in 
California. Annual Statistical Analysis Report for 
the California the Department of Alcohol and Drug 
Abuse Programs, Sacramento. 

Weibel-Oriando, Joan. 1984. Substance abuse among 
American Indian youth: A continuing crisis. 
Journal of Drug Issues 14(2):313- 335. 

Welbel-Orlando, Joan. 1986/87. Drinking patterns of 
urban and rural American Indians. Alcohol Health 
and Research World 11(2):9-12, 54, Winter. 

Wells, Elizabeih. 1988. Keynote address: "Risk factors for 
alcohol and other drug problems: Implications for 
treatment and prevention." Paper presented at the 
10th Annual Conference of Substance Abuse 
Librarians and Information Specialists, Seattle, 
Washington, October 17-20. 

*Welte, John W., and Barnes, G.M. 1987. Alcohol use 
among adolescent minority groups. Journal of 
Studies on Alcohol 48(4) :329-336. 

Williams, Millree. 1985. Alcohol and ethnic minorities: 
Native Americans-An update. Alcohol Health and 
Research Wor/c/9(4):66-67, Summer. 

Winfree, LT., and Griffiths, C.T. 1983. Youth at risk: 
Marijuana use among Natrve American and 
Caucasian youth. International Journal of the 
Addictions 18:53-70. 



♦Wright, Roosevelt, and Watts. T.D. 1988. Alcohol and 
minority youth. Journal of Drug Issues 18(1):1-6. 

Yates, Alayne. 1987. Current status and future directions 
of research on the American Indian child. 
American Journal Psychiatry 144:1135-1142, 
September 9. 

*Young, T.J. 1987. Inhalant use among American Indian 
youth. Child Psychiatry and Human Development 
18(10):36^. 

Zucker, RA, and Harford, T.C. 1983. National study of 
the demography of adolescent drinking practices 
in 1980. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 44:979-985. 



ERIC 



Prevention Research Update ^^o. 2/page 27 



INSTITUTIONAL AFFILIATIONS 

The following Is a list of the institutional affiliations of the 
first author of abstracted documents. 

Beauvais. Fred, PhD, Psychology Department, Colorado 
• State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523 

Bell. Ralph, PhD, Division of Health Administration, 
Governors State University, University Park, IL 
60566 

Binion, Arnold, MA. MS, Psychology Department, 
Colorado State University, Fort Cdlins, CO 80523 

Carpenter, Richard, Rorida Mental Health Institute, 
13301 North 30th St., Tampa, FL33612 

Edwards, E. Daniel, PhD, Graduate School of Social 
Work, University of Utah 

Gilchrist. Lewayne D., PhD, School of Social Work. 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 

Globettl. Gerald, PhD; Director, Center for Alcohol and 
Drug Education, Sociology Department, 
University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL 35486 

Maddahian, Ebrahim, PhD, Psychology Department, 
University of California. 405 Hilgard, Los Angeles, 
CA 90024 

May, Philip» PhD, Department of Sociology, University of 
New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131 

Newcomb, Michael D., PhD, Psychology Department, 
University of California, 405 Hilgard, Los Angeles, 
CA 90024 

Getting, E.R., PhD, Psychology Department, Colorado 
State University. Fort Collins, CO 80523 

Okwumabua, Jebose 0.. PhD, Department of Health 
Education. Memphis State University, Memphis, 
TN 38152 

Schinke, Steven P., PhD, Columbia University, School of 
Social Work, 622 West 113th St. New York. NY 
10025 

Trimble, Joseph E.. PhD, Psychology Department, 
Western Washington University, Bellingham, WA 
98225 



Watts, Thomas D., PhD, Professor of Social Work. 
University of Texas, Arlington. TX 

Welte, John W., PhD, Research Institute on Alcoholism. 
New York State Division of Alcoholism and 
Alcohol Abuse. 1021 Main St.. Buffalo. NY 14203 

Wright. Roosevelt. Jr.. PhD. Professor of Social Work, 
University of Texas. Arlington, TX 

Young, Thomas J., PhD, Department of Human 
Development, Haworth Hall, niversity of Kansas, 
Lawrence. KS 66045 

OTHER INFORMATION SOURCES 

For further information contact: 

Center for American Indian and Alaska Native Mental 
Health Research. University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center, 4200 East Ninth Ave., Denver 
CO 80262 

Indian Health Service (IHS), Alcoholism and Substance 
Abuse Programs Branch, RM 6A-53A, 5600 
Rockville. MD 20857 

National Association for Native American Children of 
Alcoholics, Jo Ann Kaufman, Chair, Seattle Indian 
Health Board, P.O. Box 3364. Seattle, WA 981 14 

National Center for American Indian and Alaska Natives 
Mental Health Research, 4200 East Ninth Ave. C- 
249. Denver CO 80262 

Native American Research Center, Native American 
Institute, University of Oklahoma, 555 Constitution 
Ave., Norman, OK 73037 



EMC 



