DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 478 400 



SO 035 097 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Old Elk, Arlene; Stoklas, Jackie 
After the Rain: Rainbows. 

Heard Museum, Phoenix, AZ . 

2001 - 00-00 

102p.; For related units, see SO 035 098-102. 

Heard Museum, 2301 North Central Avenue, Phoenix, AZ 85004- 
1323. Tel: 602-252-8344; e-mail: education0heard.org. For 
full text : http: // www.heard.org/rain/rainbows/rainbows . pdf . 
Guides - Classroom - Teacher (052) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. 

Art Activities; Community Resources; ^Cultural Context; 
Educational Facilities; ^Integrated Curriculum; 
Interdisciplinary Approach; Language Arts; Mathematics; 
^Museums; Primary Education; Primary Sources; Sciences; Skill 
Development; Student Educational Objectives; ^Thematic 
Approach 

Native Americans; ^Rain; Rainbows; United States (Southwest) 



ABSTRACT 

The Heard Museum (Phoenix, Arizona) has developed and updated 
an integrated curriculum for use in grades K-3. The goals,^ for this curriculum 
are ^to: (1) share museum resources with schools; (2) promote cross-cultural 

understanding, through a focus on rain, a universal requirement for life; (3) 
help students understand that Native Americans are contemporary people 
maintaining identity and values in the modern world; (4) develop an awareness 
of the varied expressions of rain in the art, literature, and customs of the 
native people of the greater southwest; and (5) use culturally specific 
materials as a vehicle for developing essential skills, especially as they 
relate to the Arizona Student Assessment Program. The curriculum may be used 
in any order. This unit contains: (1) art prints of artifacts in the Heard 

Museum collection related to rain; (2) specific cultural information and 
materials relating to a particular Native American tribe or nation featured 
through the art prints this cultural information is the basis for some of the 
lessons in mathematics, science, and language skills; (3) mathematics lessons 
with a special emphasis on measuring and comparing; (4) science lessons, 
usually hands-on .or observational units; (5) language skills, including 
reading, listening comprehension, writing, vocabulary, and poetry skills; and 
(6) art projects. (BT) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



ED 478 400 



After the Rain: 



Heard Museum 
2301 North Central Avenue 
Phoenix, Arizona 35004-1323 



http://www.heard.org/rain/rain pdf main.html 



oi 

! 

inj 

CO| 

o: 

j 



ERIC 



Updated 2001 



'SIST COPY AVAIUBLi 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 






TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



V 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

H This document has been reproduced as 
- received from the person or organization 
originatinr^) 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
V document do not necessarily represent 



R 

A 

I 

N 

B 

0 

W 

S 




Introduction 



The Heard Museum has developed this integrated curriculum for use in schools in grades K 
through 3. The overriding goals for this program are to: 

• 1. Share museum resources with schools; 

• 2. Promote cross-cultural understanding through a focus on rain, a universal requirement 
for life on earth; 

• 3. Help students to imderstand that Native Americans are contemporary people 
maintaining identity and values in the modem world; 

• 4. Develop an awareness of the varied expressions of rain in the art, literature and 
customs of the native peoples of the Greater Southwest; 

• 5. Use culturally specific materials as a vehicle for developing essential skills, especially 
as they relate to the Arizona Student Assessment Program. 

This curriculum is divided into six imits that can be used in any order. 

Each unit contains: 

• 1. Art Prints of artifacts in the Heard Museum collection related to rain. While these 
prints are used for art history and aesthetics lessons, these artifacts are also used to begin 
lessons in math, science and language skills. 

• 2. Speciflc cultural information and materials relating to a particular Native American 
tribe or nation featured through the art prints. This information includes a map, text from 
the RAIN exhibit applicable to the people, and other information of special interest to 
children. This cultural information is the basis for some of the lessons in math, science 
and language skills. 

• 3. Math lessons with a special emphasis on measuring and comparing. 

• 4. Science lessons, usually hands-on or observational units. 

• 5. Language skills, including reading, listening comprehension, writing, vocabulary and 
poetry skills. 

• 6. Art projects 



This K-3 curriculum was developed teachers by Arlene Old Elk (Dine') and Jackie Stoklas 
during a year-long residency at the Heard Museum, made possible by the Lila Wallace-Readers 
Digest Museum Accessibility Fimd. Additional information was developed by the Heard 
Museum Education Department staff. 



O 

ERIC 



3 



Rain 



The Southwest United States and Northwest Mexico exist in a rain shadow cast by mountain 
ranges to the west. Rainfall is light and undependable. There are two rainy seasons: summer and 
winter. Often, summer rains are brief and highly localized, as clouds suddenly boil up fi'om the 
south in the afternoon and early evening. Winter storms come fi'om the Pacific Ocean and may 
arrive in waves, soaking the ground. In higher elevations, the rain becomes snow. In between 
these two seasons are dry periods, when great care must be taken to ensure life and growth until 
the next rain. 

The indigenous people of the Southwest welcome rain into their lives and land, praying for the 
blessing of rain through a variety of ceremonies and creative expressions. Many expressions of 
rain and water focus on rain's coimection to making life and growth possible. Expressions may 
be enduring, such as embroidered figures on a ceremonial garment. Some are intended to be 
temporary, such as body paint on a ceremonial participant or the pigments of a sand painting. 
Other expressions take the form of music, song, oratory, poetry, and prayer. 

For all of the cultures in this exhibit, rain has deep meanings that reflect a culture's unique 
experience with the universe. This deep spiritual relationship is far fi'om the stereotype of the 
"Indian Rain Dance", or feeble jokes suggesting a superficial and simplistic magic. 

As you look at specific designs or symbols, please remember that they are part of a whole and 
have meaning as part of that whole. Expressions of rain span centuries. Some of the forms 
change, but the intent of people to bring the blessings that come fi'om rain into their lives and the 
world remains unchanged. 



ERIC 



u ■ 



4 







Dawn's Light, Day Light, Night Light 



Activity: Multi-media art project 

Focus Activity: Look again at the 
painting by Mary Morez (Dine) and 
review the discussion about the 
work with your class. 

Outcomes: Students will 
experience creating a textured 
background. 



Vocabulary: texture, dawn, collage 
Materials: ’"paper, ""paint, ’"materials for collage 
Suggested Criteria: 

1) Only one color may be painted onto each sheet of colored paper. 

2) Students must use a different technique on each paper. 

3) The image must fit the mood created by the backgroimd. 

Procedure: 

1) Discuss the way Mary Morez created dawn's light using two colors. 

2) Ask students how the painting would be different if she had used only yellow 
paint to suggest dawn. 

3) Give students an opportunity to add paint to colored paper by spattering one, 
dripping one, and painting patches on a third. 

4) When the paint has dried, place some examples in the chalk tray and discuss 
them. If students need scaffolding ask them: 

• Which paper makes you feel cheerful? (sad?, angry?, confused? . . . ) 

• Which paper looks like morning? (nighttime?, a stormy day?) 

• (Holding one) What would you put on this backgroimd? 





5) Tell students they need to choose one of their backgrounds for a picture. 

6) If collage is a new art form demonstrate how to cut or tear the forms for the 
collage image. Remember the product will be better if students have pictures to 
look at. A picture dictionary is a good way for students to have access to pictures. 



Student Assessment: This activity is a good one for discussion. Students can share 
tips they've discovered. Have them share some things they especially like about their 
own or someone else's artwork. Ask who has ideas for future products using this 
technique. 

Teacher Assessment: 

1) Was the image appropriate for the mood of the background? 

2) Did the student follow the stated criteria? 

3) Did the student discuss the artwork including ideas about the effect of the 
texture and why the image was chosen? 



lERiq 



6 



Mosaic Art Technique 

Activity: Students will create an 
image by inlaying paper or foam pad 
pieces into a background. 

Focus Activity: Discuss the photo 
reproduction of Leo Poblano's 
"Emblem of the Bow Priest Society." 

Be sure the students realize that a 
portion of the shell has been 
removed so that the other materials 
could be set down into it to form the 
Knife-Wing Bird. 

Outcomes: Students will experience inlay using tag board and paper scraps (or foam 
pad pieces). 

Vocabulary: inlaid, mosaic, Knife-Wing Bird, emblem 
Materials: 

• Option A: "'tag board, "'paper scraps, photo-reproduction of "The Emblem of 
,the Bow Priest Society", "'glue, "'pencils, "'scissors, "'newspaper 

• Option B: "'foam pad pieces in a variety of colors, photo-reproduction of "The 
Emblem of the Bow Priest Society", "'glue, "'pencils, "'scissors, "'newspaper 

Suggested Criteria: 

1) Inlay materials may not lap over the frame. 

2) All of the interior of the cut out must be filled. 

3) Glue must not drop over the sides. 

Procedure: 

1) Have students fold a sheet of newsprint into quarters. 

2) Direct students to make four different designs that could be used for inlay. 

Remind them to limit the number of details. 

3) After students have made the four designs direct them to choose one for an inlay 
project. 

BIST COPY AVAILABLE 




7 




4) Students will draw the perimeter of the inlay onto the background piece (tag 
board or plastic). 

5) Students cut the perimeter of the image out, leaving a piece that looks like a 
stencil. 

6) The background piece needs to be glued to another piece that is cut the same 
shape. 

7) Students can use the piece they have cut out of the background piece to trace the 
shapes they wish to inlay on the colored paper or other colors of foam pad. 



Assessment: Did students follow the stated criteria? 

Extension: A pin or tie tack base can be glued to the back of the plastic foam design 
and given as a gift. 



best COFT AVAItABIiE 



8 



Paper Weaving: A Rainbow Mat 

Activity: Students will weave mats using paper. 

Focus Activity: 

• Discuss the sequence of colors used by all the artists for making rainbows. 

• Discuss how some artists use a white or black line to separate the colors in 
their rainbows. 

• Look at the Dine dye chart (see Cultural section) and discuss how a weaver 
gets her colors. 

• Talk about weaving a rainbow. 

Vocabulary: Over, under, weave, alternate, opposite (advanced students symmetry) 
Materials: 

• *One large sheet (11 "x 17") of construction paper per student (black or white 
is best). 

• *Construction paper weaving strips in rainbow colors (1" wide x 17" long) 

• *Rulers, *pencils, *scissors, *glue 

Procedure: 

1. Fold the base paper in half, forming a rectangle 17" x 5.5". 

2. Using a ruler and pencil, draw lines from the fold to the outer edge. Stop the 
lines one inch from the edge. The lines should be one inch apart. 

3. Cut along the lines from the fold to the edge. Remember to stop the cut one inch 
from the open edge. Then place the paper flat on the table. 

4. Demonstrate the over-under weaving process by weaving in the cut strips. 

Select colors so that the weaving will look like a rainbow. 

5. A drop of glue can be placed at the ends to hold the weaving stable. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



1 . 



9 



I ii n ^ 

■0 la IB m PI I 



Pi ' m P p 'p 



I 1 
I I 
I I 



Cut paper at one inch intervals. Then, 




P P P P P 

P*P*P*P*P*P 

p*p*p*p*p*ffi 



Glue ends. 



weave in one inch strips of another color. 

Assessment: 

Was the student able to weave accurately? 

Was the student able to recognize mistakes? 

Extension: If laminating is available, mats can be laminated and given as gifts. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



10 





The Navajo Emerge 

Dine (din-EH) is the name the Navajo people call themselves. It means "The People." 
The Navajo have their own history and traditional views about how they came to live 
where they do. 

Today, many young Navajo children learn their history from their elders. The history 
they learn is more than lists of dates and events. To Dine, history means learning about 
relationships between people. It means learning about Navajo values and proper ways 
to act. And it means understanding how certain things came to be in the world. 

The Navajo cannot say just when the first people came to live in the land they call 
Dinetah {din-EH-tah). Dinetah, the Navajo homeland, is bounded by four sacred 
mountains. Each is marked by a beautiful jewel. To the east, Blanca Peak wears white 
shell. To the south, Mt. Taylor wears turquoise. The San Francisco Peaks to the west 
wear abalone shell. The La Plata Mountains to the north wear black obsidian. These 
moimtains can be seen on a map that shows Arizona, New Mexico and Colorado. The 
beautiful jewels can be seen in many pieces of Navajo jewelry. 

Dine say that the mountains were created by First Man and First Woman, Holy People 
of the Dine. First Man and First Woman and other Holy People made fire and 
designed the first hogan. In time. Night and Day, and the Sun, Moon and Stars were 
created. The Seasons and Harvests were provided. Sickness, death and other 
frightening things that are part of our lives are also described in Navajo history. Songs 
and prayers of the first people are still used by the Navajo as reminders of the earliest 
times. 

One morning at dawn. First Man and First Woman heard a baby cry. They searched 
and foimd a baby girl. They named her Changing Woman. They loved her and raised 
this child with care. As First Man and First Woman cared for their child, so do Navajo 
people care for their children today. 

According to the Navajo, Changing Woman's own children. Monster Slayer and Child 
Bom of Water, destroyed many dangerous creatures on Earth. Changing Woman 
taught many things to the animal beings that lived between the four sacred mountains. 
Finally, she went far away to the West to live with the Sun. But before she went, she 
created the first four Navajo clans from the skin of her own body. These first people 
returned to Dinetah. There, the Navajo people followed the teachings of the Holy 
People. They have increased and prospered. 



11 






Dine Children 



Children are dearly loved among the Dine. The family and the hogan are the centers of 
Dine life. When a child is bom, there is much cause for celebration of new life in the 
family. Relatives and friends join in a very special blessing ceremony called Hozho 
(Hoh-JOH) before the baby is bom. Hozho is the Din6 belief of living in harmony and 
respect with the natural, spiritual, and social worlds. The baby is blessed and wished a 
long and happy life. 

With much love and pride, the father makes an elaborate cradleboard for the new 
baby. The cradleboard did not originate with the Din6. They borrowed the idea from 
the Pueblo people and made it a part of Din^ life. The cradleboard is fashioned from 
two boards laced together with an attached foot rest. At the top, an arched wooden 
bow is placed to serve as protection if the baby falls over. A cloth is attached to the top 
and rests on the bow. This cloth can cover the whole cradle, keeping out light, flies, 
and harsh weather. A piece of turquoise bead is usually placed on the cradleboard for a 
boy and a white shell for a girl. A pouch may be found on the cradleboard, containing 
pollen or herbs for protection. 

The maternal grandparents are very important as they help in rearing and instmcting 
the child on Din6 values, proper behavior, clan relationships, and the oral tradition of 
the emergence of Din^ people. Din6 children are seldom punished. Parents lavish 
much love and affection on the children, often indulging their whims. Children are 
seldom permitted to cry, especially the last-bom. A considerable freedom of action is 
allowed, but the child knows the limits. Courtesy and respect to elders and parents, 
and obedience are strictly enforced. 

Growing up Din6 means receiving instmctions all through childhood, and learning 
through doing and observing. Important elements are taught by Din6 parents to their 
children. Din6 children are extremely close and affectionate with their parents and 
siblings. They share a home in proximity with one another, contributing and working 
together, and sharing laughter in good times and tears in bad times. 

The Din6 child is taught to know and respect Din6 beliefs and his or her relationship 
to the Holy People. Respect for parents is a part of life, like breathing. Sometimes 
parents use storytelling to instmct the children, pointing out the moralities. Not all 
Din6 children are instmcted, disciplined, and trained in the same way. Like other 
American parents, there are important differences among Din6 parents and 
grandparents. 

Din6 children are taught about food. They are taught how to obtain, prepare, and use 
the food. It's stressed that food should not be wasted but should always be offered to 
fnends and strangers. Accumulation of too much of anything is not good. Moderation 
in all things is stressed for balance in Bind life. 



12 





Din6 children are taught about taboos that deal with the proper behavior of children. 
Taboos are places, things, or actions that are filled with negative power and, therefore, 
must be avoided. Many of these taboos are simply common sense. Others are 
indications of the Din6 respect for nature and life. Some taboos originated in sacred 
stories and some are part of healing ceremonies. There is no Din6 word for taboos. 
The word Baahazidii (Bah-HA-zidy) is sometimes used, meaning feared, injurious, or 
dangerous. 



Baahazidii 



1 . Don't point at a rainbow with your fingers. Your fingers will get sores and drop off. 
Use your thumb. 

2. Don't look at the sun when it dies (eclipse). You will go blind. 

3. Don't use partially burned wood. Lightning may have struck the tree. It will cause 
illness or bad luck. 

4. Don't ride a horse during a storm. You'll get struck by lightning. 

5. Don't harm or kill homed toads. They are grandfathers who guard arrowheads. 
You'll have stomach-related problems. 

6. Don't say shush (bear) in the mountains. An unfriendly bear will come to you. 

Children are encouraged to participate in family chores and other affairs. It's not 
unusual for a family to give a child a lamb for a pet. The child is expected to care for 
the animal and assume all responsibilities of a sheep owner. A Din6 child is expected 
to contribute a gift for ceremonial feasts and other celebrations. 

Life for the Din6 children isn't all work. After the chores are done, children play 
games, ride bicycles, play video games, see movies, swim, and attend social and 
ceremonial affairs, such as rodeos and pow-wows with their families. 

Din6 children are given war names by their parents. These names are considered 
private property and are not used to address or identify a person when talking. In 
everyday conversation, Din6 refer to each other by precise kinship terms rather than 
by names. Nicknames are given, possibly earned over several years. A girl might be 
given the name Nazbah, [NAAZ-bah] (One Who Went to War), but might actually be 
called Zaadha'la'ni [zaad-hah-LANNl] (One Who Talks Too Much) for being lively 
and outgoing. Later on, as the girl grows older into womanhood, she may be called 
Olt'a'i bi'tsi' [o/-t/e-5/7'-5e/?](Daughter of One Who Can Read), but never in her 
presence because it's considered bad manners. Din6 people today haven't a problem 
saying their own names but traditionally, one is not suppose to repeat one's own name 
because it's bad luck. Children are teased by uncles and grandparents that their ears 
will dry up and fall off if they say their own names. 



BEST 



COPY 



AVAILABLE 



13 



Celebration 



J 



A baby's first laugh is considered very important in the first year of the child's life. 
Families consider it so important that they have a celebration for this happy event. 
Families and close friends are invited to come and celebrate a baby's first laugh. The 
father of the child usually fixes a special mixture of salt in a ceremonial basket to 
distribute to guests. The mother of the infant prepare other foods to be served and 
older sisters and/or aunts prepare goodies to be distributed to guests at this special 
celebration. In the past, roasted pifion nuts, fresh fruits, baked bread or tortillas were 
distributed to guests. Currently, goodies include candies, fresh fruit, and salted nuts 
which are distributed to guests in paper bags. The baby is usually dressed in his or her 
best outfit which the mother has made days before the celebration takes place. At this 
time, the grandparents of the infant can present a gift to their new grandchild. This gift 
can be a name, or something to hang from the baby's cradle board: a turquoise stone 
for a boy or a white shell for a girl. Sometimes the gifts are elaborate, like a turquoise 
and silver bracelet. It's a great time for a family to get together so that relatives and 
close friends can see the newborn infant. After everyone has something to eat, the 
children play together and the adults have a chance to visit and exchange local news. 
This is a good time for cousins to bond and form good relationships. Children are very 
important to Din6 families.»A family is considered to be wealthy if they have many 
children. 

Rain in Life 

Living on the Colorado Plateau, between the four sacred mountains. Dine are in a 
place shaped by water and wind into fantastic shapes. The area has a variety of 
environments. Lower elevations of around 5,000 feet may receive 8 inches of 
precipitation a year, while the Chuska Mountains at 8,000 feet may receive 20 to 25 
inches annually. 



Average Annual Inches of Rainfall 




Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. 



H Navajo Reservation Average Annual Rainfall Statistics 

Although it snows in winter, the Rocky Mountains block Canadian air masses, and the 
presence of moisture trapping mountains can make this region drier than the desert in 
winter. When rains come with thunder, lightning and wind, they are male rains. The 
steady, quiet rain is female rain Within one storm, both kinds of rain may fall. 




14 



Rain in Ceremony 

The concepts of male and female rain reflect the duality and balance that is 
fundamental to the Dine. Aspects of male and female are throughout the natural and 
spiritual world of the Dine: present in animals, people, and deities, as well as in 
lightning, mountains, hooghans, and rainbows. 

Water sprinkler, a deity of celestial waters, makes rain and is the water carrier in the 
Nightway Ceremony, which lasts for nine days and includes Yeii Bicheii Dances to 
which the public may come. It is a late autumn ceremony, done for healing, after the 
thunder and lightning stop, at the end of the growing season. Rain is a part of the 
ceremony because it is a fundamental part of life's balance. In the Nightway 
Ceremony, Water Sprinkler recreates and depicts the forces of rain in nature. His role 
in the ceremony is also that of a clown, one who makes people happy and who, by 
extension, represents the rain itself, a phenomenon that makes people happy. 



Expressions of Rain 

Expressions of rain in ceremony are reconstruction of nature and of the universe. For 
Dine artist Joe Ben, baskets of the "wedding basket" design, used in a wedding or 
healing ceremony, symbolically create a sense of time, place and the environment. 
They provide a foundation for the ceremony. Ceramic water drums are also a part of 
the rain imagery of ceremony, as are shell beads on necklaces and bandoliers. 
Lightning and rainbow designs are painted on ceremonial rattles. Necklaces of 
turquoise, abalone, white shell and jet contain stones that are used in most Dine rituals, 
with turquoise a central ingredient in prayer offerings for rain. 

Rain is integrated with the origins of weaving that include legends of Spider Woman. 
In Dine legend, the spindles used by Spider Woman in teaching the Dine to spin were 
made of zigzag, flash and sheet lightning, with the fourth spindle made of a rain 
streamer. The textiles that are sand painting designs and the depictions of Yeii Bicheii 
ceremonies have their links to rain through the ceremonies they represent. 



The Dine Today 



Today, the largest Indian tribe in the United States is the Din6 Nation with 
approximately 200,000 enrolled members and 25,000 square miles of land. Many of 
the people still live on the reservation, that is, land set aside by the United States 
government for Indian use. Some Din6 live off the reservation in cities and towns in 
different parts of the country, but Din^tah is always home. The Din6 reservation is 
located in northern Arizona and the four comers area of Arizona, Utah, Colorado and 
New Mexico. 







We are all of the five-fingered race, the human race. In some ways, we are all alike, 
but our lives can be very different because of where we live and the environment we 
live in. We speak a different language, dress differently, have a different religion, eat 
different foods and live in different shelters. 

Din^tah, in the high desert of the Colorado Plateau, can be very hot and dry in the 
summer and bitterly cold in the winter. Din6 have to build homes that will reflect the 
summer heat and keep the home cool in the summer. A good shelter also keeps out the 
cold wind and snow in the winter. Din6 live in hogans, roimd-shaped shelters made of 
cedar or pine logs with mud-earth filling in the cracks. Every Din6 hogan faces east to 
pay respect to Father Sim, a Din6 deity. Din6 offer prayers before sunrise for the 
world and for themselves, and give humble thanksgiving to the creator. They ask the 
Great Spirit to help them walk in beauty. The hogan is more than just a place to eat 
and sleep. It is the center of Din6 family life and is considered to be a gift fi'om the 
Holy People. It is here that tradition, religious teachings and social organizations are 
taught from birth. 

There are two main types of hogan dwellings. The fork stick hogan is the male hogan 
mainly used for ceremonies. The male hogan is patterned after the tacheeh {tah- 
CHAY), the sweat bath hogan. The second type of hogan is the walled- logs or crib 
hogan. This hogan is considered the female hogan because it resembles the flared skirt 
of the Din6 woman. It is identified with the woman because of the various household 
utensils and other items that belong to the woman into whose care the hogan is given. 

Traditionally, the hogan didn't have windows, only a smoke-hole at the center-top of 
the structure and the door. Today, you can find furniture, appliances and even a 
televisions set in some hogans. There is usually a permanent homestead where corrals, 
storage dugouts or hogans and summer ramadas are built for sleeping and cooking 
outdoors. 



BEST COPY AVAIiABLE 



IB 



Nearby, usually out of sight behind a hill, is a sweat house, built like a miniature 
forked hogan. The tacheeh serves as a bath house. Rituals are conducted in this sweat 
house, with prayers and chants to cleanse the mind and body in order to get back into 
harmony with life. After a sweat bath, one may plunge into cold water and then roll in 
the snow or in dry sand to dry off 

Questions and Answers about the Dine 

How did some of the early Spanish missionaries and explorers describe the 
Navajo people? 

• The Navajo people were described as hunters and gatherers who did little 
farming. 

• The missionaries also wrote that the Navajo traded with other groups of 
Indians such as the Pueblo peoples who lived nearby. 

What was Navajo life like in the 1600s? 

• Family was the center of Navajo life. Life centered on the home and the home 
centered on the woman. All property belonged to the woman of the family. 

• All members of the family shared the daily work of caring for the animals, the 
farmed fields, the home and the daily needs of the family. 

• Families were very close and closeness of relationships gave the people a sense 
of well-being. 

How did the arrival of the Spanish explorers cause changes in the Navajo way of 
life? 

• The Europeans imposed many elements of their culture on the Navajos and 
other Native peoples. Some of the changes improved Navajo life and were 
welcome. Other changes were not regarded as beneficial such as slavery, style 
of government and religion. 

What are some of the elements of Spanish culture that were adopted by the 
Navajo? 

• Raising sheep, goats and horses; growing new crops; and the use of metal tools 
and containers. Sheep became not only a new source of food, but a source of 
wool used to make clothes and blankets. 

• While the Navajos learned silversmithing from the Mexicans, it was the 
Spaniards who introduced the Navajo to the use of metals. 

• The design of the "squash blossom" used in necklaces seems to be of Spanish 
origin also. 



EKIC 



17 



What did the Navajo learn from the Mexicans? 

• They learned the techniques of making silver jewelry and ornaments. 
Remember that the Navajo had already learned the use of metals in jewelry 
from the Spanish. Then, from the Mexicans, they learned techniques for 
making silver jewelry. 

What was life like for the Navajo people in the 1800s? 

• The political changes in Spain, Mexico and the United States affected life for 
many groups living in the Southwest, and the Navajo were no exception. 

• The different governments competed for the land in the Southwest, and 
pressures to conform to different ways of life were placed on the Navajo and 
other native residents. 

• In 1 864, the Navajo were forced by the United States government to leave their 
homes and walk to Bosque Redondo in New Mexico. 

Why did the United States government force the Navajo people to take the "long 
walk?" 



• The government evidently wanted to remove the Navajo from their lands so 
that non-Indian settlers could move in. 

What happened to the Navajo people once they were at Bosque Redondo? 

• The sheep herds and the fields they left behind were destroyed. The Navajo 
people were imprisoned for four years. Many of them died from sickness and 
starvation. 

In 1868, after four years at Bosque Redondo, the Navajo people were freed. What 

happened then? 

• They were allowed to move to an area of land that had been defined for them. 
This new reservation included only 10% of the land the Navajo had originally 
occupied. 

Has life changed for the Navajo since their return from Bosque Redondo? How? 

• Yes. Although the federal government provided new livestock to every Navajo 
family, times have changed. The economy on the reservation shifted away 
from family self-sufficiency. Development of industry and the production of 
goods for the American marketplace, satisfying tourists' demand for Navajo 
arts and crafts, have caused changes. 



18 



• The government, under the terms of the treaty, agreed to provide health care 
and schools for the education of the Navajo children. Schools have been 
established on and off the reservation to make equally available the benefits of 
American society to all Americans. 

• Today, life for the Navajo is a blend of old and new. 

Do Navajo people still live in traditional hogans? 

• Some people do and some don't. Navajo homes can be foimd with both old and 
new styles of architecture. Hogans are built and lived in while other styles of 
homes are constructed nearby by some. Hogans are particularly important for 
the maintenance of the Navajo religion. 

• Luxuries and modem technology available to all Americans, such as television 
and telephones, are also to be foimd in many parts of the Navajo reservation. 

Do the Navajo still use horses to get around? 

• Cars and trucks have replaced the horse as the principal form of transportation. 
However, many Navajo people still own horses, which they care for with pride. 
For those who care for sheep, horses are often an efficient way to get around. 

How is the Navajo tribe governed? 

• Since the 1920s, the Navajo have had a tribal council that helps establish the 
mles, procedures and laws by which the tribal members live. The Council 
includes representatives from different reservation districts. 

• An elected Tribal Chairman heads the Navajo Nation. Its capital is located at 
Window Rock, Arizona. 

How has the Navajo economy changed since the 1800s? 

• Fewer families are fully dependent upon their animals and summer harvests for 
survival. Many Navajos go to work each day in exchange for wages. Others 
work in the production of arts and crafts to be sold to both Navajos and non- 
Navajos. 

Is the production of arts and crafts important to the tribal economy? 

• Yes. For many families, it can be the only source of income. 

• The Navajo Tribal Council is encouraging tribal members to pursue the arts. 
Through art, Navajo artists can preserve respected traditions. 



19 






What's the market for Navajo arts and crafts today? 

• Navajo arts are widely sold and appreciated by the greater society. The 
creation of Navajo art and craft objects requires long hours of work by very 
skillful artists. Most people are not aware of just how many hours it takes to 
make a small rug, for example. They complain that the prices are "too high." 
This situation has prompted non-Navajos to start making imitations of Navajo 
products and to sell them for a lower price. 

How does that effect the Navajo economy? 

• Sometimes Navajo artists cannot compete with non-Indians who make and sell 
so-called "Indian Art." This competition makes life very difficult for Indians 
who depend on their art for income. 

What can be done to change this situation? 

• (Answers will vary. Let students come up with solutions.) 



2D 



NAVAJO DYE CHART: 

One Way to Make a Rainbow 



Remind the students that they have learned that the Navajos are well known for their 
arts. They are known especially for their textiles. Textiles and other arts are not made 
just because they are useful objects or because they can be sold to non-Indians. Navajo 
arts are an expression of the self, expression of the things the artist knows and 
appreciates about his or her world. 

Navajo weavers, for example, have said that when they are in a bad or frustrated 
mood, they should not weave. To do so would be to put those bad feelings into their 
work. 

Show the Navajo Dye Chart to the students. Tell them that this chart includes some of 
the elements from nature that Navajos use in their textiles. 

This chart brings together samples of natural coloring materials in raw form with yams 
that have been dyed with those of natural materials. The good things in life — gifts of 
Mother Earth, sheep (wool) and the act of creative thought as exemplified by 
weavings. 

Ask the students to look at it and think about any qualities that make one think of good 
feelings, nature, harmony, beauty, and peace. 

from-. NATIVE PEOPLES OF THE SOUTHWEST: A CURRICULUM, LEVEL 6, 
DINE, published by the Heard Museum and available through Cloud Associates, 
(602) 866-7820 or (800)888-7820. 



ERIC 



21 




Woven With Love 

Find the images from the coloring book, Woven with Love , published by the Heard 
Museum. The pictures and text explain the process for weaving a Navajo rug, show 
some designs, and demonstrate how the textiles were and are used. There are also 
some pages which encourage the students to create their own rug designs. 

You are invited to duplicate the images for each student so that each child can make a 
booklet. The master images are numbered on the reverse side should you need to 
reestablish the sequence. 

Navajo Wearing Blankets 

Over 100 years ago, Navajo women wove blankets that were used as clothing. These 
blankets had wonderful colors and designs. The blankets showed the love and care the 
weaver felt for her work and the people who would wear her blankets. Let's learn more 
about these special Navajo blankets that were WOVEN WITH LOVE (Children's 
illustrated versions are also available). 

Many years ago, Navajo women made beautiful blankets. Navajo people wore 
blankets the way people wear sweaters today. The blankets were very colorful. Many 
blankets were red, dark blue, white, and brown or gray. How were these blankets 
made? 

Navajo blankets were made from wool. The wool came from sheep. For many years, 
sheep have been important to the Navajo people. When we make something, we need 
tools. Here are the tools the weaver used — shears, wool cards, spindle, weaving fork. 
On the next pages, we will show you how the weaver used these tools. Look for them. 
The weaver needed wool for her blanket. Every winter her sheep grew thick wool 
coats. She used SHEARS that look like big scissors to cut the wool off her sheep. 

After she clipped the wool, the weaver combed the wool with WOOL CARDS to take 
out the tangles. Then she twisted the wool into yam using a SPINDLE. Did you ever 
see a blue sheep? What colors are sheep? Some are white; some are light brown; some 
are dark brown. If a weaver wanted blue or green colors in her blanket, the yam had to 
be cooked in dye to color it. Next the weaver made a loom to weave her blanket on. A 
Navajo loom looks like a wooden frame. Inside the frame, the weaver wrapped strong 
wool yam called the warp. 

The weaver hung the warp yam on the loom. Finally the weaver was ready to sit in 
front of her loom and weave a blanket. She added many rows of yam and used her 
WEAVING FORK to put them tightly together. 



ER|C 



p9 





The weaver thought for a long time about the design she would weave in the blanket. 
She thought about the colors she would use. Here are the designs she thought of — 
Stripes, Crosses, Pictures, Zigzag Lines. Blanket Designs Here are some Navajo 
blanket designs. You can draw one of these designs in the blanket outline, or you can 
imagine your own design. 

Design a Blanket 

More Blanket Designs Here are some more Navajo blanket designs. You can draw 
them or make your own design in the blanket outline. Blankets are IMAGINATION 
CLOTHES. When we wear clothes with sleeves, we don't have many choices about 
how to wear them. But when you wear a blanket, you can imagine lots of different 
ways to wear it. Over one shoulder! Over both shoulders! Across the front of you! 
Blankets can keep your head and hands warm. They are like a hat and gloves and coat 
— all in one! There are so many different ways to wear a blanket. Blankets are really 
IMAGINATION CLOTHES! 

Navajo blankets are special. Navajo women made the blankets with care and love and 
imagination. And people who wore the blankets also could use their imagination. 

Navajo women do not make blankets any more, but they still imagine wonderful 
designs. They put the designs on rugs and other things that decorate the home. They 
also imagine designs for saddle blankets. Navajo weavers still use their imagination to 
make beautiful things. 



23 







Woven with Love 




bj 'i 1. ^ V'" ■ ■ ■ ' I ' ' ■ i ^ ' K 




Navajo Wearing Blankets 

Over 100 years ago, Navajo women 
wove blankets that were used as 
clothing. These blankets had wonderful 
colors and designs. The blankets showed 
the love and care the weaver felt for her 
work and the people who would wear 
her blankets. Let's learn more about 
these special Navajo blankets that were 
WOVEN WITH LOVE. 



Illustrations by Tom DeLapp 
Text by Ann Marshall, Curator of Collections 



ERIC 




Many years ago, Navajo women made 
beautiful blankets. Navajo people wore 
blankets the way people wear sweaters 
today. The blankets were very colorful. 
Many blankets were red, dark blue, 
white, and brown or gray. How were 
these blankets made? 



35 




yiiii 




Navajo blankets were made from wool. 
The wool came from sheep. For many 
years, sheep have been important to the 

Navajo people. 



ERIC 



2B 




When we make something, we need 
tools. Here are the tools the weaver used 
— shears, wool cards, spindle, weaving 
fork. On the next pages, we will show 
you how the weaver used these tools. 

Look for them. 




The weaver needed wool for her blanket. 
Every winter her sheep grew thick wool 
coats. She used SHEARS that look like 
big scissors to cut the wool off her sheep. 





After she clipped the wool, the weaver 
comhed the wool with WOOL CARDS 
to take out the tangles. Then she twisted 
the wool into yarn using a SPINDLE. 



29 






Did you ever see a blue sheep? What 
colors are sheep? Some are white; some 
are light brown; some are dark brown. 
If a weaver wanted blue or green colors 
in her blanket, the yarn had to be 
cooked in dye to color it. 



30 







Next the weaver made a loom to weave 
her blanket on. A Navajo loom looks like 
a wooden frame. Inside the frame, the 
weaver wrapped strong wool yarn called 

the warp. 



31 




Finally the weaver was ready to sit in 
front of her loom and weave a blanket. 
She added many rows of yarn and used 
her WEAVING FORK to put them 
tightly together. 






The weaver thought for a long time 
about the design she would weave in the 
blanket. She thought about the colors 
she would use. Here are the designs she 

thought of — 



34 




STRIPES, CROSSES, PICTURES, 
ZIGZAG LINES 





BLANKET DESIGNS 

Here are some Navajo blanket designs. 
You can draw one of these designs in the 
blanket outline, or you can imagine your 

own design. 




ERIC 



36 



MORE BLANKET DESIGNS 

Here are some Navajo blanket designs. 
You can draw them or make your own 
design in the blanket outline. 




38 



DESIGN A BLANKET 




39 






Blankets are IMAGINATION 
CLOTHES. When we wear clothes with 



sleeves, we don't have many choices 
about how to wear them. But when you 
wear a blanket, you can imagine lots of 
different ways to wear it. 




40 



Over one shoulder! Over both 
shoulders! 





Across the front of you! Blankets can 
keep your head and hands warm. They 
are like a hat and gloves and coat — all 

in one! 




ERIC 



42 




There are so many different ways to 
wear a blanket. Blankets are really 
IMAGINATION CLOTHES! 



Navajo blankets are special. Navajo 
women made the blankets with care and 
love and imagination. And people who 
wore the blankets also could use their 

imagination. 



43 





Navajo women do not make blankets 
any more, but they still imagine 
wonderful designs. They put the designs 
on rugs and other things that decorate 

the home. 



44 




They also imagine designs for saddle 
blankets. Navajo weavers still use their 
imagination to make beautiful things. 



^5 







Important Things 

Activity: Using the model, "The Important Book of the Dine," students will write a 
"book." Depending upon the make-up of the class, students will also learn some words 
in other languages. 

Focus Activity: After having discussed the cultural information on the Dine' provided 
in this kit, read "The Important Book of the Dine." Note: The Dine' words used in this 
text are the same ones highlighted in the activity "Summer Rain" (Personal Narrative 
Grades 2-3). 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will understand more about the Dine and learn some Dine words. 

2. Students will write an "Important Book" about their own lives. 

Materials: 

• "Important Book of the Dine." 

• paper and ’"pencils 

Procedure: 

1. Explain that the "Important Book of the Dine" was written by a Dine girl. In this 
book, she has used words from her language to identify people and things that are 
important to her. 

2. Discuss with the class some things they learned from having this book read to 
them. What things are the same in their experience? What's different? 

3. Start working with the students to write their own book. If you have students in 
the class who speak another language, encourage them to share the words for 
people and things in their language. 

4. Since there are a number of sections or segments in this book, students will 
probably need to spend several days completing this assignment. 

5. With illustrations, these "Important Books" might make excellent gifts for the 
children to give to their parent(s). 

6. If these relatives are not appropriate for a particular child, encourage them to 
transfer the identification to another person: uncle, aunt, cousin, etc.. You might 
also encourage children to complete only a portion of the segments. 



<!B 



ii 





Assessment: 

• Did the students personalize the narrative to their own lives? 

• Did they understand the organization of each "important" narrative? 



47 




The Important Book of the 

Dine 

Shi ma (shi-MAH) 

The important thing about Shi ma (my mother) is that 
she loves you no matter what. 

Shi ma gives you the foods you need to keep 
your bones healthy and strong. 

Shi ma makes nice velveteen shirts and skirts for 
you to wear to nice places. 

Shi ma cooks com tortillas and hominy stew when 
your stomach is hungry. 

Shi ma tucks you in bed at night and sings softly 
before you close your eyes to sleep, 

But the important thing about Shi ma is that 
she loves you no matter what. 



Shi zhe ee (shi-JAH-ah) 

The important thing about a Shi zhe e (my father) 
is that he cares for you. 

Shi zhe e builds the hogan to keep you safe 
and comfortable. 

Shi zhe e makes the Aweetsaal out of cedar or oak 
for the baby to be carried in. 

Shi zhe e builds the corral to keep the cows, horses 
and sheep safe and comfortable. 



-48 



Shi zhe e tends to the crops and makes sure we all get 
plenty to eat. 

But the most important thing about Shi zhe e is that he 
cares for you. 



Shi ma sani (shi-MAH-sana) 

The important thing about Shi ma sani (my grandmother) 
is that she is wise. 

Shi ma sani teaches you to speak the Dine language, the 
names for herbs, plants and special songs to sing while 
weaving a rug, riding a horse, and just being a happy person. 

Shi ma sani teaches you not to hurt animals and insects, that 
animals and insects are our friends. 

It is Shi ma sani who said, according to a Dine legend. 

Spider Woman taught Dine' women how to weave rugs and 
blankets. 

Shi ma sani gives you a goat in the spring 
as a gift for always doing your chores. 

But the important thing about Shi ma sani 
is that she is wise. 



Shi cheii (Shi-CHAY) 

The important thing about a Shi cheii (my grandfather) 
is that he is kind to me. 

Shi cheii is a special teacher, who teaches you to be kind, 
because the holy people are always watching. 



49 



Shi cheii makes sure your goats and lambs will get 
plenty to eat. 

Shi cheii takes care of the horses and cows. 

Shi cheii loves to tell you stories and legends 
around the fire on winter nights. 

But the important thing about Shi cheii is that 
he is kind. 



Shi deezhi (Shi-DAY-zah) 

The most important thing about Shi deezhi (my young sister) 
is that she is your friend and sister at the same time. 

Shi deezhi always needs many questions answered and help 
from you. She needs help reaching things she caimot reach, 
and help getting dressed and fixing her hair. 

Shi deezhi is always proud to wear your clothes and shoes that 
you've outgrown. 

You can play for hours with Shi deezhi. You can play 
together and teach her games like cat's cradle. You can tell 
her secrets and you can be sure the secrets will be kept 
between you two. 

Shi deezhi likes to help you make fiy bread and hominy stew 
and she likes to help you gather com, melons and squash 
from the garden. 

But the most important thing about a Shi deezhi is that she 
is your friend and sister at the same time. 



50 



■riiiiiiiii 



Shi tsili (Shi-TSILA) 

The most important thing about a Shi tsili (my young brother) 
is that he is your brother and friend at the same time. 

You can spend many hours playing with Shi tsili and actually 
have fun playing with a boy's things. Shi tsili helps you to 
mold clay figures into horses, cows and farm animals when 
you play together. Shi tsili lets you borrow his jacket on a 
cold, windy day. 

Shi tsili tells you that you tried your best, even if you didn't 
win a game. He is always your biggest fan. 

You can tell a secret to Shi tsili and know the secret will stay 
between you two. You can fight and quarrel with Shi tsili and 
are friends again soon. 

Shi tsili asks you to teach him how to social dance so that he 
knows what to do when a girl asks him to dance. Shi tsili 
shows you how to ride horses when everyone seems to be 
busy doing other things. 

But the most important thing about a Shi tsili is that 
he is your brother and friend at the same time. 



Aweetsaal (Ah-WEET-sal) 

The important thing about an Aweetsaal (a cradleboard) 
is that it is a safe and comfortable traveling bed. 

A stone of white shell is used to decorate the headboard 
of a baby girl. A stone of turquoise is used to decorate 
the headboard of a baby boy. 

The rainbow arc is to protect the baby. 



Beneath are Mother Earth and Father Sky to watch the 
baby grow healthy and strong. 

The blanket cover is of white clouds. 

Along the sides of the Aweetsaal are loops made of zig-zag lightning, 
Sunbeam straps hold the baby snugly together. 

But the important thing about din Aweetsaal 
is that it is a safe and comfortable traveling bed. 



Mosi Yazhi (Musa-yah-zah) 

The important thing about a mosi yazhi (kitten) 
is that it licks your face to show its love. 

Mosi yazhi has soft, shining fur and likes to purr as it sleeps. 

If you give mosi yazhi milk, it will lick it's paws and 
curl up in your lap. 

Mosi yazhi likes to spend hours looking for mice to play with. 

Mosi yazhi likes to play with Shi ma sani's yam as she sits at 
her loom weaving a mg. 

But the important thing about a mosi yazhi is that 
it will lick your face to show its love. 



Kelchi (Keh-CHAH) 

The important thing about kelchi (moccasins) is that 
they are something to wear on your feet. 

Kelchi are made from soft buckskin and the soles are made 
from cowhide. Kelchi are made to dance in at a social 
dance with a favorite partner. 



52 



Kelchi are made only for you to wear, once they are blessed 
in a Beauty Way Ceremony, no one else should wear them 
except you. 

Kelchi help you to walk in beauty 



. in front of you 

• behind you 

• on top of you 

• beneath you 



All around you, you may walk in beauty. 

But the important thing about kelchi is that 
they are something to wear on your feet. 



Hogan 

The most important thing about a hogan is that it is 
where you live. 

A hogan is where you eat, play and sleep with your family. 

A hogan is round in shape and is made out of logs and mud 
and the door always faces the east to greet the morning sun. 

A hogan must be blessed by an elder before you live in it. 

A hogan is where the family comes together for celebrations, 
for baby's first laugh, a girl coming of age, traditional 
weddings and other important ceremonies. 

But the important thing about a hogan is that it is 
where you live. 



53 



Ts' aa' (Tsah) 

The important thing about a ts' aa' (basket) is that it is used 
for serving traditional food at ceremonies. 

Ts’ aa' is made by women from sumac and mountain 
mahogany and coiled into a plaque. 

Ts' aa' is used for storage of food, nuts, berries and com 
pollen. 

Ts' aa' is used at a Dine wedding ceremony to serve 
traditional food to the bride and groom. 

The design on a ' <3<3 ' represents rain, black clouds and 
mountains. 

But the important thing about a ' <3<3 ' is that it is used for 
serving traditional food at ceremonies. 



Tsedaashjee' (SAY-dash-jay-ee) 

The important thing about tsedaashjee' (grinding stone) is that 
it helps grind corn for tortillas. 

Tsedaashjee ' is something every mother should have in her 
home. 

Tsedaashjee' can be used to grind com, seeds, pinon nuts and 
other foods. 

Tsedaashjee ' can be used to grind plants and herbs and to 
cmsh hard meat. 

A bmsh made out of bent grass goes with the tsedaashjee’ to 
help bmsh the ground material off the stone. 



54 



But the important thing about tsedaashjee ’ is that it helps 
grind com for com tortillas. 



'Asaateeli (Ah-SAH-tee-lah) 

The important thing about 'asaateeli (ceramic pot) is that you 
eat out of it. 

'Asaateeli is made from special clay and baked in an oven to 
make it last and last. 

'Asaateeli is used for storage of seeds and ground com. 

'Asaateeli is used for cooking, storing and serving food. 

'Asaateeli is used in Navajo ceremonies to hold herbs. It is 
used to serve food to the Yei during the Night Chant since 
they only eat food cooked in traditional pots. 

But the important thing about 'asaateeli is that you can eat out 
of it. 



Dine (Din-NEH) 

The important thing about being a Dine 
is Hozho na sha (I walk in beauty). 

The Dine are also called Navajos, a name given to them 
by others a long time ago. 

The Dine live on the Navajo Reservation near the 
four comers area. 

The Dine are proud of their language, legends, songs, 
games and dances. 



55 



The Dine are the largest Native American tribe 
in the United States. 

But the important thing about being a Dine 
is Hozho na sha (I walk in beauty). 






Sim 

Personal Narrative (K-1) 

Activity: Students will write a personal narrative. 

Focus Activity: Read "My Home in Kitsillie." 

Outcomes: 

1) Students will understand that some books are written by the people in them and 
some are written by people who are not in them. 

2) Students will write their own personal narrative. 

Vocabulary: personal, narrative, share, audience 

Materials: "My Home in Kitsillie," *paper, *pencil, *drawing materials 
Procedure: 

1) Explain that "My Home In Kitsillie" is written as a personal narrative. Personal 
narrative means telling about yourself. Remind students that they don't know 
Desiree so she had to explain things that she wouldn't have had to explain to a 
friend. 

2) Ask students to tell what kinds of information Desiree shared in the book. 
(Where she lives, things she likes, family information . . .) 

3) Choose some kinds of information appropriate for the students in yom class. 
(The amoimt and kinds of information are dependent on yom students' interests, 
abilities, and the time you can give to the activity.) 

4) Discuss the idea of audience with your class. Try to find an audience of 
strangers to read your students work ( another class, especially at another school, 
or visitors to the school library). 

5) After you have chosen the kinds of information and students imderstand that 
they are sharing information about themselves with strangers have students write 
their own personal narrative. The procedure you use depends on the writing 
process format normally used in yom classroom. This can be a daily journal 
assignment that is later put together in a published format, or a formal writing 
assignment. 

Assessment: 

• Did students share information necessary for a stranger to understand the 
narrative? 

• Did students write in the first person? 

• Was the narrative an account of the students life or fiction? 



57 



A 



My Home in Kitsillie 

Ya at eeh, my name is Desiree Yazzie. 

My Dine name is Dez. 

My Dine name was given to me by my grandmother. 

My mother's clan is Coyote Pass. 

My father's clan is Bitter Water. 

I live in a community called Kitsillie on the Dine Reservation. 

These are my pets. 

I have a kitten. Her name is Ash. 

I have goats, lambs, and a horse. 

I have to take care of my pets each day. 

I make sure they have water to drink and food to eat. 

I also make sure their homes are clean and safe. 

My goats and lambs were given to me by my grandparents for doing my 
daily chores. 

This is my mother, Dorothy. She takes care of us. 

She fixes my hair each day and helps me get ready for school. 

She is a school administrator. 

This is my father, Wayne. He goes to work each day. 

He is a supervisor with a construction company. 

He has many workers working for him. 

Today, they are repairing a house. 

This is my grandmother, Anna Redhair. 

She makes my skirts and blouses in the style that Dine women wear. 

I like to wear the style of clothing that was worn by my grandmother and her 
grandmothers to social dances and ceremonial events. 

Grandmother Arma also gives me turquoise and silver jewelry to wear with 
my outfit. 

This is my grandfather, Allen Redhair. 

My grandfather is a famous storyteller. 

At night time, I like to sit and listen to Grandfather's winter stories. 

My grandparents live in a Dine style hooghan. 

I live next door to them, I like living near them. 



58 



I go to school at Black Mesa Community School. 

I ride the bus everyday to school. 

This is my classroom teacher, Mr. Don Walker. 

He is helping me with my school work. 

I enjoy doing creative writing on the computer at school. 

In my class, I write stories about my heroes and holidays. 

After school and after my homework is done I have to do my chores. 

I like to help my grandmother with her rug weaving. 

I help her with carding and spinning the wool. 

My grandmother is weaving a beautiful and colorful rug. 

When someone leaves, we say Ha goo nee, which means "I hope we meet 
again in the future". 



Text: Arlene Old Elk 

Thanks go to Desiree Yazzie, her parents Wayne and Dorothy Yazzie, and her 
grandparents Allen and Anna Redhair, of Kitsillie Community, Pinon, Arizona 
for their time and efforts. 

We also thank Desiree Yazzie's teacher, Don Walker and the staff of Black 
Mesa Community School, Pinon, Arizona for their cooperation. 



59 



Personal Narrative / Grades 2-3 

Activity: Reading, analyzing, and writing a personal narrative about rain. 

Focus Activity: Read the book "Summer Rain." The Dine' words used in the text are 
the same ones used in "The Important Book of the Dine'." It may be useful for your 
students to work on the activity "Important Things" either immediately before or 
immediately after this activity. 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will understand the concept "personal narrative." 

2. Students will analyze the kinds of information included in the personal narrative 
"Summer Rain." 

Vocabulary: trotting, tended, artist, patiently, admiringly 
Materials: "Summer Rain" 

* paper and "^pencils 
Procedure: 

1. Read "Summer Rain." 

2. As a class discussion, as a small group activity, or individually, students need to 
analyze the story for words that show thoughts, emotions, actions, sensory details 
(things seen, smelled, heard, etc..) Have the students create a worksheet listing all 
the senses if they are having trouble picking these out of the text. 

3. After completing the worksheet discuss why author Arlene Old Elk (Dine) 
needed to describe what she saw, heard, and smelled. Be sure students understand 
the audience's need for information. 

4. Give the students a "think time" to remember a time when it rained. 

5. Give the students a few minutes to discuss their memories. 

6. Have students organize their thoughts listing a sequence and their impressions. 
Caution them to write only a word or two for each idea — complete sentences often 
inhibit children's writing on the final draft. 

7. Give students time to write a personal narrative about rain. 



ERJC 



Assessment: If carefully supervised, children can help each other assess their work. 
After they listen to a classmate's narrative, have them tell their favorite part (word, 
event, description) and then ask a question. The question will suggest areas of 
confusion or areas where more information would be helpful. 

Extension: Personal narratives do not always need to be "literature." When children 
write an explanation of their involvement of a mishap on the playgroimd, they are 
writing a personal narrative. Diary or joximal entries meant to be shared and field trip 
reports can be written as personal narratives. 



'61 






il 



Personal Narrative 
Older Students 



Activity: Reading a personal narrative about rain, understanding the vocabulary 
words, and using a thesaurus to replace words while keeping the same meaning. 

Focus Activity: Read the book "Summer Rain." The Dine' words used in the text are 
the same ones used in "The Important Book of the Dine'." It may be useful for your 
students to work on the activity "Important Things" either immediately before or 
immediately after this activity. 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will understand the concept "personal narrative." 

2. Students will use a dictionary to discover the meanings of words, and select the 
correct definition based on context. 

3. Students will use a thesaurus to find synonyms for words in the story. 
Materials: 

• "Summer Rain" 

• * paper and ’"pencils 

• ’"dictionary 

• ’"thesaurus 



Procedure: 

1 . Read "Summer Rain." 

2. Discuss with the students how some words have two or more different 
meanings, and may also be different parts of speech. Words that appear in the 
story include: loom, corral, wash, miniature, skin, function, still, show, squash. 

3. Using a dictionary, look up the various meanings and parts of speech. Then, by 
finding the word in the story, decide on the correct meaning and part of speech. 

4. Discuss with the students how some words are different but have the same, or 
almost the same, meaning. Words that can be explored in the text include: quickly, 
instructed, respect, returned, exciting, finally, planned. 



62 



5. Using a thesaurus, look up some synonyms for the words. Then, decide on an 
appropriate word to use. 



Assessment: 

1 . Could the students use the dictionary and thesaurus effectively? 

2. Could the students make appropriate decisions on meaning, parts of speech and 
synonyms? 

Extension: 

• Repeat this exercise using a different story. 

• Have the students repeat this exercise with their own stories written in the 
activity "Hidden Story." 



63 





Summer Rain 

by 

Arlene Old Elk 



The dark clouds moved quickly from different directions covering the blue skies. The 
strong wind swiftly came in, as it moved the branches on the jimiper tree. They 
swayed back and forth, just like, men and women sway back and forth at a summer 
social function. 

The goats and lambs were getting restless. They looked and ran around wildly looking 
for their mothers. Maziyasi, the family kitten, stretched lazily near the loom where she 
was sleeping on a sheep skin. She went outside to join lai chaii, the family dog, who 
was guarding the hogan. They both sniffed the air and couldn't sit still. The horses in 
the corral were neighing and trotting back and forth. The children were playing 
outside on the rocks near by. 

Grandmother y4^z/zaan Ashii (Salt Woman) went outside her hogan and instructed the 
children to come quickly inside the hogan. She said that it was going to rain soon. The 
children went inside the hogan and sat down. Grandmother told them to sit quietly. 

Pretty soon, a female rain started, it was a gentle rain, as it came down softly and 
soaked Mother Earth. Grandmother explained that it was important for everyone to sit 
quietly to show respect for the rain. We sat and listened to the sound of the rain for 
what seemed like a long time. After a few hours, the rain stopped and Grandmother 
said it was time to go outside. As we stepped outside, the earth smelled so good. The 
blue skies returned. The horses had settled and seemed to be in a calmer mood. The 
goats and lambs were kicking and prancing around. They seemed so happy! 

Grandmother was very pleased, since it had been hot and dry all summer. She went 
outside and faced the east and said a prayer of thanks to the rain gods for giving us 
rain. Grandfather was pleased too, he knew the melons, squash, beans and com he 
tended in the garden would bring good food to everyone now. Father and Mother were 
also happy that it rained. It meant that the children would soon be eating healthy fruits 
and vegetables. Mother couldn't wait to start baking bread in her bread house. Right 
away father went to the garden to see how much rain fell on our crops. 

The children were excited! They danced with joy outside. They all knew what they 
wanted to do. They ran as fast as their legs could carry them towards the wash. They 
found the spot where they usually played. They loved to spend hours and hours 
playing there. Today there was wet mud clay to play with. They spent the entire 
afternoon playing, using the mud clay to model people figures and animal figures such 
as horses, cows, dogs, cats and farm animals. There was a village to build, roads to 
build, trees and plants to make. It was always exciting to see what someone else 
created out of the mud clay. 



64 



After we finished, we looked at our works of art to decide who was the most 
outstanding artist. Everything looked so good. It was hard to decide. We simply 
couldn't make up our minds. We quickly ran home to ask Shi-ma (mother) to come 
and look at our art work, but she was too busy nursing her new baby in the awee-tsaal 
singing her a lullaby song. We asked Shi-zhe'e (father), but he was too busy giving 
water to the horses. We couldn't possibly ask Shi-chai (Grandfather), he was too busy 
making sure the crops received plenty of rain water. We finally decided to ask Shi-ma- 
sonnie (Grandmother) to look at our work of art. Of course she was busy weaving her 
rug, but she said she would come with us. We followed Grandmother, making sure not 
to run ahead of her. We got there and she walked back and forth looking at our clay 
village of people and animals. She looked and looked and we patiently watched her 
wrinkled face for any signs of emotion, but she didn't show any. Finally, she said it 
wasn't a good idea to think our work was better than anyone else's. She said each one 
of us were talented and that she was extremely proud of us. That made our hearts 
happy. We were all winners! 

She said she had to get back to her weaving and she left. Slowly, she disappeared over 
the hill. For a long time we sat there admiring our work of art. Then we decided to let 
the sim bake our clay projects and tomorrow we would return and put on the finishing 
touches. There were all kinds of possibilities, we could paint the village and add skirts 
and ruffles to women figures. We still had miniature baskets to weave and a miniature 
loom to set up just like Grandmother's. Yes, we planned to come back the next day. 

What joy the rain can give to everyone, especially the Dine children on a summer 
afternoon. 






ERiC 






xJ 



Special Day 

Activity: Using the model, "Aweetsaal: The Dine' Cradleboard", students will write a 
narrative about an important day in their lives. 

Focus Activity: After discussing the cultural information available in this kit, read 
"Aweetsaal: The DineCradleboard. " Note: The Dine' words used in this text are found 
in "Summer Rain" and "The Important Book of the Dine'. " 

Outcome: 

1 . Students will understand more about the Dine. 

2. Students will write about an important day in their own lives. 

Materials: "Aweetsaal: The DineCradleboard", *paper, *pencils 
Procedure: 

1 . Read aloud the story "Aweetsaal: The DineCradleboard. " 

2. Discuss with the class all the things that Shanabah saw, felt, smelled, and did 
while in her aweetsaal. 

3. Discuss Shanabah's special day. 

4. Ask students to think of a special day in their lives. If there are students from 
different countries and backgrounds in your class, encourage each child to draw on 
something different or unique. 

5. Begin by asking students to start telling about their special day before the day 
happens: what leads up to the day? What happened before that time? 

6. Ask students to share their rough draft with a friend, and then re-write it. 

7. Ask students to read aloud what they have written. 

Assessment: 

• Did students draw on their own lives to write this narrative? 

• Did they tell of the special happening by telling about the events leading up to 
the event? 

Extension: Students could illustrate their special day stories. 



66 



Aweetsaal: The Dine Cradleboard 

by 

Arlene Old Elk 



Desbah is very happy. She is going to have a baby soon. She sings to her baby 
everyday, while she does her daily chores: 

She na sha, She na sha, She na sha, 

Lakai Hozoni la a ya hey na ya 
Aa ha la, Aa ha la, go na sha, 

Aa ha la, Aa ha la, go na sha. 

She na sha. She na sha. She na sha 

Kee, the baby's father, is happy too. He is looking for an oak tree to make the 
aweetsaal. Aweetsaal is a cradleboard that the Dine have used for a long time as a 
baby carrier. Father is thinking happy thoughts while he is busy making the aweetsaal. 

The baby arrives early one summer morning, when the lambs and goats are jumping, 
kicking and prancing around and the flowers are smelling sweetly. 

Kee and Desbah decide to call their baby Shanabah. Desbah proudly puts Shanabah in 
the aweetsaal. Softly she tells her baby: 

The rainbow arch above your head is to protect you. 

Beneath you are Mother Earth and Father Sky 
to watch you grow into a healthy person. 

Straps of lightning hold you tight 
as well as the lace of sunbeam bright. 

Grandmother and grandfather watch proudly as mother puts Shanabah in her new 
aweetsaal. Even masiyazi (kitten) looks on proudly. Shanabah feels so comfortable 
and safe in her snug bed. She can hear her mother's soft voice as she sings a lullaby 
song. Shanabah loves to hear her mother's voice. At bedtime, the only other soimd 
Shanabah hears is the fire crackling in the wood stove. As the warmth of the fire fills 
the hogan, Shanabah falls asleep. 

Shanabah loves her aweetsaal. Sometimes mother stands aweetsaal against the hogan 
so that Shanabah can watch her mother grind com. There is blue com, yellow com, 
red com and white com. They all look colorful in the basket. The basket has a 
beautiful design of clouds, lightning, rain and moimtains. After the com is groimd. 



G7 







Shanabah loves the smell of the com tortillas that her mother is making for diimer. 
When she smells the tortillas, Shanabah knows that father will soon be coming home 
from tending the flock of sheep all day. 

Besides watching mother, Shanabah also loves looking up at the sky through the 
opening in the hogan. She sees clouds moving swiftly by; the blue sky seems so still. 
She hears the wind howling and the dogs barking outside. At night time, Shanabah 
sees the stars dancing in the sky and the big, bright moon looking at her. 

As the days go by, she grows to love her aweetsaal. Mother sometimes takes 
Shanabah outside. She loves to watch her mother work on her loom. It is grandmother 
who tells how Spider Woman taught the Dine' how to weave mgs and blankets. 
Mother works proudly on her loom of many colors: red, gray, white and black. It is a 
beautiful design of lightning and thimder. 

One day, Shanabah and her mother are sitting outside waiting for father. It is a nice 
day. A butterfly flutters by. Shanabah has never seen beautiful colors like that before. 
A rabbit darts out and runs quickly behind a jimiper tree. Shanabah enjoys seeing the 
sights outside. She loves the red mesas near their hogan. All of a sudden as they are 
sitting there, waiting for father to take the sheep in the corral, a little goat starts 
nibbling on Shanabah's ear. At first she smiles. Then —all of a sudden — a giggle 
comes from within her! She laughs and laughs as the goat tickles her. Mother smiles. 
This is Shanabah's first baby laugh. This calls for a celebration! 

All the relatives are invited for the baby's first laugh celebration. It is important that a 
celebration be given so that the baby will not be selfish. Grandmother and mother are 
very busy preparing food to give away to all the people who are coming for the 
celebration. Father prepares the special salt that is part of the give away. 

Finally, the big day comes and Shanabah is dressed in a bright velveteen skirt and 
blouse. The relatives arrive and some of them bring gifts. Grandfather has made 
Shanabah a turquoise bracelet, just big enough to go aroimd her chubby wrist. 
Grandmother gives a gift of turquoise earrings that Shanabah will wear on her first 
birthday. 

Mother helps Shanabah give everyone the salt, food and other goodies. Everyone 
wishes Shanabah a happy and healthy life. Shanabah hears the children talking, 
laughing and playing outside. Everyone has something to eat and has a good time. 

It is a long day for Shanabah. Finally, it is time for everyone to go home. People wave 
good-bye. Shanabah is getting tired. She wishes for the comfort of her aweetsaal to 
hold her tight. Gently, mother wraps Shanabah in her aweetsaal and softly sings the 
lullaby song. After Shanabah goes to sleep, mother gently places aweetsaal down on 
the earth. Masi yazi curls up next to Shanabah. The hogan is quiet and peaceful as the 
sim sets against the red canyons in the west. It has been a very important day for 
Shanabah. 




68 






Card Game 

Activity: Card game with rainbows 

Focus Activity: Look at the art prints and pick out the rainbows. Notice how many 
artists show a rainbow with just a few colors, rather than with all colors. Notice too 
how sometimes there is a line between the colors of the rainbows. This is a kind of 
"short hand" used by the artists to show us a rainbow. 




Outcome: Students will gain experience in counting and addition. 

Materials: 30 rainbow cards (10 with one color; 10 with two colors; 10 with 3 colors) 
Procedure: 

1. Shuffle deck and then place all cards face down, individually, in neat rows. 

2. The first player turns over two cards at random. If the cards match, the player 
keeps the pair. If the cards are not a match, the player turns them back, face down, 
in their same places. 

BEST COPY AVASIABLE 



70 







3. Each player takes a turn until all the cards are paired up and collected. 



4. There is only one try per turn, even if the player is successful in gaining a 
match. 

5. To find who wins the game, add up the rainbows: 

• 1 color rainbow = 1 point 

• 2 color rainbow = 2 points 

• 3 color rainbow = 3 points 



Assessment: How easily could the students add up their scores? 

For Older Students: For additional practice, multiply the points. For example, 1 color 
rainbow = 1 X 35; 2 color rainbow = 2 X 46; 3 color rainbow = 3 X 57. Then add up 
the scores. (Suggestion: the multiplier might be the number of students in the class, or 
the street address of the school.) 



71 










72 




Flying Rainbow 



Activity: Estimating a distance a rainbow will fly; charting actual distance; writing a 
report of the results. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art prints. The rainbows in the art prints are like real 
rainbows: they're never in the same place or direction. Where are the rainbows in the 
prints? North, south, east, west? Up, down, left, right? Around? 




Outcome: Students will estimate, measure, compare and write about the flight of 
their rainbows. 

Materials: 



*duplicate copies of the Rainbow Pattern and Flight Log for each child 

*tag board 

"■pencils 

"■markers in rainbow colors 

"■scissors 

"■tape measure 



ERLC 




Procedure: 



1 . Read the directions for making a flying rainbow with your students. Remind 
them that the design choice is theirs, but it must be made of one or more rainbows 
and it must fly. Be sure to stress the need for writing their name on the rainbow in 
order to avoid confusion during the test flight stage of the experience. Note: 
Rainbows made from the pattern fly better if slightly bent in the center. 

2. The test range needs to be a clear lane with a take-offline. It can be inside or 
out. Explain that the test flight is the most serious step in aircraft design. So that no 
one is distracted there may be no loud noises and no one in the flight lane during 
take-off. Monitor flight time and measurement time so that no one is in the flight 
path during test flights. 

3. Remind students to record all information in their flight log at the appropriate 
time. 

4. There are many possibilities for recording the flight information in graphic 
form. If you are using this experience to test that skill give no help at this point. If 
this is a learning tool, a class discussion of possible graphs or charts could precede 
students making their own. 

5. Before students begin writing their report, review the standards for a good 
report. 



A good report: 

• explain the design of your rainbow including any changes or modifications you 
made to improve its flight. 

• give a summary of your findings during the test flight stage of your experience. 

• give your strategy for estimating flight distances. 

• give suggestions for things you might do differently next time you need to 
estimate distances. 



Assessment: 

• Did students identify a strategy for estimating distances? 

• Did students try different ways of solving flight problems? 

• Were reports of the account clear and logically organized? 



74 



Pattern for Rainbow 




Er|c 75 



This rainbow pattern is provided for those who might wish to use it. You may use any shape as a 
rainbow to fulfill the requirements of this assignment. 



Name 

Date 



Rainbow 
Flight Log 


Estimate 


Flight 

Distance 


) 

i 

I 

Number 

1 

Sentence \ 

\ 

\ 


1 






j 


2 






I 


3 




* 




4 








5 








6 






1 


7 









ERIC 



76 



Stamping Rainbows 

Activity: Estimating "How many rainbows will it take to go from here to there?" 

Focus Activity: Look at the art prints. Compare the rainbows in the prints. Which one 
is longest? shortest? 




Outcome: Students will estimate, count, compare, determine odd or even. 

Materials: Ruler with rainbows on it (1 rainbow = 1") 

Procedure: 

1. Select an item to be "rainbow measured" — a desk, a book, a child's height, etc.. 

2. Have each child estimate the number of rainbows it will take to go that distance. 
Have students write down their guess. 

3. Measure the item. Count the number of rainbows. 



77 







4. Compare the actual number with the estimates. The student with the closest 
estimate wins the game, and gets to select the next item for "rainbow 
measurement." 

Assessment: Did the estimates become more accurate with more measurements? 

Extension: Using the rainbow stamp included in this kit students might make their 
own rainbow rulers." 

For Older Students: Set a number value for each rainbow (for example, one rainbow 
= 2.5 inches or 1.75 inches). After measuring, multiply the number of rainbows by the 
value to arrive at an answer. 

Use the rainbow measuring tape to discover the perimeter of an object, or the 
hypotenuse of a triangle. 



78 



79 








Coiled Basket 





Artist: Unknown 
Culture: Hopi 

Size: Height 1 1 7/8"; Depth 12 3/8" 

Media: Coiled yucca, galletta grass 
Date: 1970s 

Catalogue Number: NA-SW-HO-B-302 
Description: 

Kachina - This Kachina is Kwahu, the Eagle Kachina. 
Rainbow - The rainbow is a symbol of new life. 

Com - Beside Kwahu is an ear of com. 




30 



BEST COPT AVAIMBLE 




Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - curved, straight 
Shape - cylinder, round, flat 
Color - warm neutral, natural, dyed 

Space - discuss use of top-to-bottom, side -to-side, 3-dimensional, 2-dimensional, 
inside, outside 

Texture - rough, coiled, woven 
Art Principle: 

Concept - Balance 

Ask: What parts of this are symmetrical? Is the whole design balanced of unbalanced? 

Cultural Context: 

Hopi villages are built on top of mesas. Each Hopi mesa is home to several different 
villages. Many traditions are shared by all the Hopi villages, but each village has much 
that is uniquely its own. 

The coiled technique used to make this basket is done only at Second Mesa. Galletta 
grass and yucca leaves are bundled together, wound in a flat spiral and entirely 
covered with a yucca thread that also stitches one coil to another. 

The artist, who made this basket, dyed fibers to make the designs on it. The rainbow 
above the Kachina's head is a symbol of new life. The com beside him is and 
important food for the Hopi. 

Hopi com is different than com grown in the grasslands. This is important because 
there is usually only 10 to 13 inches of rain or snow falls each year at Hopi. Hopi com 
grows well with this smaller amount of water. Com grown in the grasslands grows 
best with as much as 20 inches of rainfall a year. 

This Kachina is the Eagle Kachina called Kwahu. He comes to Hopi villages during 
night ceremonies in March. He dances with the motions and cries made by eagles. 

About the time this basket was made, U.S. soldiers were fighting in Vietnam. Neil 
Armstrong had recently been the first man to walk on the moon. And big companies 
were just beginning to use computers. It would be ten more years before computers 
were small enough and inexpensive enough for schools and homes. 



31 



Image for comparison: 

"Emblem of the Bow Priest Society" by Leo Poblano (Zuni Pueblo) 

Questions for comparison: 

Each piece has a rainbow. How are they the same? How are they different? 

Look at the wings on the Knife-Wing Bird and the wings on the eagle. What shape are 
they? Which one has a rough texture? 



,82 





Emblem of the Bow Priest Society 




Artist: Leo Poblano 

Culture: Zuni Pueblo, New Mexico 

Size: Diameter 3 1 1/16"; Height 3 5/16" 

Media: Silver, spiny oyster shell, jet, turquoise, coral, mother of pearl 
Date: 1930s- 1950s 
Catalogue Number: 348S 
Description: 

Knife-Wing Bird - The Knife-Wing Bird is the central figure in the emblem of the 
Bow Priest Society. The Bow Priest Society is the group of people who make the most 
important decision at the Pueblo of Zu-i. 

Rainbow - This is the Knife-Wing Bird's bow. 

Snake - This is the arrow for Knife-Wing Bird. It represents lightning. 

Animal with an arrow - The arrow represents the life or spirit of the animal. 





Headpiece - The Knife-Wing Bird is wearing a cloud-shaped headpiece 
Bird - This bird is the Knife-Wing. 

Vocabulary for the discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - curved, broken, regular, irregular 
Shape - circle, organic, symmetrical, triangle 
Color - even, uneven, bright 

Space - 2-dimensional. Ask students to look from top-to-bottom, side-to-side. 

Texture - surface, smooth, shiny 
Art Principle: 

Concept - movement 

Cultural Context: 

In the late 1800s, Zu-i artists cut and polished colorful stones and shells. They used 
these with silver to make jewelry for their families and neighbors. In 1880, the railroad 
was built through New Mexico and it was easier for people from the East to some to 
Zu-i. It was also easier for store keepers in the West to send things to the East. This 
meant that Easterners learned about the beautiful silver and in-lay jewelry and other 
objects that Zu-i artists were making. They wanted to buy these pieces. Zu-i artists 
began making more and more jewelry and decorative items to sell or trade for things 
they wanted at the trading post. 

In 1918, C.G. Wallace went to work at Zu-i Pueblo. Part of his job as a store keeper 
was to get materials from far away, like spiny oyster shell, mother of pearl, and coral, 
for Zu-i artists. After artists finished making the jewelry and decorative pieces, Mr. 
Wallace sold them to shops in the East. 

C.G. Wallace and Leo Poblano worked together on many pieces of art. Mr. Wallace 
got the materials for Mr. Poblano. Mr. Poblano used them to make beautiful works of 
art which Mr. Wallace, traded or bought from Mr. Poblano and sold. In this way, both 
men made money. 

Image for comparison: 

Kwahu Kachina basket 



84 






■ti 



Questions for comparison: 

Each piece has a rainbow. How are they the same? How are they different? 

Look at the wings on the Knife-Wing Bird and the wings on the eagle. What shape are 
they? Which one has a rough texture? 



,8S 





Artist: Joe Ben, Jr. 
Culture: Din6 (Navajo) 



Size: Width 28"; Height 31 1 1/16" 



Media: Masonite, gesso, azurite, diamond, gold, lapis, coal, hematite, chrysocolla, 
g)T)Sum, sand, sandstone 

Date: 1993 

Catalogue Number: 345-1 



Description: 

Sky - The background of this painting is the sky. In the sky you see crosses and dots, 
these are stars. There is a five-pointed star. 



Sun - The homed-figure on center top is the sun. 





Moon - The sun's light reflects off the moon to the right of the sim. 

Rainbow - Dine do not point at a rainbow with their fingers. This is considered 
disrespectful. You should show respect because the rainbow is a sign of new life. 

Crosses - The crosses are stars. 

Morning Star - The Morning Star is the cross on the left side of the painting. This star 
represents Changing Woman. 

Evening Star - The Evening Star is on the right side. This star represents White Shell 
Woman. 

Pollen Boy - Com Pollen is important in prayer ceremonies. 

Four triangles - The triangles are a bank of clouds. 

Row of diamonds - This is the Milky Way. 

Rectangles - This is a bed of clouds. In the clouds you see rain. Female rain is a soft 
gentle rain. It is represented in white and yellow rain symbols. Male rain is a storm. It 
is represented by blue and black rain symbols. 

Zig-zag - The short zig-zag below the clouds is lightning 

Colors: 

White - White represents dawn and east. 

Blue - Blue represents the blue sky and south. 

Yellow - Yellow represents evening light and west. 

Black - Black represents night and north. 

Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - straight, curved, diagonal, horizontal, vertical, zig-zag, crossed 
Shape - illusion, depth, overlapping, enclosed 
Color - warm, cool, neutral, contrast 
Texture - real, rough, shiny 



87 



Art Principles: 

Concept: Contrast 

Ask: What do you see first? Why do you think you saw that first? (Contrast and 
position on the page are topics for discussion if the answer is the four rectangles.) 

Cultural Context: 

1993 was a very rainy year in Arizona. It was so rainy that many rivers flooded. It was 
also a year of firsts. It was the first year William Clinton was president of the United 
States. It was the first year of Peterson Zah's second term as tribal chairman of the 
Navajo Nation. It was the year grocery stores were being built in remote areas of the 
reservation. 

Joe Ben, Jr. painted "Rain in the Line of the Sky" in 1993. He wanted to show the sky 
because it tells us about rain. It tells us how much it will rain and when it will rain. 

Mr. Ben was raised on the Navajo Nation where he learned the traditions of his 
people. Now he lives in Phoenix, Arizona and travels to Paris, France to teach art. 

Image for comparison: 

"Untitled" by Mary Morez (Dine') 

Questions for comparison: 

Which work of art makes you think of daytime? Why? 

Which work of art makes you think of nighttime? Why? 

What do you see in Mary Morez's Father Sky that is also in Joe Ben, Jr.'s "Rain in the 
Line of the Sky"? 

Both pictures have many symbols but they also have realistic images too. What do you 
see that looks like a symbol? . . . real? 



88 



Untitled 




Artist: Mary Morez 
Culture: Dine (Navajo) 

Size: Height 36 3/16"; Width 48 9/16" 

Media: Acrylic, canvas 
Date: c. 1970 
Catalog Number: IAC446 
Description: 

Gray person - Mother Earth 
Black person - Father Sky 

Black circle - This is the place where plants are attached to Mother Earth like a baby is 
attached to its mother. 

White and blue circles - These circles represent the sun and moon. 



89 




Horn - A horn is a sign of power. 

Lines from horns - The lines coming from the horn are raindrops. 

Feather - The feather stands for a bird. 

Stars (white spots) - The white spots on Father Sky represent four constellations. 
Crossed lines - The crossed lines represent the Milky Way. 

Rainbow - The rainbow ties Mother Earth and Father Sky together. 

Com - Com pollen is used for prayers. 

Yellow - The yellow backgroimd is the dawn. 

Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - horizontal, vertical, diagonal, zig-zag 
Shape - circular, rectangular 
Color - warm, cool, neutral, bright 
Space - enclosed 

Texture - surface, simulated, rough, even, uneven 

Art Principles: 

Concept - Contrast (color and texture) 

Repetition (circles) 

Balance (Symmetry) 

Cultural Context: 

Mother Earth and Father Sky are symbols that were given to Dine' at the begiiming of 
their history. Dine' healers use these symbols at healing ceremonies. 

It is interesting to remember that Ms. Morez painted this picture of Mother Earth and 
Father Sky shortly after the first man walked on the moon. It was a time when earth 
and sky seemed to be coming even closer for many people — an exciting time! 



90 



ft--,,:,. ■»->. 

Artist's Response: 

Mary Morez thinks of the circle of life when she remembers this painting. She thinks 
about how important it is to take care of Mother Earth and to keep life in Hozho 
(beauty, peace, joy, and harmony) in daily life. 

Images for comparison: 

"Rain In the Line of the Sky" by Joe Ben, Jr. (Dine') 

"Women with Water Jars" by Gilbert Atencio (San Ildefonso) 

Questions for comparison: 

What is the same in all three works of art? 

There is a moon in two of the art works. Which moon looks like the one you see at 
night? Which moon looks the most friendly? 

Which work of art uses the brightest colors? Which one uses the colors that are most 
like the earth? 

Four is an important number to the Dine' (Navajo). Where do you see items in fours? 

If you could only choose one of these pictures to represent rain in an exhibit which 
would you choose? Why? 



91 



’’Women with Water Jars” 




Artist: Gilbert Atencio 

Culture: San Ildefonso Pueblo, New Mexico 

Size: Height 29 1 1/16"; Width 39 5/8" 

Media: Watercolor, paper 
Date: 1960s 

Catalog Number: IAC71 
Description: 

Three ladies - These ladies are carrying water to their homes. This is the way water 
was taken to homes for cooking and drinking before water was piped into homes. 

Water jars - These water jars are decorated in designs slightly different from those 
painted on jars. 

Plants - The cattails especially are associated with water. 

Rainbow - The rainbow represents good things. 



92 





Sun - This stylized sun is a round circle with three areas of color. 

Rain - Draw attention to this way of representing rain instead of the dots children often 
use. 

Lightning - Notice lightning on both sides of the painting. 

Clouds - There are both terraced (stepped) and curved clouds. 

Butterflies - Butterflies are a water symbol for many Pueblo people because they are 
found near water. 

Pond - Small ponds are sources of water. 

Symbols on water jars - Many people who paint jars think of them in sections: for 
example, the neck, the middle, the bottom, the inside and the outside. When they are 
planning the design of the piece, they plan how to do each section differently. This is a 
good time to have students look at the three jars to see how they are different in each 
section. 

First jar - on the neck are terraced clouds. 

The middle jar - this jar has an avanyu (water serpent) on it with clouds above it. 

Last jar - This seems to have bird designs on it. 

(These jars are not like those usually made at San Ildefonso Pueblo. The shapes are 
not their traditional shapes, and polychrome - more than two colors- are not done as 
frequently as they once were). 

Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - continuous (the rainbow is a continuous line around the jar), curved, straight, 
zig-zag, dashed 

Shape - organic, geometric, rounded, curved, rectangular 
Color - bright, neutral 

Space - Have students look at the picture from side to side, top to bottom looking at 
the way the artist has used the space on the paper. 

Texture - rough, wet, slick, soft 



ERIC 

MfliffililRlffTlTliU * 



93 



Art Principles: 

Concept - contrast Discuss with students the contrast between the natural looking 
women carrying the water jars and the weather symbols. 

Cultural Context: 

Gilbert Atencio painted "Women with Water Jars" during the time that the American 
Indian Youth Movement was encouraging Native Americans to remember the art and 
traditions of their ancestors. This was also the time that Dr. Martin Luther King and 
Cesar Chavez were telling people to be proud of their history and family traditions 

Gilbert Atencio is known for painting the abstract symbols from the history and 
traditions of San Ildefonso Pueblo with life-like figures. His paintings can be 
considered a blending of history and present styles of Native American artists. 

Artist's Response: 

"When my aunts were still alive, when they told stories about when they were yoimg," 
Gilbert Atencio said. "I could picture in my mind just how the people looked and what 
the people did in their day and age. And that is what I went by when I started drawing 
pictures." 

"For non-Indians who buy my work, I do it so they will appreciate Indian art and 
imderstand the Pueblo Indians — For more imderstanding between non-Indians and 
Indians." (quoted in "When the Rainbow Touches Down," by Tryntje Van Ness 
Seymour. The Heard Museum, Phoenix, 1988.) 

Questions for Discussion: 

How did the artist show that it is raining? 

What objects look real? What objects look like symbols? 

What time of day do you think it is? Why? 

Would you like to visit this pond? Why? 



ERIC 



94 





Zia Water Jar 




Artist: Unknown 

Culture: Zia Pueblo, New Mexico 

Size: Height 9 15/15"; Diameter 11 1/2" 

Media: Clay 
Date: c. 1900 
Catalog Number: 241P 
Description: 

Red base - This style of water jar is traditionally painted on the underbelly. 

Black rim - The black bands around the rim of this water jar are typical of Zia water 
jars painted in the late 1800s. 

Curved red stripes - These stripes curve all around the water jar. They are a rainbow. 

Bird - Zia potters leave line breaks between tail feathers when painting birds. Students 
might speculate about what these birds eat after examining the birds' beaks. 

95 






Flowers (plants) - The bird and floral designs became popular after 1850 and show 
how new ideas came fi'om looking at European designs. 



Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - curved, pointed, natural, organic, continuous 
Shape - stylized, organic 

Color - polychrome (that is, more than two colors) 

Space - Discuss use of space top-to-bottom, side-to-side, 3-dimensional 
Texture - smooth 
Art Principle: 

Concept - movement (Discuss how the rainbow moves your eye around the jar.) 

Cultural Context: 

The end of the 1 9th century and the beginning of the 20th century were a time when 
people were creating new things. The ice cream cone was first sold at the 1 904 
World's Fair. The Wright Brothers made the first successful airplane flight. The teddy 
bear was created and named after the president of the United States, Theodore (Teddy) 
Roosevelt. Arizona and New Mexico did not become a part of the United States until 
1912, but Native Americans and Euro-Americans were living in these territories, 
farming and trading with one another. 

This water jar shows how Native Americans and Euro- Americans traded ideas as well 
as things. The Zia artist who made this water jar used birds, rainbows, and plants to 
decorate it. These symbols had been used by ancestors of Zia Pueblo for many 
generations. The way the artist made the birds and flowers on this water jar is similar 
to designs that were made by Euro-Americans artists of that time. 



98 



s 




I 

E 



+ 






,1 


© 


• 




V 




+ 






NT 






m.. 


Rial 






mn 


. \ 















Mixing Light 

Activity: Students will mix colored lights 
using 3 flashlights covered with colored 
cellophane. 

Focus Activity: Look at the paintings by Joe 
Ben, Jr.. Atencio's is more realistic, showing 
a rainbow, rain and the sun, as well as 
women, pottery jars and plants. Ben's 
painting is symbolic and shows the rainbow 
in a black sky. Ben shows us no light, some 
parts of the spectrum, and all light mixed 
together (white) in one painting. 



Outcomes: Students will understand that colored light when mixed together changes 
colors. 

Vocabulary: shine, cellophane, transparent, translucent, filter 

Materials: 3 flashlights, colored cellophane (red, yellow, and blue), *a dark room 

Procedure: 

1) Cover a flashlight lens with red cellophane, one with yellow cellophane and one 
with blue cellophane. 

2) Turn the lights out in the classroom. 

3) Shine the lights against a blank wall so that each makes a separate spot and 
students are aware that they show light the color of the cellophane. 

4) Overlap the light spots in different combinations of two. 

5) Combine the lights so that all three colors meet in the center. You should get a 
kind of white when the three color spots overlap. 

Assessment: 

• Can students explain that different colored light mixes together to make a new 
color? 

• Do students understand that the colored lights have mixed together to create 
the white light? 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Q7 







Extension: 

• Can students find translucent colors in their own environments that can be used 
in this experiment? What do other colors do in the same experiment? Are there 
other substances that can be used? 

• What happens when you mix paint colors together? Why is the result black 
instead of white? 



■98 



1 



Rainbow: Here One Minute and Gone 

the Next 



Activity: A demonstration of 
separating white light into a rainbow 
and the rainbow into white light again. 

Focus Activity: Rainbows often don't 
last very long. Sometimes we even 
miss seeing them! Look at the ladies in 
Gilbert Atencio's painting; Do you 
think they know about that rainbow? 



Outcomes: Students will understand that a prism can sort white light into a color 
spectrum. 

Vocabulary: prism, separate, mixture, spectrum 

Materials: prism, *a white surface or paper to cover the surface 

Procedure: 

1) Shine a light through a prism so that the color spectrum is seen on the other 
side. 

2) Discuss what has happened reinforcing the concept that white light is really a 
mixture of colors. 




Assessment: 

• Can students draw what they saw? 

• Can children write or verbally describe what they saw? 

• Does students written, or oral, discussion reflect understanding of white light. 

• Do they understand that it is really a mixture of colors and that the prism has 
separated them? 



99 



Spinning Colors 

Activity: Spinning colors on a disk (also a game!) 

Focus Activity: Look at the rainbows in the art prints. Notice that the artists have put 
a line between the colors of the rainbow. White and black are used. When all colors of 
paint are mixed together, the result is black. When all colors of light are mixed 
together, the result is white. 




Outcomes: Students will see that when something is moving quickly, our eyes may 
deceive us. Something of many colors, rotating rapidly, appears white in our eyes. 

Materials: *4 disks of heavy cardboard, * markers in rainbow colors, * scissors, 
"‘string (optional) 

Procedure: 

1 . Color the sections on a disk in 7 rainbow colors. 



100 





2. Make a small hole in the middle of the disk and put a sharp pencil through it. 

3. Spin the disk quickly. What do you see? (You should see a grayish white instead 
of the colors.) 



Or: 



1. Color the sections on the disk in 7 rainbow colors. 

2. To make an old-style Hopi toy, put two holes in the disk so that it looks like a 
button. 

3. Put a 24" string through the disk and tie the ends together. 

4. Put one hand in each loop and (with the button disk in the middle of the string) 
flip the button away from yourself several times. 

5. Gently move your hands apart and together, making the button whirl. This 
action is similar to using a yo-yo, so several tries may be required before you get 
the hang of it! 

6. As the disk spins, what do you see? (You should see a grayish white instead of 
all the colors.) 




Assessment: Do students understand that they see colors mixed together to make the 
disk appear white? 

Extension: 

• Make a disk that you divide into three sections and color in the primary colors. 
This should give the same results because the other colors are made out of 
primary colors. 

• Divide a disk in half and put a different color on each side. What happens 
when it is spun? 






Water, Mirror, and Rainbows 



Activity: Water, Mirrors, and 
Rainbows (Adapted from Brenda 
Walpole, 175 Science Experiments to 
Amuse and Amaze Your Friends. 
Random House, NY, 1988. 

Focus Activity: Look carefully at 
Gilbert Atencio's painting, "Women 
with Water Jars." Review how Atencio 
shows a rainbow and rain in this 
painting. Discuss how this activity 
shows why these two natural 
phenomena are linked. 



Outcomes: Students will see that water can be used to separate light into rainbow 
colors. 

Vocabulary: spectrum, separate 

Materials: *water, *a transparent (either glass or clear acrylic) container for the 
water, a mirror, *a white card, *clay 

Procedure: 

1) Take a dish of water outside on a sunny day. 

2) Position a flat mirror so that the sunlight hits the mirror and is reflected through 
the water. 

3) Adjust the white card so that it "catches" the rainbow as it emerges from the 
other side of the dish. Once you have the correct position you can keep the mirror 
still with modeling clay. 

Assessment: 



Do the students understand that the light is coming from the sun? 

Do the students understand that the water is separating the sun's light, not 
creating new colors? 



Extension: 

• Using a clear glass of water students can project a rainbow onto the sidewalk 
or wall. 

• What happens with other liquids? Does cooking oil separate the color, or 
syrup? 



"UlBBS&m * 



8I§? COPY AVAILABLE 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 




Educitlonpl Resouces loionnolfon Center 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: SO 



Title; 





After the Rain: Rainbows 




Author(s): 


Arlene Uld b-lk andJackie btokias 


Publication Date; 


Corporate Source: 




2001 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in miCTofiche, reproduced paper copy, and 
electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if reproduction 
release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permisston is granted to reproduce and disserhinate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 




CtiockheraforLevell release, permitting reproduction Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction Check here for Level 2B release, permitting reproduction 

and (fissemlnation tn microfiche or other ERIC arcNvai and dissemination in microfiche and in electronic media for and (fissemination in microTiche only 



media (e.o.. e l ec t ron ic) and paper copy. ERIC archival coOection subscrfbers only 



Documents wM be processed as indicated provided reproduction quaRty permits. 

If pennission to reproduce b granted, but no box b checked, documents win be processed at Lovell. 



Sign 

here, 

please 

ERIC 



/ hereby grant to the Educationat Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce arnl disseminate this 
document as indicated above. Reproduction froni the ERIC microbe or electronic media by persons odierthan ERIC employees and 
its system contractors requires pennission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for tiorhprofit reproduction by libraries and other 
service agencies to satisfy information needs of educators In response to discrete inquiries. 




Printed Nam^osHionrae: i r, f) 7 I 

fiM/J toUednu,^, f , 


OrganizattorVAddress: 

/H aseiL^ ^ , 

Al. CLer\ 














III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, If you wish ERIC to cite ^e availability of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document uriless it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 

Publisher/Distributor: 



Address: 



Price: 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 




However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution, to ERIC, return this form (and the document beinq 
contributed) to: v » 



ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 

4483-A Forbes Boulevard . 

Lanham, Maryland -20706 



O 

ERLC 

fag i m i jm g 2/2001) 



Telephone: 301-552-4200 
Toll Free: 800-799-3742 
FAX: 301-552-4700 
e-mail: ericfac@ineted.gov 
WWW: http://ericfacility.org 



