DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 354 126 



RC 018 964 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

SPONS AGENCY 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



Swisher, Karen; And Others 

American Indian/Alaskan Native Dropout Study. 
Arizona State Univ., Tempe. Center for Indian 
Educat ion. 

National Education Association, Washington, D.C. 
91 

122p. 

Reports - Research/Technical (143) — Information 
Analyses (070) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. 

''^Alaska Natives; ^American Indian Education; 
''American Indians; '^Data Analysis; Data Collection; 
Def ini tlons ; ''^Dropout Rate ; ''^Dropout Research; 
Research Problems ; School Statistics; Secondary 
Education; Student Mobi 1 i ty 



ABSTRACT 

Dropout rates for American Indians and Alaska Natives 
(AI/AN) are higher than those of other racial/ethnic groups, but the 
overall or national Al/AN dropout rate is not knovm. In an attempt to 
generate a national rate, data were collected from 26 state 
departments of education, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) , and 
tribally controlled schools; and extensive searches of existing 
literature and data were conducted in libraries, ERIC, and other 
federal databases. It quickly became clear that meta-analysis was 
impossible due to the lack of standardized definitions of dropouts 
and standardized methods of counting and calculating rates. Given 
that interstate dropout reporting does not exist for public school 
systems, attempts to incorporate non-standardized data from BIA, 
mission, and other private schools increased the difficulty of 
generating a national dropout estimate for AI/AN students. Also, 
mobility and transfer rates were quite high for Al/AN students in 
certain parts of the country. Longitudinal studies suggest a dropout 
rate between 247. and 487. for 1962-89 and 29-367. in the 1980s, but 
most of these studies were limited to a specific population or 
region. Though it is perplexing to determine the reason students 
leave school, it appears that academic reasons are less important 
than family and school environment factors. This report contains over 
300 references, 31 data tables, and an extensive review of the 
various methods of defining, counting, calculating, and reporting 
dropout rates. (SV) 



Vc Vc ye Vc -k -i't'kiKiK'kiK Vc Vc Ve V: i/t Ve Vc ik -k Vc k -k ic :k Vc -}< k k Vc k k k k k Vc k k k k kkkkkkkk Vc ^'c k k k k k k k kitkk k 

Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made ^'^ 
from the original document. * 

yc k kkk-k yc yc yc yc yc k k k k yc -k k k k k k k k k k yc k yc yc yc yc k k k k k k ic k k kkickkkkk k yc k k ic k kkkic k k k k k ickkick 



CD 

CO 






Foreword 



The National ;^ducation Association (NBA) has a long history of interest in the 
nation's dropout problem and attendent issues. In 1961, the NEA Project: School 
Dropouts was mitiated. Under the direction of Daniel Schreiber, the purpose of the project 
was to focus national and local attention on the "seriousness of the problem, to serve as a 
clearinghouse for information regarding current programs and research, and to provide 
consultation to school, agency, government and organization officials" (p.5). 

The present study stems from a concern expressed in the 1987 regional hearings 
conducted by the NEA ethnic minority smdy group on American Indian/Alaska Native 
(AI/AN) concerns. The hearings, and tiiose from Black, Asian and Pacific Islander, and 
Hispanic study groups formed tiie report known as And Justice for All. One concern and 
subsequent recommendation focused on the need for "a study on the mobility of Indian 
students" (p. 15). The apparent belief was that high mobility rates contribute significantiy 
to the dropout problem. The reconnmendation stated that "NEA will work with its affiliates 
and other appropriate groups to develop programs for monitoring American Indian/Alaska 
Native smdent mobility. Such programs will augment efforts to reduce tiie dropout rate of 
American hidian/Alaska Native students" (p. 18). 

The data which report mobility rates are gathered in much the same manner as those 
data which report dropout rates; one cannot be extrapolated from the other. In addition, the 
relationship between mobility and dropping out among Al/ANs has not been smdied to any 
great extent (Platero, Brandt, Witherspoon, & Wong, 1986). Therefore, in order to study 
the mobility rates, the dropout rates have to be identified. 

In And Justice for All, the NEA executive committee invited the cooperation and 
partnership of others to address the problems that were identified. The American 
Indian! Alaskan Native Dropout Study is a response to this invitation. The study is 
sponsored by the NEA Office of Human and Civil Rights tiirough an agreement with the 
Center for Indian Education at Arizona State University to determine a national dropout rate 



for AVAN students by establishing a comprehensive, compelling knowledge base about the 
dropout problem among AI/ANs. The following report is the result of our efforts. 

For the past two years we have been collecting the existing data about AI/AN 
dropouts from state and national agencies, and other sources as they became known to us. 
As we gathered these data, we entered the essential descriptive information into a dBase IV 
system. For most entries we have the hard copy on file also. By storing these data both 
electronically and physically, we are establishing a valuable source of I iformation for 
further study. 

In this report we have presented information according to the objectives of our 
study. We gathered existing statistics from states, other agencies, and research reports 
indicating a dropout rate for Al/AN students. We reviewed the literature, extracting that 
information which was contextually related to the condition of dropping out among 
AI/ANs. We were particularly interested in the definitions and methods in counting and 
calculating rates. We also wanted to know about correlates and reasons given for leaving 
school from students and schools. We knew that in addition to tiie condition of dropping 
out, transferring and mobility was also troublesome; we wanted to know how widespread 
the problem really is. Last, but not least, we were interested in hearing about successful 
intervention programs. We have presented as much as we found. We realize this not an 
exhaustive study; rather, we hope it is one which can be updated each year with current 
data reporting the condition of AI/AMs leaving our schools. It is our hope tiiat it will serve 
as a resource guide and source of further research. 

The report is organized into sections. In the first section, we have described our 
purpose and presented the research design. In the next section, we briefly discussed the 
relationship between school and society and dropping out. The third section includes a 
thorough review of tiie problems related to defining, counting, calculating, and reporting 
dropout rates in order to present for the reader the complexities involved in this whole 
process. We ended tiiis section with an optimistic view by describing current field testing 



4 



of methods for more accurately presenting a national dropout rate. The fourth section is a 
review of existing studies followed by current information regarding the inclusion of 
AVANs in the national longitudinal databases. Data from states are included in the next 
section. The correlates and reasons for dropping out are discussed in the sixth section. 
The final section includes our observations and discussions, and conclusions. The reader 
will be able to draw further conclusions that can lead to developing recommendations. The 
bibUography consists of works cited in the report as well as other resource material; an 
appendix includes a listing of states from which the data came. The reader will notice that 
we have used ttie term American Indian and Alaskan Native and the acronym AI/AN when 
we are describing the people in a general way; we have used tribal names whenever 
possible. 

This report is a team effort by Center for Indian Education staff: Dr. Karen 
Swisher, director, graduate assistants, Michelle Hoisch, Frances Totsoni, AnCita Benally, 
and Helga Kansy; Dr. D. Michael Pavel, senior rese^ch associate (now a visiting assistant 
professor at UCLA); and Laura Williams, secretary. Dr. John Tippeconnic played an 
important part in early efforts. Consultants to the project were Dr. Donna Deyhle, 
University of Utah; Dr. Elizabeth Brandt, Arizona State University; and Dr. Louette 
McGraw, Arizona State University West 

We are grateful to the 26 states who sent us theu" data or let us know why they 

couldn't There were so many supportive comments included with the data we received as 

well as in letters of mquiry about receiving the study. The support we received is indicative 

of the conceme i interest the topic of this study has for maiiy people. Our thanks go to Ron 

Houston of NEA who said, "We know there's a need for this study, let's quit talking about 

it and do it!" Without support from NEA, this study would not have been possible. 

Karen Swisher, Ed.D, 
Michelle Hoisch 
D. Michael Pavel, Ph. D. 
Center for Indian Education 
Arizona State University 



Table of "Contents 

Forward ^ 

Table of Contents v 

List of Tables 

Background and Need 1 

Research Problem 3 

Purpose of Study 3 

Research Design 3 

Data Collection 3 

Data Analysis 5 

Scope of the Research Design 5 

Schooling, Society, and Dropping Out 6 

Collecting Dropout Data and Reporting Dropout Rates 8 

The Issue of Definition 8 

Sources of Dropout Data 10 

Types of Dropout Statistics 12 

Calculating Statistics 13 

Comparing Methods and Rates 15 

Cumulative -vs- Annual 15 

Student Population -vs- Student Cohort 15 

Arithmetic Accountibility: ADA or ADM 19 

Academic Year -vs- Calendar Year 19 

Different Grades, Different Dropout Rates 19 

Dropping Out, Dropping In 20 

Identifying a National Dropout Rate 21 

National Dropout Statistics Field Test 22 

American Indian/Alaskan Native Dropout Studies 23 



v 

G 



The 60s and 70s 23 

The 80s and 90s 25 

National Longitudinal Studies 32 

State Reports 

Alaska 3^ 

Arizona 

California 

Colorado 

Florida 

Georgia 

Idaho 39 

Illinois 

Kansas 

Michigan 

Minnesota 

Mississippi ^2 

Montana ^2 

Nebraska 

New Mexico 

New York ^ 

North Carolina 

North Dakota 45 

Oklahoma 

Oregon 

Rhode Island 46 

South Dakota 46 

Texas 47 



vi 

7 



Utah 48 

Washington 48 

Wisconsin 49 

Summary of State Data 49 

Reports From Four Large Urban School Districts 50 

Albuquerque Public Schools 50 

Los Angeles Unified School District 51 

Phoenix Union High School District 52 

Tulsa Public Schools 52 

Correlates, Causes, and Reasons for Dropping Out 53 

Correlates of Dropping Out 54 

State Reports on Reasons AI/ANs Drop Out 59 

What AI/AN Students Say 61 

Transfer and Mobility 66 

Prevention 68 

What Some Local Educations Agencies Are Doing 72 

Discussion 

Caring • '^'^ 

Autonomy and Non-interference 79 

Relevance of Schooling 79 

Issues of Rural -vs- Urban Education 81 

Family 82 

Student-Centered Schools 82 

Intervention 83 

Policy and Practice 83 

Research Studies in Progress 85 

Conclusions 86 



ERLC 



vii 

s 



Bibliography 

Sources for State Dropout Information 



3 



viii 



List of Tables 

Table 1. Changes in Class Membership (Four Years) 16 

Table 2. Changes in School Membership (Single Year) 16 

Table 3. Comparison of National AI/AN Dropout Rates by Grade with 

Selected Areas of the United States 24 

Table 4. State of Alaska 1989 Percent of Early Leavers by Grade 

and Ethnicity 35 

Table 5. State of Alaska 1990 Percent of AI/AN and Total Early 

Leavers by Grade 36 

Table 6. State of Alaska 1990 Early Leavers for Grades 7- 12 

by Race/Ethnicity 36 

Table 7. State of Arizona AI/AN and Total Dropout Rates for 

Grades 9-12 by Year 36 

Table 8. Three Year Summary for Number of Dropouts in Grades 10-12 
at California Public High Schools by Race/Ethnicity 

in the Class of 1989 37 

Table 9. State of Colorado Class of 1990 AI/AN and Total Graduation 

Rate by School Type 37 

Table 10. State of Colorado AI/AN and Total Dropout Rate in 

Grades 10-12 by Year 38 

Table 1 1 . State of Colorado AI/AN and Total Dropout Rate in 

Grades 7-12 by Year 38 

Table 12. State of Colorado AI/AN and Total Dropout Rate 

by Grade and Year 38 

Table 13. State of Idaho Johnson - O'Malley EnroUment and Dropout 

Figures by Year 39 

Table 14. State of Idaho Johnson - O'Malley Completion Rates 40 



ERIC 



Table 15. 1989-90 State of Illinois AVAN and Total Dropout Rates 

by Grade and Gender ^0 

Table 16. State of Kansas 1989-90 AI/AN Em-ollment and Dropout 

Figures for Grades 9-12 41 

Table 17. State of Minnesota 1989-90 AI/AN and Total Dropout 

Rates for Grades 7-12 41 

Table 18. Minnesota AI/AN Dropout Rates From Selected Urban 

Versus Rural School Districts by Year 42 

Table 19. State of New Mexico AI/AN and Total Dropout Rates 

for Grades 9-12 43 

Table 20. State of New Mexico 1988-89 AI/AN and Total Dropout 

Rate by Grade 44 

Table 21. State of New Mexico 1988-89 AI/AN and Total Dropout 

Rate by Sex and Grade 44 

Table 22. State of New Mexico Statewide Total Dropout Rate by Sex 

for Grades 7-8 44 

Table 23. State of Oklahoma 1988-89 Dropout Rate by Race/Ethnicity 

for Grades 9-12 45 

Table 24. State of Oklahoma AI/AN Dropout Rate by Year for Grades K- 12 46 

Table 25. State of Oregon 1988-89 Dropout Rates by Race/Ethnicity 

for Grades 9-12 46 

Table 26. State of South Dakota AI/AN Dropout Rates for Grades 9-12 

by School Type and Year 47 

Table 27. State of Texas 1987-88 and 1988-89 AI/AN and Total Dropout 

Rate by Grade 47 

Table 28. State of Utah AI/AN Enrollment and Dropout Figures 

for Grades 7-12 48 



ERIC 



X 

li 



Table 29. State of Washington 1988-89 AVAN and Total Dropout 

and Graduation Rates for Grades 9-12 48 

Table 30. State of Wisconsion 1989-90 AI/AN Dropout Rate by Sex 

for Grades 9-12 49 

Table 31. State Dropout Rates by Grade and Year 61 



^ 12 



1 



Background and Need 

According to Hodgkinson, Outtz, and Obarakpor (1990), in The Demographics of 
American Indians: One Percent of the People; Fifty Percent of the Diversity, there are 
approximately 1.7 million persons who trace their lineage to over 500 tribes and native 
groups (more recent estimates proclaim that there are over two million). Sixty percent of 
the American Indian and/or Alaskan Native (AI/AN) populations represent diverse cultures 
of people who speak over 200 different languages. Approximately 66 percent of the 
population reside in ten states and more than half of the Al/AN population are members of 
ten tribes. One-fourth of all AI/AN live on reservations. Over 300,000 Indians live in 
metropolitan areas. 

The poverty rate for American Indian families was considerably higher than 
the rate for the general population (24 percent compared to 10 percent), but 
lower than the rate for African Americans (29 percent). The poverty rate for 
three of the top ten most populous Indian states was over 40 percent 
(Hodgkinson et al, 1990, Highlights). 

Approximately 390,000 Indians attend elementary and secondary schools. The 

majority of students (85%) attend public schools, ten percent attend schools funded by the 

Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), and five percent attend mission or private schools. An 

additional 90,000 attend colleges and universities. 

As the decade of the 1990s begins, there seems to be increased interest in 
American Indians in the United States. From the novels of Tony Hillerman to 
the museums to state legislatures, there is more talk now about Indians than 
during the 1980s ( Hodgkinson et al., 1990, p. 1). 

Add to this the recent popularity of the academy award winning best picture for 1990, 

Dances With Wolves. But, the authors go on to say that the talk has limited foundation 

because few facts are collected and presented. 

If one looks at all U.S. government surveys, one usually finds Indian data 
included with Asians and-or Hispanics in a category called "other." While it 
is easier today to get involved in the issues of African American and Hispanic 
poverty, jobs, family life, it is very difficult to feel close to the problems and 
potentials of people called "others," and in^ossible for people who are not 
included at all because of general omission or omitted because the numbers 
were to small to be statistically reliable, (p. 1) 

Attempts to improve the quality life for AI/ANs in the United States has not been 



ERIC 



13 



2 

particularly successful because assimilation has been the dominant policy of the fedwal 
government in its relationship with AVANs. The educational practice was one that tried to 
change AI/ANs by teaching dominant cultural values and concepts. The results have been 
devastating, often resulting in individuals who not only had difficulty with formal 
education, but difficulty in day-to-day life. Only recentiy, since the federal policy of self- 
detemination, have AI/AN people become actively involved in the education of their 
children. Yet many problems continue to affect the education of AI/AN students today. 
Dropping out or leaving school is one of these problems which is obfuscated by the lack of 
comprehensive information about the problem. 

There are numerous references in the literature tiiat indicate the extent of the dropout 
problem among AI/AN students. In 1969, the Kennedy Report, Indian Education: A 
National Tragedy A National Challenge, (U.S. Senate, 1969) found tiiat dropout rates for 
AI/AN smdents were twice the national average in both public and Bureau of Indian Affairs 
(BIA) schools, with some schools approaching a 100 percent dropout rate. A 1983 
National Impact Evaluation of Title IV. Part A, found that the dropout rates contained in a 
number of smdies ranged from 14 percent to 60 percent (Development Associates, 1983). 
General studies of AVAN education offer no specific statistics, but refer to the rate as being 
higher than other segments of the American population. More recent estimates of the 
problem include dropout rates from 35.5 percent (NCES, 1988) to over 50 percent (Wells, 
1991) and in undocumented cases between 80 and 90 percent. Not only do AI/AN 
students tend to have the highest dropout rates of otiier major racial/etiinic groups, they also 
have the lowest rate of returning to eventually complete high school or an equivalent 
program (NCES, 1989). High dropout rates are used to justify programs and budgets. 
Dropout rates are called for when questioning programs and holding schools accountable. 

Decision-makers, especially politicians, often request a national rate to assist in 
reaching program and fiscal judgments. Programs are funded because we "know" there is 
a problem, but the magnitude of the problem still remains one of speculation or estimation. 



14 



3 



As long as AI/ANs continue to be categorized as "other" in surveys and reports of federal 
agencies or attempts are made to defining who is an AI/AN, there will continue to be few 
comprehensive facts known about AI/ANs. As a consequence, efforts to decrease chronic 
dropout rates and markedly improve education services are likely to be circumvented by 
inaction. 

Research Problem 

It is difficult to determine what the overall or national dropout rate is for AI/AN 
students, for reasons beyond demographic exclusion. First, because AI/AN students 
attend several types of schools operated by the BIA, state, or private agencies, there is no 
one repository for data; second, the data are gathered and calculated according to several 
different methods (to be described later) making aggregation very difficult; thh-d, the 
mobility of AI/AN students suggests that transferring is as serious a problem as dropping 
out in some parts of the country, and fourth, the problem had never been collectively 
reported and gathered in a comprehensive database. There is virtually no mention of 
AI/AN in the general reference books about dropouts, or in reports generated from national 
data. Currently the dropout data are not found in one place, but with sources around the 
country in local, state, and some national agencies. Thus, the accessibility of the dropout 

data that do exist is extremely limited. 

Purpose of the Study 

The primary purpose of the study was to determine a dropout rate for AI/AN students 

by conducting a comprehensive search and review of existing AI/AN dropout data 

nationwide. A secondary purpose was to become a repository for this data and future data. 

A related purpose was to draw conclusions and make recommendations from the review of 

the literature. 

Research Design 

Data Collection 

Data were requested from state departments of education, through the AI/AN 



ERLC 



15 



Education desk and/or the Chief State School Officers, agency and area offices and the 
central office of the BIA, and tribally controUed community coUeges. Local school districts 
which have federal programs that serve AI/AN students (Tide IVA^ Indian Education Act) 
were notified of this request through respective regional technical assistance centers. 
Tribes who have studied their dropout situation were also contacted. A press release was 
prepared and was printed in newspapers and newsletters distributed in Indian Country such 
as the National Indian Education Association (NIEA) Newsletter, Linkages For Indian 
Child Welfare Programs, and Indian Youth of America- 
Existing databases generated by various agencies within the federal government and 
the Educational Resource Information Clearinghouse (ERIC) were searched for information 
on AI/AN dropouts. Extensive Ubrary searches revealed dissertations, masters theses, and 
individual commissioned studies that had this topic as a central or corollary theme of study. 
Fourteen studies completed between 1967 and 1989 were reviewed and summarized. The 
Journal of American Indian Education (JAIE) was a source for a majority of AI/AN-related 
dropout articles. Prtsentations were made at various AI/AN education conferences and 
meetings to announce tlie commencement of this study. 

State data were requested from all states; the states whose population of AI/AN 
numbered in the top 20 according to the 1980 census figures were targeted for data, or a 
statement regarding absence of data. These data were essential since states were presumed 
to be one of the main repositories of dropout figures if they existed; their data presumably 
came fi:om school districts in the state. It was assumed that if 85 percent of AI/AN students 
attend public schools, then the data which reflect their attendance, completion, and dropout 
rates would be collected from districts by the state. We recognized that all data are based 
on estimates, and that state data arc not accurate because they may be gathered, defmed and 
computed differently; however, we hoped that some states would present potential models 
upon which we could base recommendations. We received data from the twenty states we 
had targeted; sue additional states also responded with data and/or a statement about absence 



16 



5 



of data. 

The BIA Office of Indian Education Programs (BIA/OffiP) central office, area 
offices, and agency offices responded to the request with a commitment to assist. Ttieir 
efforts to gather dropout data through bureau-wide information management systems have 
not yet been realized so they were supportive of our study. 

Soon after the various announcements and letters of request \vent out to the public, 
letters and calls began to come in. Responses ranged from thick descriptions of programs 
to one-page impassioned letters from individuals expressing the severity of the problem 
from a personal point of view. It became clear that there was a great deal of support fox 
this effort and individuals were eager to share what data they had. 
Data Analysis 

The data were anai yzed to determine definitions of dropouts, dropout rates, methods 
cf identifying and calculating or computing dropout rates, and reasons why students 
dropout or leave school. It became clear early on that any type of meta-analysis would not 
work with the disparate data sets we received, therefore the data from states, for example, 
were treated separately but combined by grade span and method of calculation in summary. 
Scope of the Research Design 

It was not our intent to conduct an exhaustive review of the dropout literature; this 
would have been duplicative. Platero et al. (1986) presented a comprehensive review 
which contextualized then- study of Navajo students at risk. They advised, "While there is 
extensive information available on die phenomenon of dropout, there is relatively little 
information available on dropout of Indian students" (p. 4). 

Existing data were gathered fit)m national and state agencies, tribal entities, offices of 
the BIA; several school districts who are recipients of Tide V - Indian Education Act funds 
responded independemly. There was no concerte^4 effort to gatiier statistics directiy from 
local schools, since it was assumed that state data included district data. It was also not 
witiiin the purview of this study to gather persistence/attrition data from colleges and 

t 

ERIC 



6 



universities; establishing a K-12 database was a priority. 

Schooling, Society, and Dropping Out 

Historically, AI/AN young people were educated, for the most part, in federal and 
mission schools; the purpose of schooling was much the same as it was for young people 
attending public schools during the 19th century, i.e., to provide vocational training for 
semi-skilled work. In addition, the purpose of educating young AI/AN people was to 
civilize, Cliristianize, and hasten assimilation into tiie existing society. Public schooling 
became available to AI/AN youth in some regions of the country after die early 1900s. 
Under the Dawes Act or Allotment Act of 1887, reservation land was allotted to individual 
AVANs, and surplus lands became available for lease by non-AI/ANs. Public schools 
were soon established for children of die ranchers and fanners who acquired surplus lands 
on those reservations whose lands were allotted (Szasz, 1974). 

Early education in diis country was reserved for the elite; tiie majority of young 
people did not graduate from high school. Industry and agriculture were able to absorb the 
bulk of unskilled workers who did not finish high school. Not until die 1950s did diis 
country have more graduates tiian non-graduates. ITiis phenomenon was an indication of 
the growing link between educational attainment and employment and of the changing 
social, economic, and philosophical conditions in American society (LeCompte, 1987a). 
Graduating from high school was soon an accepted educational goal for all Americans. By 
the 1960s, the problem of high school dropouts gained national attention. 

Many changes have occurred in the social and economic life of the country since the 
1950s. Heavy urbanization, rising numbers of nonwhite minority families, new middle- 
and low- wage jobs in service and pan-time sectors have redefined the economic realities of 
life; schools, however, continue with outdated faci/ties and curricula. Changing cultural 
moies have resulted in students taking easier courses, working more outside of school, and 
doing less homework. Students who feel that schooling is no advantage to them are 
dropping out in increasing numbers. 



ERIC 



IS 



The dropout issue can be used to characterize the relationship between school and 
society, or more precisely, whether schools are working for society* Today we are 
concerned about this relationship because our cultural and economic conditions have 
changed so much and our education system appears inadequate to meet the needs of 
society* To experience any long-term success of decreasing the number of dropouts-or 
feel confident that schools are v/orking-may require us to transform our school systems to 
be congruent with the social, economic, and philosophical realities of a post-industrial, 
multiethnic society (LeCompte, 1987b). 

Rumberger (1987) notes that Afi'o-American, Hispanic, and AI/AN populations 
disproportionately represented among dropouts are increasing at a faster rate than the White 
majority. This is a critical problem when one considers that in many areas, these 
populations represent the majority of school-age children and will be the majority in the 
very near future. Increased academic requirements are likely to have severe repercussions 
for the population of at-risk students. The importance placed upon educational achievement 
to gain entry into the work force leave the dropout with menial job opportunities. 

It is clear from the literature that dropping out has a myriad of individual and social 
consequences (Task Force on New York State Dropout Problem, 1986). Individual 
consequences include low academic skills, lack of employment opportunities, limited 
advanced educational and training opportunities, and an adverse affect on the dropout's 
psychological well-being and health. The social consequences include foregone national 
income, increased demand for social services, increased crime, reduced political 
participation, reduced intergenerational mobility, and fragile levels of community stability 
and security. 

Finally, it is sensible to address the school and society relationship through the 
dropout issue because dropout prevention is more likely to return social and economic 
dividends to society. Collectively, being able to confront the dropout situation is another 
indicator of a successful social and economic community environment. The promise of 



8 

economic dividends are alluring. For example, in the State of Arizona, if nothing changes, 
$990,000,024 in new tax revenues will have to be generated annually to cover the cost 
impact of dropouts by the year 2004. However, if the graduation rate were increased from 
57.3 percent to 90 percent, by tlie year 2004 the increased taxable income would generate 
$1,792,599,976 in new tax revenues annually (IBM, 1991)- 

Collecting Dropout Data and Reporting Dropout Rates 
To the extent that they must illustrate their effectiveness, states, school districts, 
individual schools, and dropout prevention programs all ultimately fulfill their obligation 
for accountability by reporting statistics which reflect the extent of the dropout problem. 
Once made public, such data could be used to evaluate dropout prevention program 
success, inform a community as to the effectiveness of its schools, and establish national 
dropout rates. 

The potential of educational outcome data, however, cannot be realized without some 
agreement as to the methodology ultimately used to derive the statistics. While much 
dropout data exist, there is a great deal of disparity in the procedures used to collect it, the 
methods used to transform it into rates, and the definitions applied to it (GAO, 1986; 
Hamby, 1989; LeCompte & Goebel, 1987; Morrow, 1987). Different definitions and 
methods produce data which are not equivalent and therefore cannot be juxtaposed for 
comparison, nor can they be combined to produce aggregate rates. The procedures for 
collecting these data must be adequately explained and some means of standardization 
adopted if dropout and other educational statistics are to have meaning to anyone beyond 
the organization for or by whom tiiey are collected. The following sections are presented 
for the reader in order that the statistics may be more clearly understood, but also to serve 
as a guide for determining appropriate methodology in computing statistics. 
The Issue of Definition 

Before any talk of calculating dropout rates can begin, agreement must be reached on 
the precise definition for the term "dropout". Some districts count students as dropouts 



ERLC 



20 



9 



who have a certain number of unexplained absences on their record. Others count students 

as dropouts who join the military. There is some question as to whether a Graduate 

Equivalency Diploma (GED) is really the equivalent of high school completion, raising the 

question of whether those who quit high school to acquire a GED should be counted as 

dropouts. Some schools who only account for their students between September and Junu 

therefore exclude from their definition of a dropout those students who drop out in June, 

July and August, failing to return in September. 

The specific definition of "dropout" that is utilized ultimately affects the overall 

dropout rate reported. In Alaska a statewide effort to establish dropout statistics produced 

two separate dropout rates, one for the Anchorage School district and one for the rest of the 

participating districts because Anchorage included transfer students in those reported as 

dropouts (Alaska Department of Education, 1989, 1990). Dropout statistics can only be 

combined and compared if a standardized definition for dropout exists and is adhered to. 

With respect to calculating a national dropout rate, any attempt to do so requires that first a 

national definition for the term dropout be adopted by all of the states. Morrow reports on 

past attempts and ultimate failures to establish a common definition for the term "dropout" 

(Morrow, 1987). He suggests that any definition of the term should include three criteria; 

(1) Is the student actively enrolled? (2) If not, has the enrollment been 
formally transferred to another legitimate institution? (3) Has tlie student 
earned a high school diploma or its equivalent? (p. 40) 

The tenn "dropout" actually includes several categories of students. There are the 
"pushouts" or those students who are deemed undesirable, the "disaffiliated" or those who 
no longer wish to be associated with school, the "educational mortalities" or those who 
have failed in attempts to complete a program, the "capable dropouts" or those who are just 
not suited for school, and the "stopouts" who drop out and return to school again. The 
distinctions between these types of school leavers may merit more extensive examination 
than that done at present. Certainly intervention strategies aimed at holding onto a student 
who just thinks school is "uncool" will not suffice for a stodent who is at risk because he 



ERIC 



21 



10 



or she cannot complete the assigned schoolwork. 

Turning the focus to the issue of dropping out among AJ/AN students, the problem of 
definitions includes specifying who is an AVAN and how such individuals are identified. 
The question of tribal membership is decided within individual tribes, with litde or no 
standardization between tribal groups. According to the BIA, an individual is considered 
AI/AN if he/she claims 1/4 "degree of blood" and membership in a federally recognized 
tribe. However, many individuals exist who can claim to be fuU-blooded AI/ANs from a 
variety of tribes, but because they do not Iiave sufficient ancestry in any one to satisfy the 
tribe's defmition, they cannot claim membership in any of them and are thus not recognized 
as Al/ANs. 

With the exception of students who live on federally owned lands or reservations, 
there is no reliable systematic way to identify AI/AN students other than by self report. 
Teachers cannot be expected to accurately identify AI/AN students by appearance or 
intuition. Reports of dropout rates should include the definition used to classify AI/AN 
students and the methods used to identity them. 

The fact that AI/AN students must self identify in order to be counted as such brings 
up the issue of which students will, if asked claim their AI/AN affiliation. How do 
students who qualify, but do not identify as AI/AN differ from tfiose who claim their 
ethnicity? Research by Deyhle (1989) indicates that often, students with the weakest 
cultural identities are interestingly enough those most adversely affected by culturally 
irrelevant curriculum. Furthermore, will the new ethnic pride that has recently developed 
encourage people with only miniscule AI/AN ancestry to proudly identify themselves as 
AVAN when technically, they do not qualify as such? Such factors will certainly impact on 
attempts to quantify the problem of AI/AN dropouts; before AI/AN dropouts can be 
counted, they must be found. 
Sources of Dropout Data 

National dropout data are generally available from a limited number of sources. The 



ERLC 



22 



11 



General Accounting Office's (GAO) report. School Dropouts; The Extent and Nature of the 
Problem, discusses most of these sources (U. S. GAO, 1986). Some nationally sponsored 
databases with information on high school dropouts do exist. The Department of 
Education collects data on school dropouts through tfie National Center for Educational 
Statistics (NCES). The Bureau of Labor Statistics sponsors several reports tiiat include 
data on school dropouts such as the "Current Population Survey," a monthly report carried 
out by the Bureau of the Census that includes tabulations on school dropouts and 
graduates. Information on school dropouts is also found scattered throughout the 
educational research literature. The bulk of information on school dropouts comes from the 
school districts themselves and is usually processed into some type of state report on 
educational outcomes. 

Dropout data from the school districts vary in a number of respects. The term 
dropout is not defined the same way across agencies and different methods are used to 
calculate tlie dropout rate. This makes comparing dropout data between states difficult, and 
in some cases impossible. Even within the same state methodological differences between 
districts may confound attempts to accurately report dropout rates (Cardenas, 1990; 
Hamby, 1989). These facts place the hopeful researcher in the aggravating position of 
having a wealth of information but no practical way to synthesize it 

The present study included a review of the above mentioned sources to locate dropout 
data specific to AI/AN students. Much of the nationally sponsored data on di opouts does 
not include AI/AN samples. As noted previously, these groups are often included in the 
non-specific "others" classification. Noteworthy exceptions to this are the "High School 
and Beyond" and other national longitudinal survey databases, however even in those cases 
the samples on AI/AN students drawn were very small. Even the BIA/OIEP does not 
presently have a standardized system in place for collecting statistics for educational 
indicators on AI/AN students, whetiier in BIA-funded or public schools. The majority of 
AI/AN dropout information can only be found in what is reported by individual states and 



ERLC 



23 



12 

in individual research studies. The findings from searches through national longitudinal 
studies, research studies and reports, and journal articles are reported in a latter section. 
Types of Dropout Statistics 

There are, according to Mark Twain, "lies, damn lies and statistics." The dropout 
problem is most often illustrated by reporting and comparing statistically derived dropout 
rates. These rates may be calculated using a number of different types of valid databases 
and with several statistically correct methods, any of which may produce a useful rate. The 
danger arises when dropout rates derived using separate methods or different segments of a 
population are compared If a reporting agency calculated a dropout rate for grades 9-12 in 
one year and found the rate t) be high, the ensuing alarm might unrealistically abate if in the 
next year a lower rate was reported which had in fact been calculated on grades K-12. 
Thus dropout statistics can easily mislead when either the people reporting them or tiie 
parties accepting them do not completely understand what they reflect and how they ai-e 
derived. Everyone involved in the dropout issue is therefore obligated to acquaint 
themselves witii all of the ways in which dropout statistics may be created. 

The need to intimately understand statistical methods is even more urgent witii respect 
to dropout rates among AVAN students. The AI/AN student population is very small, and 
therefore small numerical changes can drastically alter tiie dropout rates. The difference 
between a method that will produce a higher dropout rate and one tiiat will produce a rate 
that is less alarming may be more acute when the population is smaller. In addition, the 
knowledge that AI/AN students may drop out at higher rates in their senior year of school, 
or that they, like most of the population, generally drop out between grades nine and 
twelve, or drop out during the summer between grades eight and nine, makes it vital to 
understand how and for which grade levels dropout rates are calculated. 

Dropout statistics may be calculated either annually or cumulatively, the latter 
form accounting for die fate of students over successive school years and the former 
reflecting an event rate for one school year. Furthermore, annual and cumulative statistics 



24 



13 



may be reported using different configuationas of student populations. For example, one 
can consider the number of students in the population and the number of graduates or 
dropouts identified in it, or use student cohorts, in which case the individual students are 
tracked and classified as enrolled students, identified dropouts or identified graduates. 
Such variables provide the possibility for many permutations; annual statistics may be 
reported for a cohort, or cumulative statistics may be calculated using die freshman class of 
1982 and the sophomore, junior and senior classes of die three subsequent school years. 
Each statistical variant is useful in its own right, and at the same time limited. 
Calculating Statistics 

The National Education Association described the precise methodology for calculating 
dropout statistics in its 1965 report. Dropout Studies, Design and Conduct. The report 
includes discussion of the uses and limitations of these methods, as well as commentary on 
the relative comparability inherent in them. The 1965 NEA report was a seminal piece, 
used here (and referred to by otiiers such as Morrow, 1987) as a framework for describing 
the current methodological options for calculating the statistics to reflect the extent to which 
students succeed or fail in completing school. 

The NEA's 1965 report described tiiese statistics in tenns of a ratio, where the 
numerator is the identified type of student counted, whether tiiis be dropouts, graduates or 
students retained in school, and the denominator is always the figure reported as "arithmetic 
accountability" or "the number of pupils for whom a school or school system is 
arithmetically accountable during tfie period of time under study" (p. 24). Aritiimetic 
accountability is often defined by those who calculate dropout rates as school membership 
on a given day in the beginning of die school year. The NEA report recommends defining 
arithmetic accountability for a student population in one of two ways: 
End-of-year membership + number of dropouts + graduates 
or 

Initial membership + total in transfers - total out transfers - deaths - total holdovers + total holdovers 
from the preceding Class 



ERLC 



25 



14 



Alternatively, the figure for arithmetic accountability for a cohort caay be derived by 
enumerating the members of an initiil cohort who are tracked through the school system. 
This metliod differs from the one used on student populations because the members of the 
cohort are accounted for individually rather than simply arithmetically. 

The statistics offered to illustrate the problem of dropping out of school usually take 
the form of either graduation rates or dropout rates. The NEA's 1965 report discussed the 
statistic "holding power," a reflection of the number of students for whom a school was 
deemed accountable who either graduated or remained in school during the reporting 
period. When holding power is calculated cumulatively it closely resembles the definition 
for graduation rate. The NEA report provided the following formulas for calculating 
various rates: 

Annual Dropout Rate = rH'"'-^"-'' nFT>ronouts (Jah 1-Junc 30) 
Aiithmetic Accountability* (July l-June 30) 

Cumulative Dropout Rate = Number of Dronouts (for pgri od Of timg) 
Arithmetic, Accountability (for period of time) 

Annual Holding Power = F.nrf nf Year M p-mhershin (hme. 30) + Graduates (June 3Q) 
Arithmetic Accountability (June 30) 

Cumulative Holding Power =A11 Graduates 
Arithmetic Accountability (June 30 Graduating Year) 

If 12th grade holdovers are included in arithmetic accountability, cumulative holding 
power reflects the school's ability to graduate students on time. When 12th grade 
holdovers are excluded from arithmetic accountability, dien the cumulative holding power 
reflects tiie school's ability to keep students from dropping out and ultimately graduate 
them, whetiier tfiey graduate in four years or more. Although no separate formula for 
graduation rate is listed in the NEA report, the formula for cumulative holding power 
always produces a cumulative graduation rate. An annual graduation rate could be 
calculated if aritiimetic accountability equalled die number of 12tfi-graders for whom the 

* Arithmetic accountability is the number of graduates plus the number of drqpouts in the group identified 
for the period of time under study. 12th grade holdovers are not counted in the arithmeUc accountabiUty. 



15 



school was accountable that year (including or excluding the eventual 12th-grade 
holdovers). 

Dropout rates, graduation rates and holding power each illustrate a separate 
phenomena When the dropout rate is reported the statistic represents only the number 
of students out of a given population or cohort who left school, according to whatever 
definition of "leaving school" is utilized. Holding power illustrates the percentage of 
students who were reported in school at a given time who remained there at another given 
time, or graduated. The graduation rate reflects the percentage of students expected to 
graduate who actually did. Dropout rates and holding power are closely interrelated, as 
subtracting the dropout rate from 100 percent will produce the corresponding holding 
power, and vice versa (one should note, however that annual rates can only be used to 
derive corresponding annual rates, the same being true of cumulative rates). Because 
graduation rates may be calculated either including or excluding 12th-grade holdovers from 
arithmetic accountability, they are not as closely related to dropout rates as is holding 
power. If 12th grade holdovers are excluded from arithmetic accountability in calculating 
graduation rates, then subtracting the graduation rate from 100 percent will yield the 
corresponding dropout rate. However, since holdovers are not classified as dropouts, if 
they are included in the arithmetic accountability fot the graduation rate, then subtracting the 
graduation rate from 100 percent vdll not yield a corresponding dropout rate. 
Comparing Methods and Rates 

Cumulative -vs- annual. Cumulative dropout rates differ from annual dropout 
rates in that they are subject to the influence of compounded attrition rates over successive 
grade levels (LeCompte & Goebel, 1987). Annual dropout rates are therefore never equal 
to an equivalent fraction of the cumulative dropout rate, and the cumulative dropout rate is 
never equal to the sum of the annual dropout rates for that period of time. The 1965 NEA 
report gave an excellent graphic example of tfiis principle: 



ERLC 



27 



16 



Table 1 

Changes in Class Membership (Four Years) 
Year 

Grade 7/1-6/30 Membership Dropoms Graduates Membership 

9 1961-62 100 5 0 95 

10 1962-63 95 10 0 85 

11 1963-64 85 10 0 75 

12 1964-65 75 5 70 0 



Dropout Rate = 30% 



Table 2 

Changes in School Membership (Single Year) 

Membership Dropouts Dropouts Graduates 

Grade Year July 1 Summer Regular IimeJQ Membership 

9 1964-65 100 i 4 - 95 

10 1964-65 95 3 7 - 85 

11 1964-65 85 ^ ~" « 

12 1964-65 75 0 5 70 0 

Dropout Rate = 8.5%, Dropout Rate Excluding Summer Leavers 6.2% 

In this example, the annual rate, when summer leavers were excluded was less than a 
quarter of the cumulative rate, and, when summer leavers were included, was greater than a 
quarter of the cumulative dropout rate. 

With respect to comparability, drawing parallels between annual and cumulative 
statistics is a flawed endeavor from the outset. As the above example illustrates, annual 
statistics do not proportionately represent cumulative statistics, nor does a formula exist to 
convert them into a mathematical equivalent. Furthermore, annual rates consistently 
provide smaller numbers than cumulative rates do. An agency which overlooks this fact 
could inspire panic with tiie finding that tiie dropout rate had gone from ten percent to forty 
percent in a few years if the former rate had been calculated annually and the latter rate had 
been calculated cumulatively. The difference between tiiese two methods for calculating 
statistics must be correctiy understood for informed discussion to ensue regarding tiie 
dropout rate. Simplistically comparing annual to cumulative rates is the statistical 
equivalent to trading apples for lemons. 

Student population -vs- student cohort. Statistics calculated for student 



28 



17 



populations produce information which is definitively different from that derived from 
statistics calculated for student cohorts. A statistic for a student population, whether 
calculated annually or cumulatively represents the number of incidents that occurred within 
a given number of individuals. Statistics for student cohorts represent the fate of each 
individual member of that cohort over time. A three-year cumulative dropout study done 
on the entire student body at high school X might produce a completely different dropout 
rate from a three-year cumulative dropout study performed on the cohort of students who 
began lOth-grade at the beginning of the study at high school X. This is because students 
may tansfer out of high school X from the initial lOth-grade cohort and eventually drop 
out at another school, but numerically, they may be replaced in a subsequent grade by a 
student who graduates, or vice versa. That initial student would not be accurately 
represented in tiie final dropout rate as reported in a cumulative dropout study on the entire 
student body. The rate represents what happened at the school, but not what happened to 
the smdents themselves. 

Correspondence received during the course of this study from Patrick Graham, an 
administrative assistant at Window Rock Unified School district, illustrated the descriptive 
utility of student cohort statistics. Mr. Graham provided the results of a twelve year cohort 
tracking attempt: 

There were 212 students in the first grade in the district in 1978-79. There were 203 
students who graduated from the 8th grade in 1986. This group included 88 students 
from the 78-79 first grade and 21 students from the second grade of the same year. 
There were 180 graduates from the 12th grade in 1990. This group included 61 
students from the 1978-79 first grade. It also included six of the second grade 
students from that year who had graduated from the 8th grade in 1986 and 40 
students who had graduated from the 8th grade in 1986, but who had not been in the 
original first grade class. Of the original first grade class, at least 13 other students 
are still in school. 

Mr. Graham went on, using this cohort information to discuss his findings that, in his 
district, 42 percent of the students were promoted between grades one and eight, and fifty 
percent of the students were promoted between grades eight and twelve. However, 
according to the cohort figiu-es only 29 percent of tiie cohort was promoted between grades 



18 

one and twelve. Furthermore, it was obvious that there were many students who were 
several grade levels behind their peers, judging by the initial cohort. None of this 
information would be possible without performing the cohort tracking done by Mr. 
Graham, and he concludes that such cohort studies are necessary in order to develop a 
meaningful profile. 

Ideally, one would assume that cohort statistics would be of more value than student 
population statistics, assuming that the education system takes an interest in the experiences 
of individuals as they pass through it. Cohort statistics, however, require a sophisticated 
tracking system which could account for individuals as they transfer, drop out, drop back 
in, and acquire diplomas through alternative means. Such tracking technology does not 
currently exist everywhere, and has not been invented yet at the national level (U. S. GAO, 
1986). 

LeCompte (1987) described a model for inter-district longitudinal tracking of 
smdents. The Migrant Student Record Transfer System (MSRTS) has been used to assist 
in the tracking of children whose parents are migrant workers. It is a data base which 
maintains demographic, achievement, language proficiency, and social service eligibility 
data for each qualified migrant students. This information enables enrolling schools to 
retrieve information needed to place incoming students in appropriate instructional 
programs. It was noted, however, that MSRTS is a small system, it is expensive, it is 
federally funded and therefore in jeopardy of funding cuts. In lieu of computerized 
technology, student tracking would need to be done by telephone, or relying on requests 
for student records indicating enrollment in another school. In addition, cohort smdies cost 
more in time and resources than do student population statistics which only require that the 
bodies be counted. Finally, one must ask in cohort studies how long students should be 
tracked. Ideally, members of a cohort should be followed until they are classified as either 
a dropout or a graduate, which can take longer than the expected 12 years in some cases. A 
student might also return to school after several years or even decades as a classified 

ErJc 30 



19 



dropout to finally complete high school. How long can tracldiig realistically continue? 

Arithmetic accountability: ADA or ADM. The denominator, or arithmetic 
accountability used in calculating student statistics has the power to raise or lower tiie rate 
being reported. Large denominators will yield low rates and smaller denominators will 
raise the rates. The two most common metiiods for arriving at arithmetic accountability, 
average daily attendance (ADA) and average daily membership (ADM) each have unique 
properties which consistently yield either high or low numbers. Average daily attendance 
is the "average number of smdents who enter the school building daily", while average 
daily membership "includes all students who are assigned to a school" (Morrow, 1987, p. 
46). ADA consistently produces smaller numbers than ADM, and the rates reported using 
ADA as the numerator produce higher percentages than rates using ADM as the 
denominator. 

Academic year -vs- calendar year. Many school districts count their students 
in the fall and total their dropout counts in the spring (LeCompte & Goebel, 1987). When 
the dropout rate is calculated in this way the students who leave school in the summer are 
not included in the dropout rate. The NEA report addresses this issue, concluding that 
schools should be accountable for their students for twelve months out of the year, 
including summer dropouts in their dropout rates. Thus, the figure for arithmetic 
accountability should reflect the student population over a calendar year, and dropouts 
should also be identified year-round. One needs to be awaie that if a dropout rate does not 
include summer dropouts, it will be lower than the dropout rate that does include students 
who left during the summer, if large numbers of students leave over the summer months. 

Different grades, different dropout rates. As one looks at grades K-12, one 
sees a different dropout rate at different grade levels. Thexiropout rate in the elementary 
school grades is lower than the dropout rates in grades 9-12. Thus, in comparing different 
dropout rates it is important to di5tinguish rates calculated on grades K-12 from that for 
grades 7-12 or grades 9- 12. The higher dro jout rates in the upper grades can be watered 



20 

down when the dropout rates for the lower grades is factored into a K-12 dropout rate. 
Graduation rates are similarly affected depending on the year one begins tracking the 
selected cohort of students to graduation. Graduation rates calculated beginning with grade 
nine will differ from graduation rates calculated beginning with kindergarten due to the 
different rate at which students drop out or are retained in the lower grade levels. 

In comparing dropout rates across grade levels, one should consider the type of 
school for which the dropout rate is calculated. Specifically, the dropout rate in grade nine 
in a school that serves students in grades 7-9 might differ from die dropout rate at a school 
that educated students in grades 9-12. The ninth grade student experience in these two 
types of school is different. Students in grade nine in a 7-9 school have seniority and the 
respect that goes with it, but students in grade nine in a four year high school are novices 
and treated as such. Comparably, a student who attends one school for grades K-12 may 
enjoy a sense of continuity and security unknown to a student who attends a separate K-6, 
7-8 and 9-12 institution, tiius reducing the stress that he or she might otherwise experience 
in the transition grades seven and nine. 
Dropping Out, Dropping In 

A shortcoming of all of die statistical methods used to illustrate the extent of dropping 
out is that none of them offers information on students who drop in and out of school 
several times over the course of a school year, termed a "stopout" (Morrow, 1987). A 
student who drops out in October, returns in January, drops out in March and returns in 
May and then re-enters school in September of the next year is usually counted only once 
as a dropout This same student however, may be at greater risk for eventually dropping 
out completely than anoUier student who drops out only once over the course of a school 
year or school career and then returns. If the chronic "stopout" is indeed a higher dropout 
risk, a special designation may allow intervention programs to be tailored for him or her. 
More research on the subject of stopouts, their prevalence and ultimate outcomes is 
warranted. 



32 



21 



The phenomena of dropping out and back into a school during the same school year 
further impedes documenting the extent of dropping out as a problem. If a smdent drops 
out, but then returns during the same school year, should that student be counted as a 
diopout at all? Also, if a student drops out of school, and then returns to complete two 
years later, should the previous statistics be altered, since the former dropout completed 
school in the end? The lack of general agreement regarding the answers to questions such 
as these obstmcts attempts to clarify dropout statistics and their interpretation. 

In addition, the research documents problems with smdents who are misclassified as 
dropouts altogether. A comprehensive study for the Navajo tribe on the extent of its 
dropout problem found that many students who had actually transferred were mistakenly 
counted as dropouts (Platero et al., 1986). Reports of dropout rates have been criticized 
for failing to find out "whether students have actually dropped out, transferred, or remain a 
semester away from graduation" (DeYoung, Huffman, & Turner, 1989, p. 76). An 
obvious point at which dropout statistics become irreparably flawed is when smdents are 
inappropriately counted as dropouts in the first place. 
Identifying a National Dropout Rate 

When the data from various authorities, state and local, are synthesized, when all of 
the school records are in the hands of the proper authorities and all of the student bodies 
have been appropriately categorized one fact becomes glaringly obvious; no accurate 
national dropout rate exists afid the present lack of standardization across reporting agencies 
makes calculating one impossible at this time (Giles, 1985; Hamby, 1989; Rumberger, 
1987). Without standardized definitions or methods currently in use, very little more can 
or should be expected. Current studies or reports tliat wish to reference such a rate must, 
and do, rely on speculation in lieu of factual data. 

In trying to establish a national dropout rate for AVAN students, one faces further 
complexities due to the number of options available to these students for schooling. Given 
that interstate standardization of dropout reporting does not exist for public school systems, 

33 



22 



attempts to incorporate non-standaidized rates ftom BIA, mission and various other private 
schools increases the difficulty exponentially* Tracking transfers between these four 
systems alone requires a far more complex and comprehensive system than any presently 
available. Of couri^^e, this all becomes a moot point if Al/AN students are not identified as a 
group in the first place but are relegated to the ephemeral "other** category in the realm of 
educational statistics. 

National Dropout Statistics Field Test 

A cooperative effort between the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) 
and the National Center for Education Statistic (NCES) has produced a National Dropout 
Statistics Field Test. This cooperative venture is tlie result of the recognition that dropout 
statistics are key education indicators and a realization that current dropout statistics are 
inaccurate and unreliable. Thirty states are participating in the dropout statistics field test 
which began in 1989. Pilot school districts within each state are applying the standard 
dropout definition and data collection and reporting procedures. The field test will report 
dropout rates by grade, gender, race/ethnicity, and for males and females in each 
race/ethnicity category. The information will help to decide on the definition and 
procedures that will add a dropout statistics collection to the Common Core of Data (CCD) 
in school year 1991-92. Participating districts are reporting student membership counts at 
the beginning and end of the school year studied, and in the fall of the following school 
year. These data produce three different "denominators" for calculating the dropout rate, 
and will measure the effect of students transferring in and out of the school districts on the 
size of their dropout rate. The definition of dropout used in the pilot is: 

A. A dropout is an individual who: 

(1) was enrolled in school at some time during the previous school year, 

(2) was not enrolled at the beginning of the current year, 

(3) has not graduated firom high school or completed a state- or district-approved 

education program, and 

(4) does not meet any of the following exclusionary conditions: 

(i) transfer to another public school district, private school, or state- or district 

qjproved education program; 

(ii) temporary absence due to suspension or school-approved illness, or 

(iii) death. 



ERLC 



34 



23 



B. For the purposes of applying the dropout definition, the following additional definitions also 
apply: 

(1) A school year is the 12-month period of time beginning with the normal opening of 

school in the fall; 

(2) An individual has graduated from high school or completed an approved education 

program upon receipt of formal recognition from school authorities; 

(3) A state* or district-2^)proved program may include special education programs, home- 

based instruction, and school-sponsored GED preparation. 

According to Finn (1991), "The dropout rate is not itself the catastrophe of the 
decade, and efforts to estimate it with still greater precision may be unnecessary" (p. 28). 
He suggests that the act of leaving school without graduation is not new and has, in fact, 
not changed much over the last twenty years. There will always be a proportion of youth 
who leave school, even with the best preventive programs in place; "dropping out , on the 
other hand, may be seen as a symptom that directs our attention to other more basic 
educational processes" (p. 28). 

American Indian/Alaskan Native Dropout Studies 

The 60s and 70s 

A history of the education for AVANs is chronicled in the works of Margaret Connell 

Szasz. Szasz (1974) makes reference to the high dropout rate of AI/AN children in both 

federal and public schools as a problem which plagued BIA educators in the fifties and 

sixties. In 1967 a national study was devoted to looking at the conditions of education for 

AI/ANs: The National Study of American Indian Education: The Education of Indian 

Children and Youth, Aurbach, Fuchs and Macgregor (1970) produced an interim report of 

The Status of American Indian Education for the National Study of American Indian 

Education. A section of this report was devoted to the status of dropouts from secondary 

school They reported the research results of two regional educational laboratories; the 

Southwestern Cooperative Educational Laboratory (SWCEL) and the Northwest Regional 

Educational Laboratory (NWREL) and declared that 

The dropout figures for 1968 are substantially lower than the 60 percent for 
Indian high school students reported by the BIA ten years ago: 50 percent 
lower in the case of the Southwest and well below the oft quoted estimate of 
50 percent for all Indian high school students, (p, 62) 



ERLC 



35 



24 

The study by SWCEL was authored by Owens and Bass (1969) and titled The 

American Indian High School Dropout in the Southwest. The NWREL study was 

authored by Selinger (1968) and was titled The American Indian High School Dropout: 

The Magnitude of the Problem. The studies gathered baseline data from eighth graders 

enrolled in BIA, public, and private schools in the fall of 1962. Their data did not include 

reasons for students dropping out. In both studies students wei'e ti-aced by individual name 

to completion, continuation, dropping out, or death. The SWCEL study covered the states 

of Alabama, Arizona, southern Colorado, Nevada, New Mexico, and southern Utah. The 

total dropout rate was 39 percent; male and female rates were the same. The NWREL 

study covered the states of Idaho, Montana, North Dakota, Oregon, South Dakota, and 

Washington. The total dropout rate was 48 percent; males were 43 percent and females 52 

percent. Aurbach, Fuchs, and Macgregor (1970, p. 62) compared these rates with the 

national dropout rate at the time and summarized as follows: 

Tables , . . 

Comparison of National AI/AN Dropout Rates by Grade with Selected Areas of the United States 

Grades iMoM MoiUfflesi Southaesl 

8- 12 27% 48% 39% 

9- 12 23% 40%. 31% 

In 1967 Rosalie H. Wax wrote about the dropout experience on the Pine Ridge 

Reservation in Soutii Dakota based on data gathered by Robert V. Dumont, Jr. 1962-1963. 

Titled, Oglala Sioux Dropouts and Their Problems, the article described tiie experience of 

dropping out among Oglala Sioux boys. The article was later rewritten and retitied, The 

Warrior Dropout. Wax suggested that "neither the dropout nor the process of dropping out 

are well understood" (p. 247). It is assumed tiiat dropouts are alike and drop out of school 

for much the same reasons; tiiey dislike school and reject school. But, according to Wax 

(1967a), they leave school under different conditions and for different reasons. She stated: 

Many state explicitly that they do not wish to leave school and see themselves 
as "pushouts" or "kickouts" rather than "dropouts." As a Sioux youth in our 
sample put it, "I quit, but I never did want to quit!" (p. 247). 



25 



Wax presented a descriptive analysis of how Sioux boys come to drop out of high 

school. The interview sample included 153 youth between the ages of 13 and 21, 35 

percent of whom had dropped out before the end of the ninth grade. Rarely did the young 

men mention trouble with studies, but about half found school a lonely place or unbearable 

for other reasons such as abuse by experienced students. The school population was quite 

heterogeneous and Wax took particular notice of the students she identified as Country 

Indians, i.e., those who were raised out in the country and were more traditional than their 

town counterparts or those who had spent a great part of their lives in boarding schools. 

For many of tiie dropouts, school was "all right," but conforming to regulations was too 

difficult Wax stated that most of the young men 

arrive at adolescence valuing 4lan, bravery, generosity, passion, and luck, 
and admiring outstanding talent in athletics, singing, and dancing. While 
capable of wider relations and reciprocities, they function at their social best 
as members of small groups of peers or relatives (p. 254). 

These youth are told that they must graduate from high school in order to get a job, but in 

order to graduate they must develop qualities opposite from those they possess: 

a respect for humdrum diligence and routine, for "discipline," (in the sense of 
not smoking in toilets, not cutting classes, and not getting drunk), and for 
government property. In addition, they are expected to compete scholastically 
on a highly privatized and individualistic level, while living in large 
dormitories, surrounded by strangers who make privacy impossible (p.255). 

Wax's study is significant in that voices of students were presented. She was able to 

descriptively tell the story from a student's point of view, 

Kutsche (1964) examined the dropout rates of Cherokee High School students in 

comparison with two other high schools in North Carolina. His conclusion was that 

Cherokee high school students dropped out at a higher rate in all grades than white students 

witii the exception of twelftii grade. He did not report data about reasons for leaving 

school, nor was there any speculation about why the dropout rate for twelfth grade was 

less than other grades. 

The 80s and 90s 

The increased attention given to the issue of AI/AN students leaving school in the 



37 



26 

1960s and 1970s intensified greatly in the 1980s. Nine studies reported the rates and/or 
reasons for what was described as a severe problem. The reports ranged from the 
examination of existing data to multi-year ethnographic studies. They are presented here in 
chronological order. 

In 1980, educators in a Montana high school district asked for a different kind of 
inservice program; they came up with a study that was the first of several studies which 
examined the factors contributing to high dropout rates among AI/AN students. Under the 
direction of Coladarci (1983) the dropout rate - 60 percent - was examined through 
interviews with 46 of 224 students who had dropped out during the past three years. The 
students' responses were categorized into three areas; teacher-student relationships, 
content of schooling, and parental support The major findings indicated that "over a third 
of the dropouts cited as a factor that teachers did not care about them" (p. 18). Other 
related factors included, teachers did not provide enough assistance with student's work; 
school was not important to Native American culture; disagreements with teachers; and 
getting into trouble at school. "A little less than half of the dropouts cited as a factor that 
school was not important for what they wanted to do in life" (p. 18). Related to this factor 
was a feeling that school was not important to them as Native Americans. "Lack of 
parental support "and "problems at home" appeared to be a salient factors for the dropout 
decision in roughly 40% of the cases (p. 19). Suggestions for parents included providing 
more encouragement, communication, and cooperation. Over 90 percent of the dropouts 
would advise students to stay in school or reconsider because as the dropouts they 
experienced a change in attitude after dropping out. 

The urban Phoenix Union High School District provided the setting for Milone 
(1983) to survey 31 AI/AN dropouts. Milone asked them about their reasons for dropping 
out and their attitudes toward school. In follow-up interviews with 15 of the students, she 
found students to have surprisingly positive attitudes toward school. For some, the 
decision to leave school was involuntary in that they were dropped from the rolls for poor 



3S 



27 



attendance. Other factors such as academic or discipline problems and pregnancy appeai'ed 
to "push" them out. Many students regretted the decision to leave school and indicated that 
they would like to return to school, but didn't know how. Milone recommended that 
personal contact from the school would have helped many of the students who dropped out 
or were contemidating it 

A case study by Cnan and Osthimer (1983) investigated the educational experience of 
24 Navajo adolescents in the areas of language minority status, traditionalism, critical 
markers, distance to school, and future orientation. Thirteen males and 1 1 females 
represented 6 high school dropouts, 9 high school seniors with no future educational plans, 
and 9 high school seniors who were college-bound. Their findings indicated that "the most 
successful students (college bound graduates) were for the most part Navajo/bilinguals" (p. 
34). Traditionalism did not appear to be a negative factor. Given the absence of historical 
records to conduct a careful analysis, critical markers could not be identified that could 
serve as early warning signals of potential dropouts. "All students residing on the 
reservation, regardless of school outcome, reported distance to school and transportation as 
a negative incentive to go to school. Travel tunc interfered with school activities, 
homework time, and recreation time" (p. 35). In terms of future orientation, "Dropouts 
were found to be quite vague in their future plans and goals, while graduate (sic) and 
college-bound students had relatively concrete plans and goals for tiie future" (p. 35). 

Ten years after small local high schools were built in rural Alaska villages, Kieinfeld, 
McDiarmid, and Hagstrom (1989) examined dropout rates of die village high schools. The 
schools for the most part had enrollments less than 100 and about 60 percent of Alaskan 
Natives attended schools with fewer than 40 smdents. Examining data from 1983-84, a 
substantial increase in the number of graduates was reported as small high schools were 
established over this ten-year period. Kleinfeld et al. (1989) concluded: 

The shift from boarding schools to small village high schools has dramatically 
reduced the drop-out rate of rural Alaska Native students. These small high 
schools, despite their academic limitations, have characteristics similar to 
alternative schools which have been successful in reducing drop-out among 

ERLC 



28 



at-risk students - small size, personalized atmosphere, a sense of community, 
and individualized iwftruction tailored to students' academic background. In 
rural villages, high school graduation has become the norm. The most 
profound impact of this change in educational attainment levels will be on the 
next generation of rural Native students, (p. 29) 

Giles (1985) explored the cultural factors which affected the decision of AI/AN 
students in Milwaukee Public schools to remain or drop out of school. Data was collected 
by reviewing high school records, looking at participants' neighborhoods and homes, 
observing participants in their classrooms, and interviewing (when possible) participants' 
parents, peers, siblings, and teachers. Through eight case studies of four dropouts and 
fom- enrolled high school students, Giles found that the "schooling is failing to meet the 
needs of Indians. There is widespread dissatisfaction with attempts to remedy the situation 
and public schools are not preparing students for society" (p. 2). 

Latham (1985) examined data from on-site visits, reviews of literature, questionnaires 
to schools, BIA offices, state offices of education, and telephone contacts with officials and 
administrators of various federal agencies and BIA and public schools. He found, among 
other things, mean annual dropout rates for high school grades were 32 percent for 
students in BIA and BIA contract schools and 24 percent for AI/ANs students of federally 
recognized tribes enrolled in public school programs. Latham observed that because 
schools are awarded federal funding based on the number of AI/ANs enrolled during a 
count week, considerable extra effort is made at many schools to assure optimum 
attendance only up to and during this period. AI/AN students were found to transfer 
frequently after tliis count week and find placement in a BIA school as their last resort to 
educational opportunity. Students dropping out of public schools into a BIA school, then 
dropping out altogether from the BIA schools (or vice versa) result in a dropout rate which 
escalated as high as (and even higher than) 50 percent in some schools. Very few of those 
who dropped out either acquured a high school diploma or fulfilled high school graduation 
requirements. 

A recognition of the growing problem of Navajo student dropouts provided the 



ERIC 



40 



29 



impetus for Navajo Students at Risk, a Final Report for the Navajo Area Student Dropout 
Study conducted by Platero, Brandt, Witherspoon, and Wong (1986). Encumbered by 
insufficient data and speculative reasons regarding the dropout problem, the Navajo 
Division of Education realized that preventive programs could not be developed until it 
knew more about the problem. The purpose of the study was to provide current 
information on the 

total number of Navajo students dropping out from schools (public, contract. 
BIA and private schools, on or near the Navajo Reservation, with a 
significant Navajo student enrollment) and to determine the cause(s)for their 
dropping out and make recommendations for preventive programs and/or 
services, (p. ii) 

Three databases were developed for this smdy. The student roster database included 
individual smdent records from 101 (of 259) schools. The school characteristic database 
included information from the school characteristics survey remmed from 86 (of 259) 
schools. The student and former student database included surveys from tlQ stayers and 
219 dropouts. Platero et al. used a two-stage stratified sample with schools by type of 
school (BIA, contract, public and private) as the first unit of analysis, and smdents as a 
second unit of analysis. From this vast amount of information, the dropout rate was 
determined to be 31 percent. The correlates, and reasons that stayers and dropouts in the 
Platero et al. study gave are discussed further in a later section of this study. The 
sociaVculmral interpretation centered around four main areas: the nature of Navajo dropout 
behavior, schooling and socializadon, the home environment and dropout behavior, and the 
students themselves and dropping out. Their survey indicated that among Navajo students, 
academic problems seemed to be a minor factor in dropout behavior. Evidence of this was 
based on no significant difference in grade retention between persisters and dropouts; small 
difference with regard to doing homework; a high consideration among dropouts tliat their 
academic performance was average to very good; and the relatively minor role that 
academics play in the list of factors given by dropouts as to why they dropped out of 
school. 



41 



30 



The dropouts, to put it in their vernacular, are not "into" school and have not 
adopted the behavioral patterns the school lauds, encourages or finds 
tolerable. The dropouts seem to be social and/or intellectual deviants in the 
sense that they do not "fit" well at school or "get along" well there. This 
seems to apply to all the major factors of dropping out except the one of 
helping the family. The dropouts in general have not accepted or acqmesed to 
the socialization process that is a major aspect of schooling (p. 74). 

There was evidence from the surveys "that dropouts have not acquired the cultural drives 

and the behavioral molds the school systems wish to develop in then: students." So for 

example, "their boredom with school indicates that they have not internalized the 

competitive drives for individual self-maximization prevalent in the cultural atmosphere of 

the school" (p. 74). Parental support and encouragement, communication with an 

involvement in school activities, parental employment, and a two-parent home encouraged 

persistence. Platero et al. note that one of the most interesting aspects of Navajo dropout 

behavior was that they had not given up on schooling or education: "46 percent of all 

dropouts expect to return to school and graduate, while another 45.1 percent say "maybe" 

when they are asked if they expect to return to school and graduate; only 8.8 percent have 

no hope or expectation of returning to school or graduating" (p. 84). This aspect is also 

revealed in the finding ..liat both persisters and dropouts attended two or more schools 

during the academic year prior to the survey; persisters transferred or "floated" at a higher 

percentage than dropouts. They concluded tiiat student mobility played a positive rather 

than negative role in persistence and dropping out 

Following four cohorts of urban AI/AN stiidents, Eberhard (1989) discovered that 

the reported rate of pupil loss for the district was much lower tiian what he found; the 

district reported 12 percent dropout compared to Eberhard's calculation of 29 percent. 

Other significant findings included a dropout rate of 88 percent for tiiose who were 

retained. Dropouts moved twice as much as stayers, but parent statiis (one or two parents 

in the home) had no effect on dropping out; however, tiie trend was for stayers to come 

from two-parent families. AI/AN students and parents had a higL regard for education and 

preferred math and English. AI/AN stayers were acadenucally equal to other urban district 



42 



31 



stayers; GPAs and other measures of achievement were higher for stayers than dropouts. 

AI/AN parents and students rated urban schools higher than reservation schools while 

expressing the difficulties of making a successful transition from one to another. In this 

study, Navajo students dropped out less than all other tribes. 

Another longitudinal study began in 1984 by Deyhle (1989). This ethnographic 

study of Navajo and Ute youth in a border reservation community analyzed issues such as 

leaving school, race relations, academic achievement and culture change within the context 

of school and community. In data presented from 179 dropout questionnaires, a database 

of 1,489 youth tracked over an eight year period, several hundred etiinographic interviews, 

and observations in schools and communities, Deyhle found that culturally specific factors 

are important in understanding why many Navajo and Ute youth leave school. Deyhle 

tracked five cohorts of 543 students from the class of 1984 to the class of 1988. She 

summarized her findings in this way: 

In summary, combining the data that represent complete high school careers 
for these five groups of youth, 57% graduated through either traditional or 
non-traditional means, 36% dropped out of school, and 7% remain 
"unknown" The graduate rate of 57% is lowered to 47% when reporting 
only students who graduated on time in the traditional high school program. 
However, these combined figures gloss over a clear pattern determined by 
examining the record year by year. As many as 18% of these youth were 
physically in school for twelve years and still did not graduate. Over half 
55%, of the youth that dropped out did so during the 12th grade, indicating a 
persistence towards getting a high school degree, and a significant number of 
the graduates (20%) managed to graduate only through additional years or 
alternative programs, (p. 38) 

Deyhle then asked 174 school leavers why tiiey left school; die reasons students gave are 

reported in a later section of this study. The significance of Deyhle's study is that she was 

able to reveal a cross-over in the final year (1988) indicating that dropouts exceeded 

graduates. Deyhle attributes this to the fact that data do not reflect additional years needed 

to complete high school for the class of 1988; in other words, tiie class of 1988 has not had 

as many years to finish as the class of 1986. Nevertheless, tiiis emphasizes the point that 

the situation does not appear to be getting better. 



43 



32 



National Longitudinal Studies 

There are three major student longitudinal studies that have been sponsored by the 
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES); the National Longitudinal Study of the 
High School Class of 1972 (NLS-72), the High School and Beyond (HS&B) project, and 
the National Educational Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS:88). The snaall sample size of 
AI/ANs in these data bases makes it statistically tenuous to explore the dropout issue. 
However, the trae value of knowing about and analyzing the Al/AN data in NCES student 
data bases lies in the potential to hopefully increase the AJ/AN sample size in future studies. 
To do so, we need to know why existing studies were initiated and how they were 
conducted in order to employ sampling strategies to ensure a robust sampling of AI/ANs. 

NLS-72, the first longitudinal student study sponsored by NCES, gathered data from 
a sample population of nearly 23,000 high school seniors in over 1,000 schools beginning 
in 1972. In the base-year and four follow-up surveys, data were gathered on students' 
secondary school background, academic ability, activities related to work, postsecondary 
experiences, family life, and personal ambitions. Survey data was also collected from 
school administrators. The fifth follow-up survey in 1986 continued to collect considerable 
data on work experiences and periods of unemployment, postsecondary achievements, 
family history, and personal ambitions. Through these surveys, NL.S-72 compiled a very 
large volume of data relating to pre- and post-high school experiences of students. 

The AVAN sample in NLS-72 was listed at 242 respondents which represents about 
one percent of the total sample. Published reports using NLS-72 data never report specific 
findings on AI/ANs because the standard errors are too large due to the small sample size. 
It is of interest to note that a descriptive analysis of the unweighted data indicates only 12 
percent of die AI/AN sample were college graduates by 1986 compared to 42 percent of the 
Asians, 30 percent of the Whites, and 22 percent of die Afro- Americans. 

The second NCES-initiated longitudinal study, HS&B, included both a high school 
sophomore cohort and a senior cohort. These two cohorts were surveyed in order to 



33 



collect additional data related to high school persistence (the "dropout problem") and the 
transition to and success in postsecondary education. HS&B collected baseline survey data 
from over 52,000 sophomore and senior high school students in over 1,100 schools in 
1980, with subsequent follow-up surveys in 1982, 1984, and 1986. Student 
questionnaires gathered data on individual and family backgrounds, high school 
experiences, work experiences, plans for the future, and cognitive tests. A separate survey 
collected data on school enrollment, staff characteristics, educational programs, facilities 
and services, dropout rates (for sophomore cohort only). 

There was a self-reported sample of 351 "Native Americans" in tiie sophomore 
cohort, of which 122 were recoded to White, non-Hispanic based on speculation tiiat some 
respondents thought this category meant being bom in America. This left a total of 229 
respondents identified as "AI/AN" in the sophomore cohort. The dropout rate of this 
sample based on a weighted estimates was around 23 percent compared to seven percent of 
tiie Asians and 14 percent of tfie Whites. There was a self-reported sample of 229 Native 
Americans in the senior cohort, and again 20 were recoded to White, non-Hispanic. This 
left a total of 209 respondents identified as "AI/AN" in tiie senior cohort. It is difficult to 
extrapolate on the dropout issue for tiie senior cohort, but follow-up surveys indicate tiiat 
over 70 percent of tiie AI/AN sample had only a high school diploma or less six years later 
compared to around 50 percent of the Whites. 

Studies generated from tiie high school cohort data in NLS-72 and HS&B led to tiie 
need to examine student development and educational experiences at even younger ages. 
As a result NELS:88 became NCES's tiiird major longitudinal student study. NELS:88 
collected baseUne data from 24,599 eighth graders in 1988 and will conduct follow-up 
surveys through middle school, high school, and coUege or employment. Key research 
issues include mathematics and science programs, effective schools, academic growth, 
dropouts, disadvantaged students, bilingualism, transitions to high school and college, and 
the influence of peer groups. 



34 

There was a self-reported sample of 936 "Native Americans" in the NELS:88 data, of 
which 639 were receded to White, non-Hispanic for die same reason stated earlier. This 
left a total of 307 respondents identified as "AI/AN." At the present time, dropout data for 
the NELS:88 study are being compiled and will be presented to Congress in September, 
1991. 

There is a need to increase the sample of AI/AN respondents in NCES longilaidinal 
student studies. There are several strategies to increase the sample size by taking advanta je 
of the two stage stratified sampling technique used by NCES-schools are the first unit of 
analysis and students are the second. At the very least, NCES should target states with 
concentrated populations of native people. Public, private and federal schools receiving 
federal monies to educate AI/ANs need to be asked to assist in Identifying and contacting 
respondents to participate in these smdies. Tribal govemments and education programs 
must be active parmers in ensuring a representative sampling. Larger tribes need to carry 
out their own studies using survey instiuments developed by NCES to compare local 
conditions with national data. 

The next step is to make sure that AI/AN researchers and : olicy analysts at all levels 
have access to the data, knowledge of appropriate research metiiods, and the technical 
resources to cany out credible studies. At die basic level, this means knowing how to use 
NCES data bases and disseminate the findings tiirough scholarly outlets. Unless more 
AI/AN people become proficient at using NCES data bases, tiieir pleas and demands to 
increase the sample size will go unheard. 

State Reports 

The fifty states were contacted and asked to participate in this initial study. Twenty 
states witii the highest AVAN populations according to die 1980 census were targeted for 
the study. The Indian education official and die Chief State School Officer in each state 
were asked to supply information for their state on AVAN dropouts, and were also 
encouraged to share any information that tiiey knew of regarding the national AI/AN 



35 



dropout problem. In subsequent communication, we asked for the rate, how the rate was 
computed, and the definition of dix)pout. Although we were aware that state data would be 
quite disparate, we gathered it in light of tlie fact that it was the only plentil ul and readily 
available data on AI/AN dropouts. All twenty of the targeted states plus sbc others 
responded and sent either current dropout mformation for AI/AN students or an explanation 
indicating that their state did not collect such statistics by ethnicity. 

In almost all cases the AI/AN dropout rate was one of the highest, if not the highest 
of any ethnic group in the state. The AI/AN dropout rate was always higher than the 
statewide total dropout rate where such information was available. The following is a 
summary of the dropout information on AI/AN students provided by the states. 

Alaska. Alaska sent its Report on Early Leaver Project, Phase I as well as Report 
on Early Leaver Project Phase IL Phase I supplies a count of "early leavers" in the 17 
districts in the state which served "60.3 percent of tiie total 7-12 grade enrollment in the 
state in June of 1989" (p. 1) and lists them by etiinicity.* The formula used to calculate the 
annual dropout rate was reported as: 

Number of leavers x 100 = percent left school in a given year 

June enrollment + leavers 

The study provides a "completion rate (9th grade to graduation)" for different ethnic 
groups, citing a 67.0 percent completion rate for AI/AN students and a 75.1 percent 
statev/ide total completion rate. The following data were also included: 
Table 4 

State of Alaska 1989 Percent of Early Leavers By Grade and Race/Ethnicity 



Grade 


AT/AN 


Other 


9 


6.3% 


4.0% 


10 


7.5% 


5.7% 


11 


13.5% 


5.8% 


12 


8.6% 


4.6% 



* Data for Anchorage were excluded ftom the final statistics because unlike the other districts. Anchorage 
included transfer students in those reported as dropouts. 



36 

The total dropout rate for grades 9-12 is not given fay ethnicity. The report 
concludes, among other things, that "a standardized system needs to be in place to track 
program successes over time" (p. 6). Phase n included data from the 32 districts who 
consented to participate in die study. The same methodology was used as in Phase I of the 
study. The following annual dropout rates were reported: 

Tables ^ ^ 

State of Alaska 1990 Percent of AI/AN and Total Early Leavers by Grade 



Grade 


AI/AN 


Total 


7 


1.5% 


1.3% 


8 


1.4% 


1.2% 


9 


6.9% 


4.1% 


10 


9.3% 


7.3% 


11 


9.2% 


8.2% 


12 


9.0% 


6.0% 



Table6 ^, . . 

State of Alaska 1990 Early Leavers for Grades 7-12 by Race/Ethfiicity 

All Participating Districts 

Rape/Ethnicifv Except Anchorage Anchorasg CTllV 

White 3.9% 11.8% 

AI/AN 5.8% 23.0% 

Other 4.5% 11.8% 



Arizona. Arizona sent a Comparison of Dropout Rates Between American Indians 
and Total Enrollment for the State of Arizona. Grades 9-12 for the Years 1985-86 to 1989- 
90. The state calculated annual dropout rates. The foUowing dropout rates were reported: 

Table 7 

State of Arizona AI/AN and Total Dropout Rate for Grades 9-12 by Year 



Year AI/AN Jot^ EnroUment 



1985-86 


19.11% 


10.93% 


1986-87 


18.38% 


10.69% 


1987-88 


16.06% 


10.11% 


1988-89 


15.80% 


10.17% 


1989-90 


14.32% 


9.90% 



Included in the data from Arizona were enrollment and dropout rates by county for AI/AN 
and overall (total) high school enrollment. 



37 



California. California sent a three-year summary of dropouts in public high 
schools by ethnic group, class of 1989. The rate reported was a three-year cumulative 
dropout rate, comparing the total enrollment in grade 10 (1986-87) with the total number of 
dropouts in grade 10 (1986-87), grade 11 (1987-88) and grade 12 (1988-89) and 
computing a dropout rate. The following data were reported: 



Three Year Summary for Number of Dropouts in Grades 10-12 at California Public ffigh Schools by 
Race/Ethnicity in the Class of 1989 

Race/Ethnicitv Dropout Rate 

AI/AN 20.7% 
Hispanic 28.5% 
Black 31.1% 
State Total 20.4% 



Colorado. Colorado sent the Colorado Public School Annual Dropout Rates 

Grades Seven Through Twelve 1989-90 and Class of 1990 Graduation Rates. The state 

reported its annual dropout rate in grades seven through twelve, counting the students 

enrolled in those grades and calculating a dropout rate based on the number of students 

who dropped out between July 1 and June 30. The graduation rate reported is a three-year 

graduation rate encompassing grades 10-12, but the state has adopted the following 

definition for its graduation rate to go into effect in 1991: 

The number of graduates as a percentage of the ninth grade enrollment four 
years earlier and does not account for mobility into and out of the state. 
(Colorado Department of Education, 1990, p. v) 

The following data were reported: 

Table 9 

State of Colorado Class of 1990 AI/AN and Total Graduation Rate by School Type* 

School Type A VAN lolal 

Excluding Alternative Schools 63.6% 82.3% 
Including Alternative Schools 57.0% 80.0% 



♦This graduation rate was based on a three year rate, grades 10-12 



38 



Table 10 

State of Colorado AI/AN and Total Dropout Rate in Grades 10-12 by Year 

Year MIAH iQlal 

1987- 88 12.1% 6.9% 

1988- 89 12.3% 6.8% 

1989- 90 13.5% 6.8% 



Table 11 

State of Colorado AI/AN and Total Dropout Rate in Grades 7- 12 by Year 

Year AI/AN lolal 

1987- 88 7.5% 4.1% 

1988- 89 7.8% 4.2% 

1989- 90 8.5% 4.1% 



Table 12 

State of Colorado AI/AN and Total Dropout Rate by Grade and Year 







AI/AN 






Total 


1989-90 


Grade 


1987-88 


1988-89 


1989-90 


1987-88 


1988-89 


7 


0.2% 


1.1% 


0.7% 


2.0% 


0.2% 


0.2% 


8 


1.0% 


1.2% 


0.7% 


0.4% 


0.4% 


0.3% 


9 


8.0% 


6.8% 


8.0% 


3.7% 


3.5% 


3.2% 


10 


10.6% 


11.8% 


10.3% 


5.7% 


5.3% 


5.6% 


n 


9.0% 


8.4% 


11.0% 


5.7% 


6.3% 


5.7% 


12 


7.8% 


6.1% 


9.5% 


4.6% 


4.7% 


4.6% 


Ungraded 


21.1% 


0.0% 


0.0% 


13.1% 


4.1% 


2.8% 


Altem. 


34.5% 


33.9% 


33.0% 


31.8% 


31.5% 


28.5% 



In general, AI/AN students had the highest dropout rates and the lowest graduation rates of 
any ethnic group in the state. 

Florida* Florida responded over the telephone to a request for AI/AN dropout data. 
The annual dropout rate was reported, with dropouts identified annually between August 1 
and July 31 and compared to enrollment figures collected in October. They reported a 
dropout rate of 6.4 percent indicating that 53 out of 831 AI/AN students in grades 9-12 had 
dropped out. 

The state of Florida is able to account for transfers often labeled as dropouts through 
its Soundex System that tracks students throughout the state. Currently students are 
identified by social security number, as well as a number of other variables. Using this 
system, Florida is able to follow the transfer of students to other schools within the state. 



50 



39 



Rorida is assisting other states in setting up a similar pilot system of student record 
transfer, with hopes of developing a nationwide student record tracking system. 

Georgia. Georgia sent a response on its non-English language background and 
limited English-proficient students, including AI/AN, but did not include any specific 
dropout information. Marilyn Beck, Dropout Prevention Specialist at the Georgia 
Department of Education, responded to a telephone inquiry as to the nature of the data 
available in the State of Georgia on AI/AN dropouts. According to her letter, the state of 
Georgia has not, in the past, collected dropout statistics by race/ethnic group, but will begin 
doing so in the 1991-92 school year. 

Idaho. Idaho sent a summary of AI/AN enrollment and dropout figures for those 
schools in Idaho that participate in the Johnson-0*Malley* program. This included the 
following figures for student enrolknent and dropout: 
Table 13 

State of Idaho Johnson - O'Malley Enrollment and Dropout Figures by Year 





Elementary 


Secondary 




Year 


Enrollment 


Enrollment 


Dropouts 


85-86 


974 


576 


34 


86-87 


1061 


614 


41 


87-88 


1020 


614 


31 


88-89 


987 


613 


23 


89-90 


1023 


663 


37 



It is unclear whether the dropout data represent grades K-12 or grades 9-12, although 
officials in Idaho communicated the belief that dropouts were reported for grades 9-12 
only. Completion data were also available: 



* The Johnson-O'Malley Act of 1934 (amended in 1936 and 1975) provides funding for supplemental 
programs to meet the specialized and unique educational needs of eligible Indian students. Eligible 
participants must be children that are one-fourth or more degrees of Indian blood and who are recognized by 
the Secretary of Interior as being eligible for Bureau of Indian Affairs services. Also, participants must be 
between at least three years of age and not past the 12th grade, with a priority given to those resisding on or 
near Indian reservations. 



ERLC 



51 



40 



Table 14 

State of Idaho Johnson - O'Malley Completion Rate 



Year 


12th Grade 
Enrollment 


Graduates 


Graduation Rate 


85-86 


62 


51 


82.26% 


86-87 


84 


65 


77.38% 


87-88 


80 


66 


82.50% 


88-89 


77 


60 


77.92% 


89-90 


93 


72 


77.42% 



The drawback to reporting such completion data is that they only provide a graduation 
rate for those students who persevere to 12th grade. ConsequenUy, the graduation rate for 
all of the students who started kindergarten twelve years earlier cannot be generalize from 
these data. The state of Idaho does not currently collect dropout data on students by 
ethnicity. A new system to do so is being adopted by the state. 

Iliinois. The Illinois State Board of Education sent the state's report on dropouts by 
grade, sex and racial/ethnic category. Annual dropout rates were derived by counting the 
students enrolled in the Fall and the number of dropouts in the Spring and calculating a 
dropout rate. The following data were reported: 



Table 15 

1989-90 State of Illinois AI/AN and Total Dropout Rate by Grade and Sex 





AI/AN Dropout Rate 


State Total E)rc^ut Rate 


Grade 


Male 


Female 


Male 


Female 


1 


1.4% 


2.0% 


0.3% 


0.3% 


2 


0.0% 


1.2% 


0.2% 


02% 


3 


0.0% 


0.0% 


0.2% 


0.2% 


4 


0.0% 


0.0% 


0.2% 


0.2% 


5 


0.0% 


0.0% 


0.2% 


0.2% 


6 


0.0% 


0.0% 


0.2% 


0.2% 


7 


0.9% 


0.0% 


0.3% 


0.3% 


8 


0.0% 


1.0% 


0.6% 


0.6% 


9 


6.5% 


0.8% 


5.4% 


4.1% 


10 


10.0% 


10.2% 


8.1% 


6.5% 


11 


11.9% 


6.9% 


8.1% 


6.8% 


12 


13.3% 


6.7% 


6.9% 


5.6% 



Illinois also reported that AI/AN total dropout rates for grades 1-8 was 0.51 percent 
compared to the state total of 0.34 percent. AI/AN dropout rates for grades 9-12 was 8 
percent compare to 6.6 percent for the state as a whole. The dropout rate in grades 1-8 for 



ERIC 



52 



41 



AI/AN students is the third highest in tlie state, behind the Hispanic (0.78%) and Black 
non-Hispanic (0.75%) dropout rates in grades 1-8. The dropout rate in grades 9-12 for 
AI/AN students is the third highest in the state, bshind the Hispanic (12.26%) and Black 
non-Hispanic (12.07%) dropout rates in grades 9-12. 

Kansas. Kansas sent the following data for AI/AN students and dropout figures 
for grades 9-12 during the 1989-90 school year: 



Table 16 

State of Kansas 1989-90 AI/AN Enrollment and Drt^ut Figures fw Grades 9-12 

AI/AN AI/AN 

Enrollment Dropouts Dropout Rate 

Male 464 34 7.33% 

Female 452 32 7.08% 

Total 916 66 7.21% 



From these statistics it is unclear when students were counted, how they were defined, or 
how AI/ANs compare with the rest of the population in Kansas. 

Michigan. No current dropout information was available; 1990-91 information was 
expected in May 1991. 

Minnesota. Minnesota sent their report //i/bmMir/on on Minnesota School Dropouts 
1989-90, in which the following rates were reported: 



Table 17 

State of Minnesota 1989-90 AI/AN and Total Dropout Rate for Grades 7-12 





AI/AN 


State Total 


Year 


Dropout Rate 


Dropout Rate 


1980-81 


10.8% 


2.6% 


1981-82 


10.9% 


2.5% 


1982-83* 


10.8% 


2.1% 


1983-84 


9.2% 


2.2% 


1984-85 


10.1% 


2.5% 


1985-86* 


10.8% 


2.6% 


1986-87 


9.4% 


2.9% 


1987-88* 


11.6% 


3.0% 


1988-89 


11.1% 


3.2% 


1989-90 


12.4% 


3.4% 



For all but three of the years included in this report, die AI/AN dropout rate was the 
second highest of any racial/ethnic group, surpassed only by the reported Black dropout 



ERIC 



53 



42 



rate. In tlie remaining three years identified with an asterisk, the AI/AN dropout rate was 
the highest reported of any racial/ethnic group. Minnesota also sent two documents 
produced by thek Indian School Council. It's Time to Break the Trend! Annual Dropout 
Percentage Rate for AI/AN and White Students in Selected Urban School Districts (1983- 
1987), focuses primarily on tlie educational status of AI/AN and suggests that a solution to 
this problem may be found in the creation (or revival) of Indian controlled schools. The 
report includes a discussion of enrollment, attrition, absenteeism, suspension, 
dropout/mobility and graduation rate among AI/ANs in Minnesota and contains information 
supplied by the MINCRIS data file from MinneapoUs, St. Paul, and Duluth public school 
districts. Included in this report were the following dropout rates for the State of 
Mmnesota: 
Tabic 18 

Minnesota AI/AN Dropout Rate From Selected Urban Versus Rural School Districts by Year 
Urban School Rural School 



Year Districts Disllicta 

1983- 84 21.0% 4.0% 

1984- 85 18.0% 4.0% 

1985- 86 21.0% 5.0% 

1986- 87 19.0% 4.0% 



Our Children Our Future, the second additional document sent includes a statement on the 
dropout rate among AI/AN in Minnesota taken from "educational statistics." It is unclear 
exactly what system was used to compile these statistics. This report states that "of every 
100 students entering the 9tli grade 54 will graduate" (Indian School Council, p. 1). 

Mississippi. No dropout information specific to AI/ANs was collected at this time. 

Montana. Montana sent information on its "Tracks" program, an attempt to design 
and implement a comprehensive database and pennanent collection, tracking, accountability 
and reporting process that provides a statistical profile of AI/AN participation and 
achievement at all educational levels. No specific dropout information is presently available 
on AI/AN dropouts in the state, but work on a record keeping system in Montana is 



54 



43 



underway. 

Nebraska. The state sent a Nebraska Department of Education 1988-89 Report of 
Dropouts by Race by School District. The report gives a statewide AI/AN dropout total but 
the total number of students is not indicated. According to Dennis Pool, Education 
Information and Technology Specialist for the State of Nebraska, the total population is not 
provided because that information is collected in the Fall, but dropout data are collected in 
the Spring, making the two populations incomparable and the calculation of an accirrate rate 
impossible at this time. The state is currendy modifying its data collection methods to 
address this problem. However, they did report that one AI/AN in grades 7-12 dropped 
out of the non-public district, 147 out of the public, and seven out of the state-operated 
district. 

New Mexico. New Mexico sent a comprehensive dropout report. It reports the 
dropout rate by race, grade and gender for 1988-89, and supplies rates by ethnicity for 
grades 942 for the 1984-85 to 1988-89 school years. It also breaks down dropout reasons 
by race, using a combination of student and school reports to ascertain the reasons for 
dropping out. These are annual dropout rates, adding the number of dropouts identified to 
the number of students enrolled on the last day of school and using the resulting number to 
calculate a dropout rate based on the number of identified dropouts. The following rates 
were reported: 
Table 19 

State of New Mexico AI/AN and Total Dropout Rate for Grades 9- 12 

AI/AN Statewide Total 

Year Dropout Rate i;>ropQUt Ratg 

1984- 85 10.2% 6.8% 

1985- 86 12.2% 7.4% 

1986- 87 12.0% 8.0% 

1987- 88 11,2% 8.3% 

1988- 89 13.3% 10.4% 



44 



Table 20 

State of New Mexico 1988-89 AJ/AN and Total Dropout Rate by Grade 





AI/AN 


Statewide Total 


Grade 


Dropout Rate 


DroooutRate 


9 


14.7% 


10.5% 


10 


13.8% 


11.7% 


11 


13.4% 


10.7% 


12 


10.6% 


8.2% 



Table 21 

State of New Mexico 1988-89 Al/AN and Total Dropout Rate by Sex and Grade 



Grades 7-R Grades 9-12 



Al/AN 






Male 


7.38% 


14.6% 


Female 


6.45% 


12.0% 


State Total 






Male 


*** 


10.9% 


Female 


*** 


9.8% 



Table 22 

State of New Mexico Statewide Total Dropout Rate by Sex for Grades 7-8 

DrqpoutRate 
Grade Male Female 

7 4.08% 3.77% 

8 4.42% 4.15% 



In all of the years reported and grade level, the AI/AN dropout rate was the highest of any 
ethnic group in the state. 

New York. New York does not compile dropout information by ethnic group at 
this time, but plans to begin doing so in the future. 

North Carolina. North Carolina sent its 1988-89 Dropout Data Report. This 
included the state's annual dropout rate, counting the number of students enrolled on the 
last day of the term and comparing this number with the number of dropouts identified 
during the regular and Summer terms. They reported that the AI/AN dropout rate for 
grades 9-12 was 12.5 percent for males and 10.4 percent for females. The dropout rate 
reported for AI/AN was the highest of any ethnic group reported for either sex. 

North Carolina also sent the report What Do We Know About North Carolina 



45 



Dropouts? The information compiled in this report was collected by individual school 
districts. The report does identify reasons given for dropping out. It also includes 
suggestions for improving the reporting of the dropout rate and improving services to 
reduce tiie dropout phenomena. In this report, a projected four-year dropout rate among 
AI/AN students of 39 percent was reported This projection was made by calculating the 
dropout rate using a one year cohort study for a group of ninth-graders and multiplying the 
resulting rate by four to come up with a projected four year dropout rate. 

A report from the State Advisory Council on American Indian Education was also 
included in the material received fipom the state of North Carolina- 

North Dakota. North Dakota sent a letter stating that "the North Dakota 
Department of Public Instruction currendy does not have a comprehensive mechanism for 
identifying and tracking dropouts." The state is in the process of developing such a 
system. 

Oklahoma. Oklahoma sent the Oklahoma Educational Indicators Program report, 
Perspective^ as well as yearly dropout reports for 1984-89. Perspective included an 
"annual rate that reflects the percentage of all students enrolled in grades 9 through 12 who 
left school during a smgle school year" (p. 12). The rates reported were as follows: 
Table 23 

State of Oklahoma 1988-89 Dropout Rate by Race/Ethnicity for Grades 9-12 

Race/Ethnicitv Dropout Rate 
White 4.58% 
AI/AN 4.89% 
Black 7.01% 
Hispanic 5.22% 
Asian/Other 3.73% 

Using the yearly dropout reports provided by the state, the following AI/AN annual 
dropout rates were calculated: 



ERLC 



57 



46 



Table 24 

State of Oklahoma AI/AN Dropout Rale by Year for Grades K- 1 2 

AI/AN 

Year Dropout Rate 

1984- 85 1.27% 

1985- 86 1.20% 

1986- 87 1.27% 

1987- 88 1.45% 

1988- 89 1.50% 



Oregon. Oregon sent the report Dropout Rates in Oregon High Schools: The First 
Year of the Student Accounting System. The report includes dropout statistics for grades 
9-12 for the 1988-89 school year. This was the first such report generated by the state and 
it is acknowledged that certain methodological flaws remained to be worked out of this first 
attempt. This was an annual dropout rate, with an initial student count done in October of 
1988 which was used to calculate the dropout rate based on the dropouts identified between 
October of 1988 and October of 1989. The following rates were reported: 



Table 25 

State of Oregon 1988-89 Dropout Rale by Race/Ethnicity for Grades 9-12 

Race/Ethnicitv D ropout Rate 

White 7.2% 

Black 8.8% 

Hispanic 14.3% 

Asian American 4.3% 

AVAN 12,0% 



Rhode Island. Rhode Island reported that no AI/ANs were listed as participants in 
any of their dropout prevention projects. However, it was reported in later communication 
that six male and three female AI/AN students dropped out of school in Rhode Island 

South Dakota. South Dakota sent 1981-82 to 1987-88 dropout statistics for grades 
9-12 public and non-pubUc. This included an annual dropout rate, based on the number of 
dropouts identified in the fall as having dropped out the previous year and die number of 
students enrolled in the fall of the previous year. The following dropout figures were 



reported: 



5 



47 



Table 26 

State of South Dakota Al/AN Dropouts for Grades 9-12 by Type of School and Year 
Public School Dropouts Non-Public School Dropouts 



1981-82 


14.22% 


3.49% 


27.77% 


0.25% 


1982-83 


17.39% 


2.27% 


22.38% 


0.14% 


1983-84 


15.65% 


2.44% 


19.78% 


0.14% 


1984-85 


19.52% 


2.82% 


24.77% 


0.13% 


1985-86 


12.49% 


2.22% 


18.64% 


0.94% 


1986-87 


13.05% 


2.20% 


37.25% 


0.03% 


1987-88 


14.27% 


2.66% 


27.13% 


0.15% 



Also included was a photocopy of a page from the South Dakota Educational 
Statistical Digest 1988-89, reporting high school dropout information. Specific 
methodology for collecting this data could not be provided by the South Dakota Dei-artment 
of Education. According to Susan Ryan who works with the office in charge of collecting 
dropout statistics in the state, a new, comprehensive dropout data collection system is being 
designed and should be in use by the 1991-92 school year. The state of South Dakota 
reported that the AI/AN dropout rate was 13 percent for grades 7-12 compared to the 2.99 
percent for the statewide total. 

Texas. Texas provided Report on 1987-88 Public School Dropouts" and "1988-89 
Public School Dropout Report. These reports provide annual dropout rates, comparing the 
number of identified dropouts between September and August to the fall enrollment figures 
for that year. The 1987-88 report provided the following dropout data: 



Table 27 










State of Texas 1987-88 and 1988-89 AI/AN and Total Dn^ut Rate by Grade 




Al/AN 


Total 




Dropout Rate 


DiopoutRate 


Crade 


1987-88 


1988-89 


1987-88 


1988-98 


7 


475% 


4.81% 


3.05% 


2.57% 


8 


6.36% 


6.68% 


4.60% 


3.58% 


9 


9.89% 


20.59% 


9.57% 


9.17% 


10 


13.83% 


22.89% 


8.06% 


8.15% 


11 


8.99% 


21.21% 


7.41% 


7.06% 


12 


7.88% 


25.18% 


5.68% 


5.78% 


All Grades 


8.64% 


16.50% 


6.44% 


6.05% 



The overall dropout rate decreased between the two years, but this may be attributed 



5^ 



48 



to "improved record keeping and tracking of students" (p. 1). However, during this same 
period of time, the AI/AN dropout rate in grades 7-12 went from 8.64 percent to 16^50 
percent. The fact that between the two years the AI/AN dropout rate increased by ahnost 
100 percent provides evidence that many AI/AN dropouts may never be identified without 
careful tracking and record keeping. The reports also include rates by ethnic groups in 
urban and rural areas and the reasons given by students for dropping out 

Utah. The Utah State Office of Education sent statistics on AI/AN dropouts from 
1980-1989. It is unclear how the statistics were derived, although the rates are obviously 
caluculated on an annual basis. There was no indication of definition of a dropout. The 
following data were reported: 
Table 28 

State of Utah AI/AN Enrollment and Drq;)Out Figure for Grades 7-12 



Year 


Enrollment 


Dropouts 


Dropout Rate 


1980-81 


5,985 


130 


2.17% 


1981-82 


5.907 


159 


2.69% 


1982-83 


5,923 


178 


3.00% 


1983-84 


5,961 


121 


2.03% 


1984-85 


5,645 


138 


2.44% 


1985-86 


5.615 


125 


2.23% 


1986-87 


5,633 


155 


2.75% 


1987-88 


5,635 


87 


1.54% 


1988-89 


5,739 


113 


1.97% 



Washington. Washington sent Dropout Rates and Graduation Statistics by County 
and School District for School Year 1988-89. The dropout rates report included reasons 
given for dropping out by ethnicity. Annual dropout rates were reported, counting students 
enrolled in October and counting the number of dropouts identified between October 1 and 
September 30. The following dropout rates were reported: 
Table 29 

State of Washington 1988-89 AI/AN and Total Dropout and Graduation Rate for Grades 9-12 
propout Rate Graduatipn Rate 

AI/AN 13.63% 72.09% 

Total Dropout Rate 6.53% 84.44% 



Note. Graduation rates were calculated based on 12th grade enrollment 

The dropout rate reported for AI/ANs was the second highest dropout rate of any 



ERIC 



60 



49 



ethnic group in the state, behind the 14^55 percent Black dropout rate^ The AI/AN 
graduation rate is the lowest rate reported for any ethnic group in the state* The drawback 
to reporting such completion data is that it only provides a graduation rate for those 
students who persevere to 12th-grade. The graduation rate for all of the students who 
started kindergarten twelve years earlier cannot be generalized from this data* A letter from 
Joan Banker, Secretary of the Washington State Indian Education Office claims that ''the 
percentages of Indian students dropping out of school can range anywhere from 50-75 
percent in ruralAeservation areas to almost 57 percent in the Seattie area" 

Wisconsin. Wisconsin sent a summary of the enrollment and dropout figures for 
AI/AN students by school district. Using these figures, an annual dropout rate was 
calculated The following dropout rates were calculated for grades 9-12: 



Table 30 

State of Wisconsin 1989-90 AI/AN Dropout Rate by Sex for Grades 9-12 



Sex 



Dropout Rate 



Males 

Females 

Total 



7.84% 
4.33% 
6.08% 



Summary of State Data 

The following table presents a composite view of all state statistics we received for this study. 



Table 31 

State Dropout Rate by Grade and Year 



State 



Dropout Rate 



Grades 7-12 
Alaska 
Colorado 
Minnesota 
South Dakota 
Texas 
Utah 

Grades 10-12 
California* 
Colorado 



5.80% 
8.50% 
12.40% 
13.00% 
16.50% 
1.97% 



20.70% 
13.50% 



Year 



1990-91 
1989-90 
1989-90 
1988-89 
1988-89 
1988-89 



1988- 89 

1989- 90 



State 



Dropout Rate 



Year 



Grades 9-12 

Arizona 14.32% 1989-90 

Florida 6.40% 1990-91 

Illinois 8.03% 1989-90 

Kansas 7.21% 1989-90 

New Mexico 13.30% 1988-89 
North Carolina 

Male 12.50% 1988-89 

Female 10.40% 1988-89 

Oklahoma 4.89% 1988-89 

Oregon 12.00% 1988-89 
South Dakota 

PubUc 14.27% 1987-88 

Non-PubUc 2.66% 1987-88 

Washington 13.63% 1988-89 

Wisconsin 6.08% 1989-90 



♦California reported a three-year cumulative dropout rate. 



ERLC 



6 



50 

Most of the states that sent the requested infonnation sent reports published by 
various state agencies. These agencies use a variety of formats to report state data. Many 
states provide only total dropout rates without any accompanying enrollment figures, while 
some states provide enrolhnent and dropout figures in each grade, K-12, and provide rates 
for each grade as well. In addition, some states report dropout rates for grades K-12, some 
for grades 7-12, some for grades 9-12 and still others in grades 10-12. In addition, it is 
not always clear for which time period a state is reporting dropouts, some only collecting 
dropout information for September through June and some including summer dropouts in 
their overall rates. 

The ultimate solution would be for all fifty of the states to adopt the exact same format 
for collecting and reporting dropout statistics as suggested by die Council of Chief State 
School Officers' (CCSSO) task force on collecting national dropout statistics. In the 

meantime, state reporting agencies could facilitate the possibility of interstate comparisons 

// 

and cumulative rates by reporting both the student enrollment and dropout figures by 
ethnicity and grade, in addition to reportiing cumulative dropout rates. States should also 
clearly state which time period the reported dropout rate covers. Interested third parties 
could then i..anjpulate this raw data to suit tiieir needs. 

Reports From Four Large Urban School Districts 
Data were received from four large urban school districts to represent the AVAN 
dropout condition in urban areas of a high concentration of AI/ANs. The districts included 
Albuquerque Public Schools, Los Angeles Unified School District, Phoenix Union High 
School District, and Tulsa Public Schools. The data are summarized below. 

Albuquerque Public Schools. A distiict report for 1989-90, (\vm?\ Rgpon On 
Dropouts. Alhnquerque Public Schools was received from Dr. Eugene Leitka, District 
Coordinator of APS Indian Education. In this comprehensive report, the AI/AN high 
school dropout rate is calculated at 14.83 percent for 1989-90. The highest dropout rates in 
the district were for AI/AN and Hispanic students, 14.03 percent ; Black students dropped 



ERIC 



) 

62 



51 



out at a rate of 1 L85 percent, Anglo at 10.15 percent and the Asian/Other rate was 9.52 
percent. There were decreases in the dropout rate from 1988-89 to 1989-90 among Blacks 
and Asians; the rate for Anglos remained the same. There were increases in the Hispanic 
and AI/AN rates; Hispanics increased the most with 2.42 percent and .38 percent for 
AI/ANs. The middle school dropout rate is somewhat less at 1 1.83 percent for AI/AN, 
10.37 percent for Blacks, 7.04 percent for Anglos, 6.39 percent for Hispanics, and 4.58 
percent for Asian/Other. In considering the statistics, the rates for AVAN, Black, and 
Asian/Other are based on smaller numbers than the rates for Hispanics and Anglos and 
therefore may not be as accurate. According to Dr. Leitka, there are approximately 5,000 
AI/AN students, however, about 4,200 are "certified" as AI/AN for the district's Indian 
education programs. APS has a total school population of approximately 86,000. Dr. 
Leitka indicated that mobility for AI/AN is the highest among all ethnic groups in the 
district. Tutorial assistance under the various federal programs is in place, but the numbers 
of students reached each year is limited to 800-900. 

Los Angeles Unified School District. In the heart of one of the largest 
metropolitan areas with one of the highest concentrations of AI/ANs is the LA Unified. 
Tim Faulkner, Indian Education Coordinator and Tony Bautista, Dkector of the American 
Indian Education Conraiission within the district provided information. Data on dropouts 
are not kept in the Indian Education Coordinator's Office and Mr. Faulkner indicated that 
he was not successful in getting information from the district office responsible for dropout 
data. Each year he sends out a list of last years*s seniors to find out their status. It is 
assumed that most graduate, but there is no way of knowing whether they completed high 
school requirements. Mr. Bautista indicated that through his office, the estimate of AI/AN 
dropouts is approximately 51 percent, K-12 for the district, and 49 percent for the state of 
California. He indicated that there is no system for accurate identification of AI/AN, partly 
due to peer pressure of not wanting to be called "Indian." There are approximately 1,500 
AI/AN students in LA Unified, but it should be noted that Long Beach and Oakland, and 



52 



southern California communities also have large Al/AN populations. Transition from 
reservation to urban has been a problem. Mr. Bautista attributes this, in part, to a lack of 
role models, lack of career goals, and close cultural and family ties to the reservation. 

Phoenix Union High School District. The dropout rates for AVAN students 
in the Phoenix Union High School District have typically been the highest of all minority 
groups. The purpose of the Indian Education Program is to increase the number of AI/AN 
students who complete their high school requkements. Through a counseling model, the 
program has been able to steadily reduce the dropout rate over the last ten years. In 1990- 
91, the dropout rate for AI/ANs was 16.7 percent compared to 27.6 percent in 1082-83. 
The dropout rates for other ethnic groups for 1990-91 are as follows: Hispanic, 14.0 
percent; Black, 12.8 percent; Anglo, 9.2 percent; and Oriental, 5.7 percent; the total was 
1 1.9 percent. The AI/AN population in PUHSD has stabilized over the years at about 620 
students, but for 1990-91 there were nearly 800 students. According to Sam Mackey, 
Indian Education Counselor, the program focuses on the following components: tutorial 
assistance, personal counseling, vocational counseling, personal growth camps and 
conferences, academic planning, higher education counseling, summer school, academic 
camps, transportation, and cultural activities. 

Tulsa Public Schools. In a Tulsa Public Schools Dropout Report 1990-91 . the 
percent of Al/AN dropouts for grades 9-12 was 8.9 compared with 8.2 percent for Black, 
5.8 percent for White, 4.4 percent for Hispanic, and 3.8 percent for Asian. Tables which 
presented Long-Terra Suspensions for 1990-91 indicated that AI/AN were among the 
lowest of the ethnic groups in this regard. There were approximately 2,700 AI/AN 
students out of 41,000 students in K-12 during 1990-91. There is mobility among AI/ANs 
between rural northeastern Oklahoma and Tulsa, and within the city as well. Prevention 
strategies have centered around K-12 guidance and counseling programs and having Indian 
academic advisors. According to Archie Mason, Indian Pupil Education Coordinator, the 
rate is high, but not alarming; it is not any more or less than other minorities during any 



53 

given year. 

Correlates, Causes, and Reasons for Dropping Out 

That dropping out of school is a serious problem within the AI/AN community has 
been accepted by most of the parties concerned. One line of inquiry that this fact naturally 
inspires is research into the correlates of dropping out among AI/AN students, particularly 
those unique to this group, as well as the reasons given for ultimately leavmg school. 
Programs aimed at solving the problem once it is identified should logically focus on the 
catalyst(s) which inspire it. 

Discussion of the correlates of dropping out gets confounded by o^^er-utilization of 
the term "cause" in writings within the educational field. Unfortunately, it has been 
observed in much of the Uterature on dropouts reviewed for this study that correlates 
regularly undergo an unwarranted metamorphosis, emerging without the proper credentials 
as "causes" for dropping out soon after they are identified. The requirements for a causal 
argument include the following basic guidelines: (1) the cause must precede the effect in 
time, (2) the cause and effect must be empirically correlated, and (3) this observed 
empirical correlation cannot be explained away as being due to the influence of some third 
variable that causes both of them (Rubin & Babbie, 1989, p. 237-239). 

While examples of correlates which comply with the first two requirements for the 
causal argument should be relatively easy to find, the very nature of reality makes 
compliance with the third requirement virtually impossible. Subjects cannot be realistically 
or ethically isolated and exposed in a tightly controlled environment to poverty or grade 
retention to see whether they subsequently drop out of scV ol. Identified correlates are just 
that and although they have predictive power, they cannot be treated as causal factors. 
Even where relationships between variables are highly correlated, examples abound of the 
exceptions (i.e., low socioeconomic stams students who graduate as valedictorians and 
students who were retained several grades, but eventually graduated fi-om high school). In 
deference to the canons of good research, one would be well advised to use infinite caution 



54 

before discussing "causes" or making causal arguments, and the term should certainly not 
be used interchangeably with "correlates". 

Embarking on any discussion of why students drop out could conceivably inspire a 
heated philosophical debate. One logins iO wonder whether correlates and reasons for 
dropping out are not, after all, synonymous, that if one can state the reason for a student's 
dropping out, one has, by definition, identified the cause for dropping out as well. 
However, for the purposes of the present study, reasons and correlates will be discussed in 
the following manner. Reasons for dropping out will be those factors and variables which 
directly influenced their decision to leave school. Correlates of dropping out will be those 
factors which have been identified and are associated with students who drop out. Causes 
will not be discussed in this study. 

There are different sources for identifying both the correlates of dropping out and the 
reasons for dropping out. LeCompte (1987) suggests, "For example, it is easier for an 
alienated student to tell school staff that he or she is transferring to another school or 
entering the military than to admit he has no intention of continuing his studies (p. 253)." 
One would expect that students would be the most valid and valuable resource for 
ascertaining their reasons for dropping out, and indeed Wehlage and Rutter (1987) identify 
the reasons that students themselves give for dropping out as an important source of 
information. However, in the context of examining self report, Ledlow (1990) asks an 
age-old yet significant question in research, "Do people really know why they do what they 
do, and do they tell the truth about it?" (p. 19). She suggests that it is unreasonable to 
expect that adolescents can fully explain all the factors leading to such a complex decision 
as leaving school and more corroborating data are needed in most of these studies. Thus it 
would seem that information acquired firom a variety of sources (i.e., school, parents, 
students, etc.) should be used together where possible. 
Correlates of Dropping Out 

The General Accounting Office's 1986 report School Dropouts, the Extent and 

ERLC 



55 



Nature of the Problem presents the findings of several major studies on the correlates of 
dropping out The following is a list of correlates identified in these studies: 

• Being two or more years behind grade level 

• Being iH^gnant 

• Coming from a household where the mother or father were not in the home when the youth was 

age fourteen 

• Havingrelatively little knowledge of the labor market 

• Low classroom grades 

• Negative school attitudes 

• Delinquent behavior in junior high school 

Using the High School and Beyond (HS&B) database, Ekstrom, Goertz, Pollack, 
and Rock (1986) found significant correlations between socioeconomic status, ethnicity, 
and dropout rates. In addition to those listed by GAO, Ekstrom et al. (1986) also identified 
dropouts to: 

• Be less active in sports and other extracurricular activities and more active in non-school 

related social activities with peers; and 

• Have lower self-esteem with a feeling that they do not have a great deal of control over 

their lives and futures. 

Wehlage and Rutter (1987) also discuss the common correlates for dropping found in 
the four best known national longitudinal studies. These included: 

• Low socioeconomic status 

• Poor performance leading to low grades and course failures 

• Disciplinary problems 

In addition, Wehlage and Rutter (1987) identify low educational/occupational 
aspirations, weak sociability, negative school attitudes, low self esteem, and utilizing an 
external locus of control as possible correlates, although it is unclear whether these 
characteristics are brought to the school or are a product of school experiences. 

To the best of our knowledge, very litde data exist on the correlates for dropping out 
specific to AVAN students. Most of the correlates have been identified in the population at 
large. Some notable exceptions have included work by Platero et al. (1986) and Chan and 
Osthimer (1983). That Platero et al. study on Navajo dropouts identified factors tiiat 
tended to be associated with the school dropouts, as opposed to stayers (1986, p. 28-37). 
The following correlates were identified: 



67 



• Dropouts tended not to live with both parents, often residing in dormitories 

• There was a significant relationship between age and dropping out, with dropouts tending 

to be older than stayers 

• Dropouts tend to come from a lower socioeconomic status than stayers 

• Dropouts are more likely to rome from families that have retained the Navajo language 

anid culture 

• Stayers report more encouragement at home for school, were less likely to report that 

they never took part in school activities and were more likely to agree that tliey would 
like more communication between school and the people with whom they live 

• Dropouts are more likely than stayers to rely on the bus for transportation to school, 

dropouts are more likely to cite hitchhiking as their backup mode of transportation if 
they miss the bus, while stayers are more likely to report that they are able to walk or 
be driven to school if Uiey miss the bus 

• Stayers were more likely than dropouts to report tiiat they always completed their 

homework, were more likely to have described tiieir schoolwork as very good or good, 
and stayers reported fewer days absent than the dropouts. Dropouts were more likely to 
have previous experience with suspension and dropping out than stayers, and the 
number of times that one had dropped out previously was a good predictor of current 
dropout status. Interestingly enough, dropouts were no more likely to have been forced 
to repeat a grade. Dropouts also reported a lower average number of schools previously 
attended 

• Stayers were significantly more likely to expect to graduate from from high school, were 

more likely to believe that further schooling would enhance their chances of getting a 
job, and were more likely to plan to go to college. 

• Dropouts were more likely to report problems with drugs or alcohol than stayers, and 

dropouts w^ more likely to report previous arrests. 

Chan and Osthimer also embarked on a study of "the educational experiences of high 

risk Navajo youth" (1983, p. 1). Their study reported the following conclusions: 

Students whose families encouraged the development of English appeared to 
be more likely to do well in school and to graduate. Successful youths came 
from moderate homes that valued many of the Navajo traditions while 
adhering to many modern notions. Dropouts perceived themselves as more 
contemporary.... Distance to school and transportation problems affected 
school attendance, motivation and the ability to go to school and to keep up 
with school work. Finally, college bound students had concrete future goals 
and plans, while graduates had some future goals and plans. Dropouts had 
little future orientation and no plans to improve their unemployment status. 
fp. 1) 

Ousterhout's (1979) findings reveal that the economic base of seasonal earnings (like 
fishing) and mobility of employment opportunities influence many Tlingit students to drop 
out. However, this factor would also relate to non-AI/AN students who come from this 
type of an economy. More research into the area of the unique correlates of dropping out 
among AI/AN students would seem to be indicated. 

In addition, there are indications that those excelling in education want to be less like 



their parents who lack a formal education (Chan & Osthimer, 1983). This is problematic 



57 



because parents can be a tremendous resource to help students succeed, and a sense of 
alienation among family niembers has lasting effects in terms of the fundamental well-being 
among different generations. For example, the children of AI/AN parents, who are 
themselves likely to be dropouts, often come from home environments that do not put any 
value in education. These type of conditions typically lead to poor basic skills which do 
not allow some students to keep up with classroom demands. As a result, conflicts with 
teachers and administrators, poor peer relationships, and feelings of alienation begin to 
foster. It is times like these that make alternatives to going to school far more attractive. 
These alternatives include high school equivalent calificates (i.e., GED), for profit training 
programs and trade schools, military involvement, crime related occupations, and menial 
jobs. 

The variables identified as correlates to dropping out may be discussed as common 
characteristics of the individual students who are later identified as dropouts, both within 
the student and within their home environment. This addresses one half of the dropout 
equation, the other half is the schools themselves. Students at risk for dropping out bring 
all of their assets and liabilities, poverty at home, learning disabilities, support from 
parents, and educational attitudes into the school system, where these attributes are further 
synthesized by and through the characteristics of the schools that they attend New student 
characteristics, both good and bad are the product of this educational crucible. A 
discussion of a Ludents* educational experiences, both the successes and failures is not 
complete without concurrently uavestigating the institutions which they attend 

While studies generally look at the student characteristics that correlate to dropping 
out, they rarely examine the characteristics of schools from which students leave (Wehlage, 
& Rutter, 1987). Such a focus leads to a "blame the victim mentality" which conflicts with 
the reality that students do not drop out in a vacuum. The Platero et al. (1986) study of 
Navajo reservation student dropouts examined school characteristics. They described 
schools in terms of location, type (BIA, contract, public, and private), ethnic composition 



6S 



58 



of principals, transportation and selected environmental factors in school attendance, and 

availability of different academic support programs. In addition, they asked administrators 

and staff their opinion about what causes Navajos to leave school. They reported that lack 

of parental/family support and encouragement, poor academic skills and performance, 

home and family problems, and lack of interest in education were cited as the most 

important reasons given by administrators and staff. It was interesting that factors 

associated with school environment and interactions within the school were not cited as the 

most important reasons; rather, external factors and the responsiblity of the student were 

emphasized. Platero et al. noted that. 

The opinions of the administrators and stajf on the main reasons for the 
dropout problem diverge sharply from the findings that we obtained from the 
student/dropout survey. In contrast to the administrators and staff, the 
students and dropouts were more likely to focus on interactions (between 
peers, between students, and teachers) and school enviromental factors in 
response to the question of what causes Navajos to drop out (p. 61). 

Schools contribute to the dropout problem through institutional behavior that allow a 
student to become excessively absent, then truant, and ultimately dropout These behaviors 
are often characterized by accepting excessive absences and excused absences, accepting 
late home work and maintaining weak/vague discipline standards, attributing problems to 
community and permitting a non-involvement attitude, and setting low expectations for all 
involved (Gonzalez, 1989; Caudell, 1990). The schools are an integral part of die dropout 
equation, and we should be looking at them more carefully, both those from which 
students drop out and those in which they succeed. 

Critical theorists have attempted to confront die dropout issue by focusing on die need 
to change die school system itself (Fine, 1991; LeCompte, 1987). For example, teachers 
who could play key roles in preventing dropouts should be afforded opportunities to direct 
policy, to influence the structures of schooling, or to collaborate with one another. Parental 
involvement, typically suggested as crucial, may not occur because parents lack 
opportunities to present tiiemselves fuUy-in a room spacious with time, patience, and 
respect, in which reciprocity was assumed, power shared, and critique nurtured. 

ER?C 70 



59 



Resources can be reallocated to schools with large numbers of minority students relative to 

more privileged schools. 

From a sccio-cultural perspective, Traeba (1988), sees that 

academic underachievement is not an attribute of the individual [minority 
student], but a socio-cultural phenomenon related to social factors that isolate 
minorities. Cultural and psychological isolation prevents minority students 
from ol?taining the experience, knowledge, and skills required for active 
participation in school activities that are the basis for cognitive development 
and academic success, (p. 202) 

In addition, peer reference groups-who retaliate against such isolation-have a strong 

influence upon at-risk students which increases during the critical learning period when a 

young person is attempting to internalize norms, values, and goals, to find emotional 

support, and to develop a positive self-identity. Social exploitation and discrimination 

takes place in schools when its representatives subject minorities to critical degradation 

incidents through instruction and curriculum. 

Cain, Moody, and Pendergrass (1988b) concur tfiat dropping out can be related to a 

variety of school and social factors, and they ^so add that various economic related factors 

are involved. Low-income or poverty lifestyles result in a lack f adequate nutrition, 

clothing, transportation, medical attention or money for school fees. Students desire for 

money may lead to involvement with dmgs and alcohol. Encounters vrith law enforcement 

because of this involvement results in time lost from school, higher than average rate of 

discipline problems, and school suspensions or expulsion. 

State Reports on Reasons AL'ANs Drop Out 

All of these factors, the dropout correlates that students experience, the individual 

characteristics of the students themselves, the environment in which the students live, and 

the experiences of students within the school system combine to, in the case of dropouts 

produce an ultimate reason or reasons for a student's leaving school. Many states 

contacted during this study provided either lists of the reasons for student drop out or 

specific categories into which dropouts arc placed. Sometimes the students themselves are 

contacted, either as they .lotify the school that they arc dropping out or sometime after they 



ERIC 



71 



60 



have left, to ascertain their reasons for dropping out. According to the information 
supplied by the states, the following would be a comprehensive list of the reasons for 
dropping out of school, both those given by students and those deduced by the schools 

themselves: 

• Transfer - indicated transfer, no transcripts requested 

• Lack of interest or motivation 

• Did not re-enroll, no transcript request 

• Indicated intention of taking the GED 

• Suspended from school and did not return 

• Expelled 

• Pregnancy 

• Unable to adjust to school 

• Left school to work 

• Failing, unable to complete course work 

• Parental request 

• Cannot attend school because of childcarc problems 

• Runaway 

• Marriage 

• Illness, unable to attend because of health reasons (physical or psychological) 

• Entered the military 

• Substance abuse 

• Administrative drop/truancy 

• No interest/disliked school 

• ConfUct with school administrators 

• Financial problems 

• Peer problems/pressure 

• School not meeting needs 

• In alternative program 

• Language problems 

• Unstable home problems 

• Age (too old) 



Most of the states also report the reasons for dropping out without separating them 
out by the ethnicity of the students. The notable exception is New Mexico, the only state 
which presented the reasons for dropping out specific to AI/AN students. The state of 
New Mexico, in its report New Mexico Dropout Study; School Year 1988-89 provided a 
list of the reasons for dropping out by gender and ethnicity. Information was "generally 
provided by the student" (New Mexico State Department of Education, 1990, p- 14). The 
following were the reasons listed for AI/AN students: 



72 



61 



State of New Mexico 1988-89 AI/AN Reasons for Drc^ping Out by Gender, Grades 7-12 



Reason 

Exix'-kd 
Lack . )f Interest 
♦Transfer 
Pregnancy 

Unable to adjust to school 
*Failed to reenroll 
Failing, can't to complete work 
GED 

Parent request 

Child Care 

Suspended 

Employment 

Runaway 

Mairiage 

lUness 

OtherAmknown 



Males 



Females 



25.7% 
23.4% 
12.5% 
0.0% 
9.1% 
4.1% 
4.4% 
4.0% 
3.5% 
0.0% 
2.4% 
1.5% 
0.6% 
0.3% 
0.8% 
7.9% 



17.8% 
20.7% 
16.9% 
12.4% 
5.5% 
5.5% 
3.4% 
2.5% 
3.0% 
3.0% 
1.5% 
1.0% 
1.0% 
1.0% 
0.7% 
4.3% 



* no transcript requested 



According to the information sent by the state, the most common reason for dropping 
out among AI/AN students was expulsion (removed from school by district), followed by 
lack of interest, transferring and, for girls pregnancy, for boys adjustment problems. For 
Asian, White and Black students the four most common reasons were transfer, lack of 
interest, failure to rc-enroll and leaving to take the GED. For Hispanic students the four 
most common reasons were transfer, lack of interest, failure to reenroll and suspension. 
Apparently, in New Mexico AI/AN students are more likely than any other ethnic group to 
become dropouts because for one reason or another the district removes them from school, 
a fact that warrants further investigation given that, as previously mentioned, AI/ANs also 
have the highest dropout rate in the state. 
What AI/AN Students Say 

While briefly reviewed early, tiie Coladarci (1983), Deyhle (1989), and Platero et al. 
(1986) studies are again discussed here in more detail because they sought to find out from 
AI/AN students themselves tiie reasons why tiiey dropped out. In Coladarci's study, tiie 
factors that students said influenced tiieir decision to drop out included: 

Teacher student relationships: 

• Teachers do not care about them - 37% 

• Teachers do not provide enough assistance w/student work -39% 



62 



• Having disagreements with teachers - 33% 
Content of schooling: 

• School is not important to what I want to do in life - 44% 

• School is not important to me as a Native American - 24% 

Lack of parental support: 

• Problems at home - 44% 

• Lack of parental encouragement - 39% 

The Coladarci study further points to the desire to be with other dropouts and/or some 
degree of peer pressure as salient factors in these students* decisions to drop out Another 
element discussed was the students' dissatisfaction with the fact that even though they may 
have only one or two classes left to complete, they were required to attend school for the 
entire year. Home problems were also identified in this study as elements that led in part to 
dropping out, but Coladarci interjects the realization that "home problems may be 
particularly difficult for educators to address" (p. 21). Recommendations are made in this 
study for educators to examine the curriculum, both its relevance to AI/ANs and the extent 
to which it reflects Native culture, and to also explore the nature of student/teacher and 
student/administrator relations in an attempt to address the dropout issue. 

Platero et al. (1986) contacted dropouts and asked thek reasons for dropping out. 
They listed the following factors, in rank order: 

• Bored with school 

• Problems with students 

• Retained by absenteeism 

• Pregnancy/marriage 

• Discipline home/school 

• Help family 

• Legal, delinquency 

• Problem with teachers 

• Substance abuse 

• Academic failure 

• Older than the others 

• Transportation 

• Health 

• Language problem 

• Outside employment 



Reasons for contemplating dropping out were also solicited from students who 
indicated that they were considering dropping out: 



ERLC 



7^ 



63 



• Bored with school 

• Held back by absenteeism 

• Problems with students 

• Problems with teachers 

• Help family 

• PregnancyAnarriage 

• Older than other students 

• Discipline-home/school 

• Substance abuse 

• Academic Cailure 

• Legal, delinquency 

• Transportation 

• Language 

• Outside employment 

• Health 

Although categorically different, distinctions are not always made between reasons 
for dropping out given by students and reasons for dropping out assigned to them by 
administrators. While administrators cited lack of familial encouragement, academic 
problems and performance, and home and family problems as the three most likely reasons 
why students drop out; students claim that boredom with school, problems with other 
students, and being retained a grade due to absenteeism were the top three reasons that led 
most of them to actually drop out 

Deyhle's (1989) study provided the percentage of AI/AN students that indicated the 
following reasons for leaving school. 

• Problems at home - 66% 

• Difficulty with classes - 65% 

• Teachers do not provide enough assistance with student work - 53% 

• Difficulty with reading -53% 

• Lack of parental encouragement - 49% 

• Teachers do not care about them - 48% 

• Work needs at home or job - 47% 

• Distance from school - 46% 

• School is not important to what I want to do in life - 46% 

• Having disagreements with teachCTS - 43% 

• Unwanted at school - 43% 

• Pregnancy - 37% 

• School is not important to me as a Native American - 36% 



Deyhle also discusses the relevance of racial tensions in a student's decision to leave 
school. Students may perceive hostility directed at them from their non-Indian peers as well 
as from some teachers and community members. The effects of peer and community 
pressure are also identified as factors influencing the dropout's decision. According to this 



64 

study, students who do well in school often face ridicule from members of the community 
in the face of their apparent attempts at success in the "white" world. 

It is interesting to note the global and intemal nature of "lack of interest in education", 
the number one cause, according to this survey of students' dropping out. When asked, 
the students themselves list being bored with school as the number one reason for either 
dropping out or contemplating it, which suggests that the students would like to be 
educated, but that what they are being offered is not interesting to them. This does not 
merely imply that these students have no interest at all in becoming educated, as school 
officials seem to be saying. However, this is also not to say that dropouts are 
misunderstood erudite scholars, or tiiat school administrators are uncaring taskmasters - 
some middle ground is in order. 

In her Masters Thesis Ledlow (1990) reviewed several studies that included data on 
the reasons that AI/AN students drop out of school. In addition to concluding that not 
enough research was being done on this subject, Ledlow points out that what research has 
been done produced data that are incomparable with respect to other existing studies due to 
methodological and even philosophical differences between them. There is further 
discussion of the influence of cultural discontinuity, questioning its actual impact on a 
student's decision to drop out of school. Ledlow criticizes what she sees as a current 
research trend, exploring cultural discontinuity's role in leading a student to drop out by 
showing "how tiiis is true rather tiian if this is true." (p. 17). There are unquestionable 
cultural differences between AI/AN students and their classmates from other cultures, but 
according to Ledlow more research addressing just how tiiese differences affect school 
persistence and dropping out is called for before cultural discontinuity can be identified as a 
factor influencing the eventual act of dropping out 

Ledlow goes on to discuss whether the factors that influence an AI/AN student's 
decision to leave school are substantially different from those which impact on any other 
etlinic group: 



65 



"...economic and social issues which have little to do with being Indian are very 
significant in causing students to drop out of school. .Long commuting distances 
and the lack of relevance of school to reservation student's economic future may be 
the only differences between Indian and non-Indian students' reasons for dropping 
out. In the case of urban Indian students - are the problems they encounter which 
lead to their dropping out of school any different from the problems encountered by 
African American or Hispanic students? Chances are, they are not. If there is 
cultural discontinuity, it is not unique to their situation. If there is institutional 
racism, it is also not unique to them (although the lack of general awareness about 
American Indians is probably greater than for other groups), (p. 22-23)" 

Ledlow concludes that such possibilities indicate a need for "further investigation into the 

issue of macrostructural forces influencing dropping out" (p. 23). To this end a great deal 

of attention is paid to the work of John Ogbu. 

Ledlow discusses Ogbu's concepts of autonomous, immigrant, and castelike 

minorities, where AI/AN populations are identified as castelike minorities. Autonomous 

minorities are described by Ogbu as "not totally subordinated by the dominant group 

politically or economically " while immigrant minorities are "people who have moved more 

or less voluntarily to their host societies (Ogbu, 1983, p. 169, cited in Ledlow, 1990)". Of 

the castelike minorities, Ogbu says: 

"(they) are distinguished from immigrant and other types of minorities in that (1) 
they have been incorporated into the society involuntarily and permanently, (2) they 
face a job and status ceiling, and (3) they tend to formulate their economic and 
social problems in terms of collective institutional discrimination, which they 
perceive as more than temporary (Ogbu, 1982, p. 299, cited in Ledlow, 1990)" 

Ogbu (1982) theorizes that the experience of the castelike minorities may result in their 

remterpreting "their pjimary cultural features in opposition to those of the do.iiinant group". 

The possibility therefore exists that for an American Indian or Alaskan Native student, 

doing well in school is an act of disloyalty to their own culture and is perceived as "acting 

white" (Ledlow, 1990). 

Ogbu (1987) writes of a tendency of the castelike minorities to view with 

skepticism the notion that success in the educational system will result in economic reward 

in the form of better paying jobs or financial stability. Unlike the n>embers of voluntary or 

immigrant minority groups, the experiences of castelike minorities do not suppon this 

belief. Therefore, members of castelike nodnorities evolve a folk theory of getting ahead 



77 



66 



that stresses other strategies besides schooling. Castelike minorities such as American 
Indians and Alaskan Natives may face exactly the same barriers to school success as other 
minorities, but they may view these difficulties as enduring and insurmountable, whereas 
other minority groups may view them as obstacles to be overcome on the way to an 
attainable goal. 

More research is called for to identify and understand both the reasons that AI/AN 
students leave school and the correlates which might help to identify students at risk for 
dropping out Whether explained in terms of cultural discontinuity, societal discrimination 
or economic hardship, efforts to reduce the dropout rate should be targeted at whatever the 
primary reasons are for students leaving school. In addition, the identification of correlates 
to dropping out might help to focus early intervention efforts on those who might later be at 
risk for dropping out, even before such a student considers the option of dropping out to 
begin with. 

Transfer and Mobility X 

Because responsibility for the education of Indian youth is distributed 
between three types of agencies, federal, state public, and private, uniform 
data concerning school attendance, school persistence, and rates of school 
leaving prior to graduation at the twelfth grade are difficult to obtain. The 
complexity of data collection is further compounded by a high degree of 
school transfers. These frequently take place between different types of 
schools, or between schools in different states, precluding accurate follow-up 
on pupils in the absence of a centralized data collection system for Indian 
youth, a problem referred to above. ( Aurbach & Fuchs with Macgregor, 
1970, p. 53) 

Twenty years ago, The Status of American Indian Education, an interim report of the 
National Smdy of American Indian Education stated that the transfer rate or mobility of 
Indian students was a concern. In 1991, it is stiU a concern and for the same reasons; it 
precludes "accurate follow-up on pupils in the absence of a centralized data collection 
system for Indian youth . . ." (p. 53). 

Although transferring or mobility was not a problem related to dropping out in the 
Navajo study (Platero et al., 1986), in some areas of Indian Country, transferring is a 
bigger problem than dropping out. On one northern plains reservation, the student transfer 



67 



rate is higher than the dropout rate and it is believed to negatively affect the achievement 

rate. The author of a study (yet to be published) stated in a letter to the tribal council for a 

northern plains reservation: 

It is difficult to collect exact figures, but it is clear that the problem is high, 
meaning that 25-35% of students move from one school to another during the 
school year; this causes them to fall behind or get lost in the shuffle, making 
them uninterested in school and a potential dropout. Even though most of 
these kids don't quit school altogether, the attendance rate drops, and many 
administrators and counselors term them mental dropouts - students who are 
already bored and have no interest in learning by the eighth grade. At the high 
schools, the problem is far worse. During the 1989-1990 school year, the 
high schools lost from 35-45% of their original enrolled students, and over 
50% of late entrants quit school within 2-3 months of arriving. Most schools 
reported that of an entering ninth grade class, about 65-75% will drop out of 
school before graduating the twe^h grade. ( Letter from Andrew Kassoy in 
BIA file) 

On this same reservation, a principal of a Day School indicated that 

"About one-third of our students change schools about three times during the 
school year. After leaving one school many students do not become re- 
enrolled in another school for ten to thirty days. This can easily build to forty 
or sixty days of non-school attendance (hiring the school year." (Letter from 
Robert Jones in BIA file) 

In an American Indian Education Survey of Oregon City Public Schools which 
addressed the major problems that hinder public education for AI/AN students, it was 
concluded that mobility of the family decidedly plays a negative role in student 
achievement 

In Eberhard's study (1989) of urban AI/AN students, dropouts moved twice as much 
as stayers and dropping out increased with the number of moves made. Both parents and 
students confirmed the difficulty their mobility presented for achieving in urban schools. 
He suggested that "highly mobile pupils come into school classrooms unable to adjust. 
Teachers have not the time nor skills to ease this adjustment. Mobility is a dangerous 
ingredient for failure" (p. 39). 

It was noted earlier that Florida is able to account for transfers through a system that 
tracks students throughout the state. The state department is assisting other states in setting 
up pilot systems with hopes of developing a nationwide student record tracking system. 



ERLC 



68 



Prevention 

Several studies have presented characteristics of effective dropout prevention 
programs. Wehlage (1983) conducted an analysis of programs that work for marginal high 
school students. The successful programs were small and provided for personal contact. 
Teachers had high expectations, used a variety of instructional techniques and cared about 
student progress. Students were challenged with tasks that were attainable, and had 
opportunities to take initiatives and demonstrate responsibility 

Mann (1986) suggested that four Cs characterize programs that seem to help: cash, 
care, computers, and coalitions. He defined them further. 

• Cash: There needs to be a link between learning and earning, i.e.. experience with both schooling 
and paid employment. 

• Care: Teachers must care about students and show that they care or are concerned by knowing 
names, asking about their lives, assigning, grading, and returning homework 

• Computers: Use of computers for instructional management and student management, e. g.. 
computerized index of competencies in basic skills, attitudes and job performance skills and using 
computer programs for identifying those at risk and tracking their progress. 

• Coalitions: Increasing the interaction between schools and employment-training organizations; 
building school-business partnerships. 

Ray wid (1987), in her examination of successful programs, believes tiiat establishing 
a personalized environment and sense of community, providing students witii choice about 
tiieir academic programs, opportunities to leam cooperatively as a part of a social group, 
and opportunities to experience success are essential features. This list, she concludes, is 
one that would apply to many inner city youtii or otiiers who have not been well-served by 
our schools. 

We concur with Platero et al. (1986) in tiieir conclusion tiiat there is an extensive 
literature on dropout prevention but tiiere is relatively litde literature on dropout prevention 
programs that were successful. As tiiey stated, "apparentiy tiiere is littie or no literature on 
dropout prevention programs that are successful for Navajos" (p. 184) or otiier AI/AN 
groups. 

As we write this report, a new book is in press which culminates tiie efforts of the 

ERslC 



69 



Indian Nations At Risk Task Force established by the former Secretary of Education, Lauro 
Cavazos at the National Indian Education Association annual meeting in Anchorage, Alaska 
in 1989. One chapter is devoted to the dropout problem among AI/AN youth. In the 
chapter entitled, "Plans for Dropout Prevention and Special School Support Services for 
AI/AN Students," Jon Reyhner concluded that in order "to prevent students from dropping 
out of school, it is necessary to know why they drop out" (p. 3 of draft). He lists seven 
factors that are critical for AI/AN students: 

• large schools 

• tracked classes 

• uncaring teachers 

• passive teaching methods 

• culturally irrelevant curriculum 

• inappropriate use of testing 

• lack of parent involvement 

If these negative factors were viewed on a dichotomous scale, the solutions would be 
at the opposite end. So if large schools are detrimental, the solution is either returning to 
smaller, community schools or developing community within larger schools. If AI/'AN 
students are tracked into unchaUenging classes, the classes must become more intellectually 
stimulating. If uncaring teachers are a factor then we must find ways to recognize or 
develop caring in teachers. If passive teaching methods are ineffective, then teaching 
methods which consider the learning styles of students must be implemented. If the 
curriculum is not relevant then there is a need to ask why this is so. If there is an 
inappropriate use of testing, then alternative ways to demonstrate knowledge or 
competency must be developed. If lack of parent involvement is a contributing factor to 
dropping out of school, then parent programs must stress the importance of parent 
participation in the cycle of success or failure. Reyhner also discussed the role of GED, 
young mo hers, tribal colleges, and other programs such as alcohol and substance abuse, 
vocational education and business partnerships in the context of dropout prevention. 

When examining what doesn't work, retaining students appears to be near the top of 
the list. Shepard and Smith (1989) point out that retention has negative effects on 



81 



70 



achievement and adjustment. Although there is limited empirical data to support this thesis 
among AI/AN students, Eberhard (1989) found that 88 percent of urban AI/AN students in 
his study who were retained did drop out. In contrast, Platero ct al- (1986) found that there 
were no significant differences in the number of retentions between persisters and 
dropouts. 

Absenteeism, according to Platero et al.(1986), is an obvious first step toward 
dropping out, but it may be more of a symptom than a cause. They suggest that "probably 
the same factors that cause absenteeism also cause the more permanent foitn of absenteeism 
known as dropping out" and "some schools simply push out some students who have 
missed a lot of school or make it difficult for them to make up or get credit for their work" 
(p. 72). As stated earlier, schools contribute to the problem of dropping out by allowing 
excessive absenses and accepting weak excuses. A strategy from the prevention literature 
suggests that schools must deal with absenteesisra as soon as it occurs with quick follow- 
up and consequences. In the Navajo study, Platero et al. (1986) asked respondents to list 
the programs the school has that deal with dropout prevention and found that most 
respondents did not mention any program. Those who did respond mentioned two things 
most often: more personal attention to be given to students and better parent/teacher 
relations. They concluded that no detailed information could be provided on types of 
prevention programs that were successful. 

The tacit knowledge of students is as important in prevention as it is in determination 
of why students drop out. Prevention stems naturally from cause when cause is identified. 
Two recent documents in which voices of students were important are a 1987 study by the 
Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory (NWREL), Characteristics of Successful 
Indian Students (later known as Teachers Do Make A Difference: What Indian Graduates 
Say About Their School Experience, 1988) and Thoughts on Drop-out Prevention: A 
Collection of Essays by Alaskan Seniors published by the Alaskan Department of 
Education in 1988. In the NWREL study, a survey of 133 graduates in the northwestern 



82 



71 



states of Idaho, Montana, Oregon, and Washington revealed that successful students most 
likely (p. 7): 

• Liked school (94%) 

• Liked other students (75%) 

• Liked teachers (72%) 

• Extracurricular activities with sports (70% - both boys and girls) and clubs (61%) 

• Both sports (49%) and church (35%) were popular community activities 

• Grades averaged 2.86 

• Students felt extracurricular activities were their strength (65%) although over half (53%) felt 

course work was strong (many answered affirmative to both) 

• A majority of students (82%) felt that teachers influenced them to succeed with most (56%) feeling 

that only a small number of teacher (1-3) influenced them 

• Most helpful teachers were tliose that respected and complimented the students (81%), although 

most of the positive characteristics of teachers ranked throughout 



Respondents were asked to describe the most important things that happened in 
school which made them feel motivated to finish. Then- responses were categorized into 
six major topics of motivation (p. 8). 

• The expectation of others to finish school (17%) 

• The reward of current successful experiences (50%) 

• The consequences of current negative experiences (5%) 

• The reward of future success (14%) 

• The consequences of future failure (1%) 

• Internal motivation of the student (12%) 



In describing the attributes or actions of those teachers who helped them most, caring and a 

positive attitude were mentioned by 74 percent of the students. 

The thoughts from Alaskan seniors provided a telling commentary on the dropout 

situation in their schools. Twenty-nine seniors from twenty communities were applicants 

for a state scholarship wrote the essays. What they said was often critical. They cited the 

typical reasons given for dropping out, i.e., pregnancy or need for a job. That school 

experiences lead students to drop out was implied by many of the writers. In surautnarizing 

the essays, Bob Arnold (1989) project director for Helping Schools Succeed at Helping All 

Children Learn, wrote, 

These critics called upon teachers to help prevent drop-outs by being caring, 
interesting, and encouraging, by offering words of kindness, rewarding even 
small successes, helping instill confidence and a sense of self-worth in their 
students. One observed that these kinds of attitudes and actions are afforded 
to good students, but rarely to poorer students, (p. 128) 



ERLC 



03 



72 



Only a few of the writers blamed their fellow students; they said "students need to 

care about education, to learn responsibility, and to end their delinquent behavior" (p. 128). 

The students also had recommendations about what the school could do about dropouts: 

Peer tutoring ("it works"), alternative programs ("but they carry a bad 
name"), more social activities (with good grades required for participation), 
psychology/behavior classes, a non-college prep track, and student 
participation in shaping a school's program, (p. 128) 

Arnold went on to say, "It seems to me that many of these seniors are saying that 
schools experiences contribute to putting high schoolers 'at risk,* and changes in the 
schooling experience can reduce the number of persons at risk" (p. 128), 
What Some Local Education Agencies Are Doing 

Response to our call for information brought reports from several local education 
agencies (LEAs) about successful efforts to reduce their dropout rate. Using a counseling 
model, the Title V-Indian Education Program at Phoenix Union High School District has 
been able to steadily decrease its AI/AN dropout rate in eight years. The rate in 1982-83 
was 27.6 percent compared to 16.7 percent in 1990-9L A strength of this program is in 
the continuity provided by Sam Mackey who has been a counselor in the district for 13 
years. 

The Title V-Indian Education Program at Placer Union High School District in 
Auburn, California has been able to reduce theh* rate from 99 percent to 29 percent over the 
past 15 years. The key according to ±e director, Patty Stone, is an effective parenting 
skills program. She also indicated that the success rate of students is directly correlated 
with upward mobility of staff, which presents a compelling argument for staff 
development. The effectiveness of role modeling is rooted in students seeing the 
progression of staff from paraprofessional to professional status. She began as a teacher 
aide now has her degree and certification as a counselor. She also attributes program 
success to the longevity and consistency she has been able to provide to the program in the 
15 years she has been there. 

The Title V-Indian Education Program at Hoonah Public Schools in Hoonah, Alaska 



73 



has also had some success. Carol Williams, Program Director wrote, "In a nutshell, before 
we had our *AT^RISK* program, wc had seven out 12 students not graduate from our 
school all dropping out. Presently, we have all students graduating from Hoonah Public 
Schools and many pursuing post-secondary education." The strength of this program is in 
its parent involvement Great efforts are made to communicate with parents and involve 
them through school/community cultural activities. There has been a concerted effort to 
increase the awareness and pride in Tlingit culture. For example, all students now have 
native regalia that their parents helped them make. Another strength is the program director 
who is Tlingit and has been in this position for 12 years. 

From Rock Point Community School in Rock Point, Arizona, Roberta J. Ackley 
wrote that they have a very low drop out rate. She attributes the low dropout rate to the 
community ownership of the school. Rock Point Community School is a Navajo 
Community Controlled Contract School. As such, local people determine the curriculum 
and policy for the school. There is high parent involvement; 90 percent of the parents 
attend parent teacher conferences. Other factors include a faculty of teachers of which 90 
percent + are Navajo or AI/AN. Students are taught by those who they feel understand 
them. This faculty stability contributes to effective planning and staff development. The 
K-12 school is bilingual; part of daily instruction is in Navajo. In the early grades science, 
social studies, and math are taught in Navajo. In the secondary school there is Navajo 
social studies; Navajo government and history classes parallel those in American 
government and history. Secondary students also take a Navajo Research Class in which 
topics are researched written and published in Navajo or English in the high school 
bilingual newspaper. Of 470 K-12 students in 1990-91, no one dropped out of school, 
however, there was an approximate ten percent transfer rate. Students who transfer are 
tracked, however, most of them return to Rock Point Community School. 

Intuitively, it follows that addressing the drop out issue by declaring it a priority 
concern by all personnel within the school, district, and/or community will show a decrease 



85 



74 



in those who drop out. Recent research by the Sacramento City Unified School District 
reported a drastic decline in one school year (83-84) when in prior years the dropout rate 
had fluctuated mildly. The district attributed this decline to two possible reasons: schools 
considered the dropout issue of priority concern and on-site personnel followed up on 
truancy and absenteeism more closely than in previous years (Dropouts, 1980-1984. 
Summary Report. Revised. 1985). 

In Rapid City, South Dakota the school and community are making dropout 
prevention from preschool through high school a priority concern. Louis Tyon, 
Coordinator of the Rapid City Johnson-O'Malley Program forwarded a copy of their plan. 
The model plan, Project 2000 Rapid City Dropout Prevention Plan, published in May 1990 
is the culmination of sbt months of work by the Rapid City Dropout Prevention Coalition, a 
group of concerned citizens representing community and business interests. The impetus 
came from the Governor's office which designated Rapid City as one of two South Dakota 
communities to target at-risk youth. The Coalition assigned tasks for collecting data to four 
subcommittees. They described the process as follows: 

One of these committees, "Programs that Work," collected data on at-risk 
programs throughout the United States. Two other committees, "Why 
Students Drop Out" and "Rapid City Now," gathered local dropout data and 
surveyed recent dropouts, community agencies and educators for perceptions 
of reasons students drop out and possible solutions to the problem. 
Additionally, the "Alternative Education" committee interviewed a substantial 
number of community agencies and educators, and members of the Coalition 
held brainstorming sessions with staff at every school in the district. 
Following this preliminary work, selected teachers, counselors, 
administrators and Coalition members participated in five, all-day writing 
sessions. Finally, follow-up meetings with sc' 'yol district and agency 
personnel were held for feedback on the completed proposal. Thus, this plan 
draws upon current thinking nation-wide on at-risk youth and also upon the 
knowledge and experience of those closest to the problem at hand - members 
of the local community. (Introduction,/?. 2) 

While the whole plan speaks to the issue of dropout prevention with very specific 
goals for each area from preschool through high school, the following recommendations 
may be of interest for the reader: 



75 



• Early identification and intervention with at-risk children 

• Parent education and incieased parent-school coniniunication 

• Increased attention to self-esteem and counseling needs of students and and increase in school 

counseling staff 

• Lower pupil-teacher ratio, especially at the primary level 

• Emphasis on goal setting throughout a child's schooling 

• Curriculum focus on functional and vocational skills and career awareness 

• Curriculum adaptation and flexibility and more individual attention to needy students 

• Reviewof attendance policy and the open campus policy 

• Closer school-community Illations 

• Continued attention to prevention and treatment of substance abuse 

• Promotion of cross-cultural awareness and attention to the unique needs of Native American 

students 

• Standardized record-keeping on attendance 



This plan is a Rapid City Plan; it is a naodel for what a community can do to address 
the dropout problem, if it is perceived as a problem of sufficient magnitude. It may serve 
as a guide for other communities, but it is not transportable in total. Another model 
developed in the border towns of Calexico, California and Calexico, Mexico. This model 
grew out of a need for understanding academic excellence through an analysis of dropouts 
and students at risk. Three phases characterize this project. In the first phase, a state-of- 
the-art is established, i.e., a description of what exists from dropouts to high achievers is 
prepared. In the second phase, an ethnography of the conununity is conducted. In the 
third phase, policy design is prepared through the reactions of a panel of experts, many of 
whom are from the community. Researchers concluded that the urgency of the problems 
cause people to transport ' successful" programs from one place to another when 
realistically the key i? lo look at the community for what will work. Apparently this is what 
the Rapid City community is doing. 

Discussion 

A prominent theme in the research on Al/AN dropouts during the 1960s was the need 

to retiiink how the school system approached the education of AI/ANs (Kutsche, 1964). It 

became obvious that tiie school system provided differential treatment to AI/AN students. 

If the Indian child shows an interest in school work, he will be helped as all 
Euro-American children are, whether the latter bring an interest in class wc rk 
with them to school or not. If the Indian child does not bring motivation for 
school work with him, no one at the school is too concerned. (Brockrrcann, 
1970, p. 29) 

87 



76 



As Padfield, Hemingway, and Greenfeld (1966) observed, it was rare to see any formal 
recognition that it is not the AI/AN performances which are inappropriate, but the basic 
tenants of the school systems seeking to enculturate them. 

However, Wax, Wax, and Dumont (1964) recorded that Oglala Sioux parents had 
confidePxce in the concept of education. "When their children enjoy, they are pleased and 
proud; when they hate school, they may for various reasons ask them to go; but Sioux 
parents are not going to tell their children that they ought to like school" (p. 44). Many 
parents felt that school taught their children bad behavior, caused their children to 
experience physical and verbal abuse, and created feelings of inferiority and inadequacy 
because of children*s clothing, and frightened or shamed their children into truancy or 
giving up. The schools that Sioux children liked to attend were places that appreciated the 
power and depth of their social life. 

Years of failure made it easier for researchers, practitioners, and policy-makers to 
accept the notion that patterns of relationships among AJ/AN students, peers and teachers 
as well as community-school relationships were different from Whites, or even other 
minority groups. These differences brought to light the real (as opposed to ideal) effects of 
the practices and rationales ingrained in the mainstream school system. This perceived 
effect gave rise to the notion that implication of maladjustment or cultural inappropriateness 
could be applicable to just about all reasons for non-enrollment except perhaps chronic 
illness, but even tiiis symptom was tiiought to be due to stress caused by the school 
situations (Coombs, 1970). The negative effect and cycles of failure began to cultivate a 
new frame of thinking that the educational experience for AI/AN should not be just one of 
occupational preparation, developing able-minded citizens, and for understanding oneself. 
It should also provide them with an understanding of the social context and the problems 
and processes of culture change tiiat will allow tiiem to determine their own social and 
economic adjustment (Aurbach, Fuchs, & Macgregor, 1970). 

Suggestions to cultivate tiiese concepts into tiie school nearly thirty years ago are still 



77 



applicable in the education of AI/ANs as we approach the 21 st century. For example, it 
was suggested that schools should solicit volunteers and hire people from the local 
community to assist both the teachers and bus drivers in maintaining control, increase the 
opportunity for AI/ANs to tune in on events outside the community, and have more adult 
social/educational evenings i ^Jie school. Qirriculum should have a blend of vocational 
and academic elements, be developed with community input, and include elements of tribal 
history and current events. Tribal governments can develop career and educational 
guidance office, and cooperate with other tribes to meet the educational needs of off- 
reservation children. Finally, administrators should be made aware of new developments 
in learning and teaching of AI/AN students, and implement them when feasible. 

Aside from the presentation of statistics regarding rates and the discussion of 
problems in calculating them, several themes emerged from current literature on AI/AN 
dropouts. Some themes were student-centered while others were school-centered. The 
reasons students gave for leaving school and the reasons schools gave are presented for the 
reader to consider and perhaps study further. The personal interactions and the interactions 
with cunicular and extracurricular activities that take place in school assume a prominent 
role in the study of why students are leaving school or staying. 
Caring 

A major theme appears to be related to caring and all that it means and implies as a 
quality or characteristic that must not be assumed We assume that parents do care for thetr 
children. However, along with this assumption there must be an awareness and 
acknowledgement that caring may not be manifested in similar ways across cultures. We 
assume that people responsible for youth at school do care about smdents, and yet students 
are questioning this assumption. One thing seems to be clear; students recognize it as a 
factor which influences their decision to stay in school or leave (Cobum & Smith, 1989). 

Caring is a quality that is demonstrated by what one does and says and less by the 
subject matter one teaches. The students Deyhle (1989) talked with consistently explained 



78 



that a good teacher was one who "cares." This person was one who helped students with 
work. Many of the AVAN dropouts interviewed by Coladarci (1983) felt that teachers did 
not care about them, did not provide enough assistance, and engaged in disagreements with 
them. AVAN dropouts often indicate that greater encouragement, n^ore concern, and more 
assistance from their teachers would have made a difference (Bruce, 1990). 

Individual contact allows instructors to obtain daily knowledge of the student in a 
variety of settings, provides on-the-spot observation of strengths and weaknesses of the 
student, and offers information about the AVAN student regarding peer and teacher 
interaction. These strategies are indicative of how schools are adapting to help AVAN 
students develop appropriate learning behavior and skills which enable them to successfully 
function in their expected roles as students. However, many teachers hold negative views 
and attitudes toward AVAN students and this limitation is reflected in efforts to 
accommodate students' needs. 

In addition, schools can become more caring by developing formal and inforaial 
membership associations with the community. The goal of these associations should be 
directed at enabling students to feel attached, committed, and involved in the activities of 
the school, as well as believe in the school (WICHE, 1987, 1988). This membership is 
nurtured in the minds of students by school and community representatives that create 
positive and respectful relationships, communicate concern and provide help to individuals 
with personal problems, assist in meeting institutional standards, and help the student 
understand the relationship between self, school and community's future. In exchange, 
students must appreciate this membership through behaviors that are positive and respectful 
toward adults and peers, and partake in academic/extra-curricular activities to extent that 
makes their own achievement likely and makes die commitment of adults rewarding. 

Trueba (1988) suggests tiiat schools and society must declare tiiat the dropout issue is 
a problem and persuade students that tiiey are worthwhile, deserve attention and affection; 
schools must be serious about confronting academic problems that may be attributed to 



79 



years of degradation. A psycho-social approach may be needed to create a productive 
learning environment within the context of communit>% school, and home. Efforts should 
be directed at engaging dropouts and at-risk students in social groups and one-on-one 
interactional settings that offer a retrospective view of what they have experienced and 
offers them meaningful opportunities to start a new day with the will to succeed. 
Autonomy and Non-interference 

Another important theme related to caring is the issue of autonomy and non- 
interference. These phenomena exist in some Al/AN cultures. Autonomy of the individual 
is respected regardless of age. Therefore, it is not appropriate to interfere with aecisions an 
individual might make. These issues were discussed most recendy by Deyhle (1989), but 
over twenty years ago by Wax, Wax, and Dumont (1964) relative to the decisions AI/AN 
youth make about staying in school or leaving. Deyhle cited the early works of Lamphere 
(1977) and Kluckhon and Leighton (1946) in her discussion of autonomy and non- 
interference among Navajos who ascribe to the philosophy that suggests,"it's up to him or 
her to decide" (p. 47) about schooling. Wax and Thomas (1961) explained die "ethic of 
non-interference," or simply respecting other people by not interfering with thek way of 
life. These practices which affect child-rearing may be very confusing and may represent a 
non-caring attitude to non-AI/AN readers. These concepts should, nonetheless, be 
considered in the discussion about factors influencing decisions to leave school. 
Relevance of Schooling 

The content of schooling, or the curriculum, appeared to elicit strong feelings from 
students. For many students, the connection between subject nciatter and the real world of 
work has littie meaning. They did not see the relationship between a good education and a 
good job in their communities. Gade et al. (1986) found AI/ANs to be uninterested in 
school because it was not important for what they wanted to do in life. However, school 
has meaning in that it presents an alternative to making an immediate decision about 
whether to enter the work force or not. 



91 



80 



For some who persist until the 1 1th or 12th grade, school is evidently a viable option 
as a place in which to interact socially - "hang out" - with peers. It is only when the reality 
of not receiving a diploma is felt that students actually leave school. In essence they attend 
in order to communicate to their peers that "I can be here, too/' Since others do not know 
the conditions of their scholarship, they are safe until the time comes to tally the credits 
earned toward graduation. These students have always wanted to be in school, but factors 
such as mobility, attendance, and stopping out, or intermittant dropping out, have affected 
the students' ability to earn the necessary credits in a time frame consistent with more 
persistent peers- They often do not recognize the consequences of non-attendance until this 
point; these students are the ones who are likely to come back to school, or perhaps another 
school away from contemporary peers, or finish their high school career in a GED 
program. 

For others, school is something that they have "outgrown" by 11th or 12th grade 
because they may be overage - the result of retention in earlier grades. For example, those 
students interviewed by Wax (1967) indicated a sense of boredom, and a feeling of not 
fitting in anymore. Wax suggested a common undertone in their statements was, "they are 
the expressions of relatively mature young men who find the atmosphere of high school 
stultifying and childish" (p- 254), 

And yet for other students, according to Deyhle (1989), leaving school is a complex 
decision they have made involving culturally embedded factors. For Navajo and Ute 
students in her study, Deyhle determined that cultural reasons for leaving school were 
specific to the racial tensions in the community, differences in child rearing practices, and 
resistance which supported cultural integrity. Feelings of intergenerational discrimination 
and not being wanted by the school; questioning the myth of a high school education 
resulting in a good job; the pressure fiom die school to "change" and adopt school values 
rather than one's own cultural values; pressure from peers to remain the same and not adapt 
to ways which will ensure "success" in school and the mainstream world; these art the 

^ on 



81 



factors which influence the complex decisions to stay or leave school 
Issues of Rural -vs- Urban Education 

Long commutes to school often prohibit students from participatmg in extracurricular 
activities when those activities are held after the school bus leaves or on weekends. 
Involvement in school activities, referred to as "school membership" by Wehlage et al. 
(1989) and "participation-identification" by Finn (1989) establishes the "bonding" with 
school, and therefore decreases the likelihood of school leaving before completion. This 
involvement must be redefined to be inclusive of those students who must travel long 
distances to schooL 

Dropout issues in rural America, where a good many AI/ANs still attend school, 
cannot be compared to dropout issues in urban schools (Deyong, Huffman, & Turner 
1989; Latham, 1985). Geographic service area causes many school budgets to be 
disproportionately allocated for transportation needs. Rural locations make it more difficult 
to recruit and retain good teachers who often have to teach multiple subjects. Federal and 
state programs to aid the disadvantaged often favor the urban sector. Research dollars to 
examine the problem focus upon urban minorities while the plight of AI/ANs in rural areas 
goes unmentioned and unanalyzed. Education programs developed for concentrated urban 
school districts are difficult to implement in widely dispersed raral schools serving 
AI/ANs. Of the studies we reviewed, only two were completed in an urban setting. 

The issue of transfer and mobility is a major problem cited in the literature. It is a 
problem between urban areas and home reservation areas, and within and between schools 
on the reservation. It is often exacerbated by the number of schools that students may 
choose to attend. From a practical point of view, transfer and mobility may be a factor 
contributing to low academic achievement, non-attendance, and eventual school leaving 
precipitated by the school or die student. From die logistics of tracking students, transfer 
and mobility prohibits any longitudinal study or program evaluation which could provide 
insight into the extent of the problem of students leaving school. 

93 



82 



Family 

Emphasis on the whole family, whatever the configuration of family, is important. 
Those programs which are experiencing success do involve parents. In direct response to 
students* comments that lack of family support was a factor in dropping out, programs that 
incorporate parental support appear to be working. For example, several of the successful 
programs discussed earlier are supplemental programs funded by Title V of the Indian 
Education Act. This would suggest that while supportive of Title V, the core school 
programs need to consider integrating those appropriate aspects that are working into their 
"regular" progranx In addition, another important factor the programs had in common was 
the continuity provided by a director or coordinator who has been uere for more than ten 
years thus creating closer ties between the community and schools. 

Unfortunately, "blaming the victim" is prevalent and many schools regard dropping 
out as the result of poor home environments and inferior family relationships. They look at 
the problem in despai:^ because family and home have been viewed as beyond the sphere 
of the school's influence. Many schools still struggle to get parents involved; however, 
this appears to be changing because schools are becoming more sensitive to the community 
and, as a result, AI/AN parents are starting to feel like the schools belong to them- 
Student-Centered Schools 

There is a need to develop student-driven systems that respond to student differences 
rather than curriculum-driven systems that are currentiy the norm (Caudell, 1990). The 
emphasis of such programs is holding high expectations for all students and believing that 
the student can succeed. Prominent characteristics of student-driven systems are early 
dropout prevention programs, complunented by programs aimed at academic achievement, 
emotional development, social skills, and family relations, particularly among parents 
(Arnold, 1989). 

In areas where there is a chronically high dropout rate, it is necessary to consider 
more fundamental and systematic changes to the education system. In such cases, to 



ERLC 



94 



83 



adequately confront the dropout issue and achieve excellence in education, social, political 
and economic arenas will require a thorough commitment from all parties concerned 
(Robledo, 1989; Rumberger, 1987), LeCompte (1987) and Wehlage (1989) suggest that 
schools can confront the dropout dilemma by first being sensitive to the cultural context and 
value consistency that is generated and sustained through community social interaction. 
Secondly, schools should know how to ensure that the cultural context and value 
consistency of the school are in line with that of the community. 
Intervention 

Early identification and intervention is critical and will help alleviate future problems 
(Gonzalez, 1989). Some effective methods are alerting staff to identify at-risk students, 
develop clear-cut policies about behavior, involve parents, and reinforce positive behavior. 
Schools systems also can network staff throughout the district, initiate a publicity 
campaign, utilize at-risk students as tutors for lower grades, provide theatrical/artistic 
outlets, publish a newsletter, survey parents, and design programs to meet their needs. In 
addition, teachers can be paid extra when they work with at-risk students on their own 
time, the school can provide job credit experience, and efforts can be made to keep in touch 
with dropouts. 

A common element of successful dropout prevention programs is that at least one 
adult establishes a relationship of trust with each youth. This relationship has been found 
to provide a secure outiet for fears and enthusiasms, and a living affirmation that someone 
cares if that student leaves school (Mathews, 1991), Some other important strategies for 
dropout prevention are an appropriate mix of educational and noneducational programs and 
systematic evaluations to determine th^^j cost effectiveness of dropout prevention programs. 
Policy and Practice 

Administrative leadership is essential for schools to adequately carry out many 
reforms necessary to decrease the number of students who drop out. Although school 
policy may be formulated at the state or school district level, the principal is tiie key person 



ERLC 



95 



84 

to see that policy in the local school is implemented to maximize the probability that all 
students will successfully complete their education. The principal can exert strong 
leadership and sensitivity, demonstrate competence and commitment, be responsive to local 
conditions and needs of the community, and provide leadership for the school within that 
context. 

The current literature is characterized by the fact that some educational practices are 
not working and more effective practices need to be implemented. For example, 
Eberhard's (1989) research notes that AI/AN retentions seldom stay in school; six of 51 
graduated. School systems need to change their retention policies. Students are not being 
helped when school systems retain them (Shepaid & Smith, 1989). Many AI/AN students 
face the normal turmoil of adolescence while developing a cultural identity. Effective 
programs to meet their needs are often not available. Giles (1985) call for a balance 
between academic achievement and cultural awareness. Academic and social activities 
should embody native cultural values. In-service training should be offered to teachers that 
helps them become more familiar with strategies and activities oriented for AI/AN students 
(Swisher & Deyhle, 1989). 

Specialized programming is needed to address the low psychological well-being of 
the AI/AN student compounded by an impoverished lifestyle where educational services 
may not be adequate or difficult to establish and maintain (Beare, 1986). Some successful 
strategies emphasize individualized and personalized approaches to helping AI/AN 
students. For example, students should be helped to set realistic expectations, monitor 
their own progress, and achieve recognition for improvement. Groups sessions can help 
students develop a feeling of belonging and cohesiveness, allow feedback from other 
AI/AN students, interact witii role models, and review goals from a group perspective. 
Individual sessions between instructor and the AI/AN student are necessary to re-evaluate 
goal performance, academic perfonmnce, and other concerns the students are experiencing 
(Mokler & Hernandez, 1987). 



85 



More AI/AN teachers and administrators are needed to serve as role models and 
mentors to stress the importance of education. This message will have more impact and 
meaning to AI/AN students in that the relevance of schooling is exemplified by people of 
their own culture. Unfortunately, many AI/AN students never have the experience of 
seeing a teacher or administrator who is "like" them directing educational programs. 

The issue of AI/AN students absorbing attitudes of the mainstream society is still 
being questioned (Pewewardy, 1989). It is questioned because "success" in school often 
means becoming more assimilated. Programs emphasizing multicultural education enable 
AI/AN students to retain their culture while acquiring the knowledge and skills that 
constitute an "education." It is our belief that for schools to maintain the present class 
structure and mono-cultural values without respecting those AI/AN students who wish to 
leam and preserve their ancestral identity contributes to the problems associated with 
dropping out. 

Research Studies in Progress 

In the process of searching for studies of the status of the AI/AN dropout situation, 
we discovered that several studies are in progress. We became aware of three studies on 
various reservations: Pine Ridge, South Dakota; Northern Cheyenne, Montana, and at four 
other northern plains reservations under the auspices of the Western Behavioral Studies 
office at Colorado State University. The purpose of the latter study is to determine the 
extent of alcohol problems among AI/AN dropouts and see how they differ from youth 
who remain in school. 

Finally, the newly created Branch of Research and PoUcy Analysis within the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs, Office of Indian Education Programs (BIA-OIEP) has initiated a study of 
the dropout situation in BIA-funded schools. In progress at this time through a contract 
with the Center for Indian Education at Arizona State University, the study will collect and 
compute data from a representative sample of 166 schools funded by the BIA-OIEP and a 
report will be completed in December 1991. 



9? 



86 



Conclusions 

The purpose of this study was to determine a national dropout rate for AI/AN 
students. However, the rate at which AI/AN students leave school or drop out cannot be 
defined in a single statistic. Lack of standardized definitions of dropouts and methods for 
counting and calculating rates makes it impossible to generate a single accurate rate. Given 
that interstate dropout reporting does not exist for public school systems, attempts to 
incorporate non-standardized rates from BIA-funded, mission, and other private schools 
increase the difficulty exponentially. Tracking transfers among and between these four 
systems alone requires a far more complex and comprehensive system than is presently 
available (an exception is the system operating in the state of Rorida described earlier). 
Until these conditions are rectified, the dropout rate must still be qualified by descriptors. 

The best estimate of an AI/AN rate at this point can be derived from those longitudinal 
studies, including those conducted between 1962-1989 which calculated die rate to be 
between 24 and 48 percent, and the longimdinal studies completed in the 1980s which 
established a rate between 29 and 36 percent. However, with the exception of NCES 
(1988) which reported 35.5 percent dropout rate, other smdies are limited to a specific 
population or region, and are not national in scope. 

We believe that the efforts of the National Center for Educational Statistics and tiie 
Council of Chief State School Officers to standardize the definition and methods for 
counting, collecting, and computing data should be supported. Depending on the 
effectiveness of such efforts, public schools, and perhaps some BIA-funded schools 
attended by AI/AN smdents will then gather data which are standardized and rates will then 
have more substantial meaning. 

From this review we were not able to make comparisons between and among the 
types of schools attended by AI/AN students. Other factors also prevented us from 
generalizing results of the studies we reviewed. Of the more recent studies, three involved 
Navajo students; two studies were of urban high school settings; and one smdy was in a 



87 



northern reservation setting. For example, transportation was a factor in the Navajo studies 
(Chan and Osthimer, 1983; Platero et al., 1986). but may not be generaHzable to other 
reservation schools. The studies were also different from each other in methodology, 
further complicating comparisons. However, although incomparable as a group, tlie 
results of each individual study should be considered significant and meriting attention. 

If it has been perplexing to establish the rate at which AI/AN students leave K-i2 
schools, the reasons smdents leave school have been even more difficult to determine. 
Listening to students beyond just asking them to tell us reasons is one strategy. It must be 
recognized, however, that smdents may give a reason out of convenience, when in reality 
there may be a host of complex cumulative factors which contribute to the final decision to 
leave school. At any rate, the reasons students are giving include: boredom with school, 
problems with students, retention by absenteeism, non-relevance of school, problems at 
home, noncaring attimdes, difficulty with classes, lack of parent encouragement 

Both Wax (1967a) and Platero et al. (1986) found that academic performance is not a 
major factor influencing the smdents' decision to leave school. Interactions with peers and 
teachers and other school environment factors are more likely to be the focus of the 
decision to leave school. Also, both smdies speak about the smdents' concem for having 
to conform and/or change in order to fit into the school's mold for them as AI/AN students. 
Those who could or would not conform/change often left school. 

Several of the studies (Deyhle, 1989; Milone, 1983; Platero et al., 1986; Wax, 
1967a) refer to smdents' involuntary decision to leave. For reasons such as absenteeism, 
culttiral behavior, or nonconformity, students felt like they were "push outs" rather than 
dropouts. 

There is evidence that many AI/AN smdents do find school a place which is "all 
right" and, thus, some smdents willingly attend even when they know they will not 
complete on time with their peers. For others, school is a place that is uncaring and/or not 
very challenging. There are intervention strategies which can address both conditions. 



99 



88 



People in schools can learn to care, and teaching styles and curriculum can be less boring 
and more challenging. We know that it is important to pay attention to learning styles when 
teaching. We also know that strategies or structures such as cooperative learning are 
effective. In partnership with students and parents, schools can be more caring, interesting 
and intellectually stimulating places. 

Transferring or mobility of students is a serious problem in some parts of the country 
and seems to correlate with the number of schools available within a given geographic area. 
Communication networks seem to be an important key to the solution of this problem. 
Until a tracking system is developed and in place, agreements regarding transfer policies 
between and among schools and school districts are an apparent solution. 

Those programs which have experienced some success in keeping students in school 
until completion have involved parents through various and appropriate activities such as 
parenting classes, cultural events, and concerted communication. They have developed the 
feeling of ownership in the school among these parents. Another success factor has been 
the consistency which is created when one individual maintains liaisons with parents over a 
long period of time. Even though the number who reported successes is small, this one 
factor is worth considering when the turnover rate in many rural schools is very high each 
year. 

The motivation to stay in school must be realized by students. If school has no 
meaning to life outside of school, then the decision to drop out is less complicated. The 
economic pay-off, whether it be short-term or long-terra, must be comunicated to students. 
The school, however, must not be expected to take sole responsibility for conveying this 
message. The community and the home must become partners with the school in an effort 
to both communicate and illustrate to students the long term utility of remaining in school, 

Chan and Osthimer (1983) and Platero et al, (1986) have provided correlates or 
indicators to consider in terms of Navajo students leaving school. If correlates for AI/AN 
students differ from each other (by tribal group and geographic location) and the 

lOu 



89 



mainstream, then more specific predictors need to be generated to serve as a base for early 
intervention efforts. 

Self-study is probably the most effective method for finding definition and solution to 
the problems which contribute to students leaving school The responsibilty must be 
shared by students, parents, community business and professional people, tribal councils, 
and the schools. Prevention programs are not transportable in total; the keys to prevention 
are in the community. Prevention stems naturally from cause when cause is defined 



101 



90 



Bibliography 



Albuquerque Public Schools. (1990). Annual repo rt on dronouts. Albuquerque public 
schools . Albuquerque, NM. 

American Indian Policy Review Commission. (1976). Final report: Indian education . 
Washington D.C.: U.S. GovCTnment Printing Office. 

Anderson, S. M. (1975). The dropout prevention pr ogram. 1971-72 regular and 1972 
Slimmer school terms. Consolidated program information report Washington, D.C.: 
National Center for Education Statistics. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 
ED 124 609) 

Arnold, B. (1989). Helping schools succeed a t helping all children learn: Report of the 
Senate committee on school performa nrft. fifteenth Alaska legislature. Juneau, AK: 
Alaska Legislature. 

Auerbach, H. A., Fuchs, E., & Macgregor, G. (1970). The status of American Indian 
p-dncarion. An interim report of the national sm dv of American Indian education to the 
Office of Education. U.S. Department of Health. Education and Welfare . University 
Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University. OSRIC Document Reproduction Service No. 
ED 039 055) 

Augistin, J. W., & Novak, J. L. (1980). Dropout prev ention: What are the effective 
ingredients? Madison, WI: Wisconsin Vocational Smdies Center, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 192-235) 

Bachman, J. G., G-reen, S., & Wirtanen, I. D. (1971). Dro pping out. Problem or 
symptom? Youth in Transition series. Vol. III. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social 
Research, The University of Michigan. 

Barber, L. (1984). Dropont. transfers, withdrawn and rem oved smdents. Phi Delta 
Kappa Center on Evaluation, Development and Research. 

Bass, W. P. (1969). The American Indian high school graduate in the Southwest. 
Albuquerque, NM: Southwestem Cooperative Educational Laboratory, Inc. 

Bass, W.P., & Tonjes, M. (1970). Dropout or graduate? A svnthesis of th ree studies on 
the degree of success of American Indian high school smdents in the Soutiiwest 
Albuquerque, NM: Southwestem Cooperative Educational Laboratory Inc. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 036 369) 

Beare, P. (1986). Programming for behaviorally disordered Native Americans. Ifflimal 
of American Indian Education. 22(2), 24-31. 

Becham, H. C. (1980). Reaching and helping high school dropouts and potential school 
leavers. Final report . Tallahassee, FL: Florida A&M University. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 236 451) 

Beck, L., & Muia, J. (1981). Potential high school dropouts. Education Digest. 46(7). 
16-19. 

102 



ERIC 



91 



BenallaI,W. (1965). Study of voluntary school dropouts in the Lakeland Union High 
School District Madison, WI: State Department of Public Welfare, Division for 
Children and Youth. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 051 938) 

Binnan, B. F., & Natrielio, G. (1980). Absenteeism in high schools: Multiple 
explanations for an epidemic in schoo l crime and violence. Lexington, MA: D.C. 
Heath. 

Boloz, S. A., & Lincoln, D. C. (1983). Combating student absenteeism: Strategies for 
raising attendance and achievement Tonmal of American Indian Education. 22(3), 25- 
30. 

Borgrink,H. (1986). New Mexico school district profile: 1984-1985 school year. Santa 
Fe, NM: New Mexico State Department of Education. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 270 244) 

Borgrink,H. (1987). New Mexico dropout study 1986-87 school year. Santa Fe,NM: 
New Mexico State Department of Education. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED 303 289) 

Boras, M. E. (1985). What works for school dropouts? A review of what we have 

learned from impact evaluarions of employment an d training prop'ams. Paper prepared 
for Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation. 

Bramer, S. T., & Enderiein, T. E. (1973). Identification of potential vocational high 
school dropouts. Journal of In dustrial Teacher Educarion. 11(1), 44-52. 

Brockman, C. T. (1970). Social class and educational level on the Flathead Reservation. 
Journal of American Indian Education . 10(1), 23-31. 

Bruce, L. (1990). Young women of Alaska speak out abo ut dropping out. Anchorage, 
AK: Alaska Women's Commission. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 
323 474) 

Bryde, J. F. (1967). New approach to Indian education. Hne Ridge, SD: Holy Rosary 
Mission. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 015 818) 

Bureau of Indian Affairs. (1988). Renort on BI A education: Excellence in Indian 

educarion through effecrive school process . Washington, D.C: U.S. Department of 
the Interior. 

Cage, B.N. (1984). Dropout prevention . Jackson, MS: Mississippi State Department of 
Education, Division of Instruction. 

Cain, A., Moody, B., and Pendergrass, J. (1988). School dropouts: The principal's 
IqIs. Clemson,SC: The National Dropout Prevention Center. 

Cain, A., Moody, B., and Pendergrass, J. (1988). So you want to dropout of school: 
You ought to know the facts! Clemson, SC: The National Dropout Prevention Center. 

Camp (1980). School Dropouts. The na tional longitudinal smdies handbook. Columbus, 
OH: Center for Human Resource Research, Ohio State University. 



103 



92 



Cardenas, J. A, (1989). Texas dropouts revisited: 1989. Tntercultiiral Development 
Research As snriat^nn Newsletter. 16f4'>. 1-2. 

Cardenas, J. A. (1990). Texas school dropouts: 1986 to 1989. Intercultural Development 
Research As snr.iarion Newsletter. 11(3), 1 & 3. 

Caudell, L. S. (Hd.) (1990.). Keeping students in school requires belief that all can 
learn. Northwest Report. 

Cavatta, J., & Gomez, A. (1982). New Mexico dropout study 1981-1982 school year. 
Santa Fe, NM: New Mexico State Department of Education. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 227 992). 

Cavatta, J., & Gomez, A. (1984). New Mexico dropout study 1983-1984 school year. 
Santa Fe, NM: New Mexico State Department of Education. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 264 052) 

Cervantes, L. F. (1965). The dropout Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan 
Press. 

Champagne, D., & Query, J. M. N. (1980). Urban education and draining for American 
Indian students. Some correlates of success. Urban Education. 15(1), 93-101. 

Chan, K. S., & Ostiiimer, B. (1983). Navaio youth and earlv s chool withdrawal: A case 
smdy- Los Alamitos, CA: National Center fw Bilingual Research. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 240 414) 

Chiago, R. K. Making education work for the American Indian. Theory Into Practice. 
2Q(1), 20-25. 

Church, A. G. (1980). Some academic and personality comparisons of Spanish- American 
seniOTS with Anglo- American and Navajo seniors in a multi-etimic high school: A 
research note. Psychology. 11(3) 1-2, 

Cinal,T.L. (1982). The school dropout: Causes, effects a nd solutions. South Bend, 
IN: Indiana University. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 221 820) 

Claus.R.N.etal. (1979). Cooperative p roject in American Indian development. 

Productive evaluation report Tide IV. Par t A. 1978-79. Saginaw, Ml: Saginaw Public 
Schools. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 184 739) 

Cobum, J ., & Smith, S. (1989). Teachers do make a difference: What Indian graduates 
say about their school experience . Portland: Northwest Regional Educational 
Laboratory. 

Cobum, J., & Smitii, S. (1987). Characteristic s of successful Indian students. Portland: 
Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory. 

Coladaici, T. (1983). High school dropout among Native Americans. Journal of 
American Indian Education. 21(1), 15-22. 

Colorado River Indian Tribes (1977). Career guidance for Indian voutii. Parker, AZ: 
Colorado River Indian Tribes. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 132 
366) 



93 



Combs, J., & Cooley, W. (1968). Dropouts: In high school and after school. American 
Educarional Research Journal. ^(3), 343-363. 

Conrath, J. (1986). Effective schools must focus on dropouts. NASSP Bulletin ^ 
70(487), 46-50. 

Cook, E. S, (1956). An analysis of factors related to withdrawal from high school prior 
to graduation. Journal of Educational Research. 2i}(3), 191-196. 

Coombs, M. (1970). The Indian Student is not low man on the totem pole. Journal of 
American In dian Education, 2(3), 1-9. 

Cox, J. L., & Spivey, R. (1986). High school dropouts in Appalachian: Problems and 
palliatives . San Francisco, CA: American Educational Research Association, April. 

Cox, J. L., HoUey, J., Kite, R., & Durham, W. (1985). Studv of high school dropouts 
in Appalachian. Washington, D.C.: Appalachian Regional Conmiissio a. 

Crew,B. K. (1985). Dropout and functional illiteracy rates in Central Appalachian data 
bank> Report #1. Lexington, KY: Appalachian Center, University of Kentucky. 

Crumb, J. (1982). Alaskan Native early school leavers: A study with recommendations . 
Anchorage, AK: The Anchorage Borough School District (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 247 064) 

Cuch,F. (1983). Ute Indian tribe comprehensive education plan. Fort Duchesne, UT: 
Ute Indian Tribe. OERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 278 517) 

D'Amico, R. (1984). Does employment during high school impair academic progress? 
Sociologv of Educati on, 57 (3\ 152-164. 




Dauphinais, P., LaFramboise, T.,&Rowc, W. (1980). Perceived problems and sources 
of help for American Indian students. Counselor Education ^ n ^ Supervision . 2Q(1)> 



Davis, J. A., & Levinsholm, J. R. (1979). The NLS study of high school class of 1972: 
A resource for educational and human development researchers. In J. E. Millholloan 
fEd.\ New pfa-ections fqr Testing and Measurement No. 2: Insights From Large-Scale 
Surveys. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 

Dayson, D. S. (1983). Parent's roles and responsibilities in Indian education. American 
Indian Fact Sheet , March, ERIC/CRESS. 

Development Associates, Inc. (1983). Academic performance, attendance and 

expectations of Indian students in public schools. Arlington, VA. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 237 277). 

Developnient Associates, Inc. (1983). National Impact Evaluation of Title TV. Part A . 
Arlington, VA. 

Deyhle,D. (1991). Empowerment and cultural conflict: Navajo parents and the schooling 
of their children. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education . 4(4). 




37-44. 



105 



94 



Deyhle.D. (1986). From Ho^an t ft PTA: li^nl*^'^' conflict. Nav^io piirente and the 
schooling of tl^eir children . Paper presented at the sinnual meeting of the American 
Anthropological Association, Philadelphia, PA. 

Deyhle,D. (1989). Pushouts and puUouts: Navajo and Ute school leavers. Journal pf 
TMavajo Rdncation. ^(2), 36-Sl. 

Deyoung, A., Huffman, K., & Turner, M. (1989). Dropout issues and problems in rural 
America, vnth a case study of one centnil Appalachian school district. In L. Weiss, E. 
Farrar & H. Petrie (Eds.), Dropouts from sghfx?|: Issues, dilemmas and Solutions, 
(pp. 55-77). Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 

Doss, D., & HoUey, F. (1985). A study of (hopouts in die Ausrin Indeijcndent School 
District. Spectrum . 1. 23-31. 

Dysinger.D. (1976). Title Vn stu dent sup port programs: Minneapolis i^blic Schools 
final evaluation report Minneapolis, MN: Mianeapolis Public Schools. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 118 643) 

Eberhaid, D. (1989). American Indian education: A study of dropouts, 1980-87. Jomai 
of American I ndian Education. 22(1), 32-40. 

Eckland, B. K., & Alexander, K. L. (1980). The national longimdinal study of the high 
school senior class of 1972. In A. C. Kerldioff (Ed.), RfiSfiarch in SOCioloSV of 
education and snoialization. Vol. 1. Greenwich, NJ: JAI Press Inc. 

Edington, E. D. (1969). Review of recent research on American Indian students: 
Academic achievement. , youmal of A mftrican Indian F^ncation. 8(3'). 10-15. 

Edington, E. D. (1969). Academic ach ievement of American Indian students; Review of 
recent research . Las Cruces, NM: New Mexico State University, Educational 
Resources Information Center. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 032 
168) 

Education Research Service (Trend Analysis). (1983). Enrollment trends: The nation's 
50 largest school districts. Spectrum. 1(2), 22. 

Education Week. (1986). The dropouts go on everyone else's rolls. Education Wggk, 
May 14, 34. 

Edwards, M.E. (1985). This last ditch plan keeps would-l>e dropouts in school Ihs 
■School Board Journal . 11(8), 24-25. 

Ekstrom, R. B., Geortz, M. E., Pollack, J. M., & Rock, D. A. (1986). Who drops out 
of high school and why? Findings from a national sUidy. Teachers College Record. 
Sl(3), 356-373. 

Elliot, D. S., & Voss, H. (1966). Capable dropouts and social milieu of die high school. 
The Journal of Filiicarional Research. 60(41 180-186. 

Elliot, D. S., & Voss, H. L. (1974). Delinquency a nd dropout. Lexington, KY: D. C. 
Heath & Co. 



95 



Elofson, W., & Elofson, B. (1988). Improving native education in the Province of 
Alherta. Canadian Jo urnal of Native Education. 15f n. 31-38. 

Enger, J. M., & Vaupel, C. F. (1981). Inservice for countering the dropout problem. 
Journal of th e International Association of Pupil Personnel Workers. 25(3^. 170-173. 

Erickson, F. (1987). Transformation and school success: The politisJS and culture of 
educational achievement Anthropology andEdug^tjon Quarterly , 1S(4). 

Fallbrook Union High School District. (1990). Title V (Indian Educa don't evaluation 
^summary rep p f^ 1 QSQ-9n for Fal I hrnolc Uni pn High School Distric t. Fallbrook, CA: 
Fallbrook Union High School District. 

Far West Labs. (1990). Pa pers, protrrams. and technical assistance foi" educators of at- 
psk students . San Francisco, CAr Far West Laboratory for Educat'onal Research and 
Development (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 247 064) 

Farrar, E. (1985). An Evaluation of Indian-controlled schools: Final rep ort. C:.irbridge, 
MA: ABT Associates, Inc. 

Fenton, R., & Crumb, J. (1984). Alaskan Native earlv school leavers: Update . 

Anchorage, AK: Anchorage School District (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED 276 556) 

Fine, M. (1986). Why urban adolescents drop into and out of public high schools. 
Teacher's College Record . fiZO), 393-409. 

Fine, M. (1991). J praming dropouts: Notes on the politics of an urban public high school . 
Albany, NY: S.*ate University of New York Press. 

Finn, J. D. (1991). How to make the dropout problem go away. Book review. 
Educational Researcher . 2Q(1), 28-30. 

Finn, J. D. (1989). Withdrawing from school. Review of Educational Research . 59. 117- 
142. 

Fletcher, J. D. (1983). What problems do American Indians have with English? Journal 
of American Indian Education. 23(1). 1-14. 

Fuchs, E., & Havighurst, R. J. (1972). To live on this earth: American Indian education. 
Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press. 

Fuller, G. B., & Friedrich, D. (1972). Rural high school dropout: A descriptive analysis. 
Perceptual and Motor Skills . 35(1). 195-201. 

Gadwa, K. (1983). School dropo uts! A study and final report-Edmonds School Disfrict 
Lynwood, WA: Educational Services Center. 

Gade, E., Hurlburt, G., & Fuqua, D. (1986). Smdy habits and attitudes of American 
Indian students: Implications for counselors. School Counselors . M(2), 135-139. 

Gale,N. (Ed.) (1988). Linkages for Indian child welfare program: Resource dh-ectory. 
Washington, D.C.: TCI, Inc. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 302 
372) 



107 



96 



Giles, K.N. (1985). Indian high sc hool dropout: A perspective. Milwaukee, WI: 
Midwest National Origin Desegregation Assistance Qmter: The University of 
Wisconsin-Milwaukee. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 270 282) 

Goldberg, M., & Harvey, J. (1983). A nation at risk: Tlie report of the National 
Commission on Excellence in Education. Phi Delta ICappan. M(l), 14-18. 

Gonzalez, L. (1989). Factors affecting school attendance. Clemson.SC: National 
Dropout Pre vention Newsletter. Winter. 



Gottfredson, D. C. (1982). Personality and persistence in education: A longitudinal 
study. Journal of Personality and Social Psvcholopv. 43f3'>. 532-45. 

Hammack.F. M. (1986). Large school systems' dropout reports: An analysis of 
definition, procedures and findings. Teacher's College Record. 2K3), 324-341. 

Harlem Consolidated School Disuict #122 (1983). Rgducing dropout,? through 

achievement motivation. End of project report. Rockford.IL: Ti'le HI, E.S.E.A. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 117 265) 

Hairis, I., Hedman, C, & Homing, M. (1983). Success with high scl.ool dropouts. 
Education L eadership. 4Q(6), 35-36. 

Henshaw, R. A. (1982). Alternatives for potential dropouts. School Guidance Worker. 
10-13. 

Heyns, B., & Hilton, T. (1982). The cognitive tests for high school and b-eyond: An 
assessment. Sociologv of Education . 55(2/3). 89-102. 

Hispanic Administrators for Quality Education. (1984). Symposium on ■Sciwl dropOtitS. 
Summary of recommenda tions f"»- drononts in California. San Diego, CA: San Diego 
State University, National Origin Desegregation Law Center. 

Hodgkinson, H., Outtz, J., & Obarakpor, A. (1990). The demographics of American 
Indians: One percent of the p eo ple: fif tv nercent of the diversity. Washington, D.C.: 
Institute for Educational Leadership. 

Howard, M. A. P., & Anderson, R.J. (1978). Early identification of potential dropouts: 
A Uterature review. Children's Welfare . 57. 221-231. 

Hoyt, E. B. (1965) Some light on the adjustment of Indian children. Tonmal of American 
Indian Education . 4(2), 26-29. 

Hoyt, K. B. (1962). The counselor and the dropout The Clearinghouse. M(9), 515- 
522. 

IBM. (1991). Graphs generated hv IBM customer business development. Phoenix, AZ: 
IBM Customer Business Development. 

International Instimte of Adult Literacy Methods. (1980). The problem of dropouts. Ihs 
Indian Journ al of Education. 41(9), 4-9. 



106 



97 



Jacobi,D.,&Borgrink,H. (1986). New Mexico Hmpnnt shidvt 1984-85 school year. 
Santa Fe, NM: Evaluation, Testing, and Data Management, New Mexico State- 
Department of Education. 

Jencks,C. (1979). Who gets ahe ad? The detemiinants of economic success in America. 
New York: Basic Books. 

Jencks, C. S., Brown, M.D. (1975). Effects of high schools on their students. Harvard 
Educational Review. 45(3). 273-324. 

Kaeser, S.C.,& Hooper, P. K. (1983). Seventh and eighth grade dropouts in Ohio. 
Research on who thev arft. whv thev leave and h ow school districts count them. 
Cleveland, OH: Citizens Council for Ohio Schools. (ERIC Document Reproduction - 
Service No. ED 236 488) 

Kaplan, J. L., Luck, E. D. (1977). The dropout phenomenon as a social problem. Ihs 
Educational Forum. 42(D. 41-46. 

Kentucky Department of Education (1980). Alternative education to address smdent 
behavior concerns . Frankfort, KY. 

Kentucky Department of Education (NI>.). Dropout prevention: A sound investment for 
the fumre: Kenmckv's successful dropout preve ntion programs. Frankfort, KY: 
Division of Compensatory Education; Dropout Prevention Unit. 

Kentucky Department of Education, Dropout Prevention Staff. (NX).). Pro pping out: 
Wliat does it cost? Frankfort, KY: Division of Compensatory Education; Dropout 
Prevention Unit. 

Kenmcky Department of Education, Dropout Prevention Staff (1986). Dropout 

prevention: A success sharing confer ence. T^nisville. Frankfort, KY: Division of 
Compensatory Education, Dropout Prevention Unit. 

KentuckyDropoutPrevention Advisory Commission. (1985). Keeping Kentucky's 
students in school: An initial report on dropout p revention. Rrankfort, KY: Division 
of Compensatory Education; Dropout Prevention Unit. 

Kleinfeld, J., McDiarmid, G. W., & Hagsti-om, D. (1989). Snaall local high schools 
decrease Alaska Native drop-out rates. Journal of A merican Indian Education. 2S.(3), 
24-29. 

Kleinfeld,!. (1974). A long wav froin home: Effects of pub lic high schools on village 
children away from home . Fairbanks, AK: Alaska University Institute of Social, 
Economic, and Government Research. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 
ED 087 581) 

Klinekole, R. (1979). Indian smdents' problems in boarding schools. BIA Education 
Research Bulletin. 1(2), 16-25. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 173 
052) 

Kluckhohn,C.,&Leighton,D. (1946). The Navaho . Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Kutsche, P. (1964). Cherokee high school dropouts. Journal of American Indian 



lOS 



98 



ERIC 



Ediicatifin, 2(2), 22-30. 

Lake, S. (1986). Dropouts. vSMRRC alert! Information for nrofessional excellence. 
Redwood City, CA: SMERC Information Center, San Mateo Office of Education. 

Lakeland Union ffigh School. (1971). Study of volu ntary high school dropoui s in the 
T^kdand Union High School District . Madison, WI: Wisconsin State Department of 
Public Welfare. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 051 938) 

Lamphere,L. (1977). To run after them: Cultura l and social biases of cooperation in a 
Navqjo community . Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press. 

Latham, G. (1985). The educational status of federally recognized Indian students. 
Journal of American Ind ian Education. 25(1). 25-33. 

Latham, G. I. (1989). Thirteen most common needs of American Indian education in BIA 
schools. Journal of American Indi an Education. 29(n. 1-11. 

Latham, G., & Barcas, C. (1986). Smdents at ri sk: Follow-up study of the education 
affects on students displaced hv the closer of Inter mnnntain Inter-tribal school. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 296 863) 

Lecompte, M.D., & Dworkin, G. (1991). Giving up on school: Teacher burnout and 
snident dropout . Newbury Park, CA: Sage/Corwin Press. 

LeCompte, M. D. (1987). The cultiiral context of dropping out Why remedial programs 
fail to solve tiie problems. Education an d Urban Society. 1^(3), 232-249. 

LeCompte, M. D. (1987). The cultural c ontext of dropnint^ out: Whv good droPQUt 
programs don't work . Paper presented at the American Association for the 
Advancement of Sciences, Chicago, EL. 

Ledlow, S. (1990). Anthropological perspectives in resea rch on American Indian 
dropouts . Unpublished masters tiiesis substitute, Arizona State University. 

Lee, J. D. (1986). Education of native adolescents in inner-city schools. Canadian 
Journal of Native Education. 12(2), 22-26. 

Lin, R. (1985). The promise and problems of the Native American student: A 

comparative study of high school students on the reservation and surrounding areas. 
Journal of American Ind ian Education. 2S(1), 6-16. 

Mackey, S. L. (1989). Native Americ an Program at Phoenix Union High School Pistrigt. 
Memorandum from Sam L. Mackey. 

Mann,D. (1985). Action on dropouts. Educational leadership. 43(n. 16-17. 

Mann,D. (1985). Re port of the national invitational working conference on h olding 
power and dropout . New York: Department of Educational Administi^ition, Teacher's 
CoUege, Columbia University, mimeographed. 

Mann,D. (1986). Can we help dropouts: Thinking about the undoable. Teacher's 
College Record . S2(3), 307-323. 



llu 



99 



Mann.D. (1986). Can we help dropouts? Thinking about the undoable. InG. Natriello 
(FAX School dropouts: Patterns and policies, (pp. 3-19). Teachers College 
Columbia University, Teachers College Press. 

Martin, D.L. (1981). Identifying potential dropo uts. A research report Frankfort, KY; 
Office of Research and Planning, Kentucky Department of Education. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 216 304) 

Maryland State Department of Education. (1981). Confronting the dropout. Collaborative 
a pproaches to serving the potential and actual earlv school leavers. Workshop report. 
Baltimore, MD: Youth Employability Branch, Division of Education. 

Mathews,!. (1991). Dropout prevention: The human touch helps. The Washington 
Post. June 3, Al & A4. 

Maurer, R. E. (1982). Dropout prevention. An interview model for today's high schools. 
Phi Delta Kappan . 62(7), 470-471. 

McBee,M. (1986). Dropout report for the 1985-86 school year . Oklahoma City, OK: 
Oklahoma City Public Schools. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 275 
785) 

McCarty, T. L. (1989). School as community. The Rough Rock demonstration. 
Harvard Educational Review . 52(4), 484-503. 

McDill, E. L., Natriello, G., & Pallas, A. M. (1986). A population at risk. Potential 
consequences of tougher school standards for student dropouts. American Journal of 
Education . 94(21 135-181. 

McNitt, G.D. (1983). Excused and unexcused absences-setting die limit. NASSP 
Bulletin . 67(476). 125. 

Merritt, R. (1983). The effect of enroUment and school organization on the dropout rate. 
Phi Delta Kapp an. ^5(3), 224. 

Milone,D.E. (1983). American Indian student r easons for dropping out and attitude 
toward school . UnpubUshed Masters Thesis, Arizona State University, Tempe, 
Arizona. 

Minnesota State Department of Education. (1981). Secondary sc hool dropouts. St. Paul, 
MN: Minnesota State Department of Education. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 205 684) 

Mokler, M. M., & Hernandez, F. (1987). Doing someth ing about voune Navaio women 
who are school dropouts . Albuquerque, NM: Mokler Associates. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 301 388) 

Montana State Department of Public Instmction. (1967). Indian educa tion: Annual report 
1966-67 . Helena, MT: Montana State Department of Public Instruction. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 041 651) 

Moore, C. (1982). Native American attrition studies . Albuquerque, NM: Albuquerque 
Technical Vocational Institute. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 226 
898) 



111 



100 



Morrison, W. (1977). A statistical p ortrait of the American Indian in 1976. Washington, 
D.C.: Office of Education, Indian Education. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED 135 556) • 

Morrow, G. (1987). Standardizing practice in the analysis of school dropouts. InG. 
Natrielln (¥A\ School dropouts! Pattern s and policies, (pp. 38-51). New York: 
Teachers College Press. 

National Center for Education Statistics. (1988). Dropout rates in the United States. 
Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Education, Office of Educational 
Research and Improvement. 

National Commission on Excellence in Education. (1983). A nation at risk. The 

imperative for educational reform . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, 
Government Printing Office. 

National Education Association of the United States. (1965). Dropout studies: Design 
and conduct . Washington, D.C.: National Education Association. 

National Education Association of the United States. (1987). American Indian/Alaskan 
Native concerns: Report of the studv committee . Washington, D.C.: National 
Education Association. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 310 185) 

National Executive Committee Study Group Reports on Ethnic Minority Concerns. 
(1987). And Justice for All . Washington, DC: National Education Association. 

National studv of American Indian education: Th e education of Indian children and vouth. 
(1970). Washington, DC: U.S. Office of Education. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 045 275) 

Natriello,G. (1982). Organizational evaluation svstems and student disengagement in 
secondary schools. A final report to the National Institute of Edncarion. St Louis, MP: 
Washington University. 

Natriello, G. (1984). Problems in tiie evaluation of students and student disengagement 
ft-om secondary schools. Journal of Research and D evelopment in Education. 12(4), 
14-24. 

Natriello, G., McDiU, E. L., & Pallas, A. M. (1985). School reform and potential 
dropouts. Educational Leadership. 43(1). 11-14. 

Natriello, G., McDill, E. L., & Pallas, A. M. (1986). Taking stock: Renewing our 
research agenda on the causes and consequences of dropping out. Teacher's College 
Record . 87(3). 430-440. 

Navajo Division of Education. (1982). Teg -year plan . Window Rock, AZ: The Navajo 
Nation. 

Navajo Division of Education. (1984). New Horizon educational policv in 1984-85. 
Window Rock, AZ: Navajo Nation. 

Navajo Division of Education. (1985). Navqjo Nation education policies. Window Rock, 
AZ: Navajo Nation. 



112 



101 



Navajo Tribal Council (1984). Navajo nation educarion policies . Windov^^ Rock, AZ: 
Navajo Nation. 

NeilUS.B. (1979). Keeping studentf; in school, pmhlems and solutions. AASA critical 
issues report , Arlington, VA: American Association of School Administrators. 

New York State Education Department (1964). How high sch ools can reduce their 
dn opout rate-An action guide . Albany, NY: Bureau of Guidance. 

New York State Education Department (1986). Alternative high school e quivalency 
pre paration program^ Albany, NY: Division of School Registration and Supervision. 

North Carolina Department of Public Instruction. (1983). North Carolina public hig h 
school dropout studv . Raleigh, NC: Division of Research. 

North Carolina Department of Public Instmction. (1985). A plan for d ropout prevention 
in North Carolina. Cooperation and comprehensiveness . Raleigh, NC: Office of 
Dropout Prevention, Support Services Area. 

North Carolina Department of Publiclnstruction. (1985). Keeping students in school 
PropQut data, research and programs . Raleigh, NC: Office of Dropout Prevention, 
Support Services Area. 

North Carolina Department of Public Instruction. (1986). State dropout prevention funds. 
Annual report . Raleigh, NC: Dropout Prevention Section, Division of Support 
Services Area. 

North Carolina Department of Public Instruction. (N.D.). Dropout prev ention in North 
Carolina - Facts and figures . Raleigh, NC: Dropout Prevention Section, Division of 
Support Services Area. 

North Carolina Department of Public Instruction. (N.D.). Statewide dr opout prevention 
coordination program . Raleigh, NC: Dropout Prevention Section, Division of Support 
Services Area. 

Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory. (1984). Effective schooling practices. A 
research synthesis. Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory, Goal 
Based Education Program. April 

Notrianni, D. (1985). High school dropouts. A literature review. Tempe,AZ: 
Hispanic Research Center, Arizona State University. 

Novak, J., & Dougherty, B. (N.D.). Staying in-A dropout prev ention handbook. K-12. 
Madison, WI: Vocational Studies Center, University of Wisconsin* 

0'Conner,P. (1985). Dropout prevention programs that work. OSSC Bulletin , 29(4). 1- 
30. 

Ogbu,J.U. (1974)* The next generation . New York: Acadeniic Press. 

Ogbu,J.U. (1978). Minority education and caste. The Am erican svstem in cross-cultural 
pers pective . Nev^^York: Academic Press. 



ERLC 



113 



102 



Ogbu, J. U. (1979). Social stratification and the sociali2ation of competence. 
Anthropology and Education Quarterly. IQ, 3-20. 

Ogbu, J. U. (1981). School ethnography. A multilevel approach. Anthropology and 
Filncation Quarterly. 12, 3-29. 

Qgbu,J.U. (1982). Cultural discontinuities and schooling. Anthropolog y and Education 
Quarterly. 13.290-307. 

Ogbu, J. U. (1983). Minority status and schorling in plural societies. Comparative 
Kdncarion Review. 27. 168-190. 

Ogbu, J. U. (1985). Research currents: Cultural-ecological influences on minority school 
learning. Language Arts . 62, 860-869. 

Ogbu, J. U. (1987). Variability in minority school performance. A problem in search of 
an explanation. Anthropology and Educa tion Quarterly. 18. 312-334. 

Oklahoma State Department of Education (1983). JQM Indian education program 

RvaTnation: 1982-83 . Oklahoma City, OK: Oklahoma State Department of Education. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 241 205) 

Ousterhout, A, (1979). Alaska's unique dropout problems. Tonmal of American Indian 
Edii2atiQa.I&(2),6-iO. 

Owens, C. S., & Bass, W. P. (1969). The American Indian hii;h school dropout in the 
Southwest . Albuquerque, NM: Southwestern Cooperative Educational Laboratory. 

Padfield, H., Hemingway, P., & Greenfeld, P. (1966). The Rma-Papago education 
population: A census and analysis. Journal of Am erican Indian Education. ^1), 1-24. 

Pallas, A. M. (1984). The determinants of high sc hool dropout. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, Johns Hopkins University. 

Peng, S. S. (1982). High school dropouts. Digest of Ed ucation Statistics. 14-15. 

Peng, S. S. (1983). High school dropouts: De scriptive information from high school and 
beyond . Washington, D.C.: National Center for Education Statistics, Digest of 
Educational Statistics. 

Peng, S. S., Bailey, J. P., & Eckland, B. K. (1977). Access to higher education: 
Results from tiie national longitudinal study of tihe high school class of 1972. 
Educational Researcher. ^(1 1), 3-7. 

Peng, S. S., Fetters, W. B., & Kolstad, A. J. (1981). High school and bevond: A 
national longitudinal study for the I QSO's: A capsule description of high school 
students . Washington, D.C.: National Center for Education Statistics. 

Peng, S. S., & Takai, R. T. (1983). High school d ropouts. Descriptive information from 
hi gh school and bevond . Washington, D.C.: National Center for Education Statistics. 
(ERIC DocuEoent Reproduction Service No. ED 236 366) 

Pewewardy,C. (1989). Stody of American Indian high school students attending public 
school. Indian Affairs. Summer. 6-9. 

ERIC 



103 



Phillips, D. J. (1984). The school leaver and the world outside. Education Canada. 
21(3). 26-31. 

Platero, P., Brandt, E. A., Witherspoon, G., & V/ong, P. (1986). Nava,jo students at 
psk. Final report for the Navajo area dropout study . Window Rock, AZ: Navajo 
Nation. 

Prestholdt, P. H., & Fisher, J. L. (1983). Dro pp in g o jt of high sch ool: an application of 
the theory of reasoned action . Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Southeastern Psychological Association, Atlanta Georgia. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 244 178) 

Quay, H. C, & Allen, L. B. (1982). Truants and dropouts. Encyclopedia of Educational 
Research, i, 1958-1962. 

Raywid, M. A. (1987). Finding education's "lost" children: The status, cost and 
prevention of dropout prone youth. School Leader. 21(1987), 27-31. 

Reid,K. (1982). The self-concept and persistent school absenteeism. British Journal of 
F^ncational Psvchologv . 52. 179-187. 

Reyhner, J. (In press). Plans for dropout prevention and special school support services 
for American Indian and Alaskan Native students. In forthcoming book of Indian 
Narions At Risk Task Force. 

Rieck,W. (1984). An alternative means for improving student attendance. NASSP 
Elllktill,£a(468) 92-95. 

Robins, L. N., & Ratcliffe, K. S. (1980). The long term outcome of truancy. InL. 
Hersov and I. Berg (Eds.), Out of school: Modem perspectives in truancy and school 
refusal . New York: John Wiley. 

Robledo,M.R. (1989). Dropout prevention and recovery: An action agenda. National 
Dropout Prevention Newsletter Clemson, SC: National Dropout Prevention Center, 
Clemson University, Spring. 

Rock Point Community School. (1990). Ts^ Nitsaa Deez' dhf Dm6 B i'61ta' Annual 
Report . Rock Point, AZ. 

Ross, V. J. (1983). Find potential dropouts early, tfien help tiiem stay in school. Ihs 
Executive Educator. 5(6). 16-17. 

Rubin, A., & Babbie, E. (1989). Research met hods for social work. Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth. 

Rudes, B. A. (1986). A progress report on the na tional longitudinal evaluation of 
E.S.E.A. Title W services for Native A merican smdents. A paper presented at 
Oklahoma City, Native American Issues Institute, May. Arlington, VA: 
Developmental Associates Inc. 

Rumberger, R. W. (1983). Dropping out of high school. The influence of race, sex and 
family background. American Ed ucational Research Journal. 20f2'>. 199-220. 



115 



104 



Rumberger, R. W. (1987). High school dropouts: A review of issues and evidence. 
Review of Educational Research. 51(2), 101-121. 

Sacramento, aty Unified School District. (1984). Districtwide multi-vear status report on 
high school level dropont ineasiirement for v ears ending June 30 of 1981. 1982. and 
1983 . Sacramento, CA: Sacramento, City Unified School District (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 278 729) 

Sacramento, City Unified School District. (1985). Districtwide m ulti-vear status report on 
high school level dropout- 1980-1984 summarv report . Sacramento, CA: Sacramento, 
City Unified School District. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 278 
728) 

Saterfiel, T. H., & Blackboum, R. (1982). An economic analysis of the effects of 
dropout and state tax revenues . Paper presented at Montreal, Canada, Annual meeting 
of the American Educational Research Association. Mississippi State University. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 231 042) 

Sawyer, T. M. (1981). Indian students' study habits and attitudes. Journal of American 
Indian Education . 20(3). 13-17. 

Scales, H.H. (1969). Another look at the dropout problem. The Journal of Educational 
Research. 62(8). 339-343. 

Schrieber,D. (1962). The school dropout-Fugitive from failure. NASSP Bulletin. 
46(274), 233-241. 

Schrieber,D. (1965). Dropout studies: design a nd conduct. Project: school droPQUtS. 
Washington, D.C.: National Education Association. 

Schrieber,D. (1967). Profile of the school dropout . New York: Random House. 

Schrieber,D. (1968). 700,000 dropouts. American Education IV. 

Schwartz, J. L. (1985). Native Americans in a Sou thwestern university. A studv of the 
impact of traditionalitv on success in higher education . Unpublished masters thesis. 
Northern Arizona University. 

Sealey, D., & Riffel, J. (1986). The developm ent of education in Fairfoid: A community 
manual . Manitoba, Canada: Interlake Tribal Division for Schools. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 266 003) 

Sealey, D., et al. (1987). Little Saskatch ewan school: An educational report. St Martin, 
Manitoba: Litde Saskatchewan Indian Reserve. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 283 662) 

Selinger, A. D. (1968). The American Indian graduate: After hiph school, what ? 
Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory. 

SeUnger, A. D. (1968). The American India n high school dropout The magnitude of the 
problem. Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory. 

Shainline, M. (1987). High school dropouts 1986-87. Albuquerque, NM: Albuquerque 
Public Schools. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 297 077) 



105 



Shepard,L.,«Sc Smith, M. (Eds.). (1989). Flunking grades: Research and policies on 
retention. New York: Falmer Press. 

Shipley, A. M. (1964) I taught related subjects to the special Navajos. Journal of 
American Indian Education . 2(2), 22-30. 

Smith, J.W. (1985). Summ^ v on the school dropout conference at Washington. D.C.. 
February 28 . Washington, D.C.: Committee on Education and Labor, U.S. House of 
Representatives. 

Spilka,B. (1971). Alienation and achievement among Oglala Sioux secondary students. 
Bethesda, MD: NIMH. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 045 225) 

Squires, G. (1980). Brid ging the g ap: A reassessment St. Paul, MN: Minnesota State 
Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 180 696) 

State of Alaska Department of Education. (1990). Report of ear lv leaver protect: Phase I. 
Juneau, AK: State of Alaska Department of Education. 

Steinberg, L., Blinde, P. L., & Chan, K. S. (1984). Dropping out among language 
minority youth. Review of Ed ucational Research. 54(11 113-132. 

Steinberg, L., et al. (19S2). Dropping out among language minority youth: A review of 
the literature . Los Alamitos, CA: National Center for Bilingual Research. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 241 831) 

Stice, G., & Ekstrom, R. B. (1964). High school attrition. Princeton, NJ: Educational 
Testing Service. 

Stroup, A. L., & Robms, L. N. (1972). Research notes: Elementary school predictors of 
high school dropout ajmong black males. Sociology of Education. 45(2), 212-222. 

Swisher, K. S., & Deyhle, D. (1989). The styles of learning are different, but die 

teachmg is just the same: Suggestions for teachers of American Indian Youth. Journal 
of American Indian Education. 22(4), 1-14. 

Szasz,M. nQ74V Fiiucarion and the A merican Indian: The road to self determination 
since 1928 . Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press. 

Task Force on New York State Dropout Problem. (1986). Dropping out of school in New 
York State: The invisible people of color . Albany, NY: State University of New 
York. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 297 035) 

Thompson, H. (1975). The Navajo's long walk for education. A history of Navaio 
education . Tsaile,AZ: Navajo Community College Press. 

Trueba, H. T., Spindler, G., & Spindler, L. (1989). What do anthropologists have to sav 
about dropouts ? New York: Falmer Press. 

Trueba, H.T. (1988). Peer socialization among minority students: A high school dropout 
prevention program. In H. T. Trueba & C. Delgado-Gaitan (Eds.), School and 
Society: Learning Content Through Culture . New York: Praeger. 



117 



106 



Tulsa Public Schools. (1991). Tulsa public schools dropout report 1990-91 . Tulsa, OK: 
Tulsa Public Schools. 

Turner, A. (1984). Ute Paiute tribal restoration. Pocatello, ID: Idaho State University. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 243 637) 

U.S. Department of Education (1984). Academic performanc e, at tendance^ and 

expectations of Indian students in public schools . Washington D.C.: U.S. Department 
of Education Office of Planning, Budget, and Evaluation. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 237 277) 

U. S. General Accounting Office (1987). School dropouts: Survey of local program s. 
Washington, D.C.: United States General Accounting Office. 

U. S. General Accounting Office (1986). School dropouts: The extent and nature of the 
problem . Washington, D. C: United States General Accounting Office. 

U.S. Senate. (1969). I ndian Education: A Nat ional Tragedy - A National Challenge. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S* Government Printing Office. 

Uhrmacher, P. B. (1985). Use this step-by-step approach to reduce the student dropout 
rate. The America n School Board JoumaL 172(41 40-41. 

United States Government — Army Recruitment (1985). The high cost of dropping out 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office. 

Vogt, L. A., Jordan, C, & Tharp, R. G. (1987). Explaining school failure, producing 
school success: Two cases. Anthropology and Education Ouarterly . 18 , 276-286. 

Washington Office ofthe State Superintendent of Public Instruction. (1984). Statewide 
survey of Indian Education: Washington State . 01ympia,WA: Washington Office of 
the State Superintendent of Public Instmction. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED 245 871) 

Washington Office of the State Superintendent of Public Instruction. (1984). Washington 
State JOM Indian Education 1983-84 Annual Report 01ympia,WA: Washington 
Office of the State Superintendent of Public Instruction. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 259 854) 

Wax, M., Wax, R., & Dumont, R., Jr. (1964). Formal education in an American Indian 
community: Peer society and the failure of minority education. Piospect Heights, IL: 
Waveland Press. 

Wax, R. H. (1967a). Oglala Sioux dropouts and their problems with educators. In 
Everett T. Keach et al. (Eds.), Education and school crisis: perspectives on teaching 
disadvantaged youth s (pg. 247-257). New York: Wiley & Sons. 

Wax,R.H. (1967b). The warrior dropout TransAction. 4. 40-46. 

Wax,R.H.,&Wax.M.L. (1964). Dropout of American Indians at die secondarv level. 
Mimeoed. 



lis 

r 



107 



Wax, R. H,, & Thomas, R. K. (1961). American Indians and White people. Phylon. 
22(4), 305-318. 

Weber, J., & Silvani-Lacey, C (1983). Building basic skills. The dropQut. Research 
an d development series No. 236 . Columbus, OH: The National Center for Research 
in Vocational Education, Ohio State University. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 232 014) 

Wehlage,G. (1983). Effective Programs for the marginal high school student. 
Bloomington, IN: Phi Delta Kappa Educational Foundation. 

Wehlage, G. (1983). The marginal high school student. Defining the problem and 
searching for policy. Children and Youth Services Revievy. ^,321-342. 

Wehlage, G. (1989). Dropping out: Can schools be expected to prevent it? InL. Weis. 
E. Farrar. & H. Petrie (Eds.), Dro pouts from school: Issues, dilemmas and solutions. 
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 

Wehlage, G. G., & Rutter, R. (1986). Dropping out: Hovi^ much do schools contribute 
to the problem? Teacher College Record. 3, 374-392. 

Weis, L., Farrar, E., & Petrie, H. (Eds.). (1989). Dropoqts from school: Issues, 
dilemmas, and solutions . Albany, NY: State University of Nevi^ York Press. 

Wells, R. H., Jr. (1991). Indian education from the tribal perspective: A survey of 
American Indian tribal leaders . Unpublished manuscript, St. Lawarence, NY. 

Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education. (1987). prom minority to majority: 
Education and the future of the Southwest . Denver, CO: WICHE. 

Western Interstate Commission on Higher Education. (1988). Demography and higher 
education in the changing Southwest. Denver, CO: WICHE. 

Wolphin,K. (1983). The national longitudinal surveys handbook. 1983-84. Columbus, 
OH: Center for Human Resource Research, Ohio State Univei*sity. 

Wong, P., Padilla, R. V., & Montiel, M. (1986). Staying and achieving. A report 

prepared for the Phoenix Union High S chool District Task Force. Tempe,AZ: Office 
of Vice President for Academic Affairs/Minority Affairs and Hispanic Research Center, 
Arizona State University. 

Yagi, K. (1984). Indian education act project in the Portland public schools: 1983-84 
evaluation report . Portland, OR: Portiand Public Schools. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 251 489) 

Young, M.B. et al. (1983). Evaluation of tiie impact of the Part A Entidement program 
funded under Tide IV of the Indian Education Act Arlington, VA: Developmental 
Associates, Inc. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 237 276) 

Yudin, L. W. et al. (1973). School dropout or college bound. Study in contrast. Ih^ 
Journal of Education Research. ^(2), 87-93. 



119 



108 



Bibliography for State Dropout Information 



Banker,! (1991). CorrespondencetoKarenSwisher, January 4, 1991. 01ympia,WA: 
Washington State Superintendent of Public Instruction, Indian Education Office. 

Beck,M. (1991). CorrespondencetoMichelleHoisch, June6, 1991. Atlanta, GA: 
Georgia Department of Education. 

Butterfield, R. (1989). Ore.gon Department of Educ ation Indian education survey. Fall 
1987 . Salem, OR: Department of Education. 

California State Department of Education. (1990). Three year su mmary number of 

dronoiits in California public schools by ethnic grou p class of 1989. Sacramento, OA: 
California State Department of Education. 

Cardenas, J. (1989). Texas dropouts reyisited: 1989. Instructional Deyelopment 
Research As sociation Newsletter. 16(4), 1-4. 

Cardenas, J. (1990). Texas school dropouts: 1986 to 1989. Instructional Development 
Research Assoc iation Newsletter. 17(3), 1-5. 

Colorado Department of Education. (1990). Colorado pub lic school annual dropout rates 
grades seven through twelve 1989-90 . Denver, CO: Colorado Department of 
Education. 

Cunningham, D. Oregon Indian education study. 

Dropout Prevention and Students At Risk/Child Abuse Prevention Section Division of 
Student Services. (1990). 1 988-89 Dropout data report . Raleigh, NC: North 
Carolina Department of Public Instruction. 

Ellen Swaney, Director. Mo ntana 'Tracks" project: American Indians in education . 
Pamphlet Helena, MT: American Indian/Minority Achievement Montana University 
System. 

Ellerbe, J. M. (1990). Memo to "Dropout Prevention and Students At Risk" coordinators. 
Raleigh, NC: North Carolma Department of Public Instruction. 

Griswold,R. (1990). Dropout rates and graduat ion statistics bv countv and school district 
for school vear 1988-89. Olympia, WA: Superintendent of Public Instruction. 

Illinois State Board of Education (1990). 1989-90 Drop outs bv grade, sex and 

racial/ethnic cate gory and dropout rates for 1987-88. 1988-89 and 1989-90: Grades 1- 
6. Springfield, EL: Illinois State Board of Education. 

lUinois State Board of Education. (1990). 1 989-90 Dropouts bv grade, sex and 

racial/ethnic category and dropout rates for 1987-88. 1988-89 and 1989-90: Grades 7- 
S. Springfield, IL: Illinois State Board of Education. 

Illinois State Board of Education. (1990). 1989-90 Droiwuts bv grade, sex and 

ranial/ethnic category and dropout rates f or 1987-88. 1988-89 and 1989-90: Grades 9- 
12. Springfield, DL: Illinois State Board of Education. 



12U 



109 



Indian School Council, State of Minnesota (1989). Our children our future: Presentation 
to the state of Minnesota 1989 legislature . State of Minnesota Indian School Council. 

Kulas, C. (1991). Correspondence to Karen Swisher, January 28, 1991. Bismarck, ND: 
Department of Public Instruction. 

Minnesota Department of Education Education Finance and Analysis District Data Unit 
(1990). Information on Minnesota jchool dropouts 1989-90 , Minneapolis, MN: 
Minnesota Department of Education. 

Nebraska Department of Education Data Center. (1989). 1988-89 Dropouts by race . 
Lincoln, NE: Nebraska Department of Education. 

Office of Instructional Proframs. (1989). Non English background/limited English 
proficient students in Georgia public schools by language . Atlanta, GA: Georgia 
Department of Education. 

Oklahoma State Department of Education. (1989). Perspective: Oklahoma educational 
indicators prog ram. Oklahoma City, OK: Oklahoncm State Department of Lducation. 

Oregon Department of Education. (1990). Dropout Rates in Qreson b-igh schools: Tlie 
first year of the student accounting system. State summary report. Salem, OR: 
Oregon Department of Education. 

Planning Unit of the Oklahoma State Department of Vocational and Technical Education 
and the Accreditation Section of the Oklahoma State Department of Education. (1985). 
Dropout Report: State of Oklahoma 1984-85. Oklahoma City, OK: Oklahoma State 
Department of Education. 

Planning Unit of the Oklahoma State Department of Vocational and Technical Education 
and the Accreditation Section of the Oklahoma State Department of Education. (1986). 
Dropout report: State of Oklahoma 1985-86 . Oklahoma City, OK: Oklahoma State 
Department of Education. 

Plaiuiing Unit of tiie Oklahoma State Department of Vocational and Technical Education 
and the Accreditation Section of tiie Oklahoma State Department of Education. (1987). 
Dropout report: State of Oklahoma 1986-87 . Oklahoma City, OK: Oklahoma State 
Department of Education. 

Planning Unit of the Oklahoma State Department of Vocational and Technical Education 
and tiie Accreditation Section of the Oklahoma State Department of Education. (1988). 
Dropout report: State of Oklahoma 1987-.88 . Oklahoma Qty, OK: Oklahoma State 
Department of Education. 

Planning Unit of the Oklahoma State Department of Vocational and Teclinical Education 
and tiie Accreditation Section of the Oklahoma State Department of Education. (1989). 
Dropout report: State of Oklahoma 1988-89 . Oklahoma City, OK: Oklahoma State 
Department of Education. 

Pool,D. (1991). Correspondence to Michelle Hoisch, May 7, 1991. Lincoln, NE: 
Nebraska Department of Education. 

Research and Development (1991). Compaqsop of dropout rates between Aynerican 



121 



no 



Indians and total enrollment . Phoenix, AZ: Arizona Department of Education. 

Speas, C. (1989). What do we know about North Caroli na public school dropouts? 
Raleigh, NC: North Carolina Department of Public Instruction - Research and 
Development Services. 

State Advisory Council on Indian Education. (1990). Pamphlet Raleigh, NC: 
Compensatory Education Division of Curriculum and Instruction Services, North 
Carolina Department of Public Instruction. 

State of Idaho Department of Education. Various state wide Johnson O'Mallev statistics 
1985-90 . Boise, ID: State of Idaho Department of Education. 

State of Minnesota. It's time to break the trend! ! Annual drotwut percentage rate for 
Amftrican Indian and White students in selected y rhan school districts (1983-1987). 

State of Rhode Island. (1991). Amerif-ai) Tnrfian r>roTK>uts. 1989-90. Providence, RI: 
State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations Department of Education. 

State of South Dakota. (1989). High school dropout info rmation and enrollment and 
dropout stat if;t;i gs. state of South Dakota . South Dakota Education Statistical Digest, 
1988-89. 

State of Wisconsin. (1991). 1989-90 Wisconsin American Indian dropout rate grades 9- 
12. Derived from raw data from the state of Wisconsin. 

Stephan,R., Ennatinger, K., «& Bruckman, B. (1991). Repoji on early leaver proiect 
phase II: Fall 1989 through Fall 1990 . Juneau, AK: State of Alaska Department of 
Education Office of Data Management 

Texas Education Agency. (1989). Re port on 1987-88 public school dropouts from the 
State Board of Education . Austin, TX: Texas Education Agency. 

Texas Education Agency. (1990). 19P<^-8Q nuhlic school dropout report. Austin, TX: 
Texas Education Agency. 

The Rapid City Coalition for Dropout Prevention. (1990). Pmiect 2000: Rapid Citv 
dro pout prevention plan . Rapid City, SD: Rapid City Coalition for Dropout 
Prevention. 

Dlrich. A. L„ ^ Ttf^rgrink. F n990V New Mexico Dropout Studv 1988-89 school year . 
Santa Fe, NM: Assessment Evaluation and Information Services, State Department of 
Education. 

Utah State Office of Education. (1990). American Ind ian smdent dropouts and graduates: 
High school . Tw6 tables produced by the Utah State Office of Education. Salt Lake 
City. UT: Utah State Office of Education. 

Van Patten, J. (1990). Report on earlv leaver proiect: Phase I Fall 1 988 through Fall 
1989 . Juneau, AK: State of Alaska Department of Education. 



122 



