DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 423 530 



CS 216 487 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Standley, Melissa 

Sharing Stories and Conversation: Teaching Culture (s) in a 
College Literature Class. 

1998-04-03 

22p . ; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Conference on College Composition and Communication (49th, 
Chicago, IL, April 1-4, 1998). 

Guides - Classroom - Teacher (052) -- Opinion Papers (120) 

-- Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

*Black Literature; Classroom Techniques; ^College English; 
Cultural Background; *Cultural Context; Ethnic Groups; 
Ethnocentrism; Higher Education; ^Literature Appreciation; 
Multicultural Education; Portfolios (Background Materials) ; 
*Racial Differences; Student Needs 

*Black Writers; Cultural Sensitivity; Harlem Renaissance 



ABSTRACT 



An overriding concern in the teaching of literature from 
cultures other than the instructor's own is how to go about selecting 
appropriate literature. When selecting course texts, the question should be 
whether literary scholars write respectfully about the work. A 
sophomore -level Introduction to African-American Literature course has been 
structured historically (starting with the Harlem Renaissance) around 
canonical African-American authors, beginning with Richard Wright's "Native 
Son" and Zora Neale Hurston's "Their Eyes Were Watching God." A Toni Morrison 
novel is also taught as is one other contemporary text towards the course's 
end. Some local African-American history and literature are also included. 

The course is reading- and writing- intensive . Other classes include a 
sophomore -level Postcolonial Literature course and a junior-level American 
Multiethnic Literature course. These courses are begun by trying to subvert 
the idea of "white" as normal and everyone else as "ethnic" or "other, " 
introducing the idea of white ethnicity. Useful frameworks for considering 
how people construct their own racial identities and their ideas about other 
races are William Cross's stages of racial development (in Beverly Daniel 
Tatum's book "Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting Together in the Cafeteria?") 
and Louise Damen ' s chart that maps the stages of culture learning in her book 
"Culture Learning: The Fifth Dimension in the Language Classroom." The most 
important elements for getting students to consider their own ethnic 
identities and the identities of other people are the reading and the writing 
of portfolios. (Contains 13 references; a sample portfolio handout is 
appended.) (CR) 



******************************************************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 

******************************************************************************** 



o 

ERIC 



C£ AU.4S 7 



© 

co 



Melissa Standley 

Conference on College Composition and Communication 
April 3, 1998 



a 



Sharing Stories and Conversation: Teaching Culture (s) 
in a College Literature Class 



I am Melissa Standley, a visiting instructor currently 
teaching at Florida State University. I am a generalist in 
English studies, but my specific focus is the study of 
multiethnic literatures from a postcolonial perspective. This 
semester I am teaching three courses: Postcolonial Literature and 
African-American Literature at the sophomore -level and American 
Multiethnic Literature at the junior level. This is my ninth 
year of teaching, although I taught English as a Second Language 
as a volunteer during the year I did not teach for money, so 
perhaps it is my tenth year. My cjoal, for the twenty minutes or 
so that I have been allotted, is to share a sample of my teaching 
with you in the hope that what I share will begin a conversation. 
I have brought various handouts; please feel free to take them 
with you after the session. 

How I Select the Literature I Teach 

I am fortunate to be teaching in a department that leaves 
the selection of texts and the writing of syllabi to the 
individual instructors in most cases. When I consider how I 
select the literature that I teach, departmental requirements are 
not my main concern, which frees me to be concerned about other 



issues . 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 



U S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research end Improvement 




ATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 




l 



This document has been reproduced fcS 
received from the person or organization 
originoting it 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



□ Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality. 



2 



ERIC 



o Points of view or opmtono stated in this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or policy. 



1 



When planning the courses I teach, I consider mostly my 
goals for the course and how the course will fit into the rest of 
the departmental curriculum. I have some goals that are true for 
all literature courses I teach: students should read extensively 
and write extensively about what they read. Students should read 
texts that they have not read before. Students also should have 
many chances to express how they read the texts in a variety of 
forums, graded and ungraded. I privilege the idea of multiple 
interpretations, which is especially important in the 
multicultural literature courses I teach; I want students to 
learn that we do not all read the same texts the same way. I 
require portfolios in all of my literature classes. 

An overriding concern in the teaching of literature from 

cultures other than my own is how I go about selecting 

appropriate literature. This is a very important question. Bad 

choices will adversely affect my goal of literature articulating 

our cultural differences and helping us to learn to get along. 

Native American literature in particular is rife with possible 

bad choices: "Native American" books not written by Native 

Americans. In his novel Indian Killer . Sherman Alexie shows us a 

badly-designed Native American literature class, or perhaps a 

well-designed imperialist project: 

One of the books, The Education of Little Tree , was 
supposedly written by a Cherokee Indian named Forrest 
Carter. But Forrest Carter was actually the pseudonym 
for a former Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan. Three 
of the other books, Black Elk Speaks . Lame Deer : 

Seeker of Vissions . and Lakota Woman , were taught in 
almost every Native American Literature class in the 
country, and purported to autobiographical, though 

2 




3 



all three were co-written by white men. Black Elk 
himself had disavowed his autobiography, a fact that 
was conveniently omitted in any discussion of the book. 
The other seven books included three anthologies of 
traditional Indian stories edited by white men, two 
nonfiction studies of Indian spirituality written by 
white women, a book of traditional Indian poetry 
translations edited by a Polish-American Jewish man, 
and an Indian murder mystery written by some local 
white writer named Jack Wilson, who claimed he was 
a Shilshomish Indian. (58-9) 

So how does one choose appropriate multicultural literature to 
teach? When I am selecting texts for a course, I ask myself a 
series of questions about a text before I consider it: Do 
literary scholars respect this work, or at least this writer? 

More importantly, do scholars who are of the same culture as the 
writer presents himself as respect the work or the writer? If 
not, why not? [Gloria Bird suggests, for example, that Sherman 
Alexie exploits Native Americans by attempting to invest the 
colonizer's language with Indianness] . Whether or not literary 
scholars write respectfully about the work tells me whether other 
people think the work has merit. What literary scholars who are 
of the same culture say about a work tells me whether the author 
is who she claims to be and how her community evaluates her work; 
it also identifies some of the issues prevalent within that 
community . 

What I Am Teaching This Semester 

The sophomore -level Introduction to African-American 
literature course is described in our catalogue as a course in 
which students will read major African-American authors. Our 
department has extensive course offerings in African-American 



3 




4 



literature: we regularly run eleven to fourteen sections of this 

sophomore -level course in addition to several junior-, senior-, 

and graduate -level African-American literature courses taught by 

/ 

tenure- track faculty. When I designed my course, I 
conceptualized it as the first of more than one course most of 
the students would take in our department . I wanted my course to 
prepare students for the more in-depth work they would encounter 
in the later courses. I have structured this course 
historically, around canonical African-American authors; I 
believe that this would provide a good scaffolding for the later 
courses, and that it is also important for students who take no 
other literature courses to realize that African-American 
literature has a specific literary canon. I tend to privilege 
novels over other genres. I begin with Richard Wright's Native 
Son and Zora Neale Hurston's Their Eyes Were Watching God because 
I like to begin the course with the Harlem Renaissance and with 
the conflict between those two major figures- -it contextualizes a 
discussion of canon-formation. I nearly always teach a Toni 
Morrison novel towards the end, and one other contemporary text 
that I think students might not have read, this semester it is 
Charles Johnson's Middle Passage . I nearly always include some 
local African-American history and literature. In Tallahassee, 
Florida my local texts are Their Eyes Were Watching God and the 
film Rosewood . The course is reading- intensive and writing- 
intensive. My lectures generally provide some background in 
African-American history, beginning with the 1890s and then 

4 




5 



corresponding with the texts we read in class. The texts lend 
themselves well to the historical structure of the course, and 
usually students have learned enough American history to have 
some concept of historical events, although most students, sadly, 
do not have a working knowledge of African-American history. 

The sophomore -level Postcolonial Literature course is a 
relatively new offering in our department. Students may also 
take a senior-level or graduate -level Postcolonial literature 
class. The description in the catalogue says that students will 
read African and Caribbean authors in this course. Postcolonial 
literature is one of my main research focuses, and my course is 
somewhat different from the course description. In addition to 
African and Caribbean literature, I include Latin American and 
Native American literature because they also fit appropriately 
into this rubric, Latin American literature by virtue of the 
economic colonialism of Western powers and Native American 
literature by virtue of the current colony status of Native 
American nations in the United States (Morris 56, 57, 68-72) . I 
have structured my syllabus around theory because I believe that 
the theoretical background of Postcolonial Studies will empower 
students to re-evaluate a wide variety of texts. There are two 
units: National Consciousness and Issues of Colonization/ 
Decolonization. The unit on National Consciousness includes 
consideration of the Age of Decolonization (the twentieth 
century) , the idea of national consciousness and its pitfalls a 
la Fanon, historicity, and the function of national myth in the 

5 




6 



creation of national consciousness. My students read theoretical 
articles from The Post -colonial Reader edited by Ashcroft, 
Griffiths, and Tiffin, and I supplement that with historical 
lectures, such as the history of Nigeria gaining independence 
from the British and the history and legal impact of federal 
Indian policy in the United States. In the National 
Consciousness unit, students are assigned to read Chinua Achebe's 
Things Fall Apart . Aime Cesaire's Notebook on Return to My Native 
Land , and Sherman Alexie's Reservation Blues . The Issues of 
Colonization/Decolonization unit covers historicity including a 
look back at the Age of Colonization [re-history] , Calibanismo, 
the legacy of colonialism, hybridity, the double colonization of 
women, and Coca-cola Colonialism. Each text in this unit 
corresponds to a theoretical issue; the text that presents the 
issue of the legacy of colonialism, for example, is Ayi Kwei 
Armah's The Beautyful Ones Are Not Yet Born . The focus of the 
course is European colonization after the point of contact and 
then the decolonization and efforts to decolonize that have 
characterized especially the twentieth century. The next time I 
teach this course, I will most likely pare down the reading list. 
I have found this semester that students are challenged by the 
very concepts that underpin the course, such as the idea of 
history as a text and the United States as a current colonial 
power, and the reading list is probably too extensive and too 
challenging in combination with the challenges offered by the 
concepts . 



6 




7 



The junior-level American Multiethnic Literature course is 
described in the catalogue as a course in which students will 
read multiethnic writing, such as the works of Zora Neale Hurston 
and Ralph Ellison. This description, of course, immediately sets 
up the course to duplicate the African-American literature course 
offerings. I find this course the most difficult one to 
conceptualize; I think my resistance to it comes from what 
appears to be the ideological underpinning of the course : The 

course seems to be the institutional stop-gap measure in which 
students are to be exposed to as many non-white writers as 
possible in one semester. Elizabeth Cook-Lynn writes about 
"Ethnic Studies" Departments replacing "Native American Studies" 
and other interdisciplinary departments focused around ethnicity 
as part of the conservative backlash against multicultural 
studies; she suggests that such hybrid departments water down 
specific ethnically- important curriculum in favor of a more 
generalized focus on ethnicity or otherness (Cook-Lynn 17) . She 
is writing about the creation and dissolution of departments, 
whereas my concern is the conceptualization of courses, but her 
discussion forces me to question how the Multiethnic Literature 
course has been conceptualized within my department. I am 
fortunate to be teaching in a department which has rich course 
offerings in African-American Literature, Latino/a Literature, 
and Native American Literature, but I find that many non-English 
major students take the Multiethnic Literature course as one of 
their two required multicultural courses. I am concerned that it 

7 




8 



reinforces the status quo perception of white majority and 
everyone-else minority by its very nature: a course that is 
expected to focus on "all" non-white literature, labelled 
"ethnic . " 

My goal for the Multiethnic Literature course, all 
complaints about its philosophical antecedents aside, is for my 
students' preconceived notions to be destabilized, for students 
to discover others' differences so that they might become more 
sensitive to people of ethnic backgrounds different from theirs. 

I generally choose to teach texts that I like. In addition, I 
require students to read supplemental articles that I place on 
reserve in our library; the articles provide additional 
information that helps students decode the novels and stories. 

I usually begin the course by attempting to subvert the idea 
of white as "normal" and everyone else as "ethnic" or "other" by 
introducing the idea of white ethnicity. I want students to be 
conscious of the past results of not articulating white as an 
ethnicity, that is what Michael Omi calls the " transpar [ency] of 
whiteness" (182) and the accompanying unacknowledged white 
privilege (Frankenberg 17-8) . I also want my white students 
especially to begin to search for what it means to be white; it 
is my attempt to forestall what Cynthia Hamilton suggests is the 
almost inevitable replacement of a sense of cultural belonging 
with white supremacist racism (173) . My approach to this is 
dictated by my own heritage. I usually teach a book from the 
Appalachian mountains, often something by Sharyn McCrumb, because 




8 



I can speak with authority about the distinctness, good and bad, 
of Appalachian culture and history, and what makes the novels by 
this writer particularly authentic. Providing students with one 
model of white ethnicity helps prepare them for recognizing 
others . 

The other texts I select for the Multiethnic Literature 
course generally reflect the ethnicities that make up American 
culture and that make up typical classes at Florida State 
University: that is, Latino/a, African-American, Oriental, and 
Native American. (This is not meant to be an all-inclusive 
list) . I generally do not have very many Native American 
students, maybe one or two a semester; I include Native. American 
literature because I want to teach my students that not everyone 
is accepting of the appropriation of the Seminole as our 
university's mascot and that Native Americans are actually 
people, not what the students see at pep rallies and football 
games . 

As I have already suggested, what is lost in a course 
organized around multicultural literature is the chance to study 
one culture in-depth, but some things are gained as well. This 
format does seem to accomplish effectively the goal of 
articulating our differences in the hope of learning to get along 
because several often very different perspectives are 
represented. It also seems to be more destabilizing to the 
students' preconceptions: students find it more difficult to 
focus on how any one culture is either similar or radically 

9 




10 



different from their own and yet they find patterns of difference 
from their own cultures. It also seems advantageous when there 
is at least one author with whom students identify culturally and 
at least one with whom they identify emotionally but with whom 
they do not share cultural ties . Teaching a text by an author 
with whom students identify culturally validates their culture 
and ultimately themselves, while finding an author they love who 
is of a different culture is one way of beguiling them into 
beginning to respect what another cultural perspective has to 
offer. Teaching a wide variety of texts makes finding an author 
students love more likely, although of course it is not 
guaranteed. 

The Process of Culture Learning 

I have encountered two very useful frameworks for 
considering how people construct their own racial identities and 
their ideas about other races. I am going to share them both 
here. I will talk about how people construct their own racial 
identities first because I believe that some sense of self is 
necessary before someone can consider how she perceives others of 
different ethnicities, although both ideas, self and other, begin 
to inform each other. 

A helpful framework in considering how a person develops her 
own sense of racial identity is William Cross' five stages of 
racial development, discussed by Beverly Daniel Tatum in her 
book, Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting Together in the 
Cafeteria? . Tatum explains that the five stages are pre- 

10 



O 

ERIC 



11 



encounter, encounter, immersion/emersion, internalization, and 
internalization/ commitment (54-5) . Tatum is discussing these 
stages in relation to African-American children, but she makes 
the point that they are generally applicable to people of all 
races, although not all white people are forced to consider their 
racial identity the way non-white people are. I would add that 
these stages do not necessarily occur in order, and not 
necessarily during childhood, which is how they are presented. 

The pre-encounter stage is usually the point at which a person is 
unaware of her racial identity. The encounter stage is when 
something forces an awareness of racial identity upon the person, 
usually in a traumatic way if the person is not white. 
Immersion/emersion is a response to one's growing awareness of 
racial identity; a person surrounds herself with symbols of her 
own racial identity and friends who are like herself. The 
internalization stage is when the person has attained a sense of 
security about her own racial identity and is willing to 
establish meaningful relationships across group boundaries. The 
internalization/commitment stage is when the person turns her own 
sense of security about racial identity into a personal 
commitment to political action. 

One of the most useful ideas I have encountered in my 
thinking about teaching multicultural literature is Louise 
Damen's chart that maps the stages of culture learning in her 
book about ESL pedagogy Culture Learning: The Fifth Dimension in 
the Language Classroom . Damen's chart is based on earlier work 

11 




12 



with culture learning done by E. Kleinjans (1972) and R. Porter 
and L. Samovar (1982) . Synthesizing this work implies that the 
more familiar a learner becomes with another culture, the more 
complex is her learning about the culture, and the synthesis 
provides some stages for this familiarity and learning. Of 
course every student does not follow the domains and stages 
articulated in the chart; the chart does, however, provide a 
useful framework with which to begin thinking about the process 
students go through when they learn about other cultures . 



THE PATHS OF CULTURE LEARNING* 



Levels of Culture Learning 



Cultural/ 

Social 

Stage Distance (cognitive/af fective) 


Degrees of 

(action) Acculturation 


Max: 

1 


Lmum Little or no knowledge 

of THEM 
Low awareness 


Little Ethnocentrism 

interaction; 

stereotypic 


2 


Some knowledge; brief 
experience 
Awareness of super- 
ficial or "exotic" 
features 


Intellectual Euphoria 

interest ; 
some analysis 


3 


Much more knowledge 
and contact 
Greater awareness of 
differences 


More analysis; Conflict 
evaluation; ! ! ! ! SHOCK! ! ! ! 

disorientation 


4 


Knowledge, experience, 
and understanding 
Awareness of important 
similari ties /dif- 
ferences 


Accepting; Reintegration 

tolerance of 
the new 


5 Minin 


Understanding; insight 

Empathy; -emic point 
(\um of view 


Interactive; Assimilation 

mediating 

Adaptation 

Adjustment 



12 




13 



*This chart is from Culture Learning: The Fifth Dimension in 
the Language Classroom by Louise Damen. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1987. 218. 

The domains represented in the chart suggest, of course, that 

students' beginning knowledge of other cultures is very limited, 

characterized mostly by students' own ethnocentrism and 

stereotypes about other cultures. Students go through a euphoric 

stage when they begin to learn about other cultures; this stage 

is characterized by a focus on the "exotic" elements of other 

cultures. The final stage of the chart is characterized by 

empathy, a sense of adaptation or adjustment on the part of 

students . 

My purpose as a teacher of multicultural literature is to 
ask students to consider their own sense of racial identity and 
to move them forward along the continuum of learning about other 
cultures/ethnicities. My ultimate purpose is to destabilize 
students' preconceptions about people of other ethnicities by 
confronting them with multicultural literature; I want students 
to learn that there are multiple other perspectives, and I want 
them to begin thinking about how to get along with people who 
have some of these other perspectives . 

The two most important elements of my classes for getting 
students to consider their own ethnic identities and the 
identities of other people are the reading and the writing of 
portfolios. Students need to be challenged by being confronted 
by perspectives that • are alien to them. And students must be 

13 




14 



given a space in which to write their reactions to these alien 

perspectives . I am not suggesting that the study of non-Western 

European texts requires the blessing of a Western theoretical 

perspective, but I find this quote by Mikhail Bakhtin useful in 

considering my students' thinking processes: 

A meaning only reveals its depths once it has 
encountered and come into contact with another, 
foreign meaning: they engage in a kind of 
dialogue, which surmounts the closeedness and 
one-sidedness of these particular meanings, 
these cultures. We raise new questions for a 
foreign culture, ones that it did not raise 
itself; we seek answers to our own questions 
in it; and the foreign culture responds to us 
by revealing to us its new aspects and new 
semantic depths. Without one 1 s own questions 
one cannot creatively understand anything 
other or foreign (but, of course, the questions 
must be serious and sincere) . Such a dialogic 
encounter of two cultures does not result in 
merging or mixing. Each [culture] retains its 
own unity and open totality, but they are 
mutually enriched. (Bakhtin 7) 

If my agenda is to get students to have greater understanding of 
other cultures and other perspectives, it follows that I must 
have a way built into the structure of the course for students to 
bring their own "serious and sincere" questions to the classroom 
discussion. Students must also have a place to express their 
anxiety and often their anger at being confronted with, very 
unfamiliar ideas and perspectives, whether they share their 
anxiety and anger with their small groups or not. All responses 
to the texts must be at least one page, single - spaced . I tell 
students that I do not want summaries, that these responses will 
be graded ultimately on whether they have "engaged the texts." 



14 




15 



By that I mean that students should read the texts and then write 
about specific things from them that they have questions about, 
or that they don't understand, or that remind them of something 
in their personal lives. I also want them to interpret what they 
have read. (Please see my handouts for evaluation criteria) . I 
generally get responses that do all of these things . I encourage 
students either to turn in individual responses before they turn 
in the portfolios to be graded, or to come to my office with a 
response so that we can have an informal conference about it; I 
comment very heavily and thoroughly on any responses that I get, 
especially very early in the course. 

Does It Work? 

All of this talk about how I conceptualize courses and 
choose the texts and structure the classes leads to the next big 
question: How are my classes going? The students in my classes 
are generally interested, passionate, and well -prepared for 
class; they are not often absent, they pay attention in class and 
contribute readily to the ongoing discussion, for the most part 
they turn in their portfolios on time. At least a third of them 
turn in responses early to get some feedback on them, and 
occasionally, a student tells me she has a really creative, off- 
the-wall idea for a response. Class discussion is brisk, and 
often takes unexpected [even by me] turns. Almost a fourth of my 
students this semester are students that I have taught before, 
although that may be because I am teaching courses that many 
students need in order to fulfill certain requirements. 

15 




16 



Not everything in these courses is sunshine and roses . 
Problems do come up, but I think many of those problems are 
related to students' processes of adjusting to the multicultural 
curriculum. One problem I sometimes have is students who attempt 
to distract the class, presumably because they have not read the 
material or have had trouble understanding the material . 

Students attempting to displace attention from themselves will do 
things like ask a question from page 5 of Invisible Man when the 
rest of us are discussing Chapter 15, as one man did, or will 
tell me that his essay quiz grade should have been a B+ instead 
of a C- because I only made two negative comments on it and that 
was how a point system worked, he'd learned in his education 
class. Or students may make general announcements like "I have 
already read too much material like this in other classes and I 
am not interested in reading more." Another problem that comes 
up is the manifestation of anger from white students when the 
class is discussing issues of white privilege. Students may say 
things like "minority students get all kinds of privileges and 
special scholarships, and it's not fair" or they may write in 
portfolios comments like "...the entire content of the course 
seems to be about how these different minority groups have been 
oppressed. [It was not, of course.] We could have covered this 

during the first week and then moved on " Or students may 

attack the literature being read: " Tracks [by Louise Erdrich] is 
a bad novel: it has no clear plot, poor characterizations, and 
not much point that I can find. ..." Non-white students may also 

16 



ERIC 



17 



manifest anger at having a white teacher in a multicultural 
literature class. One African-American student wanted to know if 
someone else in the department could grade his portfolio [which 
had received a C+ at midterm] , while another non-white student 
informed me during the final conference that "the class put you 
through a lot, of course, you being white and all, but you did 
okay, I guess...." There is no easy answer for any of these 
problems that come up, except that many of them are the result of 
students who are angry because they have been confronted with 
unfamiliar ideas or students who are angry because they are 
having to deal with a white teacher of minority literature while 
they are in the encounter stage, or perhaps just when they really 
felt the need for a non-white professional role model . 

Many times things go much better than my sharing of the 
problems that come would indicate. Last semester I received the 
following comments in a student's final portfolio self- 
evaluation: 



Upon entering this course, I did not really 
think of myself as part of an ethnic group. Growing 
up white and middle class in America seemed to make me 
anti -ethnic, meaning that what was colorful, exuberant 
and interesting (what I considered ethnic) about me 
seemed to be annihilated, like anti-matter, leaving 
only Wonder Bread, Malibu Barbie and Donnie Osmond.... 

As an adult, I have begun to have doubts about the 
approach to race and culture I have been taught. My 
white, liberal politics are not working in a world in 
which racial and cultural lines are simultaneously 
blurring and being more sharply, and sometimes 
violently, drawn. My inability to acknowledge myself 
as part of white, rather than American, culture, does 
not allow me to admit my ignorance, anger, frustration 
or prejudices. It assumes that I am able to easily see 
all other cultures objectively, since I am not coming 
from a specific cultural paradigm myself. This 

17 




18 



assumption is almost as dangerous, and certainly as 
ludicrous, as the assumption that my race or culture is 
somehow superior. To fully accept myself, 
intellectually and emotionally, as part of a distinct 
ethnic group is to give myself permission to bungle 
attempts at cultural/racial exchange, to lay my 
metaphoric cards on the table, recognizing that I am 
coming from a specific cultural paradigm, that I carry 
both socially-instilled and experience-fortified 
stereotypes of other cultures . And then I can better 
engage in dialogue that breaks apart those stereotypes 
at their source. 



Sharon's comments are not atypical of response I get from many of 
my students after my courses end, except that she is more 
eloquent than many other students. 



Bibliography 

Alexie, Sherman. Indian Killer . New York: Atlantic Monthly P, 
1996 . 

* 

Bakhtin, M. M. "Response to a Question from the Novy Mir 
Editorial Staff." Speech Genres & Other Late Essays . 

Trans. Vern W. McGee. Caryl Emerson and Michael 
Holquist, eds . Austin: U of Texas P, 1986. 1-9. 

Bird, Gloria. "The Exaggeration of Despair in Sherman Alexie ' s 
Reservation Blues . Wicazo sa Review: A Journal of Native 
American Studies XI . 2 (Fall 1995): 47-52. 

"Towards a Decolonization of the Mind and Text 
1: Leslie Marmon Silko's Ceremony." Wicazo sa Review 
9.2 (Fall 1993) : 1-8 . 

Cook-Lynn, Elizabeth. "Who Stole Native American Studies?" 
Wicazo sa Review: A Journal of Native American Studies 
12.1 (Spring 1997): 9-28. 

Damen, Louise. Culture Learning: The Fifth Dimension in the 

Language Classroom . Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing 
Co., 1987. 

Frankenberg, Ruth. White Women. Race Matters: The Social 

Construction of Whiteness . Minneapolis: U of Minnesota 
P, 1993. 



18 




19 



Hamilton, Cynthia. "Multiculturalism as Political Strategy." 
in Mapping Multiculturalism . Avery F. Gordon and 
Christopher Newfield, eds . Minneapolis: U of Minnesota 
P, 1996. 167-177. 

Jaimes, M. Annette. "Introduction: Sand Creek: The Morning 
After." The State of Native America: Genocide. Colo- 
nization. and Resistance . Ed. M. Annette Jaimes. 

Boston: South End P, 1992. 1-12. 

Morris, Glenn. "International Law and Politics: Toward a Right 
to Self-Determination for Indigenous Peoples." In Jaimes, 
1992. 55-86. 

Omi, Michael. "Racialization in the Post-Civil Rights Era." 

In Gordon and Newfield, 1996. 178-186. 

Tatum, Beverly Daniel . "Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting 

Together in the Cafeteria? And Other Conversations About 
Race . New York: BasicBooks, 1997. 

Torgovnick, Marianna. Gone Primitive: Savage Intellects. 

Modern Lives . Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1990. 



19 




20 



Handout on Portfolios 



Portfolios 

The portfolios will contain at least one one-page, single- spaced 
response for each work, or section of critical essays, we have 
read. If you wish, you may return later to the works with 
additional pages of response. You may also include responses to 
any extra-curricular activities that are relevant to the 
coursework. All writing included in the portfolio must be typed, 
single-spaced, and in ten- or twelve-point font. All responses 
must be at least one full page long . Your portfolio should be 
presented in a manila folder with the list of required responses 
first, then the responses in the same order they are listed, and 
then the self-evaluation. Everything is to be neatly typed; 
responses with more than one page are to be stapled or paper 
clipped together. 

The responses are to be based upon your thoughtful analysis of 
the works we have read. They should not be summaries. They 
should be thoughtful pieces of writing that express your 
interpretation of each work, containing specific references from 
the work, discussion of other works (from. class or outside of 
class) that relate to it, and perhaps your assessment of it. Try 
to address why the work was included in the course syllabus. 

Self-evaluations 

In addition to the individual responses, your portfolio will 
contain a self-evaluation at the midterm point and another one at 
the final point. The self-evaluation will be the thoughtful, 
typed responses to questions. The purpose of the self-evaluation 
is to give you a chance to synthesize your learning from the 
course, to examine how the individual works you have read relate 
to each other and to the course content as a whole . The 
portfolios are also to give you the chance to show how much you 
have made the content of the course part of your own intellectual 
makeup... in other words, to show what you have learned. 

Grading 

As it states in your syllabus, the midterm and final portfolios 
together constitute 70% of your final grade for the course. It 
is very important that you take them seriously . It is also 
important that you use the portfolio as a learning tool rather 
than just a grading instrument. 

You are required to turn responses in each week. The first two 
will receive my extensive comments and reactions before they are 
graded in the portfolio, and you may revise them before turning 
them back in. I strongly urge you to take advantage of this, or 
to come by my office during my office hours if you have 
questions. The portfolios will be graded using the attached 
rubric. The grades will be based on the following: 




21 



organization: Are the responses in the same order as the works 
were read? 

completeness: Did you do all of the required responses? 

thoughtfulness: Does what you have said reflect genuine thought 
about what you have read? Does your writing go beyond the 
easy answer, the typical? 

specificity: Do your responses contain specific examples from the 
texts? Does your self-evaluation answer the questions in a 
clear and specific way? 

excellence: Does your writing go beyond the minimum requirement? 

engagement : Do you relate the works and the course content to 
your own experience? 

synthesis: Does the writing in your portfolio reflect some 

understanding of how the works read in the course and the 
materials, lectures, and discussions presented in class 
all relate to each other? 

written expression: Do you support the assertions you make? Are 
the responses and the self-evaluations well-written? 

professionalism: Is your portfolio neatly organized in a manila 
folder? How correct are the grammar, spelling, and 
punctuation? 




22 



Would you like to put your paper in ERIC? Please send us a clean, dark copy! 



you like to put your p 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



® 



RIO 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



jjtle ; Paper presented at the 1998 4Cs Convention (Chicago) 




Author(s): 


Corporate Source: 


Publication Date: 


. _ - " - • . • . • 


April 1-4, 1998 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 1 documents 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 2A documents 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 2B documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

A* 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE, AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY, 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

* 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 


c/ 




J* 




c$ 


TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

1 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

2A 




J 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

2B 



Level 1 




Level 2A 
! 




Level 2B 

t 




Check here for Level 1 release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche or other ERIC archival 
media (e.g., electronic) and paper copy. 



Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche and in electronic media 
for ERIC archival collection subscribers only 



Check here for Level 2B release, permitting 
reproduction and dissemination in microfiche only 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce is granted, but no box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 



Sign 

here,-* 

please 

ERIC 



/ hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 
to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 




Printed Name/Position/Title. . . , , . t 


i.vw 

UsxetL. n. 3Z30C - /ego 


%srt,*4-si>t s 


F &0- 6*4 


E-Mail Addresa>, / 


Daie -vch>Ur 7, me 



acmsAs o. edu 



(over) 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

■ . < 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, please 

provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 



Publisher/Distributor: 


Address: 






f ■' 


*- \ \ \ , 




■ ‘ A. S 


i- > 5 ■ " i . y ' \ 


Price: 






1 \ A i ^ ^ 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 








E RIC/REC 


\* 




2805 E. Tenth Street 
Smith Research Center, 150 
Indiana University 
Bloomington, IN 47408 





However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 

ER IC Pro c e ss in g and R e fe r ence Fac ility 
448 0 - W e9 t -6 troet, - 2 n(L F loor 
■ Lou r ed Mary l and 20 7 07 -3598 



EMC* (Rev. 9/97) ” 



Te l eph one : 301 - 4 0 7 *4080- 
-F AX ; 301 063 02 6 £ 

WWW. l iUp: / /er l cfa c.plcegrd :csc. -eoffv 



\ v 



L-it^w JUS versions of this form are obsolete. 



< i » 



