Encouraging post-secondary Native American student persistence 



Utah Valley University 
Dr. Richard Mosholder 
Dr. Bryan Waite 
Dr. Chris Goslin 



11/16/11 




1 



Abstract 

Native American students are the most likely racial/ethnic group tracked in post- 
secondary American education to be affected by poverty and limited access to 
educational opportunities. In addition, they are the most likely to be required to take 
remedial course work and are the least likely to graduate from college, A review of the 
literature was undertaken to analyze the research and opinions directed towards 
improving Native American student persistence and academic success at the post- 
secondary level. Five factors emerged during this review that correlate with Native 
American student post-secondary persistence. These are skill development, family and 
peer support, appropriate role-models, awareness and use of financial aid, and a 
culturally sensitive school environment. In addition to this literature review a qualitative 
research study was conducted in order to examine what current Native American college 
students’ perceptions of their college experience were and what could be done to enhance 
these perceptions. What we found, among other things, was that much more attention 
needs to be paid to creating out of class activities and socials in order for Native 
American students to interact more with each other and the college community. 




2 



Introduction 

At the beginning of the 20* century there was “a widely held belief that Native 
Americans ^ were very much a people of the past. At that time, education was expected to 
train Native Americans for life in mainstream society. Native culture was purposefully 
ignored and languages were suppressed. As we begin the 2P' century, Native American 
culture has not only survived but is becoming increasingly more vital (Boyer, 2008, pp 
22-23). Despite this increased vitality. Native American students are still the least likely 
racial/ethnic group tracked in post-secondary American education to graduate from 
college, with only 15% of those entering college earning a bachelor’s degree within six 
years compared with 51% for Asians, 49% for Whites, 31% for African Americans, and 
24% for Hispanics (Grande, 2004; Freeman and Fox, 2005). Native Americans are also 
the most economically disadvantaged racial/ethnic group tracked in the national data 
(Lomawaima, 1995). 

Significance of Study 

In addition to the above statistics, there were 1.8 million American Indians 
counted in the United States during the 2000 census. Over 25% lived below the federal 
poverty level, compared to about 12% of the total U.S. population, with a per capita 
income in 1999 dollars of $12,923 versus a total population per capita income of 
$21,587. The unemployment rate for Native Americans was over 12% in 2000, three 
times higher than for whites (United States Census Bureau, 2010). Tribal communities 
face many other economic and social hurdles. Unemployment rates range from 45-90%, 

’ The terms “Native American“, “American Indian” , and “Alaska Native” are used 
interchangeably throughout this article. All include any person having origins in any of 
the pre-European peoples of North America and maintaining tribal affiliations. 




3 



the suicide rate for American Indians is over twice that for other tracked racial/ethnic 
groups, the alcohol related death rate is very high as is the rate of single-parent 
households (Ortiz and HeavyRunner, 2000). 

These numbers are significant to this research study as the researchers are 
attempting to design better methods for retention and recruitment of Native Americans to 
a teaching university which is surrounded by many Native American reservations. 
Purpose of Study 

In light of these statistics, the researchers of this project have set out to determine 
effective retention methods for Native Americans in higher education. Mosholder and 
Goslin (In press) surveyed the literature for the factors that have been found to 
encourage or discourage Native Americans in persisting in 2 and 4 year schools. In the 
current study, our purpose was to discover the perceptions of Native American students at 
a large teaching university in the intermountain West where Native American students 
are greatly underrepresented. The intention of this study is to inform the development of 
a recruiting and retention program for Native American students. This is of particular 
interest to the researchers who teach at a university where there are currently 353 Native 
American students, but approximately 15,000 Native Americans aged 18-24 within a 7-8 
hour drive of the institution. 

Research Questions 

The research questions this project focused on are the following: 

1 . What are the perceptions of our Native American students and their communities of 
education in general, and of their community’ s acceptance, support, and involvement of 



and with them? 




4 



2. How do these perceptions compare to an idealized program based on best practices as 
found in the literature and designed to optimize Native student success? 

The researchers hope these guiding questions will inform best practices for 
recruitment and retention of Native Americans at the college level. 

Literature Review 

This literature review has been divided into two principle sections. The first is an 
empirical data review which informed the creation of a program that would facilitate 
academic success for Native American students in a mainstream university. The latter is 
more of a theoretical framework for which the researchers will use to establish how to 
best connect Native Americans to the curriculum and pedagogy they will experience in 
higher education. 

Empirical Data 

Program design - Tierney (1991b) observes that any program by a mainstream 
organization should emerge from a vision developed working with Native Americans. 
Programs developed for Native Americans using a top down approach have seldom been 
successful. The opposite is also true. Shotton, et al. (2007) report on a successful peer 
mentoring program developed by Native American students and observe that Native 
American students have rarely been asked for input when mentoring programs were 
developed for them. 

Guillory and Wolverton (2008) suggest one way of doing this. Their idea is to 
create collaborative programs with local tribes where students go directly into internships 
emphasizing academic areas popular with Native students and important to tribal growth 
like student teaching, business or natural resource management. This approach would 




5 



enable students to serve their communities while earning academic credit. These scholars 
also suggest bringing higher education to Native American communities through distance 
education 

An example of a collaborative approach is reported by Zah (1999). The Native 
American Achievement Program is a comprehensive approach to increased enrollment 
and retention at Arizona State University featuring annual workshops and orientations on 
the reservation attended by university and high school officials, students and parents in 
which students receive information on financial assistance, housing, and class selection. 

Mihesuah (2004) writes that a physical space where Native American students are 
with other Native American students, can receive academic assistance, speak their 
language without ridicule, discuss issues with other students and staff that share their 
concerns about the institution is critical. Such a space could go a long way to meeting 
Ortiz and Heavyrunner’s (2003) goal of establishing a sense of family at school in 
addition to at home. 

Institutional philosophy- Kirkness and Earnhardt (1991) observe that post- 
secondary institutions typically have cultures that inhibit the ability of American Indian 
students to express their traditional culture. Rather than insist that students conform to 
the culture of the institution, they suggest that the institution should develop ways to 
support and honor student identities by way of curricula and events (Tierney, 1992a, 
2000). Native American student perceptions of how well the institution is doing this 
correlate with learning (Lundberg, 2007). 

Choney, et al. (1995) write that institutions must recognize that there is a clash 
between traditional American Indian culture and Euro-American Culture. American 




6 



Indian students required to give up cultural behaviors to meet the expectations of the 
college may resist doing so and leave school as a result (Tierney, 1993). Non-native 
faculty and staff should familiarize themselves with the issues faced by Native American 
students (Tierney, 1991a). 

Native American students should be encouraged to fully express their cultural 
identity (Wildcat, 2001). They should be given culturally appropriate counseling 
(Huffman, 2001). The Native American students in Garrod and Larrimore’s (1997) study 
perceived that their culture was neither valued nor recognized and this resulted in 
disengagement. Cultural awareness must take the students’ dual focus into account and 
help maintain their role in their Native American culture (LaFromboise, et ah, 1993) 

Mentoring and student support - Kuh and Love (2000) write that the students’ 
initial experiences with the institution are key to retention. The “challenge is to make the 
strange seem familiar as soon as possible’’ by facilitating relationships with resource 
providers and peer groups (p. 202). 

Structured mentoring programs that connect advanced Native American students 
with incoming Native American students have been shown to address issues regarding 
isolation, lack of awareness of available resources, and lack of support and role models 
(Jackson, et ah, 2003; Shoten, et ah, 2007). Support systems should be in place to assist 
with personal issues that arise like transportation, child care, substance abuse, family 
violence, family illness, and dealing with racism in addition to the academic issues that 
arise like lack of study skills and major and career planning (Heavyrunner and DeCelles, 
2002). These systems should also address the need for adequate daycare and provide 
assistance in learning about the full range of financial assistance available (Guillory and 




7 



Wolverton, 2008). 

Skill and identity development - Tierney (1992a) observes that Native American 
students who considered their college preparatory course work adequate were the most 
interested in persisting. Mihesuah (2004) writes that Native American students have 
doubts about their identities because they often do not speak the language of their 
ancestors nor know much about their tribal traditions. Therefore they often lack self- 
confidence and cultural pride and are depressed, turning to alcohol and drugs to self- 
medicate. Programs should focus on helping Native American students develop self- 
esteem and self-regulating capabilities. 

Curricula and pedagogy - Native American educator Gregory Cajete (1994) 
writes that, to Native Americans, learning is observing nature and applying the 
understanding gained to develop relationships that have strength and stability and to 
make decisions based on tradition and values for the good of the community. Education 
helps students find face (who they are, what their potential is, and what they need to do to 
be happy), heart (intrinsic motivation), and foundation (vocation). These elements are 
harmonized and balanced by the interplay between the physical and spiritual worlds in 
order for the student to develop his or her potential for the benefit of the community. 

Sanchez (2000) in her information analysis and opinion article points out that 
Native American students “exhibited definite preferences for (more) feedback, 
participation, collaboration, and concrete experiences ... as well as teacher directed 
experiences” in comparison to white students” (p. 40). Such approaches would be 
consistent with providing student-centered and experiential learning as called for by 
Cajete (1994) and Wildcat (2001)as well as the use of problem posing models that allows 




8 



students to draw on their own experiences and encourages them to interact with other 
students as called for by Dye (1994). 

Participation structure - Classroom and participant structures are “several 
principles for allocating student turns at talk used in determining which students will hold 
the speaking end of the floor and in what order they will hold it (Philips, 1983 at p. 77 as 
cited in Brayboy, 1999) and “students who choose not to speak or who are silenced by 
these structures (p. 165). . . .Ultimately, there were negotiations and ways of finding 
comfortable spaces from which students could be both “good Indians” and “good 
students” (emphasis in the original) (p.l75). 

Theoretical Framework 

In addition to the empirical evidence previously shared, this study is also 
grounded in the theoretical principles of “Culturally Responsive Teaching” (Gay, 2000). 
This framework was used in order to better understand how Native Americans learn in 
the classroom and what teachers can be doing to enhance their learning experience. 

As previously mentioned, Brayboy (2006) suggests that the oral traditions used to 
teach in native cultures differ from academic knowledge and language. Thus, Native 
American students often have difficulty acquiring knowledge in academic settings. What 
does this mean to teachers of Native Americans? How can teachers better relate to their 
native students? 

As seen from the literature review, one of the difficult things for Native American 
students to do in school is to feel connected to the content being taught and the social 
norms found in public schools (Huffman, 2008; Cajete, 1994; Wildcat, 2001; Dye, 

1994). The paradigm of culturally responsive teaching is designed to help students 




9 



connect more with the pedagogy and curriculum in the classroom. 

Gay (2000) defines culturally responsive teaching as using knowledge, prior 
experiences, and performance styles of diverse students to make learning more 
appropriate and effective for them. “The fundamental aim of culturally responsive 
pedagogy is to empower ethnically diverse students through academic success, cultural 
affiliation, and personal efficacy” (p. 111). One of the main goals of culturally responsive 
teaching is to teach to and through the strengths of the students. According to Gay 
(2000) there are six components of culturally responsive teaching. Those components are 
validating, comprehensive, multidimensional, empowering, transformative, and 
emancipatory . 

Validation acknowledges the legitimacy of the cultural heritages of different 
ethnic groups, both as legacies that affect students' dispositions, attitudes, and approaches 
to learning and as worthy content to be taught in the formal curriculum. This component 
also builds bridges of meaningfulness between home and school experiences as well as 
between academic abstractions and lived sociocultural realities and uses a wide variety of 
instructional strategies that are connected to different learning styles. It teaches students 
to know and praise their own and each others' cultural heritages and incorporates 
multicultural information, resources, and materials in all the subjeets and skills routinely 
taught in schools (p. 29). 

Comprehensive means that the teacher focuses on the “whole child” (Gay, 2000, 
p. 30). Gay cites Hollins (1996) who writes that education should incorporate “culturally 
mediated cognition, culturally appropriate social situations for learning, and culturally 
valued knowledge in curriculum content” (as cited in Gay, 2000, p. 30). The ultimate 



10 



goal of a classroom environment with this focus is to have members function as “an 
extended family, assisting, supporting, and encouraging each other” based on a “strong 
belief in the right of students to be part of a mutually supportive group of high achievers” 
(p. 31). Ultimately, the comprehensive classroom centers around the individual student, 
focusing on what he or she needs to achieve success. It is an environment where trust and 
community can be found. 

The multidimensional component addresses the need for teachers to include 
appropriate “curriculum content, learning, context, classroom climate, student-centered 
relationships, instructional techniques, and performance assessments”. In order for this to 
happen, teachers must tap “into a wide range of cultural knowledge, experiences, 
contributions, and perspectives. Emotions, beliefs, values, ethos, opinions, and feelings 
are scrutinized along with factual information to make curriculum and instruction more 
reflective of and responsive to ethnic diversity” (Gay, 2000, pp. 32-33). 

Empowering means helping students know that they can succeed. Teachers do 
what is necessary to help students understand that they can learn and can be 
academically successful. They challenge students, no matter what their backgrounds and 
cultures in ways that they can achieve in the classroom. Teachers specifically plan their 
lessons to help their students understand and triumph. 

Transformative is a component of culturally responsive teaching that is 
emphasized in this particular study. Gay (2000) observes the following about it: 

Is very explicit about respecting the cultures and experiences of African 
American, Native American, Latino, and Asian American students, and it uses 
these as worthwhile resources for teaching and learning. It recognizes the existing 




11 



strengths and accomplishments of these students and then enhances them further 
in the instructional process, (p. 33) 

Banks (1991) adds that transformative education is more about equity than it is about 

equality. At its root, transformative education examines what can be done to help 

students develop critical thinking skills in order to become “social critics”, as Banks 

1991, puts it “who can make reflective decisions and implement their decisions in 

effective personal, social, political, and economic action” (as cited in Gay, 2000, p. 34). 

In sum, transformative education has two aspects. First it challenges the 

curriculum to include marginalized groups. Then it attempts to make students critical 

thinkers about, and then to take action to challenge the social ills (e.g., racism, and other 

forms of oppression) thereby becoming agents of change. 

Finally, culturally responsive teaching is emancipatory. It frees students from 

only being exposed to the mainstream canon traditionally taught in public education. It 

challenges the notion that there is only one right way of understanding reality. Grichlow, 

Goodwin, Shakes, and Swartz (1990) claim that emancipatory education: 

utilizes an inclusive and representational framework of knowledge in which 
students and teachers have the capacity to produce ventilated narratives. . .By 
collectively representing diverse cultures and groups as producers of knowledge, 
it facilitates a liberative student/teacher relationship that “opens up” (emphasis in 
the original) the written text and oral discourse to analysis and reconstruction, (as 
cited in Gay, 2000, p. 35). 

Gay (2000) adds, “these learning engagements encourage and enable students to find 
their own voices, to contextualize issues in multiple cultural perspectives, to engage in 
more ways of knowing and thinking, and to become more active participants in shaping 
their own learning” (p. 35). 

Community engagement is important in the development and implementation of 




12 



emancipatory education. Gay (2000) claims that, “cooperation, community, and 
connectedness are also central features of culturally responsive teaching. Students are 
expected to work together and are held accountable for one another’s success” (p. 36). 

This interaction of the students, which ideally is extended to include members of their 
communities, is paramount in understanding how diverse students learn in the classroom. 
Students will interpret what goes on in the classroom differently based on their socio- 
cultural and historical backgrounds. “Students of color who are most traditional in their 
communication styles and other aspects of culture and ethnicity are likely to encounter 
more obstacles to school achievement than those who think, behave, and express 
themselves in ways that approximate school and mainstream cultural norms (Gay, 2000, 
p. 78). Gay (2000) also claims that if teachers do not understand, or make an attempt to 
understand, the different cultural ways in which diverse students communicate, “their 
academic performance may be misdiagnosed or trapped in communicative mismatches 
(p. 78). 

The literature synthesized above provided the framework for the study reported 
in this article. The researchers conducted a qualitative study to determine what the 
Native Americans students perceived of the university they attend. The methods and 
details of this study are discussed in what follows. 

Methodology 

This section focuses on the selection of the method as well as the structure of the study; it 
is divided into three main sections. The first section is the ‘Methods’ section witch discusses the 
structure and framework used for the analysis as well as an overview of the procedural elements 
of the study. The second section presents the population and sample of the study along with the 




13 



bounded system in which the research occurred. Also described are the number of participants 
involved in the study, how they were selected, the setting in which the data were gathered, and 
the procedures used to recruit the participants. Finally, the third section examines the data 
analysis and coding for how the data was collected. 

Methods 

Structure. The intention of the study was to begin to develop a theory that would inform 
the development of a retention program for Native American students. In order to accomplish 
this task, the researchers focused on two questions aimed at probing the subjects associated with 
this issue. 

1 . What are the perceptions of our Native American students and their 
communities of education in general, and of their community’s acceptance, 
support, and involvement of and with them? 

2. How do these perceptions compare to an idealized program based on best 
practices as found in the literature and designed to optimize Native American 
student success? 

As has been discussed above, the lens or theoretical framework used to explore these questions 
was the concept of “Culturally Responsive Teaching” Gay (2000). 

The ultimate goal of the researchers is to identify some of the key elements necessary to 
build a strong retention program for Native American students. Philosophically the researchers 
believe this task can be accomplished by empowering students through positive academic 
experiences that embrace their cultural affiliation and foster a sense of personal efficacy (Gay, 
2000). In order to achieve this objective, the researchers needed to assess the perceptions of 
Native American students and examine what their support networks were towards the university 




14 



and higher education in general. In addition, the researchers needed to understand how these 
perceptions compared to what the literature said about other programs designed to accomplish 
similar objectives. 

The researchers conducted an empirical data review (Mosholder and Goslin, In Press) 
and then designed a qualitative study reflecting that research by selecting key elements from the 
literature review that were used to create an instrument. The instrument was aimed at both 
understanding our Native American student’s perceptions as well as comparing those perceptions 
to the best practices found in the literature. The study confirmed several elements of the literature 
review and underscored some new components for consideration. The following segments 
describe this process in greater detail. 

Framework. In the process of searching for the best method to explore the two questions 
mentioned above, several different options were considered. Because the query deals primarily 
with the examination of human relationships and perceptions, a qualitative method was selected. 
Using this line of inquiry allows the exploration of the depths of interpersonal connectedness and 
affiliations in a way that would be difficult using quantitative methods. Next, because this is the 
first article in a serious of articles meant to begin the process of theory building about Native 
American student retention programs several different alternatives for gathering information 
were investigated. Eventually, a process was chosen that allowed the assessment through the 
grounded theory approach of the observation of emergent themes (Glaser and Strauss, 1967). 

Grounded theory uses all forms of data that the researchers come in contact with 
to both inductively and deductively generate a theory. Data forms used within the 
comparative process can include interviews, observations, surveys, statistical analyses, 
and literature. One goal of grounded theory is to develop hypotheses about what is going 




15 



on (Martin, P. Y., and Turner, B. A., 1986). 

Population and Sample 

In order to identify the Native American population, the researchers contacted the 
Institution Research Office (IRO) at the studied university and requested a detailed 
demographic report for the Native American population. The IRO data showed that there 
were 353 Native American students attending college at the time of the study. This 
number represented an increase of 88 students from spring of 2009 when there were 265 
students enrolled at the institution. 

Once the larger population had been identified, the researchers determined the 
best method of acquiring a sample of this population would be to survey a random 
selection of the population in multiple settings using a survey method. In order to 
accomplish this task, two of the researchers created an instrument based on themes 
pulled from the literature review. The third researcher then analyzed the instrument to 
ensure that it was grounded in the principles of “Culturally Responsive Teaching” (Gay, 
2000). Four undergraduate students from within the larger population were recruited as 
Native American Student Researchers (NASRs) and given training in survey data 
collection procedures. The NASRs evaluated the instrument to ensure that it was both 
culturally relevant and appropriate for the population. 

After the instrument had been created, the NASRs initiated a data collection 
method they called “student intercepts”. The student intercepts consisted of the NASRs 
setting up a booth or scheduling a room at various locations on campus. The NASRs then 
recruited participants and had them fill out the IRB approved Informed Consent Wavier 
and then answer the questions on the instrument. The student intercepts recruited 49 




16 



participants who provided information for the study. In order to protect the identity of the 
participants, no names or form of identification were listed on any instrument. 

In addition to the 49 participants that were involved in the instrument response 
phase of the study, 14 additional students were recruited by the NASRs to participate in 
two different focus groups. The students in the focus group phase filled out the Informed 
Consent Wavier and were then asked to provide feedback on the themes that emerged 
from the instrument response phase. In order to protect the students, no names or forms 
of identification were used in the context of the focus group phase of the study. 

Instrument 

Data Analysis and Coding. The study was divided into three separate phases. In the first 
phase the researchers isolated the need, framed the questions, identified the population and 
conducted a literature review to evaluate best practices from around the country. Next the 
researchers constructed a study by gathering data from three different sources to ensure data 
triangulation. Data collection began in the spring of 201 1 and utilized several different 
independent evaluation practices to assure the trustworthiness of the data. These practices 
included using three different faculty researches to autonomously code the data and check for the 
emergent themes. Each faculty member hand coded the data checking for emergent themes 
using an open coding line by line analysis (Strauss & Corbin 1998). In addition. Native 
American student researchers were recruited and asked to follow the same process to assure that 
an accurate cultural interpretation was being represented. 

In phase two, the researchers created an instrument based on the literature review, 
distributed the instrument and then analyzed the results which became data set number 1 . In 
phase three the themes that emerged from data set number I were discussed by two different 




17 



focus groups. The information gleaned from these two focus groups was again analyzed by the 
faculty and NASRs using an open coding line by line analysis format (Strauss & Corbin 1998). 
The information from these focus groups then became data sets numbers two and three. Finally, 
the data from each data set was compared and analyzed using the same process and ultimately 
five themes emerged. 

In phase one the researchers conducted a thorough examination of all the literature based 
on the Native American collegiate experience in the United States (Mosholder and Goslin, In 
press). Through this process the researchers identified several key components of successful 
Native American retention programs. This information was then used to build an instrument to 
evaluate the perception of students at our institution. 

In phase two the survey responses from all of the 49 participants were independently 
evaluated by each of the three faculty researchers. In this stage of the process the faculty 
researchers coded the responses and then searched for emergent themes again using the open 
coding format (Strauss & Corbin 1998). In addition to the faculty researchers analyzing the data, 
two NASRs followed the same process. At the end of this process the themes that emerged 
became the central items discussed in the focus groups in data sets two and three. 

In phase three the researchers conducted two different focus groups that became data sets 
two and three. In data set two the participants were asked to respond to a series of questions 
based on the results from the survey data. During the discussion two of the faculty researchers 
took field notes which were then analyzed by the third researcher and the NASRs. The 
discussion in the final focus group was recorded and the information obtained was then evaluated 
for emergent themes by the faculty researchers as well as the NASRs utilizing an open coding 



format (Strauss & Corbin 1998). 




18 



Finally all of the data were then compared and analyzed independently by each of the 
faculty researchers who searched for themes across the data sets. The same process was followed 
by the NASRs who also searched for themes across the data sets. Ultimately the six themes 
emerged which affect the retention of Native American students. These themes will be discussed 
in the next section of the article 

Results 

The methods of data collection discussed above produced helpful results in 
addressing the purpose of this study and answering its research questions. The purpose, 
as stated above, of this project was to discover the perceptions of Native American 
students at a large teaching university in the intermountain West where Native American 
students are greatly underrepresented. The intention of this study was to inform the 
development of a recruiting and retention program for Native American students. The 
research questions which we found answers for were: 1 . What are the perceptions of the 
Native American students at our university about their and their communities’ views of 
education, acceptance, support, skills and community involvement? 2. How do these 
perceptions compare to an idealized program based on best practices as found in the 
literature and designed to optimize Native student success? In what follows we will 
address how this project answered these two questions. 

Research Question #1 

For the first research question. What are the perceptions of the Native American 
students at our university about their and their communities’ views of education, 
acceptance, support, skills and community involvement? , two data collection strategies 
were used: surveys and observations of focus groups. We will discuss the findings of 




19 



these two sources separately. 

Surveys. To begin, surveys were administered to Native American students on 
the college campus studied. Six themes emerged from these surveys which we will 
address here. 

Theme One - The need for more activities that bring the students, their families 
and communities together. In the surveys collected in this study, there was an 
overwhelmingly strong indication that the Native American students wanted more 
activities on campus that would bring Native American students, as well as their families, 
together. Some examples of this are found in the following comments made by the 
students in the surveys (survey question (SQ)): 

• SQ 15: “more events/conferences. Possible places to visit as a group or a 
getaway” 

• SQ 15: “create more social get togethers” 

• SQ 9: “Have get togethers and more meetings” 

• SQ 5: “Other Native students who I enjoy seeing more of, seem to be my 
motivators and encourage, and support me in my studies and transition to college 
life.” 

• SQ 8: “Create events that involve both family and students to make both feel part 
of the university.” 

• SQ 14: “Once again just have more events to get together” 

• SQ 14: “Event, games, going to social events maybe even get involved with other 
Natives with things on campus.” 

• SQ 7: “We need to have luncheons to get people information” 




20 



• SQ 14: “Getting them involved in school activities from the start.” 

• SQ 15: “Offer activities, clubs, and classes on our culture.” 

• SQ 15: “I would like more cultural activities - extra classes beading, dancing, 
etc., and Powwows on campus.” 

These are a few of the ideas shared by the students who filled out surveys. One 
positive comment from one participant, when answering question #15 was: 

“They are already doing an amazing work, having a powwow, buffalo dinner, and 
doing occasional frybread making fundraisers. And if I was unknowledgeable 
about making frybread or how to dance then I know at [university] I have people 
who can help me learn. That’s what I love about [university]”. 

This last comments shows that progress is being made and some Native American 
students feel like they are being brought together. However, from the many responses 
above, it proves more work needs to be done. 

Theme Two - The Native American student community is fragmented. Native 
Americans don ’t know or interact with many other Native American students. A second 
finding that emerged from the surveys is many of the Native American students feel that 
there is a lack of unity amongst the Native Americans on campus. Comments which lead 
to this finding are (Survey Question (SQ)): 

• SQ 4: “Yes and no. I feel like as Native we don’t come together enough on 
campus.” 

• SQ 4: “Yes, I’ve felt isolated at UVU. These feelings were caused by my non- 
Native and Native peers in school. I felt they didn’t understand where I was 



coming from.” 




21 



This theme also emerged from different kinds of things the Native American students 

said. For example, the following ideas were shared during the first focus group: 

• There is a need for activities that the Native community would be interested in so 
that they feel comfortable coming here. College can be as intimidating and 
foreign to the families as it is to the students. 

• Native students don’t know that many other Natives because there are not enough 
places to go where they are together or activities, other than the PowWow, that 
bring them together. 

During the second focus group, these ideas were shared: 

• Natives are reserved and shy by nature and the students here could benefit from 
more activities to break out of their shells. Our skin is brown and we can feel like 
outcasts. I don’t think we are outcasts, but it’s easy to feel that way and more 
opportunities specifically designed for Natives to interact would help overcome 
that. 

Theme Three - Native Americans should be mentoring other Native American 
students, but that is not happening. Another theme that came out of the survey data was 
the need by Native American students to have more mentors like them. Many of the 
surveys spoke of a desire to have mentors which the students could go to who were 
themselves Native Americans. Some examples of this from the surveys are (Survey 
Question SQ)): 

• SQ 8: “Offer help when they need it don’t through or cast the student aside like 
the councilors at [university] did to me. Make an effort to help and make sure 
things you say are understood by the student. [University] could make a study 




22 



group and meeting with Natives to bring things to attention” 

• SQ 8: “If they have mentors and people they know and look up to attending, so 
they can see its possible.” 

• SQ 9: “Introductory courses and full explanations of what’s to be expected. 
People should be told by people of their won culture.” 

These comments indicate that having mentors that are more like the Native American 
students would help them with the transition into the university as well as help to make 
them more successful. 

Theme Four - Parents and elders do not understand the nature of the 
commitment necessary for Native American student success and, therefore, put pressure 
on the students to attend to home and community activities at the expense of school 
success. Native American students would like help with educating parents and elders 
about these issues. This theme was also prominent in the survey data. Survey responses 
that led to this finding can be seen in the following (Survey Question (SQ)): 

• SQ 6: “Yes! Me! No support from my tribe” 

• SQ 8: “Having a strong student community. Having elders available to talk to.” 

• SQ 16: “Let them know how important education is - talk with them.” 

• SQ 16: “Make things available to tribal members family info, from tribes what 
they offer to their tribal members.” 

• SQ 16: “Family activities and show them the benefits of college experience.” 

• SQ 16: “By showing them the rewards of higher education, not just Native 
Americans, but other cultures too.” 

• SQ 16: “Have elders who highly value education speak against ostracizing those 




23 



who come home. Share their views or speak 5-10 minutes at ceremonies; 
community events, etc. 

• SQ 16: “Get them involved and show how their Native students ean be a role 
model to the other members.” 

• SQ 16: “Keep on them to keep up grades in school. Sit with them on their 
studies. . .just all around support and academic pressure to succeed.” 

• SQ 16: “Teach the Native students the value education has on tribal success.” 

• SQ 16: “Consistently keep in contact with each. Ask frequently how they are 
doing. If they can, have the family come see and participate in some part of the 
education process.” 

• SQ 16: “They have to see value in what is happening at school. As students share 
positive experiences it will faster support and trust.” 

• SQ 16: “Families might be more supportive if we took time to recognize their 
students. Perhaps a Native student achievement award or opportunities for 
students to include their families for on campus events.” 

• SQ 16: “Make Native families and tribal leader aware of how important a college 
education is. Give these families and tribal leader information to give to Native 
student. Advertise to families and tribal leaders.” 

• SQ 16: “I know that healthcare, engineering, criminal justice are important, but 
how? I need some visual aid to show me how these careers will help Native 
people. Like saying that we always need lawyers to fight water and land rights for 
Native people. Ore we need well-developed road that can be a job for engineers. 
Or nurses who understand what Native people struggle with diabetes and can 




24 



provide the personal care that is needed. If we can point out to Native American 
youth who are clueless about what their reservations are struggling with, maybe 
we Native [university] students) can share the info to motivate them to want to get 
an education and be able to accomplish something their families may have never 
had the chance, getting a higher education.” 

Many of the responses above come from question number 16 on the survey. This 
question asked ""How might we encourage the families and tribes of Native American 
students to play a larger and more supportive role in advising students and helping them 
to achieve academic success?” These answers show a concern many of the Native 
American students have about their families and tribal community understanding what it 
is like for them at the university. This was a definite theme that needs addressing at the 
university. 

Theme Five - New Native American students need more explanation on course 
and institutional requirements. The fifth finding that emerged from the data has to do 
with the classroom and student -teacher relations. Many of the Native American students 
indicated that they needed to be given more help in understanding the requirements of the 
university. Examples of this are (Survey Question (SQ)): 

• SQ 7: “Networking through the Internet and sending out mail to all of the students 
and having group meeting.” 

• SQ 7: “Assign each Native student an ‘advisor’ and go through it with them.” 

• SQ 7: “Trainings, workshops, specialized campus tours.” 

• SQ #7: “It would probably be creating some kind of pre-meet before the semester 



starts.” 




25 



• SQ #7: “Put up signs, flyers, let tribe know what is offered to their tribal 
members. Make sure tutors available. Make it so Natives will understand what is 
being offered.” 

• SQ #7 : “More information needs to be offered to incoming students with emails 
or outreach programs.” 

• SQ #8: “Native orientation; resources being more interactive and united.” 

• SQ #7: “Awareness from Native student body, other classmates, and councilors. 
Create a warm environment so they would feel comfortable to approach these 
issues.” 

• SQ 7: “Continue the Native American student success class. Organize events and 
informational presentations within multicultural center.” 

• SQ 7: “A mentoring program or a consideration of a small bridge program that 
involves other sources that provide these services - maybe at a meeting.” 

• SQ 9: “The expectation level is expected to be high in every university. 
Mentoring and helping to understand time management, work load, classes and 
fields could help show what is ahead of the student.” 

• SQ 9: “Have a class or seminar that gives advice and educates about expectations 
of classes.” 

• SQ 7: “The best way is to work one on one with them in high school. And to help 
them fill out forms with them and parents.” 

• SQ 8: “Through high school counselors. This would allow Native American 
students to know what to expect in college. Allow them not to be scared.” 

These answers express a need for more information to be shared with Native American 




26 



students. Many of the students called for more emails and postings to help students with 
reminders of important things to learn how to be a successful university student. 

Theme Six - New students could benefit from constant and consistent reminders 
through multiple modalities of course requirements and relevant student activities. 
Finally, the sixth theme to emerge from the data is the need for Native American students 
to be better informed of things happening in, as well as responsibilities related to, the 
university setting. Many of the comments from Theme 5 attest to this point; however, 
some other comments that support this finding are the following (Survey Questions 
(SQ)): 

• SQ 12: “Very successful in youth. As they would bridge that gap.” 

• SQ 12: “Makes them feel like they are part of something that makes a difference.” 

• SQ 12: “Maybe send a text everytime something is going on to get people 
involved.” 

• SQ 12: “I think it would be a great deal of help.” 

• SQ 12: “It gives information to those who receive the messages. Natives could 
help each other out if they are in the same classes. 

• SQ 12: “You could continuously bombard them with information about the 
school.” 

• SQ 12: “Excellent way to introduce natives. Facebook groups with events!” 

• SQ 12: “Some elementary schools have parents participate in an emergency 
‘calling tree’. We could have a texting/social media tree - each volunteer to 
inform X amount of people.” 

• SQ 12: “I really like seeing the Native group on Facebook. I know what’s going 




27 



on.” 

• SQ 12: “It is a good way to notify about activities and events. More structure is 
needed for class participation and attendance.” 

• SQ 12: “Its an avenue of communication that has proven to be successful I think. 
Many student Facebook/T witter...” 

• SQ 12: “Social networking might encourage students because they will recognize 
and make connections with people they know.” 

• SQ 12: “It will definitely be helpful for those who are uncomfortable in face to 
face situations, which will be beneficial to transitioning in a sense of where the 
world is foreign to them.” 

There are some interesting responses here. There seems to be a theme of texting and 
using social networking, such as Facebook, as good ways to kept Native American 
students informed. The last comment is one that needs to be taken into consideration as 
well. This idea of giving the students a less stressful mode of communication, in order to 
lower their affective filters (Krashen, 1983) could be extremely beneficial. 

These themes were ones that were the most prominent in the surveys collected for 
this study. There were other issues and ideas that came out, but these are the ones that the 
researchers felt were of most importance and occurred with the most frequency. In what 
follows, we will look at some of the themes that emerged from various observations of 
the focus groups. 

Observations. The second data collection strategies analyzed here was from the 
observations of the focus groups which occurred in this study. Notes were taken by two 
the researchers of the project during the focus group. From the discussion, three themes 




28 



emerged. 

Theme 1 - Theme one was the following: The need for more activities that bring 
the students, their families and the community together and help and support in helping 
elders and parents understand college requirements and more explanation of institutional 
and course requirements. This theme emerged from different kinds of things the Native 
American students said. For example, the following ideas were shared during the first 
focus group: 

• Students and their parents don’t understand that you can’t just walk away from 
class for two weeks or a month and still do OK. When the students are here, a lot 
of what they think about is going back home. At the same time, the family may 
need help with the sheep or building a fence. Students leave to help with this 
because they’ve always been expected to help and their parents don’t understand 
that this is a problem. If they knew, they would make the students come back. 

• Students get a check at the beginning of the semester for like $6,000. This is 
more money than they’ve ever seen in one place before. They often blow it and 
then run out of money before the semester is over. 

• There is a different concept of time. If the electric bill is past due, we just let the 
lights go off for awhile. Once there is money, we will have them turned on again. 

• There is a need for activities that the Native community would be interested in so 
that they feel comfortable coming here. College can be as intimidating and 
foreign to the families as it is to the students. 

Theme 2 - The second theme that emerged was: The Native American student 
community is fragmented at UVU and the primary importance of Native Americans 




29 



mentoring other Native Americans. Some of the ideas that came up in the focus group 
which supported this theme were: 

• Native American students expressed how they do not know that many other 
Natives because there are not enough places to go where they are together or 
activities, other than the PowWow, that bring them together. 

• There is no housing specifically for Native students. Perhaps dedicating a floor of 
one of the housing units to Natives would help build this unity. 

• There is no Native American student orientation. Perhaps matching up incoming 
students with Native students who have been here a while. This could extend to 
alumni. Perhaps a career night featuring successful Native Americans would be 
helpful. 

• The Freshman year is critical for Native Americans. They will decide during that 
year if they believe they can make it or will move back to the reservation and stay 
there. 

Theme 3 - Finally, the third theme was the following: There is a need for constant 
and consistent reminders through multiple modalities. Texting can be used to remind 
students of face-to-face meetings. One thought was that this might be something that 
might be needed for first and second year students, but should end by the time they are in 
their third year. This might help orient them, and provide scaffolding to getting them 
used to taking that responsibility on themselves. 

Research Question #2 

The main themes that emerged out of the surveys and observations were: 

• The need for more activities that bring the students, their families and 




30 



communities together. 

• The Native student community is fragmented. Natives don’t know or interact 
with many other Native students. 

• Natives should be mentoring other Native students, but that is not happening. 

• Parents and elders do not understand the nature of the commitment necessary for 
Native American student success and, therefore, put pressure on the students to 
attend to home and community activities at the expense of school success. Native 
American students would like help with educating parents and elders about these 
issues. 

• New Native American students need more explanation on course and institutional 
requirements. 

• New students could benefit from constant and consistent reminders through 
multiple modalities of course requirements and relevant student activities. 

• The purpose of this section is to compare these findings from the surveys and 
observations with what the literature says. 

In reviewing the literature review from above, there are some common themes that 
emerge. 

Tierney (1991b), for example, proposes that any program developed by a 
mainstream organization should emerge from a vision produced by working with, not for. 
Native Americans. Programs developed for Native Americans using a top down 
approach have seldom been successful. In connection with this, Shotton et al. (2007) 
report on a successful peer mentoring program developed by Native American students 
and observe that Native American students have rarely been asked for input when 




31 



mentoring programs were developed for them. The connection we made with this and our 
findings was the following: Native Americans should be mentoring other Native 
American students, but that is not happening. It appears that from the literature, and from 
the data collected here, that Native American students would benefit from mentoring and 
program creation that is done by Native Americans. 

This is also evident in Kirkness and Earnhardt (1991) who observe that post- 
secondary institutions typically have cultures that inhibit the ability of Native American 
students to express their traditional culture. Rather than insist that students conform to 
the culture of the institution, they suggest that the institution should develop ways to 
support and honor student identities by way of curricula and events (Tierney, 1992a, 
2000). Native American student perceptions of how well the institution is doing this 
correlate with learning (Lundberg, 2007). In addition, structured mentoring programs 
that connect advanced Native American students with incoming Native American 
students have been shown to address issues regarding isolation, lack of awareness of 
available resources, and lack of support and role models (Jackson, et ah, 2003; Shoten, 
et ah, 2007). 

These issues discussed in the literature also connect to the following finding: The 
Native American student community is fragmented. Native Americans don ’t know or 
interact with many other Native American students. If more mentoring and program 
creation was done by Native American students, more interaction between Native 
American students would be occurring. 

Finally, Tierney (1991a) also talked about the need for non-native faculty and 
staff to familiarize themselves with the issues faced by their Native American students. 




32 



This connects to the study’s following finding: The need for more activities that bring the 
students, their families and communities together. The more social ‘get-togethers’ that 
can be had, the more opportunities non-native individuals at the university will have to 
get to know and interact with Native American students. 

In conclusion, although not all the findings from this study were brought up in the 
literature review, there is some correlation. Many concerns that the literature mentions for 
bringing about success for Native American students is similar to what was commented 
by Native American students in this study. 

Conclusions and Recommendations 

Many similarities surfaced between the literature review and the data collected in 
this study. The six main themes that are discussed above are the following: 

• The need for more activities that bring the students, their families and 
communities together. 

• The Native American student community is fragmented. Native Americans don ’t 
know or interact with many other Native American students. 

• Native Americans should be mentoring other Native American students, but that is 
not happening. 

• Parents and elders do not understand the nature of the commitment necessary for 
Native American student success and, therefore, put pressure on the students to 
attend to home and community activities at the expense of school success. Native 
American students would like help with educating parents and elders about these 
issues. 

• New Native American students need more explanation on course and institutional 




33 



requirements. 

• New students could benefit from constant and consistent reminders through 
multiple modalities of course requirements and relevant student activities. 

These themes correlate well with what was found in the literature about what Native 
American students need to be successful in academia. 

The literature review and the current study have provided the researchers with 
clear direction upon which to develop and implement an action plan. We are partnering 
with the universities club for Native American students, the Native Sun Club, to develop 
activities (Themes One and Two) that attract both the Native American students from the 
university and members of their communities. We have funds from a National Science 
Foundation grant to support these activities. We have developed a curriculum. University 
Success Studies for Native American students that has attracted 24 Native American 
students that will allow us to take direct action on Themes Three through Six. We have 
hired three upper class Native American students as mentors and are using a new course 
management system. Canvas, which facilitates communication by all the new literacy 
techniques including texting and Facebook. We are using constructivist methods to teach 
the class like negotiating the syllabus and peer to peer instruction and indigenous 
techniques like talking circles for assessment. The learning and motivation strategies 
taught will be framed within an indigenous context wherever possible. For example, self- 
regulation (time and money management and planning and goal setting) will be presented 
as strategies to help individuals develop skills that will be used for the good of the 
community. Students will be asked to consider their mentors as “aunties” and “uncles” 
who will provide explanation on course and institutional requirements and constant and 




34 



consistent reminders through multiple modalities of course requirements and relevant 
student activities. Mentors will also provide help with educating parents and elders 
about the nature of the commitment necessary for Native American student success. 

References 

Belch, H. A., Gebel, M. and Maas, G. M. (2001). Relationship between student 

recreation complex use, academic performance, and persistence of first-time 
freshmen. NAS PA Journal, 38 (2), 254-268. 

Brayboy, B. M. (1999) Climbing the Ivy: Examining the experiences of academically 
successful Native American Indian undergraduate students at two Ivy League 
Universities. Ph.D. dissertation. University of Pennsylvania, United States — New 
York. Retrieved September 5, 2009, from UMI Microfilm. (UMI Number: 
9926100). 

Cajete, G. (1994). Look to the mountain: An ecology of indigenous education. Skyland, 
NC: Kivaki Press. 

Choney, S. K., Berry hill-Paake, E., and Robbins, R. R. (1995). The acculturation of 
American Indians. In J. G. Ponterotto, J. M. Casas, L. A. Suzuki, & C. M. 
Alexander (Eds.), Handbook of multicultural counseling (pp. 73-92). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage 

Dye, G. (1994). The use of native language models in the development of critical 
literacy. American Indian Culture and Research Journal, 18(3), 211-233 
Ereeman, C., and Eox, M. (2005). Status and trends in the education of American Indians 
and Alaska Natives. (NCES 2005-108). U.S. Department of Education, National 
Center for Education Statistics. Washington , DC: U.S. Government Printing 




35 



Office. 

Garrod, A., and Larimore, C. (1997). First person, first peoples. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press Guillory, R. M. and Wolverton, M. (2008). It’s about family: 

Native American student persistence in higher education. The Journal ofFIigher 
Education, 79(1), 58-87 

Gay, G. (2000). Culturally responsive teaching: Theory, research and practice. Teacher’s 
College Press. Teacher’s College, Columbia University. 

Glaser, B.G., & Strauss A.L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative 
research. Chicago Aldine 

Grande, S. (2004). Red pedagogy: The un-methodology. In N. K. Denzin, Y. S. Lincoln 
and L. T. Smith (Eds.), Handbook of Critical and Indigenous Methodologies, 233- 
254. Los Angeles: Sage. 

Guillory, R. M. and Wolverton, M. (2008). It’s about family: Native American student 
persistence in higher education. The Journal of Higher Education, 79(1), 58-87. 

Heavyrunner, I. and DeCelles, R. (2002) Family education model: Meeting the student 
retention challenge. Journal of American Indian Education, 41(2). 29-31 . 

Jackson, A. P., Smith, S. A., and Hill, C. L. (2003). Academic persistence among Native 
American college students. Journal of College Student Development, 44, 548- 
565. 

Kirkness, V. J. and Earnhardt, R. (1991). First nations and higher education: The four R’s 
- respect, relevance, reciprocity, responsibility. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 30(3), 1-15. 

Krashen, S.D. & Terrell, T.D. (1983). The natural approach: Language acquisition in the 




36 



classroom. London: Prentice Hall Europe. 

Kuh, G., and Love, P. (2000). A cultural perspective on student departure. In J. Braxton 
(Ed.), Reworking the student departure puzzle, 196-212. Nashville: Vanderbilt 
University Press 

LaPromboise, T. D., Colman, H.L. K., and Gerton, J. (1993). Psychological impact of 
biculturalism: Evidence and theory. Psychological Bulletin, 114(3), 395-412. 

Lomawaima, K. T. (1995). Educating Native Americans. In J. Banks and C. Banks 

(Eds,.), Handbook of research on multicultural education, (pp. 331-347). New 
York: Macmillan. 

Lundberg, C. A. (2007). Student involvement and institutional commitment to diversity 
as predictors of Native American student learning. Journal of College Student 
Development, 48(A), pp. 405-417. 

Martin, P. Y., and Turner, B. A. (1986). Grounded Theory and Organizational Research, 
The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 22(2), pp. 141-157. 

Mihesuah, J. K. (2004). Graduating indigenous students by confronting the academic 
environment. In D. A. Mihesuah &A. C. Wilson (Eds.), Indigenizing the 
academy: Transforming scholarship and empowering communities (pp. 191-199). 
Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press 

Mosholder, R. and Goslin, C (In press). Native American college student persistence. 
Journal of College Student Retention: Research, Theory & Practice 

Ortiz, A. and Heavyrunner, 1. (2003). Student access, retention, and success. Models of 
inclusion and support. In M. K. P. Ah Nee-Benham and W. Stein (Eds.). The 
renaissance of American Indian higher education: Capturing the dream. 




37 



Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Sanchez, I. (2000). Motivating and maximizing learning in minority classrooms. New 
Directions for Community Colleges, 112, 35-44. 

Shorten, H. J., Oosahwe, E. S. L., and Cintron, R. (2007). Stories of success: Experiences 
of American Indian students in a peer-mentoring retention program. The Review 
of Higher Education, 31(1), 81-107. 

Stauss A.L., Corbin J. (1998) Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for 
Developing Grounded Theory. Thousand Oaks CA. Sage 
Tierney, W. G. (1991a). The college experience of Native Americans: A critical analysis. 

In L. Weis and M. Eine (Eds.), Silenced voices: Issues of class, race, and gender 
in today ’s schools. Albany NY : State University of New Y ork Press. 

Tierney, W. G. (1991b). Native voices in academe: Strategies for empowerment. 

Change, 23(2), 36-45. 

Tierney, W. G. (1992a). Official encouragement, unofficial discouragement: Minorities 
in Academe: The Native American experience. Norwood, NJ: Ab lex. 

Tierney, W. G. (1992b). An anthropological analysis of student participation in college. 

Journal of Higher Education, 63, pp. 603-618 
Tierney, W. G. (1993). The college experience of Native Americans: A critical analysis. 

In Class, race, and gender in United States schools. Weis, L. and Eine, M. (Eds.) 

(pp. 309-323) Albany, N.Y.: SUNY Press. 

Tierney, W. G. (2000). Power, identity, and the dilemma of college student departure. In 
J. Braxton (Ed.), Reworking the student departure puzzle, I96-2I2. Nashville: 



Vanderbilt University Press 




38 



United States Census Bureau (2010). 2000 census demographic profile highlights. 
Retrieved July 19, 2010 from: 

http://faetfinder.eensus.gov/servlet/SAFFIteratedFacts?event=&geo id=01000US 
& geoContext=01000US& street=& eounty=& eitvTown=& state=& zip=& 1 
ang=en& sse=on&ActiveGeoDiv=& useEV=&petxt=fph&pgsl=010& submenu 
Id=factsheet 2&ds name=DEC 2000 SAFF& ei nbr=010&qr name=DEC 200 
0 SAFF R1010&reg=DEC 2000 SAFF R1010%3A010& kevword=& industr 

Wildcat, D. (2001). Understnading the crisi in American education. In: Power and 

place: Indian education in America. Deloria.V. and Wildcat, D. R., (Eds). Golden, 
CO: Fulcrum Resources. 

Zah, P.. (1999). Native American achievement program. .In: Exemplary Programs in 

Indian Education , 3^“^ edition(Dean Chavers, Ed.). Native American Scholarship 



Fund: Albuquerque, NM, 18-27 



