DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 311 465 



CS 212 114 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 



Gannon, Susan R., Ed.; Thompson, Ruth Anne, Ed. 
Cross-Culturalism in Children's Literature: Selected 
papers from the 1987 International Conference of the 
Children's Literature Association (14th, Octawa, 
Canada, May 14-17, 1987). 
Children's Literature Association. 
May 87 

118p.; Publication of this volume was made possible 
ty grants from Dyson College of Pace University and 
The Growing Child Foundation. 
Collected Works - Conference Proceedings (021) 



INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. 

* Adolescent Literature; *Childrens Literature; *Cross 
Cultural Studies; ^Cultural Differences; ^Cultural 
Pluralism; Elementary Education; Foreign Countries; 
Literary Criticism; Mythology 



ABSTRACT 



This conference proceedings contains a selection of 



the papers and awards given at a conference held at Carleton 
University in Canada. After the text of an address by the president 
of the Children's Literature Association, the following papers are 
included: (1) "Lone Voices in the Crowd: The Limits of 
Multiculturalism" (Brian Alderson) ; (2) "The Elizabeth Cleaver 
Memorial Lecture" (Irene Aubrey); (3) "Editing Inuit Literature: 
Leaving the Teeth in the Gently Smiling Jaws" (Robin McGrath); (4) 
"Cross-'Culturalism and Inter-Generational Communication in Children's 
Literature" (Peter Hunt); (5) "Catechisms: Whatsoever a Christian 
Child Ought to Know" (Patricia Demers); (6) "The Queer, the Strange, 
and the Curious in 'St. Nicholas': Cross Culturalism in the 
Nineteenth Century" (Greta Little); (7) "The Clash between Cultural 
Values: Adult versus Youth on the Battlefield of Poverty" (Diana 
Chlebek); (8) "Fanny Fern and the Culture of Poverty" (Anne Scott 
MacLeod) ; (9) "Crossing and Double Crossing Cultural Barriers in 
Kipling's 'Kim'" (Judith A. Plotz) ; (10) "Adolescents as Instruments 
of Change: The English-language Novel Set in Post-Independence India" 
(Meena Khorana); (11) "Virginia Hamilton's Symbolic Presentation of 
the Afro-American Sensibility" (David Russell); (12) "Arabic 
Detective Fiction for Adolescents" (Sylvia Patterson Iskander); (13) 
"Circling the Square: The Role of Native Writers in Creating Native 
Literature for Children" (James H. Gellert); (14) "'Julie of the 
Wolves' and 'Dogsong': 'me Cultural Conflict" (Mary Lickteig) ; (15) 
"Florence Crannell Means: Cultural Barriers and Bridges" (Celia 
Anderson); (16) "Censors as Critics: 'To Kill a Mockingbird' as a 
Case Study" (Jill P. May); (17) "Safety in the Structures of Art: 
Bemelmans' Madeline Books" (Jackie Eastman); (18) "Kenneth Morris and 
•The Mabinogion' : The Welsh Influence on Children's Fantasy" (C. W. 
Sullivan, III); and (19) "Fairy Tale as Myth/Myth as Fairy Taxe" 
(Jack Zipes) . (MS) 



Cross-Culturalism 

in 

Children's Literature 



U.S. OEPARTMEMTOF EDUCATION 
Otf<e 0* Educ«tK>n«l Research and Impfovemeni 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCFS INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

XThis document has been reproduced as 
received (rem the person or organization 
originating tt 
C Minor Changes have been made lo improve 
reproduction quality 

• Points of view or opinions stated in ihtsdocu- 
ment do not necessarily represent ofdciai 
OERi position or policy 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



Selected Papers from the 1987 
International Conference of The 
Children's Literature Association 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

2 



Cross-Culturafism in 
Chlidren's Literature: 
Selected Papers from the 
1987 International 
Conference of the 
Children's Literature Association 



Carleton University 
Ottawa, Canada 



IVIay 14-17, 1987 



Editors 

Susan R. Gannon and Ruth Anne Thompson 
Pace University 



Publication of this volume of Proceedings was made possible by grants from 
Dyson College of Pace University and The Growing Child Foundation. 



The cover illustration by Elizabeth Cleaver is fronn The Enchanted Caribou. (Toronto 
and Oxford: Oxford UP, 1985: 19. 



INTRODUCTION 



The P roceedings of the Fourteenth Annual Confarence of ChLA contains the addresses and 
awards given at the conferer^ce held at Carleton University May 14-17, 1987, together with a 
representative selection of conference papers, a listing of the panels and workshops 
presented, and abstracts of those papers which could not be included in their entirety. 

The success of the routteanth ChLA\ Conference was due iargeiy to tihe efforts of the Co- 
Chairs of the Conference Committee, Barbara Garner and Alan Mcluiy, to the work of the 
Paper Selection Committee, Ben Jones (chair), Glenn Clever, Sally Horrall, and Robert 
Lovejoy; and to the support given to the Conference by Carleton University. 

Publication of this volume has been made possible by grants from The Growing Child 
Foundation and from Dyson College of Pace University and by the support services supplied 
by Purdue University and the Department of Literature and Communications of Dyson 
College, Pace University. We would especially like to thank Nancy Kleckner of The Growing 
Child; Jill May and her staff at Purdue (especially Nancy Baumann and Jackie Conaway) and, 
at Pace University, Provost Joseph Pastors, Dean Joseph Houle, and Prof. Robert Klaeger. 



erJc 



CONTENTS 

PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS 1 

KEYNOTE ADDRESS: Brian Alderson, "Lone Voices In the Crowd: 

The Limits of Multlcuituraiism" 5 

ADDRESS: Irene Aubrey, "The Elizabeth Cleaver ?;5er>,orIal Lecture" 11 

AWARDS AND SCHOLARSHIPS .17 

PHOENIX AWARD: 

Citation -19 

Acceptance, Leon Garfield 20 

Panel: Books of the 1987 ChLA Phoenix Award Winner, 
Leon Garfield 

Mark West 21 

Talml Ranta 22 

Agnes Perkins 25 

Aiethea Heibig (Chair) 27 

PLENARY PAPER: 

Robin WteGrath, "Editing Inult Literature: Leaving the Teeth 

in the Gently Smiling Jaws" 31 

PAPERS: 

Peter Hunt, "Cross-Cuiturallsm and Inter-Generational Communication 
in ChiWren's Literature" 37 

Patricia Demers, "Catechisms: Whatsoever a Christian Child 

Ought to Know" .41 

Greta Little, "The Queer, the Strange, and the Curious In 

St. Nicholas: Cross Cuituraiism in the Nineteenth Century" 49 

Diana Chiobek, 'The Clash between Cultural Values: 

Adult versus Youth on the Battlefield of Poverty" 53 

Anne Scott MacLeod, "Fanny Fern and the Culture of Poverty" 57 

Judith A. Piotz, "Crossing and Double Crossing Cultural Barriers In 
Kipling's Kim" 61 

Meena Khorana, "Adolescents as instruments of Change: 

The English-language Novel Set in Post-independence India" 67 



ERIC 



David Russell, 'Virginia Hamilton's Symbolic Presentation of the 
Afro-American Sensibility" 71 

Sylvia Patterson Iskander, "Arabic Detective Fiction for Adolescents" . . 75 

James H. Gellert, "Circling the Square: The Role of Native Writers 

In Creating Native Literature for Children" 79 

Mary Licktelg, "Julie ol the Wolves and Doqsong ; The Cultural 

Conflict" 83 

Ceiia Anderson, "Florence Crannell Means: Cultural Barriers 

and Bridges" 87 

Jill P. May, "Censors as Critics: To Kill A Mockingbird as a 

Case Study" 91 

Jackie Eastman, "Safety In the Structures of Art: Bemelmans' 

Madeline Books" 97 

C. W. Sullivan, III, "Kenneth Morris and The Mablnogion: The Welsh 
Influence on Children's Fantasy" 101 

Jack ZIpes, "Fairy Tale as Myth/Myth as Fairy Tale" 107 

ABSTRACTS OF PAPERS Ill 

OTHER PRESENTATIONS 116 



Cross-Culturalism 
in Children's Literature: 

Selected Papers from the 
1987 International Conference 
of the Children's Literature 
Association 



The Presidential Address 
The Children's Literature 
Association: Cha La or ChLA? 
by 

Virginia Wolf 

Menibers and friends of the Children's Literature Association, a few years ago, when I was asked to mn for 
president of this organization, I agreed, thinking that giving this address would be a breeze. I knew, of course, that I 
would have other duties, such as writing many letters and running a few meetings, but those hardly seemed 
troublesome. You must remember that I was finishing a three-year term as ChLA's Treasurer, so almost everything 
looked relatively easy In comparison. Still, had I not had a fairly good idea of what I would talk about here, I would 
have found this feature of the presidency a major roadblock to my candidacy. But I knew. 

I knew I would talk about how special this organization Is to me because of the many close friends I have 
Made by being involved in it. I knew I would talk about the importance of friends who are colleagues-who think 
seriously about children's literature, who give it major importance in their professional and personal lives, and who 
love to talk about it with anyone, but especially so with someone who feels as strongly about It as they do. I knew, 
finally, that I would talk about specific individuals and their contribution to ChLA. For when I think of the Children's 
Literature Association, actual faces and voices come to mind, and I remember unique gifts of time and talent that 
these very real people have made to the growth and development of this organization. I remember conferences at 
Ston-s, Ypsilanti, Harvard, Toronto, Minneapolis, Gainesville, Edmonton, Chariotte, Ann Arbor, Kansas City, and 
Ottawa, and I remember stories about the conferences I missed at Williamsburg, Philadelphia, and Baylor. I 
remember Newsletters . Proceedings . Quarteriies . Touchstones , as well as a variety of other publications in diverse 
formats. I remember award and scholar? hip winners and countless stimulating papers. 1 remember over fifty officers, 
board members, and committee chairs tnrashing through countless weighty issues facing the association. In 
essence, I remember what my good friend George Shannon calls "Cha La." A few years ago when he joined, he 
startled mo with this pronunciation of what I had for about ten years called ChLA. But since then Cha La has come 
to seem a more apt expression of rny feelings for this organization than the Initials ever could. Belonging to and 
wori<ing for the Children's Literature Association have brought me many moments of happiness and contentment. I 
value the organization as one of a kind-as a scholariy club uniquely suited to my interests. 

But this year as president and last year as vice-president have taught me to look at the Children's 
Literature Association differently and have ruined the speech I planned to make here. I wanted to talk about the very 
specific and wonderful wori< of certain individuals-Jill May, Peiry Nodelman, Alethea Helbig, Ruth MacDonald, Carol 
Gay, and Margaret Esmonde, and Jon Stott, and the list goes on and on. Some people have given of themselves In 
major ways so that Cha La would wori<. I have long felt thai they deserve to be recognized for the length and 
breadth of their service. During the last two years, however, and perhaps eariier, if less consciously, I have realized 
that the Children's Literature Association Is In the throes of change. It Is no longer simply a scholariy club. It Is 
now also a small business. Unfortunately, it is still largely run as a scholariy club-on voluntCier labor. 

Surely, a few of the details of what is now being done by ChLA will clarify what I mean. The Children's 
Literature Association offers its members an annual conference; a refereed, polished Quarteriv ; the annual. Children's 
Literature ; and a published proce*>dings of each conference. All of these services, of course, encourage the serious 
study of children's literature, but so do our many awards-up to four now~to promote scholarship, two for 
outstanding writing in the form of an article and book about children's literature, and, of course, the Phoenix Award, 
Then, too, there have been a variety of efforts to improve the study of literature by children. In addition to these 
services to members and to children's literature, ChLA now publishes a few-a very few-books about children's 
literature. 

As recently as 1982-1983, the treasurer dealt almost entirely with matters of membership, collecting dues 
and paying bills acquired in providing membership benefits. The annual budget at that time was less than twenty 
thousand dollars. But In 1983 we paid for the publicatior; of the ten year retrospective and for a readings book, and 
we began to collect revenue from the sales of these volumes. In four years' time, we have neariy tripled our budget. 
Although our membership has remained fairiy constant, this year we took in neariy sixty thousand dollars. Our 

ER?C . , c, 



budget for next year Is approved at eighty thousand dollars. To some extent, this Increase results from our raising 
dues last year, but the lion's share, nearly thirty thousand dollars this year, comes from the sale of publicatlons-the 
retrospective, the readings book. The First Steps , and Touchstones , as well as pamphlets such as "Graduate Studies 
In Children's Literature" and "The ChLA Membership Directory" and some brochures. ChLA has become a small 
publisher. 

To deal v/ith this phenomenon. In 1983 the Executive Board established an Office of Publications at Purdue 
University. At first monies received and spent at this office were the responsibility of the treasurer. But then, as the 
already unmanageable job of being treasurer required at least ten hours a week and occasionally became a full-time 
job, a separate budget and account were set up for the Chair of Publications at Purdue. Part-time staff were hired 
to help both the treasurer and the Chair of Publications. As vice-president, furthermore, I was charged with chainng 
a committee to explore and recommend future directions for the organization. This committee was very active in 
1985-86, working with, among others, representatives of the Small Business Administration. Many of the committee's 
recommendations to the board in May of 1966 have been Implemented; others are in the process of becoming so. 

Ghiar among our recommendations was the creation of a central office, where all the business of the 
organization would be done. Everyone we consulted noted the many problems that result when the address of an 
organization changes frequently, as ours has every three years. Especially there Is the loss of money and 
advertising. In addition, there are the confusion and inefficiency of having more than one set of financial records. 

Also recommended was the Increase in dues, which, again, was urged by everyone consulted. Before this 
increase, ChLA was not breaking even in supplying membership benefits. 

The third recommendation, that we hire staff to cany out what Is now a business, was already In the 
process of being Implemented. The Purdue office now pays seven part-time workers. ChLA has the services of a 
secretary paid by Purdue and of a computer half-owned by Purdue. But we cannot yet afford even a half-time 
director, let alone a full-time Executive Secretary or Office Manager, which fs what we need. 

As a result of consulting a retired publisher, we also recommended a series of steps for improving our 
chances for success In publishing: direct mailing as a means of advertising (the Purdue office has done much of 
this), surveying the market by contacting other, similar publishers, and exploring grant possibilities. The last two of 
these are clearly on the back burner as no one has had time or opportunity for taking them on. 

Finally, the committee recommended a revision of the constitution to retain only that which will not need to 
be changed very often, and the creation of a procedures manual which might be changed frequently and which 
would provide new officers, board members, and committee chairs job descnptions. It would also separate the 
business functions of the organization from the advisory ones, clarifying what should be done by the office staff and 
what by the Executive Board. Lois Kuznets has had the responsibility this year of laying the groundwork for this 
manual. It Is undoubtedly the most complicated of the tasks before us as well as the one most needed dunng this 
time of rapid change In our organizational structure. The creation and approval of by-laws and a procedures manual 
will take at least another year and will thereafter need to be updated on an annual basis. 

Some of this Is surely not news to any of you. The establishment of the office at Purdue and the increase 
in dues, for example, were announced In the renewal lettc sent out last fall. But even If you know about many of 
the changes that have occun-ed In the organization during the last few years, you probably know little of the 
difficulties and thinking involved In making the decisions that are now transforming the Children's Literature 
Association from a scholarly club, Cha La, to a small business, ChLA. 

As I have already Indicated, our main weakness as a business is our strong dependence on volunteer 
labor. It Is, of course, also our great strength as a scholarly club. And, given what we have accomplished In about 
fifteen years, 1 certainly do not mean In any way to denigrate the contributions of all those who made us what we 
are today. On the other hand, the work now requires more time and expertise than volunteers can either be 
expected to possess or give. We need advice from publishers, banker accountants, lawyers, and experts In 



ERIC 



2 




r.one Voices in the Crowd: The Limits of IMuiticuituraiIsm 

by 

Brian Aiderson 

Before attending to my th^e, I should like to acknowledge the honour of being asked tc open the debate 
on "Cross'culturallsm In Children's Literature/ As I sta it, In choosing a Trinidadian to inaugurate the Conference's 
first-night reception with storytelling, and in choosing an Englishman to give the first address, ChLA Is clearly 
Illustrating the point of this yvar^s topic and I am both proud and abashed to share these Initial responsibilities with 
Rita Cox. We colonials In our offshore Islands are a long way from the bright, pulsing homeland of children's 
literature studies and It Is something of an ordeal to present what may seem a rather callow body of Idc ^s to those 
of you at the sophisticated centres of New Thought. 

Moreover, speaking for my own country, I must confess that the notion of a Children's Literature 
Association Is something which is likely to evoke Ironic smiles rather than frjil-hearted enthusiasm. This Is not Just 
because the British prefer to create children's frterature rather than to write or confe; about it; It is also because we 
have a rooted mistrust of hauling children's literature Into Schools of Learning. One British counmentator (who will 
figure significantly at a later stage In this paper) has remariced that he sees Mittle future for the academic critic 
making an exhaustive study of Angst In the writings of William Mayne'-wherefore I find It slightly unnerving to 
represent my country before an organization for whom ' Angst in the writings of William Mayne" Is possibly an issue 
of crucial Interest. 

I had therefore hoped to placate you by beginning my discussion with a quotation from an English 
"louchstone"-for here, I thought, I would be able to lay before you at once a piece of children's littralMr^ and one 
which had the ChLA seal of critical approval. Unfortunately, though, not many modem British writers have achieved 
the splendid status accorded the concocters of books like A Wrinkle li Time , and the best that I have been able to 
do Is to find a passage from an author who does not seem to be a tocichstone but who Is at least a phoenix. So 
here, by way of Introduction, Is a quotation from Rosemary Sutcliff*s The Lantern Bearers (1959). It comes from the 
chapter where Roman Aquila, now a slave at Ullasfjord, sees the Viking Thormod about to throw a scroll onto the 
fire. He stops him. and explains to him what It Is that he is about to destroy: 

It is a book. It is as though the words of a man were caught and set down on a long roll. In 
those small black marics, so that other men may take them up at another time and in another 
place-maybe long after the speaker Is dead-and speak therp again. 

So they ask him to say the wc.'-ds that are there: 

Aquila hesitated for a moment of hot rebellion. Why should he lay the mind-riches of the civilized 
worid before these barbarians who spat on their house-place floor and ate and slept like swine? 
Then he put out his hand and took the beautiful piece of scribe's work that the old rnan held out 
to him. The words looked up at him familiarly as he opened it. It was the Ninth book of The 
Odyssey-a Latin translation. . . . Now he translated again, haltingly, as he /ead. Into the Saxon 
tongue. 

You may lake that. If you care for the phrase, as a multicultural experience. A Greek text has been translated Into 
Latin and Is now being relayed by a Romano-Briton to Norsemen in their own language-and since there Is a 
commonalty of expv^rience between Odysseus and these northern seafarers, there is a sudden recognition of the 
magic by which the "small black mari<s" bring alive the voice of a dead mah. . 

What is of particular consequence for us here, however. Is the fact that Homer Is not being absorbed from 
the written page but from Aqulla's halting translation. A sophisticated mode of discourse Is giving way to something 
much more akin to the directness of the oral tale, and one may reasonably imagine Aquila looking at his audience as 
he trar»jlates, drawing them Into the story-just as Rita Cox drew Jhe audience Into her stories and as storytellers 
have done perhaps from the beginning of Story. 



In perusing your programme for this heavy date with cross-culturallsm therefore. I was not surprised to see 
recurrent references to folktales as a point whma different cultures find common ground-references to national 
traditions (Puerto RIcan. say, or Inuit), to genres (the Pourquoi tale), to influences (the Mablnoqion and the Welsh), 
and even to educational practice ("Traditional Tales In Contemporary Classrooms"), and this provided me with the 
necessary excuse to examine a little more dose*^' what there is In folktale that enables it to appeal to audiences of 
diverse Inheritances. Consider. If you will, the stor\' of "little Louse and Little Flea". [At this point Mr. Alderson 
read his own translation of the tale from his Popular Folk Tales of the Brothers Grimm .1 

This Is a perfect example of a multi-cultural tale. I hesitate to offer as one reason for saying so the 
apparent fact that many people in a fairty heterogeneous, if vaguely academic, audience seemed to enjoy listening to 
it. Preferable would be the weightier argument that, as long ago as 1913. Bolte and Pollvka noted variants of It in at 
least sixteen languages, from the Shetlands to India, and that a similar spread of popularity may be inferred from the 
section on Tale Type 2022 in the great Aame-Thompson Index of 1961. 

And if reasons are sought for such widespread and long-lasting popularity, they, too, are not far to seek. 
In the first place there is the simple, but always satisfying, cumulative mechanism of the tPle. One listens in order to 
find out what the next object of the sequence will be and In order to discover how the sequence will unwind at the 
end. For this p'jrp.->se the actual objects are of little importance in themselves so that it does not matter if an 
English storyteller replaces the louse and the flea by Trttymouse and Tattymouse or if a Maltese storyteller starts the 
story with a turkey. The essential tale remains. 

A second, related characteristic is the fluency of the language which the storyteller uses. In building up a 
cumulation of eight events, with all the repetitions that are involved, it is important to be brisk and to sustain the 
listeners* pleasure In the words of the telling (an end which I sought to reach in my translation through the rhythms 
and the assonances of the rigmarole). 

Th3 nanative structure and the linguistb momentum of the tale may thus be seen as universals which 
almost guarantee its success across a range of cultures, and whose adaptability justifies our seeing folktale as a 
major weapon In the dlalogue-polyiogue?-among the different groups who may now live thdr Kves within a single 
community. Indeed, I was myself Involved as an advisor In a lengthy research project undertaken by Jennie Ingham 
under the auspices of the Reading Materials for Minority Groups Centre at the Middlesex Polytechnic; it covered 
several boroughs In North London where were to be found immigrant groups from such diverse parts of the worid as 
Italy and Bangladesh, Greece and Pakistan, Turkey and Viet Nam. 

The purpose of the project was to coHect from each group the oral tales Indigenous to that group ^hich 
were still being told within families In the mother-tongue. These tales formed c "bank" which. In itself, demonstrated 
the richness of traditional storytelling and which, on tape, still preserves a resource iot ihe student of comparative 
folklore. But the project went beyond the stage of mere accumulation. A number of the tales from different 
language areas were translated into the languages of participating groups 30 that the universality of their appeal 
could bo observru and so that, eventually, a series of "multi-lingual" editions could be published as picture books for 
families from dfferent linguistic backgrounds to share.^ 

What was of Interest In this esq^erfment-and what wHI (I hope) lead me towards the crux of this paper-was 
the gap that opened up between folktale as told story and folktale as translated artefact-cspedally folktale as printed 
story. The Intellectual "processing" that went on (especially among the "non-professional" participants) as a natural 
experience In one language was transferred to another, or as spoken word was seen to be acquiring the "dignity ol 
print." led to various encroachments on the storyteller's tale which Inhibited Its original spontaneity. Worries about 
the caieltles or the Inequalities so rife in folktales threaten ed.bowdlerizatlon. The directness of speech rhythms was 
felt to be not dignified enough to appear In a printed book. \ri other words there was a perceived difference 
between "traditionar wort<s and more self-consciously "compoj^ed" wort<s which points towards a fundamental 
distinction that has to be made between what happens in the ever-approachable traditlona! tale and what happens in 
literature. 



ERLC 



Here Is an example which seems to me to demonstrate this distinction in a peculiarly apposite way. [Here 
Mr. AIde>son read his own translation of "The Collar" by Hans Christian Andersen.] 



What we have here is a tale which numerous editors and publishers have been happy to indude under the 
rubric "folktale". Indeed, the work for which I translated it was a new edition of the Pink Fairy Book , originally edited 
by that eminent folWorist Andrew Lang; on many occasions the story has appeared in other compilations with such 
labels as "Hans Andersen's Fairy Tales" or "Favourite Tales of Grimm and Andersen," as though Andersen were 
simply handing on a narrative that belonged within a larger body of traditional work. 

In this the editors and publishers may have b^ partially misled by that very obvious storytelling 
characteristic-a sense of the presence of the storyte!ler-ihat subsists within so many of Andersen's tales (and about 
which I shall say more shortly). But these oral characteristics serve only to emphasize the various ways In which 
"The Collar" is not, and can never be, a traditional tale. Robably the most obvious of these Is the tale's reliance on 
specifics to make its effect. Where "Little Louse and Little Flea" may be seen as being Infinitely adaptable to the 
circumstances of its audience, "The Collar" depends for its success on a duster of references which cannot be 
replaced by any alternatives. 

At its most general "The Collar" is about courtship procedures, social gradations and concepts of moral 
behaviour prevalent in (and perhaps most easily recognized by) the Denmari< of the mid-nineteenth century. These 
circumstances cannot be replaced by substitutes from some other country at some other period without radically 
changing the story, and it is perhaps only because of a certain amount of scdal inertia that most Europeans and 
Americans of the late twentieth century can still see the point of It What a Maltese, or a Turi<, or a Bangladeshi 
would make of It I do not knov/. 

And this specific cultural background for the story is matched by its drcumstantial detail. The events, the 
humour, the point all depend upon the predse objects and environment that Andersen has summed up. Comb, 
boot-jack, garter, sdssors, paper-mill can be replaced by no equivaler*s. (Indeed, there is a very pertinent example 
of this to be found In the version of "The Collar" that Andrew Lang used In the first edition of the Pink Fairy Book, 
For not only did he announce that the story was translated from the German of Hans Christian Andersen but he 
also gave no supervision to the exactness of his source, so that we find the collar beginning his adventures In 
company with a boot jack and a hair brush 1 An innocuous enough substitute, you may say, but when the jokes 
come to be made about the corrtb losing all her teeth the translator is ki a fix. The best that can be done Is to 
have the hair-bnjsh lose its hair, which only makes sense at a crude verbal level.) 

Even more significant for the purpose of this analysis Is the language In which the story is told. For 
although "The Collar", tike so many of Andersen's tales, appears to stem from an oral source (note the directness of 
address, the dramatic use of dialogue, the dear attempt to draw the audience in to the story). It has none of the 
casual mannerisms of the folktale. Everything Is predseiy calculated to foHow the tones of Hans Christian Andersen 
and not &ome featureless Mother Goose; you hear him in the puns and the tropes, and. above aH, you hear him in 
the complex ambiguities of tone. Just what sort of story is "The Collar," a comic anecdote, a satire, an allegory, a 
moral tale, or the send-up of a moral tale? It is a combination of all these and thus owns to a sophistication of 
technique beyond anything that could be retained by the comparatively simple narratives of folktale. 

Speaking as one who has translated both Grimm and Andersen and also attempted to study the history of 
their translation, perhaps I may reinforce this point by noting how the two texts call upon different skills.^ With 
Grimm one worics best by relaxing into what may be thought of as 'folktale Idk)m"; with Andersen one must be 
constantly alert to the nuances of his particular tone of voice. From 1846 onwards Andersen-English has been 
bedeviled by translators who have not merely substituted hair-brushes for combs but who have undercut or flattened 
the humour, the irony and Ihe colloquialism of his style. Where we have heard: 



"1*11 have to propose to the comb," said the collar. 
It Is reniaricable how you keep ail your teeth, little ladyl 
Have you ever thought of getting engaged? 



ERLC 




We find Carofine Peach ey, an earty translator of the tale, writing: 



1 can still address the comb.-lt Is quite delightful to see how long you have kept your teeth, fair 
lady! Thus spoke the False Collar to the Comb.-'l-fave you never thought of betrothing 
yourself?" 



And such infelicities and misrepresentations have continued in print down to the present day. 

What emerges (I hope) from this laborious discussion of The Collar' is first an example of the distinction 
between folktale and literature, and second, an assertion of the vital role of the personaTity of the author in the 
making of fiterature. This may seem to be a particulariy callow truism, but it is one that needs to be iterated in any 
discussion of cross-culturalism in children's literature if only to remind us that a division exists between the artist 
(who may be worldng not just within one drcumscdbed culture but simply perhaps within the confines of his own 
head) and his promoters, his acolytes, his critics who may harbour pious notions about the need of this work to be 
'accessible' to as wide an audience as possible. 

A leading proponent of 'accessibility' Is the English author and critic. Bob Leeson. who. in his book 
Reading and Righting has set out what I take to be the most consistently argued case for the spread of cross- 
culturalism in children's literature. Since members of ChLA are, by definition, widely read in their subject, it is hardly 
necessary here to enter a long description of Bob Leeson's thesis. Suffice it therefore lhat I remind you of his 
historical exposition, which shows how the growth of children's fiterature in England was indissolubly linked with the 
growth of the bourgeoisie and how. right through to the post-war years, it has reflected bourgeois assumptions and 
values. These Leeson sees as exerdsing a powerful restraint on the accessibility of books for the children of 
today's multicultural sodeties (and he would probably argue that * very term 'multicultural' should apply not merely 
to the diversification of national or radal groups but also to the .cioification of social dasses and genres: male, 
female, hermaphrodite, etc.). 

Resting his case on the view ihat 'the future of literature is linked very much with the expansion of 
democracy In all aspects of fife' (171), he argues for a revitalization of literature through a consdous adoption or 
adaptation of the modes of 'oral' or 'folk' culture. Casting doubts (as we have seen) on the value of studying 
Angst In the writings of William Mayne (142) he sees writers and children and the intenmediaries between th em- 
parents, teachers, libraries, etc.-as forming a sort of gigantic commune through whose corporate activity a wider 
enthusiasm for children's books may be promoted. The writer may team his trade as much as anything by leaming 
his audience; the discussion of this woric should be cam'ed out not in the academic critic's ivory tower but in do-it- 
yourself fashion, among the consumers themselves. 

There is much in Reading and Righting with which it is easy to sympathize, not least Bob Leeson's 
commitment to the unique place of books in 'the global village' and his recognition that the future of the book can 
only be assured If a broad base of book-readers can be sustained. But, as I have already suggested, the attempt to 
harmonize or re-harmonize oral-cultures and print-culture is fraught with contradiction and may become a retreat Into 
the generalities of wishful thinking. For instance, it is hopelessly cmde to try to summarize the sodology of 
children's reading in an historical survey of a hundred or so pages, much of it dependent upon secondary sources 
(which members of ChLA will know to be notoriously unreliable). While it may be true that the economic foundations 
for the growth of children's literature rested securely on a middle-class readership, this did not lead to a monolithic 
propaganda campaign on oehalf of a particular Weltanschauung . From its very Inception English children's literature 
was to prove hospitable to a multitude of talents vt!t* multitude of axes to grind (or no axes at all), and any study 
of the popular literature of the past, espedally the periodical literature, will show that authors reached far beyond a 
limited "middle-class" audience. (The fact that a proletarian audience enjoyed being regaled on worics whose 
jingoism and social message are disapproved of by Leeson is beside the point.) 

Furthermore, If we tum to the encouragement of contemporary readers, we find a similar crudity and 
contradiction in sodological estimates. Leeson Is glad to embrace the immensely popular Enid Blyton, that bete 
noire of the English critical scene, as an example of an author who "knew just how children like a story to be" (165) 



ERLC 



8 




aild whose success guaraiilecd the possibility of the markers oeing able to cany less immediately attractive work. 
At the same time he has to accept that though her books crossed muhlple boundaries of age. language, dass and 
sex, the tone and conlerit of much of her writing ran exactly counter to what i requires of an author on the 
"mulliculturar stage. And more rec tit/y the same thing can be said of Enid Blyton*s successor at the head of the 
beslseUer Hsts. Roald Oahl. Chiidrc-n from all backgrounds dote on his books and the swashbuckling directness f 
their nddress, but the sensitive edult sodal critics are bemused by his Indiscriminately subversive themes, 

PresentV at this point do the less generous proponents of cross-culturaHsm begin to show their hand. For 
while the laissez faire of the old bourgeois order may have contained with it the substance for critical ivory towers, 
the do-ft-yourse(f criticbm of the commune Is suddenly seen to point in the direction of confcrmism and censorship. 
From arguing that it Is valuable for authors to take Into account tht varied sodal composition of their audience, or 
the re<iuctive effects of stereotyping, or the need for us to respect our environment, the critics oi *he commune may 
move Oil to Indicting those authors who do not do these things (hence the blackmailing of the pfjlishlngi house, the 
Bod^y Head, to withdraw Helen Bannerman's Uttle Bhck Sambo from its catalogue, and the co-opting of young 
readers by the Inner London Education Authority to blacklist books which they considered radst or sexist). The 
pressures of confomiism. appKed by those with the best multi-cultural interests at heart, seive only to restrict the free 
play of an author's talent within the work that he Is creating (or, what may be worse, to influence the dimate of 
publishing so that the authors may fed constrained frorr the start to adhere to certain given norms). 

If we ^ire to ask for a rationale which justifies a return to Prescription-which has so often been the bane of 
children's fiterature-then I thinl< that it must lie in the moral assertion that "reading is good for you," We, who are 
committed readers and who. like Leeson, desire children to become committed readers, do so because we have 
some sense that it is an improving occupation, the more so if it takes account of our contemporary dnemmas. or 
helps to widen our sodal sympathies. This seems to me to be eyewash, if it can be proved to be anything at all. 
One could argue that there are many occasions when watching a television progrsmme (of one kind) may be vastly 
more "improving" than reading books (of another kind). If a reason is sought for us to encourage children to enjoy 
reading it has nothing to do with the tenuous benefits of sodal reaiisnt, but rather it is to give children access to a 
field of emotional and intellectual riches beyond anything that any other medium may offer-to give them the 
opportunity to add a dimension of experience to their own lives. 

What that dimension may be cannot be calculated, for rt is dependent upon so many variables. Insofar as 
it figures in my present argument, however, it may stand for the potential that Aquila^ "small black mari<s" have to 
speak to us and to represent the persona'ities of an anay of authors not to be confined within notional limits of 
"accessibility." As people with a concern for children (and as readers of literature) our business is surely not with 
regulation but with evocation-encouraging children to go beyond themselves and make r'scoveries that will extend 
their awareness of their own capadties. For despite the confomism that is so often demanded by those who wish 
to see children's books serve a social or a moral purpose, there remains room for the individual voice which is not 
to be easily transposed Into the idiom of the day and which may need the likes of us to be discovered and made 
known. 

By way of condusion I should like to read a passage from just such a writer-alas. again, not one to b\i 
elected among the hewers of touchstones, but one at least whose Angst is ready and waiting for you to study. I 
have chosen the dosing paragraphs of one of William Mayne's most remari<able books, partly because we may hear 
through them the distinctive voice of a craftsman in words, and partly because th3y represent the way in which a 
book for children may attain the stature that we ascribe to all great literature: absolutely monoculturaMor it is one 
person finding the only way In which a thing may be said. 

The book is nov/, I believe, out of print; its author remains a controversial and often derided figure; but in 
listening to this quotation I would ask you also to bear in mind the wise words of Neil Philip (whom ChlA has 
recently honoured for his critical assessment of Alan Gamer): If children will not read Mayne, it is not Mayne's fault. 
Children do not read him not because he is unreadable, but because teachers teach them to read In a way which 
exdudes him" (20). [Mr. Alderson conduded by summarizing the background to, and reading the dosing paragraphs 
of William Mayne's A Game of Daric .l 



er|c ,ie 



Notes 

^ An cffidal report on the project was produced as a video, with an explanatory booklet, under the title 
Telling Tales Together (Caedmon Trust, 1987). ten of the stories were produced as picture books. In dead- 
languages, by Luzac & Co. between 1385 and 1986 and further titles, under the editorship of Jennie Ingham, are to 
be published by Andre Deutsch. 

Works Cited 



Aame. A. The Types of Folktales: a dassification. . . translated and enlarged by Stith Thompson, 2nd ed. 
Helsinki: 1961. 

Alderson. Brian. H&ns Christian Andersen and his Eventyr In England . Hertfordshire: Wormley. 1982. 
— . Exhibition notes for Grimm Tales in English. London: British Library. 1985. 
Andersen. H. C. Danish Fairy Legends and Tales . 2nd ed. London: 1852. 

Bolte. J. and G. Folivka. Anmerkungen zu den Kinder-und-Hausmflrchen der BrOder Grimm. 5 vols. Leipzig: 1913- 
1931. 

Grimm, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. Popular Folktales of the Brothers Grimm , trans. Brian Alderson. London: 
Gollancz, 1978. 

Leeson. Robert Reading and Righting . London: Collins. 1985. 
Mayne. William. A Game of Dari< . London: Hamilton. 1971. 

Philip, Neil. "Children's Literature and the Oral Tradition. Further Approaches to Research in Children's Literature , 
ed. Peter Hunt. Cardiff: Wales Institute of Sdence and Technology, 1982: 5-22. 



ERLC 



10 



ELIZABETH CLEAVER MEMORtAL LECTURE 
by 

Irene E. Aubrey 

I am honoured and happy to have been asked to speak about Elizabeth Cleaver. She had been scheduled 
to participate in this conference, but cancer claimed her life on July 27, 1985. I met Elizabeth for the first time in 
1969 when one day she came to the Westmount Public Library where I worked, and in a friendly, casual way. 
introduced herself to me. I had just been looking at her two books. How Summer Came To Canada and The 
Mountain Goats of Temlaham . I was delighted to meet her. of course, and over a period of sixteen years in which 
we remained good friends, Elizabeth's greetings were always warm and spontaneous. 

Once embari<ed on a career as an illustrator, Elizabsth Cleaver never wavered in her determination to make 
beautiful picture books and this commitment was a guiding force in her life. 

Even though she began as young as three years old to cut and tear paper, an activity which, over the 
years, would serve well in helping her to develop her collage technique, Elizaoeth didnt come to the full realization of 
where her true talent lay until she began her university studies. 

Elizabeth's full name was Elizabeth Ann Mrazik Cleaver. She was bom on November 19, 1939, in •v^ontreal, 
of Hungarian-Canadian parents, Rosalia and Frank Mrazik, who had immigrated to Canada in the 1930s. Elizabeth 
was the youngest of four children. A sister and brother still reside in Montreal and another brother lives in 
Budapest. Her parents died in the eariy 19d0s. 

Elizabeth received her elementary educaUon at Aberdeen School in Montreal and part of her secondary 
education in Sarospaiak in Hungary, where the family had returned after the war years, in the expectation of again 
taking up pennanent residence. The family came back to Canada, howe/er, in the late 1950s. 

Elizabeth resumed her studies in science; all the childien had pursued science studies and Elizabeth was 
particulariy interested in mathematics. While attending Sir George Williams University (now Sir George Williams 
Campus of Concordia University) Elizabeth made the discovery that her real interests were in the area of art and 
design. She had prepared her first collage that eventually became pages 28 and 29 in her book How Summer Came 
to CanadaH t depicts the scene of Winter-which keeps the Far North in its icy grip. Efizabeth was now interested to 
learn more about the principles of art and design and took further instruction at the Schoc! of Art and Design of the 
Montreal Museum of Fine Arts and the Ecole des Beaux Arts. She also took the time to acquire practical secretarial 
skills. 

By the middle of the 1960s. Elizabeth was mam'ed to Edward Cleavar and living in Toronto, .'^he hoped to 
f^id a career in this c'rty as an illustrator of children's books. To help support herself, she wori<ed as a aecretary for 
an advertising firm. She had completed twenty collage pictures for a chk'iren's story called T he Dragon Story written 
by Ted Wood. She tried unsuccessfully to get it published and it remains unpublished. (All the publishers felt that 
it would be too expensive lo reproduce her collages in full colours.) She entered one of the collages in the New 
Yori< Society of Illustrators Annual National Exhibition in \ ,68 and wa^ given a Citation for Merit. 

To use Elizabeth's own words, she was ""trying to find her way in art. As a child. I always enjoyed cutting 
paper and playing with cut-out books. In a way, I went back to that time and made my Images from simple cut-out 
shapes, guided by spontaneous intuition" (""Words and Images"" 186). 

Elizabeth had met Judith St. John who was the Head of the Osborne and Lillian H. Smith Collections at 
the Toionto Public Library. At a reception to celebrate Young Canada Book Week in 1967, Miss St. John introduced 
Elizabeth to William Toye. editorial director at Oxford University Press in Toronto. Thus began a professional 
relationship which would produce a series of fine books, beginning with the one on poetjy called The Wind Has 
Winos: Poems from Canada . In several cases, their books would earn awards for both of them. Elizabeth always 
thought of Miss St. John as the fairy godmother of The Wind Has Wings. For a while, however, it was thought that 
the project wouldn't materialize as Elizabeth underwent surgery for cancer at the end of 1967. But when Mr. Toye 



ERLC 



'la 



assured Elizabeth that he still wanted her to illustrate the manuscript^ she felt encouraged by this welcome piece of 
news and recovered suffidentiy to begin work on the book in March, 1968. 



Elizabeth's list of accomplishments is impressive: she illustrated two books of Canadian poetry: The Wind 
Has Wings: Poems from Canada and The New Wind Has Winos: Poems from Canada ; a collection of folk tales of 
French Canada, The Witch of the North : a collection of Canadian folk and fairy tales, Canadian Wonder Tales , 
originally published in two volumes in 1918 and 1922; four North American Indian tales. How Summer Came to 
Canada . The Mountain Goats of Temlaham . The Loon's Necklace , and The Fire Stealer and four different editions of 
a book for adults, published on the Melville Press which Elizabeth established to publish books in a limited edition, 
such as her Love and Kisses Htiart Book . She wrote and illustrated a ballet story, Petrouchka : an alphabet book, 
ABC : an »RUit tale. The EnchantrKi Caribou : and The Miraculot;s Hind: A Hungarian Legend . 

But Bizabeth also had other interests and wori<ed as well as a freelance artist and as ^ ^ccturen for 
example, she did lovely pictures for a story called The Coming of the Com" which appeared in an eighth-grade 
reader published by Houghton Mifflin in 1981 and contributed an illustration for the section on poems and rhymes for 
the 1973 edition of Childcraft How and Why Ubrarv : she illustrated one of Gliles Vigneault's poems, "Quand vcus 
moun'ez de nos amours," which appeared in an Issue of Perspectives . The stage held a special fascination for 
Elizabeth. She designed, for the 1970-1971 season of the Centaur Theatre in Montreal, a set of posters, and 
assisted In the design of a Christmas shadow show for children, based on Inuit folk tales. 

Elizabeth made two other posters: one for the Canadian Library Association to celebrate Young Canada 
Book Week in 1969 and another for the Canadian Section of IBBY (international Board of Books for Young People) 
to celebrate the International Year of the Child in 1979. Also, for IBBY, she made a big. fat white cat, featured in 
their Cats of the Worid . 

In 1972, Elizabeth travelled to Baker Lake in the Northwest Temtories to wori< on a project with the children 
attending Kamantuak School. This project involved the adaptation of Inuit legends to shadow puppetry through 
printmaking techniques. She prepared a book-length manuscript on the project b^i \v\s never been published. 
Thirteen years later, however, Elizabeth would be able to create shadow puppets to Illustrate an Inuit tal^ published 
under the title The Enchanted Caribou and she would Include instructions on how to make shadow puppets. 

When Elizabeth returned to Montreal from Baker Lake, she received several letters from the children. One 
boy wrote: "I like the way you illustrate. You add your picture to the story. You use your brain very well" 
(correspondence)^ 

Before her Hungarian legend The Miraculous Hind came out in book fomi. Elizabeth had written the text 
and made the pictures for a filmstrip with the same name, produced by the National Film board of Canada in 1971. 
Between 1977 and 1978, Elizabeth collaborated on a television series called Boucanlers d'eau douce for ihe Ontario 
Educational Communications Authority. The series included thirteen legends with the purpose of teaching French to 
English-speaking students. Her collages were the same as those she made for her books, except that she animated 
portions of the figures. And in 1982, The Westmount Public Libra/y asked Elizabeth to make two very large (42" x 
74") linoleum prints of Petrouchka and the Ballerina from her book Petrouchka . The prints hang In the Children's 
Department. 

Elizabeth did thorough research in preparation for a book (by the way, since lool'ing at her manuscript 
material at the National Library of Canada, I discovered ^h::* some of her notes are in shorinand, a throwback to her 
days as a secretary, and others are in Hungarian). 

Elizabeth wanted to excel and she brought a total commitment to her woric. She would often express her 
feelings of happiness and contentment when she had completed the wori< on her pictures. 

Her interests were varied: for instance, she studied Jung, music, ballet, lithography and attended many 
seminars, directly or indirectly connected with her wori< (one of the seminars that she especially appreciated was 
called Story and Myth, held at Niagara University In the 1970s). 



12 



19 



Elizabeth was a creative person who deeply believed in the power of books. Her own books were featured 
in several exhibitions In Canada and elsewhere. She thought that children and adults should have the opportunity to 
see artistically beautiful books. 



ERLC 



Let us now look at a filmstrip of one of her books, The Loon's Necklace , prepared by Weston Woods. 

Elizabeth was elected to membership In the Royal Canadian Academy of Arts in 1974. 

She was a soft-spoken, caring person who had many friends, and who kept close ties with her family 
whom she loved dearly. 

There was, at times, an air of fragility about Elizabeth. She was divorced and on her own since the middle 
1970s. She always knew that she would make it, but she didn't always know how. She was fortunate in having the 
support of her family. 

She loved libraries and museums-and she loved to read. She was interested in learning. She even 
attempted to learn French. One summer, she took a course in which the participants came from Canada and the 
United States. She said that, although she didnt leam to speak French, she did, however, make a lot of friends. 

ERzabeth received many invitations from all parts of Canada to speak about her books. Although she was 
grateful for the opportunity to meet the public and to talk about her wori<, she, nevertheless, would say that she 
didnt particulariy enjoy preparing talks as she found it more worthwhile to do artwori<. 

In 1980, she completed her thesis for a Master of Fine A ts from Concordia University. It is called "Words 
and Images: Investigation into the Literal and Symbolic in Illustration of a Text." Her thesis gave her the means by 
which to "understand, articulate and communicate" her creative process. 

The National Library of Canada acquired, in 1985, shortly before her death, the original illustrations and 
related manuscript material for eleven of Elizabeth's books.^ The pictures for her other two books The Wind Has 
Wings Poems from Canada and the Miraculous Hind: A Hungarian Legend are in, respectively, the Osborne and 
Lillian H. Smith Collections of the Toronto Public Library and in the Rare Book Room, McLellan Library of McGill 
University, Montreal. 

In an article called "Idea to Image: The Journey of a Picture Book," Elizabeth Cleaver says, "As a picture 
book artist I find it exciting to go over my wori< and discover how irragery unfolds within it. When 1 began searching 
for themes to wori< with, I found that I was attracted to the legends of the North American Indian, to the folklore of 
French Canada, where ! grew up . . ., to legends of Hungary, the country of my family's origins and to puppetry and 
dance" (156). Several of Elizabeths books fit into the context of this conference on cross-culturalism in children's 
literature. 

When Elizabeth first met William Toye, in the late 1960s, she expressed the desire to illustrate Indian 
legends of Canada. She was keenly interested- in these legends and also wanted to make them available to children 
in colourful picture books. Elizabeth and William Toye wort<ed together on four books of North American Indian 
legends, for which he wrote the text: How Summer Came to Canada , The Mountain Goats of Temlaham . The Loon's 
Necklace and The Fire Stealer . They also collaborated on other books, published by Oxford University Press: The 
Wind Has Wings: Poems from Canada . The New Wind Has Wings- Poems from Canada . ABC , and The Enchanted 
Canljou which was published after Elizabeth's death. 

Elizabeth and William Toye wort<ed closely together when they prepared a book for publication. It was 
known that Elizabeth appreciated his sound and helpful advice. But, as in all relationships, their collaboration could 
be difficult at times, especially during those last few days when they were wortdng hard to meet the publication 
deadline and pressure was building up. If Elizabeth needed an extra bit of urging, Mr. Toye seemed able to provide 
it! 



"20 



From parts of their correspondence held In the National Library, It Is evident that Mr. Toye was thoughtful 
and diplomatic In his approach. On one occasion, when he returned a piece of artwork to Elizabeth, he wrote that 
he was doing It, "so that you can 2!ay with if (Correspondence). The term "play" was In reference to the way that 
Elizabeth described her method of assembling her collages. Certainly Elizabeth and William Toye had one of the 
most successful author/iilustrator/editcr relationships. 

Collage was Elizabeth's "favourite way of creating Images since it . . . [was] concerned with imaginative 
invention" ("Words and Images" 187). Elizabeth particularty enjoyed juggling her pieces of cut and torn paper until 
they formed a composition that suited and pleased her. This became a form of visual play for her. Before she 
could begin, however, to put the different elements of her picture together, there were other steps that she had to 
undertake: she would read the text several times until she had formed an idea of what pictures she would like to 
do; research her material; prepare pencil drawings which she would transfer to linoleum blocks; make monoprints 
(textured paper) and try endless combinations; and, finally, make the collage composition. It could take Elizabeth as 
long as a year to work on the illustrations for a book (In one case though, that is, for Petrouchka It took four to five 
years as she kept putting it aside to do other things). When completed, the illustrations could combine a variety of 
materials; cut and torn paper and others such as lace in The Miraculous Hind , birch bark in The Fire Stealer and a 
key in ABC . William Toye said of Elizabeth that she possessed an Intuitive sense of design. In her delightful, 
amusing alphabet book, ABC , for instance, .he cut-outs for her words, chosen for their universal appeal, are 
artistically arranged. 

Elizabeth illustrated two books in niack and white. One Is Canadian Wonder Tales , a new edition of two 
collections of North American Indian legends and European-Canadian fairy tales, originally published as Canadian 
Wonder Tales In 1918 and Canadian Fairy Tales In 1922. The author of these collections Is Cyrus MacMillan. Judy 
Taylor of the bodley Head In London had written to Elizabeth and asked her if she would illustrate Canadian Wonder 
Tales . Doing the pictures In black and white, at this stage of her career (1973, 1974) represented a challenge to 
Elizabeth and, to make them, she used simple pf»\i making methods like monoprints. cardboard and cut paper, 
linoleum prints, collagraph and mixed media. 

The other book done in black and white is The Enchanted Caribou . Elizabeth had been in touch with 
Jean Karl of Atheneum in New York, who decided, among the several projects which Elizabeth submitted to her. to 
publish The Enchanted Caribou . Oxford Unwersity Press agreed to publish the book for the Canadian market. The 
Enchanted Caribou is an In'Jit tale of transfomiation: when the girl he loves is tricked and transfomied into a white 
caribou, a young hunter^uses magic to bring her back to him. To Illustrate the story, Elizabeth created shadow 
puppets, a medium which lent itself very well lo rts magical theme. The book Is striking and appealing In its 
simplicity and has the look of folk art. Elizabeth had found a perfect vehicle for her love of puppetry. 

Most of Elizabeth's work was in colour-colour and texture were the dominant features of her artwork. 
Reviews of her books often contained the words "brilliantly coloured illustrations," or words to that effect. One 
reviewer spoke of her stories as "peacock-bright stories" fTlmes-Canada) . Elizabeth found working in colour "very 
difficult" because it was "a great struggle" for her "to achieve a colour relationship that was harmonious" ("Words 
and Images" 178). In her first book The Wind Has Wings: Poems from Canada , a collection of poems complied by 
Mary Alice Downie and Barbara Robertson, Elizabeth prepared coloured collages which alternated with black-and- 
white linoleum or potato prints. Trees dominate her compositions in this book, and. In fact, throughout her artwork 
In general, the Image of the tree Is featured. (It Is Interesting to note that one of the things that Elizabeth wanted to 
do before her death was dimb and sit In her favourite tree in Westmount Park.) 

The Wind Has Wings was a landmark in Canadian children's literature. One felt that it should be given 
official recognition, and when the Canadian Library Association established. In 1971. the Amelia Frances Howard 
Gibbon Award for the best illustrations In a Canadian book for children, Elizabeth was Its first recipient. A second 
edition was published In 1984 with the title The New Wind Has Wines: Poems from Canada . 

Elizabeth's two first books of North American Indian legends. How Summer Came to Canada , a MIcmac 
legend, and The Mountain Goats of Temlaham (a Tslmshian legend), were done In the same year (1969); The Loon's 

ERLC 2x 

14 



Necklace, another Tslmshlan legend, was done In 1977 and The Fire Stealer , an OJIbwa legend, was done In 1979. 
Elizabeth felt a great affinity with the North American Indian legend and her excellently-coloured collages, excep* for 
The Loon's Necklace , where the brilliance of the pictures is more subdued, capture the emotional Intensity of tiie 
tales. Elizabeth's use of colour to illustrate the legends has sometimes been described as inauthentlc. But she had 
her own perception of these tales and she portrayed their legendary quality in an expressive and insightful way. Her 
illustrations sometimes had other elements besides cut-paper, such as pine needles, cedar branches, birch bari<. and 
twigs. 

The Witch of the North; Folk Tales from French Canada , adapted by Mary Alice Downle, was published In 
1975. Elizabeth was eager to illustrate this book and she had been asked to make one picture for each of the nine 
legends (all the pictures, except one, are in colour). 

In the execution of her pictures, Elizabeth felt somewhat hampered by the fact that she could onl>' make 
one picture for each story, rather than several pictures for each story as was her usual approach In her plcti 
books. If one has seen the original Illustrations for The Witch of the North , one can understand Elizabeth's 
frustration with the colour reproductions In the book. 

When Elizabeth was approached by The National Fiim board of Canada to do a story and pictures, within 
thr/ framewori< of a series that would introduce children to the various Canadian ethnic groups, she chose The 
»;iiracuious Hind: A H ungarian Legend which is a legendary account of the founding of the Hungarian nation and 
knew that it would have universal appeal. 

She chose this legend since her ancestry was Hungarian. Her retelling of the story of two brothers, whose 
quest to capture a hind leads them to a new land and a new way of life, was based on the poem written by Janos 
Arany in 1863 and translated by E. D. Butler in 1881. When Elizabeth did the book version, she had to add some 
new illustrations and experienced some difficulty in creating harmony between the fadng pages. Her rrwln figures are 
created by linoleum cuts and the detail of their costume Is rich. After the publication of The MirBculous Hind . 
Elizabeth received a letter from a librarian and naturalist in New Zealand who wanted to know v/hy the hind had 
been depicted with homs. Elizabeth*'; explanation was that the hind was a divine being and that. In mythology, there 
are many references to hinds with antlers. 

In 1976, Elizabeth met Jean Kari of Atheneum Publishers and asked her if Alheneum would consider 
publishing a picture book of Petrouchka. Jean Kari agreed, and the book was published In 1980. with Macmillan of 
Canada agreeing to publish it for the Canadian martcet. With Petrouchka . Elizabeth had found a story that brought 
together two themes that she deariy loved: puppetry and ballet. She wori<ed hard on the colour relationships that 
would best convey the moods and feelings of the story: for instance, the different shades of blue and purple which 
are used to depict the evening scenes, or the gloom and loneliness of Petrouchka In his cell contrast effectively with 
the brilliant reds and greens of the Moor's cell. Ail the characters, as well as the set pieces, are made from linoleum 
prints which are put together In a collage. 

Elizabeth said: 'I played with cut-out characters of Petrouchka. the Moor and the Ballerina, moving their 
legs, arms and bodies trying to find the right gestures. . . . When we observe the pictures they remind us of paper 
cut-out characters that can be animated as In a puppet perfonnance or anirrwted film* ("Words and Images" 293-95). 

Elizabeth Cleaver was an artist of picture books of intcmational acclaim. Her pictures and books have 
been shown in exhibitions around the worid. 



She left an outstanding legacy and for generations to come, children and adults will continue to read and 
enjoy her books. She used to say; "I'm Just doing what I feel is ri^ht; I'm doing what I love to do." 



Her style was right for hen what she chose to illustrate was right for her. 




Before proceeding with the filmstrip I would like to mention that Elizabeth left In her will the original fund of 
$10,000 for an award to be named The Elizabeth Mrazik-Cleaver Canadian Picture Book Award and to be 



15 



administered by the Cansic^ Section of IBBY. By establishing this award. Elizabeth hoped to encourage excellence 
in the area of the Canadian picture book and to give, in some small measure, finandcl support to Canadian 
iilustratora. 



National Ubraiy of Canada 

Notes 

^ How Summer Came to Canada : The Mountain Goats of Temiaham . Canadian Wonder Tales : love and 
Kisses Heart Booi< : The Witch of the North; Foli< Tales of French Canada ; The Loon's Neddace ; The Fira Stealer 
Petrouchka : ABC: The New Wind Has Wings: Poems from Canada ; and The Enchanted Caribou . 

Works Cited 

ChHdcraft How and Why Ubraiv . Vol 1. n.p.: FleW Enteiprises Educational Corp.. 1973, 

Cieaver, Elizabeth. Correspondence, Baker Lake Project. Elizabeth Cleaver Collectbn: lliustrations and Related 
Material. National Library of Canada. Ottawa. 

"Idea to Image: The Journey of a Rcture Book." The Lion and the Unicom 7/8 (1983-84): 156. 

— . Illustration. Perspectives 22 d^cembre 1973. 

— . "Words and images: Investigation into the lltefal and S>'mboIic Illustration of a Text." M.A. Thesis. Concordia 
U. 1980. 

Rev. Times-Canada 18 Mar. 1983: n.p. 



ERLC 

16 



1987 ChLA AWARDS AND SCHOLARSHIPS 

PHOENIX AWARD: 

Uon Garfield for Smith (Constable. 1967; Pantheon, 1967; Penguin, 1968; Dell, 1987) 
CHU SCHOURSHIP AWARD: 

David H. Jaciuon, The Reception of R. L Steveneon's Fiction, 1883*1894" 
Mark L West, "The Grenville Tennessee Censorship Case*" 

THE WESTON WOODS MEDIA SCHOLARSHIP: 

John Cech, "Crossover Creations: The Films of Maurice Sendak, Where the Wild Things Are 
and In the NIaht Kitchen " 

CRITICISM AWARD FOR BEST ARTICLE: 

Hamlda Bosmajian, " Charlie and the Chocolate Factory and Other Excremental Visions." The 
Uon and the Unicorn , 9 (1985): 36-49. 

CRITICISM AWARD FOR BEfT BOOK 

Neil Philip for A Fine Anger: A Critical Introduction to the Work of Alan Garner. London: 
Collins, 1981. 

Samuel Pickering, Jr. (honorable mention) for John Locke and Children's Books In 
Eighteenth Century England . Knoxville: University of Tennessee P, 1981. 



17 



THE PHOENIX AWARD is given to the author, or the estate of the author, of a book for 
children first published bA^enty years earlier which did not win a major award at the time of 
Its publication but which, from the perspective of time. Is deemed worthy of special 
recognition for its literary quality. 

The Recipient of 
THE 1987 PHOENIX AWARD 

SMITH 
by 

Leon Garfield 

(Constable, 1967; Pantheon, 1967; 
, Penguin, 1968; Dell Yearling, 1987) 

Scrawny, scroungy 18th century London street urctiJn Smith picks an old gentleman's 
pocket of & document, then observes the man killed for the very paper Smith now 
possesses, whose contents Ironically, being illiterate, he cannot read. His efforts to learn to 
read and to evade the assassins hot on his trail lead him through a convoluted, action-filled, 
carefully controlled Dickensian plot. It offers a full measure of amazing characters, close 
encounters, treachery, connivance, and villainy, for grandly entertaining and thematlrally 
provocative reading from suspenseful beginning to surprising and thoroughly satisfy!: .g 
conclusion. 



Previous Winners 

The Mark of the Horse Lord 
by 

Rosemary Sutcliff 
(Welch, 1965; Oxford, 1975; Penguin, 1933) 



Queenle Peavy 
by 

Robert Burch 
(Viking, 1966; Dell Yearling, 1975) 



Each year an elected committee of ChLA members considers nominations made by 
members and others Interested 5n promoting high critical standards In literature for children. 
The 1987 Phoenix Award Committee members are Alothea Helbig, Chair, Eastern Michigan 
Unlveniity; Mary Ake, Uttleton, Colorado, Public Schools; Agnes Perkins, Eastern Michigan 
University; Peter Neumeyor, San Diego State University; and fvAark West, University of North 
Carolina-Charlotte. 



Acceptance: 1987 Phoenix Award 
by 

Leon Garfield 



Ladies and genliemen. first of all I want to thank you for the honour you have done me by awarding the 
Phoenix to Smith , not least because It puts me In the company of Rosemary Sutclrff and Bob Burch. If prizes are !o 
be valued according to the quality of their recipients, then the Phoenix stands very high mdeed. 

At the moment, I feel at the wrong end of a postcard. Inasmuch as uy sentiments are not so much, "Wish 
you were here,' as, 'Wish I were thereP So I must remain a disembodied vo^ce. But perhaps that Is best for a 
writer. Books, I fed, once written, belong to the reader; and the writer should n^d his own business and let the 
reader's Imagination take what It wants. I remember once talking to a school about -Smith . There was a boy, a 
fidgeting, restless, disagreeable-looking boy, who when at last permitted to sp&ak, announced that Smith was the 
book for him. My opinion of him went up and I saw that, rar from being disagrc^ble, he was a ;nost sensitive and 
Intelligent boy, blessed with discrimination and good judgment. Then he went on to tdl me why he had liked the 
book, and, giving way to enthusiasm, he launched upon a splendid exposition of the story, Improving on H at several 
points. Finally, exhausted as much by his own Invention as mine, he concluded by sayfnc that It was a very good 
book and I ought to read It. 

I believe It was the same boy-although I like to think It another,-for a writer always likes to multiply 
the number of his admlrers-who explained why he thought that Smith was a book that had something In It of vakie 
for everybody. There was, he,said. pick-pocketing for boys and sewing for giris. 

Smith was a book that cost me a great deal of labour to write. It was my third book; and, as the two 
previous ones had been first-person narratives, my editor, Grace Hogarth, thought It time t grew up and left the 
nursery of *!* for the grown-up world of •he'. I was thrown Into a panic. No longer could I hide my historical 
Ignorance under the convenience of seeing only what one pair of eyes would see. Mists^os made by a first-person 
are mistakes made by a character, and, to the charitabfy-mlnded, can seem deliberate. But mistakes iT^de In the 
third pert^r; are mistakes made by the writer himself. So I had to work i^ard and do ^ great deal more research, for 
which I war> fitted neither by Inclination nor training. Because t never knew where to look precisely for what I 
wanted, I stumbled upon many an Item of queer fx(\d out-of-the-v/ay nfomiation when looking In quite the wrong 
place. In fact, many of the episodes In Smith arose from just ci^ch chance encounters. ) only founa out about the 
ventilators In Newgate Prison because I was looking up something else; fjia, although I kept to my original intention 
to have Smith escape under his sister's skirts, t couldnl resist using the ventilators as well. 

I still do research In the same haphazard way. Sometimes people ask me why I don't employ a researcher 
and save myself time and trouble. The answer Is that, apart from the cost, research for a storyteller Is like the quest 
for the right husband or wife. You don't know what youVe looking for until you find It. 

There nowi I think IVe talked enough. I'm sure the bar Is open, and ycu all havr. better things to do. In 
conclusion, while thanking you again, let me remari< on the paradox of awarding a pIpe-smoker the Phoenix. Far 
from rising from the ashes, the ashes most frequently arise from mel 



CO 

20 




The remarks of Mark West: 



in Smith . Leon Garfield explores the underside of eighteenth-century England. It is a book about 
pickpockets, prisoners, and an srray of other characters who exist on the fringes of society. In The Strange Affair of 
Adelaide Harris , published In 1971, Garfield returns to eighteenth-cen^yry England, but this time his characters are a 
bit more affluent. If not more respectable. The central characters are two iwelve-year-old boys: Hanis, a clever but 
mischievous son of a prominent physician, and Bo stock, a not-so-dever son of a retired ship captain. Like Tom 
Sawyer and Huck Finn, Hanis and Bostock have a close but somewhat lopsided friendship. The two are nearly 
inseparable, but it is usually Hanis who takes the lead. One dny their teacher happens to mention that the Spartans 
sometimes exposed their unwanted infants to the elements, and Hams finds this Idea intriguing. He decides to try it 
out with his baby sister, Adeihlc^e. It is not that he wants to dispose of her, he explains to Bostock; he just wants 
to see If she will be taken in by a kindly wolf or some other wild animal. They leave little Adelaide in a wooded area 
where she is soon discovered by a young woman and her suitor. Much to the suitor's chagrin, the young woman 
decides to rescue Adelaide. What follows is a hilarious comedy of errors complete with a duel, a love affair and a 
mysterious private investigator who misinterprets every clue he unearths. It is a lively and amusing book about two 
lively and amusing boys. 

Eight years after the publication of The Strange Affai> of Adelaide Ham's . Garfield published a second book 
about these boys. The English edition bears the title Bostock and Hanii; while the American edition Is called The 
Night of the Comet . In this book, the boys have aged a year and are beginning to take an interest In giris. 
Bostock has a crush on Hanis's sister Mary, but he has no idea how tfv win her affections. Hanis agrees to help 
his friend for a price. Bostock's father owns an expensive telescope wWch Hanis wants in order better to see a 
comet that will soon pass over England, and he insists that Bostock give him the telescope as payment for his 
advice. As it tums out, though, Hanis*s advice is not worfh much. Everything he knows about courfship Is from an 
article about the mating habits of animals, and the boys soon leam that gIris are not necessarily attracted to the 
same things that attract females of other species. Like The Strange Affair of Adelaide Hanis . the book Is filled with 
ridiculous situations and complicated plot twists, but through it all Hanis and Bostock somehow manage to preserve 
their friendship. 

Garfield has deariy mastered the arf of telling a comedic tale, but not all of his books belong to this genre, 
and The Apprentices is one that does not. First published in 1976, this book consists of twelve loosely connected 
stories, all of which deal with the experiences of apprentices living in eighteenth-century London. These young 
people won< for a variety of masters, including a lamplighter, a midwife, at J a pawnbroker. Most of these 
apprentices are not quite as destitute as Smith, but they tend to iiave more in common with Smith than with Hams 
and Bostock. Like Smith, they do not have happy and ca.^efree childhoods. For seven years, they must spend 
most of their time at wori<. Still, as Garfield makes clear, they are more than the jobs that they perform. They are 
also emotional beings, and it is upon this aspect of their lives that most of the stories are focused. In "Moss and 
Blister," for example, Garfield describes the bitter disappointment that one ambitious apprentice feels upon leaming 
that his master's wife has finally given birth to a baby boy. The apprentice had planned to marry one of the 
master's daughters and eventually inherit the business, but with a son In the picture his hopes for a secure future 
Instantly evaporate. 

In ail three of these books, Garfield shows that he is as concerned with the complexities of human nature 
as he is with the complexities of English social history. This is one of the reasons why his historical fiction so often 
succeeds In touching the hearts of his readers. 



ERLC 



21 



Remarks of Talml Ranta: 



Leon Garfleld, a prolific author for nearly a quarter-cenlury. has become recognized as a leading British 
historical novelist for young people, surpassed only by Roscnfiary Sutdiff. Often his setting has been the eighteenth 
century, his atmosphere DIckensian, his characters experiencing a rags-to-riches change. However, In the earty 
1970s Gariield turned to retellings of Greek mythology and In the eariy and middle 1960s to picture books, these 
often retellings of Bible stories. 

In 1970 (U.S. 1971), he published his Carnegie Av/ard-vyinning The God Beneath the Sea and In 1973 The 
Golden Shadow . Both were co-authored by Edward Blishen, a man well-versed In Greek myths, and an editor and 
friend. 



The God Beneath the Sea Is a retelling of Greek myths, framed with the two violent expulsions of 
Hephaestus from Olympus by each c. ais caiel and angry parents. The two authors attempt to restructure the 
collection of myths Into a continuous narrative. They divkie their worf< Into three sections: "Tlie Making of the 
Gods,' "The Making of Man," and "Gods and Men." 

In "Part One: The Making of the Gods," Garfield and Blish^?n begin with the account of the ugly infant 
Hephaestus* expulsion from the heavens when his mother Hera rejects him. The authors follow the myth found in 
the Iliad which makes Hephaestus the first chHd of Hera and Zeus and has him cast out of heaven and down into 
the depths of the sea by his mother because of his monstrous defomiities. The goddesses of the sea, Thetis and 
Euiynome, become his guardians, protecting and raising the deformed child. As they tell him the history of the gods 
beginning with the birth of the Titans and continuing through the birth of his own brothers and sisters, they reveal 
the history oi Olympus. Part One concludes with Ares* birthday party when Hephaestus Is restored to Olympus and 
is granted the beautiful Aphrodite, "the magical goddess of desire' (72), as his wife, which follows dosely the story 
found In the Odyssey . 

'Part Two: The Making of Man" recounts Prometheus* creation of man from day. Prometheus, In defiance, 
does not follow Zeus' order to destroy his creation, but Instead gives man the gift of fire. Zeus, greatly angered, 
does not strike out against Prometheus Immediately, but rather bestows on him the gift of tovely Pandora as a wife. 
Through her, mankind will suffer opposition of their own passions as they mingle with the gods. Prometheus Is then 
thrown into chains and besieged by the vidous vulture who is to torment him by day. 

'Part Three: Gods and Man" relates the mingling of gods with mankind. The bulk of this section Indudes 
the retelling of the story of Persephone, the child of Demeter and Zeus, and her fate to live In the underworid with 
dari< Hades, and that of Autotycus, child of Chlone and Hermes, and his rivalry with Sisyphus. Garfield and Blishen 
condude the wori< with Zeus* overthrow by Hc/a and their children. With the help of the sea goddess Thetis and 
the hundred-handed giant Briareus, Zeus Is treed and wreaks revenge on his wife and children. Zeus then fiings 
Hephaestus, who Is sympathetic to Hera*s plight, out of Olympus again. When readers have finished the book, they 
have been exposed to a sweeping narrative from the Trtans to the birth of Odysseus and the buikling of Troy. 

This piece of fiction is written in a poetic style befitting the passk>nate tales It relates. The ugly and violent 
passions of the Titans In Part One are equalled by the tender and compassionate emotions felt by Prometheus for 
his little creatures in Part Two. The authors weave the two worids of gods and men togethet briefly In Part Three. 
Although the beauty of their style Is appredated by some, Garfield and Blishen frequentiy sacrifico clarity In an effort 
to link so many myths Into a flowing nanative. Often too many characters creote confusion, and the text has to be 
read slowly, with frequent references to Hamilton or Bulfinch for darffication. Its swift pace, the compacting of so 
much in so short a wori<, and the authors' seeming assumption that the reader already has substantial knowledge of 
mythology Hmit the book*s audience. 



The Golden Shadow by Garfield and Bllshe»i Is a more satisfactory experience for a wider range of readers. 
This recreations of Greek legends is easier to follow and Is quite beautifully written. The unity of the book is 
provided by "a poet, a storyteller, who collected tales that he wove into ballads for the entertainment of any who*d 
dothe and feed him" (12). The Golden Shadow traces the history of Herades from bkth to death, glvkig an account 




22 



of four of his twelve tabors (the slaying of the Nemean Lion, the kiillng of the Hydra, the cleaning of the stables of 
Augeas, and the abduction of the dog Cerberus from IHades). The prophecy that Thetis would bear a son greater 
than his father is witnessed by the storyteller and is also woven throughout the story of Herades. As the storyteller 
spends his life following the ilfe of Herades, he himself longs to understand the prophecy he has witnessed and to 
actually see a god He eloquently bemoans the fact that 'the pursuit of knowledge had blinded him' and he has 
'lost the power to behold the divine: and worse, almost the strength to believe in rt' (16). 

Although the storyteller is a fitemry device to link the myths being retold and gives unity to the work, he 
also supplies the mode through which the theme of the work is developed. He exemplifies man's constant 
searching for the gods, who are always slightly out of reach. Only in death does the storyteller finally see Hermes, 
who comes to carry him away. Hermes reassures the storyteller that his lifelong hero, Herades, has been restored 
to Rfe on Olympus and properfy rewarded for his Heftime of struggles. 

This work Is well-crafted, and the constant presence of Zeus, 'the golden shadow,' Is artfully presented. 
For good readers at the high school level who are interested in mythology, this could be a rewarding reading 
experience. 

Neither The God Ben&Mh the Sea nor The Golden Shadow can be thought of as source material, and, as 
Clara Hutton Pointed out In Ubraiy Joumal. they do not take the place of Colum, Benson, Hamilton, and Graves 
(2137). But, then in the Afterword of the British edition by Longman, the authors pointed out that they wanted to 
produce 'a piece of fresh fiction out of some of the oldest tales in the world.' That they did. 

Mixed reactions have been elicited by the two titles. In Contemporary Uterary Critidsm , Is is noted that 
'The modem intsnDretations of Greek myths which Garfield wrote with Edward Blishen have been espedaHy crftidzed 
for their loftiness and for losing the significance of the myths ki the psychological theorizing of the authors" (215). 
In the New Statesman. Alan Gamer called The God Beneath the Sea 'very t>ad." "It Is almost imposstole to read, let 
alone assess," he added (606-07). The BuBetin of the Center of CliHdren's Books recommended its reading for 
grades eight and up, and described it generally as "a stunning book" with 'a fluent imaginative style' (56). 

The God Beneath the Sea won the prastigious CameQie Award in 1971 and was one of the most 
controversial ol all Carnegie Medal Awards to date. When asked in an interview rf It was ironic that he had won the 
coveted prize for The God Beneath the Sea ar.d not for one of his other books, Garfield replied, "Aggravating rather 
than ironic' (204.) 

All of Garfield's five picture books are oversized and extravagantly itkjstrated. The first. Fair's Fair In 1881 
(U.S. 1963), is one with his Dk^kensian touch, set in snowy London right before Christmas. Two orphaned street 
waifs are both led to an elegant, deserted mansion by a large fierce-teoking black dog. There they eat mysteriously- 
appearing meals, together dean and take care of the place, and even share their food with others. On Christmas 
Eve, two sinister-looking men appear with the seemkig Intent to burglarize, whteh the children avert The happy 
ending proves them to be the ow.er and his lawyer who conveniently i.ave been lookmg for two such kind, brave, 
honest, and generous children to adopt. Fair's Fair Is a sentimental book with large, conventional, detailed 
illustrations in full color by S. D. Schindler to set the mood for a satisfying story, espedatty around the Christmas 
season. 



Then came three picture books that are retelRngs of Bible stories: King Nlmrod's Tower. The Writing on the 
Wall , and TTie King In the Garden . They are all Klustrated in grandiose style by Michael Bragg. 

WP-S Nl»T.rod*s Tower Is based on the story of the Tower of Babel from the King James version of the 
Bible. In this unusual variation, the author Juxtaposes a smaU boy who Is trying very hard to make friends v^h an 
unmly puppy and the Tower rising gradually In the background. God doesnl want to destroy the proud Nlmrod's 
Tower because the lad might be injured, but rather He brings about the famHiar confusing of tongues. The boy 
finally succeeds In persuading the puppy to accompany him home and the Tower Is abandoned. The 'uK-color 
illustrations are striking but not In keeping with the time of the story. "The boy and the worionen resemble figures 
fi-om Breughel, and God looks similar to WHIiam Blake's depiction of him" (510). 




23 



The Writing on the VM is based on the Belshazzar story of the writing on the wall and Danlef's 
Interpretation of the words. Here, too, as in King Nimrod's Tower , the events are seen through the eyes of a small 
boy. Sam. a kitchen boy. is more interested in an old hungry cat, Mordecai, than in the earth-shaking events 
occurring around him. Bold illustrations in double-page spreads depict the details of the castle, the gross eating 
habits of the gluttonous guests at something that resembles a medieval banquet more than an ancient feast. They 
are frequently and annoyingly intemipted by the text. Neither the boy-cat story nor the Belshazzar story stands up 
well on its own. 

The King in the Garden is an adaptation of Ine Old Testament story of King Nebuchadnezzar's madness. 
Little, spunky Abigail finds the absent, humiliated, bedraggled king in her garden, groveling in the dirt, eating her 
grass and flowers, and frightening her fish. She takes him In hand and helps him regain some self-esteem. Many of 
the illustrations are luminous, with yellow and dearwater green dominating. The events alternate betv/een the garden 
and the castle, which would be difficult for young children. As Rebecca Ray writes in School Library Journal, "The 
invented detail of this story adds nothing useful or beauLful to the original in the Book of Daniel. The picture book 
audience Is not ready for this 'art imitates life' approach* (54). 

Afthough at first glance, the Bible retellings look inviting and inspiring, upon closer scmtiny and evaluation 
they do not offer the bedrock essence of these stories found in good Bible story collections. Sumptuous 
illustrations, inclusion of distracting little subplots vwth ch^" characters, additional narrative details with something of a 
contemporary flavor all tend to make these less than really successful retellings of well-known Bible stories (Ray 54). 

Garfield's latest picture book is The Wedding Guest , illustrated by the very versatile Charics Keeping, but is 
currently unavailable in the United States. It uses some eleinents from the old Sleeping Beauty story "to embroider 
the tiutsm that man's love is divided between the Very type of normal and easy* and. if not sinister, at least the 
strange and unattainable" (Julia Briggs. Times Literary Supplement . 29 Mar. 1985: 350). Jack and plain J^II are to be 
mam'ed but he hasnl invited his old nurse to the wedding. Her present draws him from his comfortable wedding 
preparations and leads him on a strange joumey to seek that second bride, a joumey on which he encounters the 
beautiful princess covered with dust. After complications, he does in the end many his Jill, but "the recondliation of 
two such fundamentally opposed h"npulses runs the risk of being reductive or inconsistent" (Briggs, 350). It seems 
that to instill an old familiar tale with new meaning is not as easy as one might think. 

All in all, Leon Garfield's retellings of Greek m*,'thology and his picture books have not been as weil-received 
as the body of his wori<. When he is in his own element, that of historical fiction, his wori< has more vigor, 
direction, drawing power, and sense of audience than when he collaborates or when he attempts to give an 
established story a contemporary twist. 



Briggs. Julia. Rev. The Wedding Guest , times Literary Supplement 29 Mar. 1985: 350. 
Gamer, Alan. rev. The God Beneath the Sea . New Statesman 6 Nov. 1970: 606-07. 

Hulton, Clara. Rev. The God Beneath the Sea and The Golden Shadow . Library Joumal 15 June 1971: 2137. 
"Leon Garfield." Contemporary Literary Criticism 12: 215. 
Rev. King Nimrod's Tower . Horn Book Oct. 1982: 510. 

Rev. The God Beneath the Sea. Bulletin of the Center of Children's Books . 12 Dec. 1971: 56. 
Ray, Rebecca. Rev. The King in the Garden . School Library Joumal Aug. 1985: 54. 
Wintle, Justin and Emma Fisher. The Pied Pipers . Paddington, 1974. 



Worics Cited 



ERIC 



24 




The remarks of Agnes Perkins: 



Smith, Leon Garfidd's scruffy, undefsized. Ignorant hero of his 1967 novel, is a twelve-year-old pickpocket In 
18th century London. Smith (he seems to have no other name) Is dever and qulck-"a rat was a snail beside Smith, 
and the most his thousand victims ever got of him was the powerful whiff of his passing and a cold draught in their 
dexterously emptied pockets," The chance selection of a country gentleman as his victim leads to a maze of threats 
and betrayals, for after skillfully lifting the contents of the old fellow's pocket. Smith ducks into a doorway and sees 
the man murdered and his body searched. After mingling with the crowd and escaping. Smith looks to see that his 
prize is a document, valuable enough to be murdered for, which he cannot interpret, being iifrterate. Because no one 
of his acquaintance who has skill with letters can also be trusted. Smith sets about trying to find someone to teach 
him to read. 

Before this can be accomplished. Smith Is fingered as the holder of the document, and, pursued by the 
murderers, two sinister men in brown, he runs through London's back alleys and sooty courts, finally eluding them 
and bumping into a lost blind man, Mr. Mansfield, magistrate, whom the boy in pity leads to his home. Set up in 
the Mansfield household as assistant groom, with the magistrate's daughter teaching him to read. Smith Is accu^ad 
by an attorney of having killed the old country gentleman, and Mr. Mansfield, whom the boy calls "Old Blind 
Justice," regretfully sends him to Newgate GaoL From then on their lives are inextricably bound together, with Smith 
escaping from prison, saving the magistrate In a blinding snowstcm on Rnchley Common, and later refusing to 
abandon him when the real villains discover them in the cemetery at Pridder's Hill. 

The story has a breakneck pace, with tense scenes and melodramatic flourishes. Besides following the 
conventions of the eighteenth century novel, rich in language and labyrinthine plot, it skillfully enlists the reader's 
sympathy for an initially unsr./ory hero. Scenes of the grimy area of London around St. Paul's and Ludgate Hin, as 
well as the prise itself, are strongly sensory, particularly in smell, and ihe biting cold of Smith's nights in the streets 
and on the comr.ion is equally vivid. The novel also unsentimentally demonstrates the theme that blind justice must 
be tempered with compassion. 

Smith has been chosen by the Children's Literature Association Phoenix Award Committee as the best 
book published twenty years ago which did not at that time receive any major award but which has stood the test 
of the passing years. It is certainly one of his best novels, showing him as a skillful plotter, a brilliant stylist, and an 
author capable of inventing a protagonist to whom a reader is drawn emotionally set in a story that considers a 
theme of depth and complexity. 

Garfield was bom in Brighton in 1921, studied art, and, after serving from 1940 to 1946 in the Royal Army 
Medical Corps, wori<ed as a biochemical technician for more than twenty years. His writing, which began In 1964 
with Jack Holbom . a sea story, has been prolific and varied. Among other honors, ne has won the Whitbread 
Award, the Guardian Award, and the Carnegie Medal; two of his other books have been on the Carnegie 
Commended list, three have been honor books for the Boston Globe-Hom Book Award, and seven have been 
included on the Horn Book Fanfare lists. He has written biography, picture books, retellings of myths and Btble 
stories, ghost stories, and novels that range from the grim and melodramatic Dmmmer Boy to the high comedy of 
the Bostock and Hanis books. 

Two of his novels that have much in common with Smith are Black Jack , first published in 1968, and John 
Diamond , published in 1980 and reissued in the United States under the title Footsteps . If Smith can be viewed as 
a study of the conflicting demands of justice and compassion. Black Jack might be said to be about human 
bondage, the fears, obligations, and emotions that hold people together against their logical judgment. When Mrs. 
Gorgandy, a "Tyburn widow" who makes a good thing of claiming bodies of those hanged without any true grieving 
family and selling them to physicians, needs help handling the huge body of the mffian Black Jack, she calls upon 
the pity of a young draper's apprentice. Tolly Doricing, and then tricks him into sitting with the corpse while she 
rushes off to dicker with prospective buyers. To Tolly's horror, the body begins to move and make some choking 
noises and~by signs-to get him to pull a silver tube from its throat, which Black Jack has Inserted himself to thwart 
the hangman. From then on Tolly Is in the power of the giant, linked to him by mutual fear. Black Jack's that Tolly 



ERLC 



3. 



25 



will turn him In to be hanged property, and Tolly's that Black Jack will murder him or other Innocent victims If he 
tries to get away. 

When Black Jack puts a large stone In a turn In the road where it will certainly cause a coach to upset, 
planning to get a reward for helping right It or to rob the passengers, the first to overturn spills out an unusual 
cargo. It is Dr, Jones, who runs a private madhouse in Islington, and his newest Inmate, a mentally disturbed giri 
named Belle Carter, being sent by her wealthy family to be kept out of sight so that her older sister can many into a 
titled family without their secret shame being discovered. Belle escapes to a nearby wood, Tolly goes to find her, 
and together they wander on, Belle alternating between sweet, childish prattle and fits of violent temper. They Join a 
traveling fair, where Dr. Carmody, who sells the ERwr of Youth, takes them In, convlncea that his quack medicine can 
cure the glri. To Tolly's hon-or. Black Jack joins the group, planning to take Belie to the madhouse to collect a 
re//ard, but Tolly discovers the giant's weak point: he is temfied of madness and dare not take the giri fcy force. 
As Beile's mind dears with good treatment, ToHy finds himself a victim of his own contending emotions, dreading the 
fate of bemg caretaker of a madwoman yet drawn to Belle with what becomes deep and overpowering love. His 
feelings toward Black Jack are also contradictory, made up of fear and hate and a longing for admiration rather than 
scorn from the huge villain. Through the rest of the book these three break away from and are drawn back to each 
other In a complex plot that Includes blackmail, homfying scenes h the madhouse, and the public panic as an 
earthquake seems to presage the end of the worid prophesied by a street preacher. 

John Diamond Is equally melodramatic, with stronger elements of mystery. Night after night, twelve-year-old 
William Jones has been awakened by the sound of footsteps in the room below his. as his dying father paces the 
floor. Stricken by consdence, he believes his father Is 'dying of a worthless son." Hearing the footsteps suddenly 
stop one night, he creeps down, and his father gives him his gold watch and confesses that he is weighted down 
by a long-concealed sin: he cheated his friend and partner, Alfred Diamond, and fears he may have caused 
Diamond'.^ death. Next day he Is dead, and William's obnoxious unde accuses the boy of stealing the watch. 
Frantic with grief and hatred. William mns off to London, determined to find Mr. Diamond, who he Is sure, will 
somehow vindicate him. 

In London, he becomes Involved with a number of Dickensian characters and blunders through a series of 
ludicrous situations, sinister Intrigues, and chilling adventures in whfch no one Is quite what he seems, William, 
whose first-person narration depicts him as far from perfect. Is a naive and sympathetic character, and Garfield's 
style, as always. Is highly Individual and skillful. The theme that appearances are often far different from reality is 
one that recurs in many of the author's books, as does the mixture of melodramatic adventures Hghtened by Ironic, 
often biting, wit. 

These three novels exemplify one aspect of Garfield's writkig. Even If he had not achieved dstinctton In 
other types of books, these alone would be enough to merit a memorabte place In children's Rterature, 




On 



26 



Tho remarks of Alethea Helbig: 



Among Garfield's other books are several eerie and mysterious ghost stories. Two are fulWength novels: 
DeviHn'the^^oq , which concerns an unusual family of traveling actors and won the first Guardian award, and The 
Pf^jmmef Boy , which strips away the glamour from war. Two novelette^ength books improvise upon the Faustian 
legend: Mr. Corfaett's Ghost and The Ghost Downstairs . All display the Garfield hallmari<s of eighteenth century 
settings; distinctive, exuberant, sensory style; Intricate ploys full of carefully controlled, deliberateh; melodramatic 
events that lead to unexpected endings; Ironic humor; moral complexities; and elemental themes of greed, hatred, 
vengeance, illusion, and deception. 

Like most Qarfieid books. DevlMn-the-Foq defies brief summarization. George, the fourteen-year-oia narrator, 
enjoys life as the eldest son in the Treel family, an irrepressible troupe of strolling players praised with immodest 
candor by George as some of "the most talented personages in England." One misty November a "dari< and 
devilish" Siranger calls in the "unwholesome bargain eating away at my father's soul" and plunges George into the 
strange, new role of reaWife heir apparent to family-proud Sir John Dexter. Sir John is embroiled In a Cain and Abel 
feud with his brother. Richard, whom George soon encounters skulking in a copse on the Dexter estate, a tattered, 
worn, and pathetic fugitive from Newgate, certainly not the villain George expected. Aiding and advising Richard is 
the curiously ambiguous Mrs. Montagu, sometime necromancer to Lady Dexter. Mrs. Montagu has called up from 
the grave an Infant "she swore was the spirit of George Dexter," now seemingly a "wicked, wicked ghor*" that has 
prevaricated about his identity. 

Though the book's center doesn't produce the emotional pull promised by the beginning and the 
conclusion is overty extended, a full measure of excitement transpires before George and the reader make Important 
discoveries. In addition to learning who his father is, George finds that things In the real worid are not always as 
they seeiti and that the accoutrements of a gentleman do not in themselves a gentleman make. Vain, posturing, 
ambitious, a self-professed genius, George, to his credit, tries hard to please the Dexters. Given the challenge, he 
seeks to ferret out the truth, though the effort endangers his life. 

He has mixed feelings about flamboyant, unpredictable Mister Treet, the book's other most interesting figure. 
Catching George's bitter uncertainty about returning to Mister Treet, when the latter has been acknowledged 
George's true father. Lady Dexter helps the youth put things in perspective: 

"Now you've discovered Mister Treet is not the blackest of villains, dear George, don't 
be mortified that he's not the brightest of saints, eitherl There's something In between, you 
knowl So forgive him-for I'm sure he's a great man in spite of it aHr (203) 

And George forgives and accepts his father for the good he knows Is there, puts the man's shortcomings out of his 
mind, and rejoices to leave the manor and return to the troupe, his "golden past to be ... [his] golden future as 
well." and the eight Treet geniuses are together again. 

The Dmmmer Boy also involves delusion, illusion, and deception. Complex in Ideas like Devil , styllstteally 
and stnjctufally It is more tightly knit and hence more emotionally engaging. Chariie Samson, army drummer boy, 
and five red-coats are the sole survivors of ten thousand soldiers "quite harvested by ambush* on a battlefield in 
France. Thicy make their way through their fallen comrades, he dnjmming as they "talked and robbed and talked 
and robbed." Haunted by the specter of a dead soldier, Chariie travels to London to deliver a message to one Miss 
Sophia Lawrence, who turns out to be the daughter of the defeated general Hopelessly enamored of her, Chariie 
perjures himself to save her father, then discovers that this Idol also has feet of clay. His saivation comes from 
unexpected quarters: the opportunistic surgeon. Mister Shaw, who has conceived an ambiguous fondness for 
Chariie, and Charity, Miss Sophia's sensible, forthright serving wench, whom Chariie has hitherto scorned. The 
whole culminates in a smashing chase In New Forest and concludes with Chariie splitting his drumskin. which 
signifies entry Into manhood, and then leaving arm-in-arm with Charity. 

Irony supports themes well but distances us from the protagonist. Chariie lacks definition; he Is less 
interesting than his flamboyant counterpart, George Treet. Faceless, stupidly innocent, he is a shallow type who 



27 ^ ^ 




perpetuates his own deception. Having gone to war 'to find something to be worthy of/ he learns the survivors 
among the soldiers he idolized are alive because they fled and hid in ditches during the fighting, the general io 
whom he dedicated his drumming Is pompous, self-aggrandizing, and unnaturally attached to his beautiful daughter, 
and the beauty of the daughter to whom Charlie has given his untamlshed devotion masks a cruel, haughty, life- 
destroying ugliness. Yet Charlie remains doggedly romantic throughout. When he changes, he changes expectedly. 
and his entry Into adulthood, though motivated, seems abrupt. His departure from the forest with Charity "on his 
srm-and charity deep in his heart',-the novel's final words-usher him into another romantic .vorid, a happy-ever-after 
conclusion to the novel that offers hope but disquiets the thinking reader. 

Scenes are memorable, their pictures sharp, their language energetic and rich with imagery. The ironically 
poetic and visually vivid opening in present tense-"the scariet men are marching. The hillside is In bloom with them 
. . . mounting as if to capture the sun."-establishes the romantic tone, sets in stari< relief the hon-or of the ambush 
and the earthiness of the body robbing soon to follow, and contributes universality. Mister Shaw, the grotesquely 
comic surgeon, 'gray and fat, with little frightened eyes,' wastes no ti; xe as he prudently scours the battlefield 
"gathering teeth, fine, fresh teeth. Teeth for the toothless back home. Teeth for the ladies; teeth for the gentlemen- 
at upwards of two pound ten a gnasher" (16). Though not without shortcomings. Drummer stands out for the skill 
with which it is composed. 

In Devil and Drummer , the supematural forces provide atmosphere. In Mr. Corbett*s Ghost and The Ghost 
Downstairs , two finely cut gems that outshine these two predecessors, the ghosts become functioning characters In 
their own right. Mr. Corijett's Ghost echoes the tale of Scrooge as it plays twists and tums on the theme of unholy 
bargain. One New Year's Eve, willful, defiant Benjamin Partridge, apothecary's apprentice and aspiring celebrpnt. Is 
ordered by his hard-driving master. Mister CoriDett, to deliver a mixture to a little, old. black-garbed man about whom 
there is "an unmistakable smell of graveyards." Obliged to walk three miles through the dark and cold, despairing 
and raging ("Nails in your coffin, Mister Corbett"), Benjamin repairs to a secluded house on the heath and ^^ncludes 
with the same little old man a bargain for Mister CoriDett's death. When the corpse and then the ghost become 
unmanageable, he opts for an unselfish act that redeems both him and Mister Corbett, and Benjamin welcomes the 
New Year, relieved to have his master in the flesh again. He has leamed that the cost of irresponsible action nrwy 
come high and that forgiveness is sweeter than revenge. 

We feel little sympathy for complaining, surfy Benjamin at story's start, and still less when he Initiates his 
dari< agreement. But the discipline of suffering he undergoes changes his outlook substantially and draws us to him. 
We disapprove his attempts to justify himself. "You brought it on yourself. Mister Coriaett. You were as hard as 
Iron," he asserts unhappily. We think better of him when remorse sets in and he acts compassionately for the 
piteous ghost. When he realizes the ghost can "give but ten-or and freezing coid" and that there is no place for the 
two of them to go "in their misery and their shame," we see how much he has changed and share his suffering. 

At the very end. when Benjamin "begin j to wonder whether his dari< venture had been a dream." we. too. 
wonder. The third person focus is so tight it gives Jhe effect of "P narration. Maybe, we think, this has all taken 
place In Benjamin's head, a figment of the over-wrought imagination of a rebellious adolescent. But so vividly does 
Garfield draw the ghost, so tormented Is the specter ("Hell is cold . . .." he pleads), so clearfy realized is the Ironic 
New Year's Eve party at which Benjamin helps the ghost warm himself at the fire and thus is revealed as a 
murderer, that we have no difficulty accepting the events as actually happening, the ghost as real as Benjamin. 
Along with Benjamin we conclude that the evil we do has its origin within us. 

The macabre in the allegorical sense hinted at in Mister Coriaett's Ghost Is more fully realized In The Ghost 
Downstairs . Mr. Flshbane, new neighbor below, reeks of sulphur. Since he also reeks of wealth, Mr. Fast, sharp- 
minded solicitor's clerk, cultivates his friendship. Supremely confident of his ability to outwit the old man legally, he 
draws up a contract in which in retum for a million pounds he will give the old man his soul and seven years off the 
end of his life, a contract signed not in blood, but with beetroot juice, and hence "red in tooth and clause." Even 
though the fine print specifies the first seven years of his life, Mr. Fast soon feels uneasy with his bargain. He 
notices a dari< and shadowy shape accompanying his benefactor, wh/'n slowly and honibly materializes as a sad- 
eyed, pallid-faced, little boy dressed in an old-fashioned sailor suit, Mr. Fast has bargained away his own childhood, 
and with it his hopes and dreams. rendering-ironically*the million pounds of no value. What good is money without 

28 



dreams for it to satisfy? Dismay and fear progress relentlessly into ten-or when Mr. Fishbane grants the ghost-child's 
fondest wish, to drive a train, which to his horror Mr. Fast soon realizes is a death train, l-le halts it, saving the 
passengers at the cost of his own life, and is thus redeemed from his unholy bargain. 

Mr. Fast Is more repulsive at the beginning than is Benjamin Partridge. The grasping solicitors clerk 
appears to have no redeeming qualities. We are Introduced to him in a sardonically witty passage: 

Two devils lived In Mr. Fast-envy and loneliness. Together they gnawed at him, drained the color 
from his face, the luster from his eyes and the charity from his heart. (3) 

A little later we're told that avarice became a "welcome tenant," too, who "got on famously with the two devils . . , 
all three of them held parties in his head, and dined off Mr. FIshbane's estate" (9). His pride, greed, and arrogance 
continue to repel us. We dislike him intensely when he attempts to purchase the child's dreams (his own, that is) 
with the gift of a silver running hoop. The pivotal scene, where we begin to feel sympathy, occurs when he gives 
his arm to an old woman and helps her through the fog to the train, a Boy Scout act that epitomizes childhood 
virtue and hints that his discipline of suffering has awakened a deceticy dormant since childhood. When he is 
convinced that 'the phantom child was fixed on destroying him and . . ^ was driving the train to destruction," he 
undertakes to save the glimpse of the phantom at the controls, through Mr. Fast's anguished plea, "Take everything 
backl Take all my soul-only stop the train!" through the poignant death scene, after which the child speaks as 
father of the man, whispering, "My son ... oh, my son . . .," to conclude with poetic ambiguity. But the end leaves 
us to ponder the identity of Mr. Fishbane and the phantom child: 

'Come, Dennis," murmured the old man. "Come away, my dear." 

Then this weird pair-the shabby old man and the little boy in the sailor suit-drifted away 
from the glowing scene and seemed to mount the embankment and so dissolve in the upper 
reaches of the night. 

'Where shall we go now?" whispered the little phantom, its pale face smiling up into the 
old man's. 

"God knows," answered Mr. Fishbane, and his beard streamed out to catch the stars. 

(107) 

Perhaps Mr. Fishbane isn't the devil at all. Perhaps the only devil is in Mr. Fast's baser nature. Perhaps, as in Mr. 
Corijett's Ghost , the only evil people do originates with them. 

This brief discussion has merely sampled the surface texture of these four rich and deeply satisfying books. 
There is no time here to discuss such aspects as tone, color, the orchestration of rhythm and pace, the wit, the 
wordplay, the imagery a..d their effect on characterization, plotting, and atmosphere. Garfield is a master craftsman, 
whose wori<, I believe, has not received the attention it deserves on this side of the Atlantic. His books are simply 
good reading entertainment. They give us perceptive insights into human nature and the way things are in the world, 
and at the same time they enhance our appreciation for the delight that beautiful writing brings. 

-Edited by Alethea Helbig 




CO 



29 



Editing Inuit Literature: Leaving the Teeth in the 
Gently Smiling Jaws 
by 

Robin McGrath 

A quick glance around any Canadian children's library or bookstore will reveal a proliferation of books by 
and about native North Americans. This weai*' of »iative material Is the result of a realization by parents and 
educators that native songs and legends "reflect archetypes of v/orid mythology adapted to the Canadian 
environment" (Whitaker 162). The works help to put non-native children Into harmony with the country of their birth 
or adoption In a way that stories rooted in Europe, Asia or Africa cannot, and they also help to keep native children 
In touch with their culture. The use of native oral literature In books Involves a number of complex processes, 
including transmission, translation, adaptation and editing, processes which should be undertaken with caution and 
care if the integrity of the original material is to be retained. This paper wHI look at problems of adapting and editing 
Inuit literature and will compare several original manuscripts with the English texts that eventually reached the public. 

It is important In talking about editing Inuit literature to draw a dear distinction between literature about Inuit 
and literature b>^ Inuit. An excellent example of an adaptation of Inuit legend, literature about Inuit, Is Elizabeth 
Cleaver's The Enchanted Caribou . Another Is James Houston's Tikta'Litak . Houston based his story on a real 
Incident, but as he tells us: 

The year after Tikta'Llktak returned he and his wife starved to death; he was gone. I never used 
that in the book because I think it sounds depressing that, after having fought through all that to 
save himself, he should have died in such an ordinary way as starvation, (qtd. in Stott 7-6) 

Houston's story is his own, and he Is free to change or orr.it the ending. The problem arises when editors 
change Inuit writers' stories. 

A photographic version of the Taqaliktaq story can be found In Peter Prtseolak's People From Our Side . 
The sub-title is A Life Story With Photographs by Peter Prtseclak and Oral Blooraphv by Dorothy Eber , the translator 
of the manuscript section is named, the six Interpreters who worked on the Interviews are listed, a page of the 
syllabic manuscript Is reproduced on the Inside of the cover, and a d{8tlnctk}n is made between the original 
manuscript and later Insertions from Interviews by the use of Itailcs. L Nulloak . edited by Mahjrice Metayer, Is 
similarly documented and includes a sample of the original Inuktitut with both a ttteral translation and the final 
interpretation so that readers can judge how the wori< has been altered by the editor. 

In contrast, Elik and Other Stories of the MacKsnzle Eskimos is an example of a book that may appear to 
be by Inuit but Is not. Herbert T. Schwarz devotee almost half of this book to photographs and profHes of the 
storytellers he met In tne Mackenzie Delta, but a careful reading reveals that Schwarz speaks no Inuktitut, several of 
the storytellers spoke very little English, the stories were never tape-recorded, and an Interpreter was used for only 
one of the tales. Schwarz's comment that one story-teller was such a superb actor that "there were times that I did 
not need to understand Eskimo to comprehend his tale" (69) should be received with some skepticism. Ejik is an 
adapted wori< but gives the Incon-ect Impression that it has simply been edited. 

Authentic literature by Inuit Is usually falriy easy to recognize. The storytellers or poets are Identified by 
name or at least by tribal affiliation; the translators are listed; any Interim langut:ge8 such as Danish or French are 
noted; additions are identified as such either through footnotes or the use of ItaKcs; and finally, it does no hami If a 
certain number of inconsistencies of language or nanatlve developrrent are retained. If, as an English reader, you 
understand everything In the wori<, then it Is probably not the product of an Inuit writer. 

Sometimes the changes editors make are so subtle that it Is difficult to know If the editor was making a 
deliberate decision or was just inadvertently shifting the emphasis In a wori<. Either way, the reader Is left with an 
incon-ect Impression of Inuit life. Agnes Nanogak's version of the story of Anlknlyak, In her new book Mere Tales 
From the IqIoo . contains a number of examples of this kind of change. The story teHs of a childless couple who 
had adopted the husband's younger brother. The young man longed for t^cm to have a baby, a glri that he could 

ERIC 



look after, but t^^ when the wife eventually became pregnant she gave birth to a boy. The father, concerned that 
his brother might harm the child In his disappointment, instructed his wife to dress the child as a girl. All went well, 
until the child was old,enough to play outside. One day, when the unde and child were catching birds, the uncle 
discovered the deception. 

Roy Goose's original translation describes the discovety in this way: 

So when the child wanted to peo-he helped it to pee-so he found out only then that the child 
was a little boy instead. (Nanogak ts. 77-6) 

The published version reads: 

The child went to relieve himseif, and the uncle saw that he was not a girl. Only then did the 
uncie find out that the child was a little boy instead. (Nanogak) 

Several of the changes in this text can be justified. The elimination of the word "so" (taimal), used to punctuate oral 
nanatives, and the substitution of "relieve" for "pee", are decisions that editors are free to make, particulaily when 
they are woridng with a rough translation. However It is veiy clear in the original text and In the translation that the 
uncle Is helping a child that he thinks Is a girl when it needs to urinate. The edited version distances the uncle- 
"The child went to relieve himself." 

We are told earlier in the manuscript that the uncle "looked after" the child, but the published version 
changes "looked after* to "protected". All the descriptions of the uncle's relationship with the child have been 
changed to fit a non-lnult stereotype. In reality, Inult men are extremely nurturing, they are quite comfortable being 
seen feeding, washing, or 'looking after" babies and small children. Inult men do not just "protect" chlldren-a word 
that suggests a man alert to dangerous polar bears-they look after children, which includes wiping noses and 
bottoms. A teen-aged boy would not hesitate to help a two year old girl go to the toilet. One suspects that the 
editor was anxious to eliminate any implication of sexual contact from the story. The translator refers to the child as 
"she" when dressed as a girl, but the editor has substituted "he" or "ft"; since there Is no gender distinction for the 
second person singular In Inuktjtut, the use of female in English might have been accidental but most likely was 
deliberate and perhaps should have been retained. 

The editor of More Tales From the Igloo seems to have had a real aversion to bodily functions. In the 
manuscript version of one story, a man dump^* a urine pot on a fiety demon but in the book the contents of the pot 
are unidentified. Motivations that children or adults might understand often disappear In the editing. A beast-fable. 
In which a crow tricks some wolves into an act of cannibalism, hinges on the fact that the wolves are so appalled 
that they run outside to try and vomit. Crow hides their par1<as and they freeze to death. In the published story 
the reference to their attempts to vomit Is deleted and the wolves run outside for no apparent reason. A beast-fable 
about an enchanted moose who continues talking to the hunter after he has been killed and skinned provides 
another example of this editor's fastidiousness. Originally, the moose skin objects to being used as a blanket 
because the children might wet the bed. Now the moose skin suggests that the children might "get it dirty." Surely 
a reluctance to be peed on Is a stronger, more realistic motivation In such a story. 

The original manuscript of More Tales From the IqIoo provides a number of glimpses of Inult life that are 
quite intimate but that were deemed inappropriate by the editor. In one story, a manied couple have a serious 
altercation; the husband goes caribou hunting to calm down. What we are told Is that the husband was getting out 
of the house so as not to beat his wife. He doesnt beat her; however he eventually creates a drop-trap full of 
wornis to kill her but ends up falling into it himsolf and being consumed. The original comment about why he went 
hunting Is open to two Interpretations: either we are being told how to deal appropriately with anger f},e„ go caribou 
hunting), or we are being told that If rage is suppressed it will grow. Apparently the editor thinks it Is all right for an 
Inuk to speak In print about feeding a spouse to a ditch full of worms, but references to wife-beating are verboten . 
A much milder form of the same censorship has a hunter kill two caribou when In the original story he has killed a 
can'bou cow and her calf. This particular story Is chock-full of murders-it seems that an Inuk Rambo Is acceptable 
as long as he doesnt shoot Bambi's mother. 



32 



Editors who are wofWng wUh modem Inult literature have a particular responsibility to their authors. Writers 
such as Markoosie and Alootool< Ipellie frequently set their stories In traditional times but they are writing In English 
and using European narrative techniques. Markoosie's Harpoon of the Hunter , which was edited by James McNeil, 
displays both the strengths and pitfalls of such a relationship. Matkoosle was woridng as a bush pilot when he 
wrote the bool<, and had a somewhat weal< bacl<ground in traditional Inult skills. McNeil quite property did not 
attempt to eliminate the romantic love motif in the plot, a European element that some reviewers regarded as a 
distortion, nor did he want Markoosie to change the abruptly tragic ending in which the hero commits suldde. He 
did, however, change the heroine's name from Lizzie to Putooktee. and he failed to recognize that musk-oxect do not 
"roam the land, living on whatever they can kill" (Markoosie 44), but, as Fred Breummer reminds us, are fairly mild 
herbivores (v); furthennore, the harpoon of the title has a detachable head which would mal<e It impossible for the 
hero, Kamik, to repeatedly strike e polar bear. A knowledgeable anthropologist frequently knows more about the 
details of traditional camp life than a young Inuk brought up in the contact era. 

When McNeil edited Markoosie*s next work. Wings o? Mercy, the situation was somewhat reversed. 
Markoosle*s descriptions of Arctic flying were frequently too detailed and specific for the editor's taste, and the 
language a little too colloquial. Under McNeil's blue pencil, a sled became a komatik . just as In John Auaruak's 
work a boat became an Umiak , and Markoosie*s village English was cleaned up and dignified. Where a character 
originally sent a radio message that read: "Would you lell RCMP I'd like to talk to him" (ts. 12), It now reads "Would 
you tell the RCMP man I'd like to talk to him." Inult frequently refer to non-natives by the occupation and will 
address them as Pilot or Teacher or even Co-Op, and since Inktitut does not have articles such as "a" or "the", 
thesii are frequently dropped in English as well. Village English Is often colourful and delightful and Inult writers 
frequently push familiar words into shapes that those who speak English as a first language would never attempt. 
Markoosie's sentence: "He switched his eyes to the airspeed Indicator," (ts. 12) becomes: "He looked at his 
instruments" (Markoosie 12). but the notion of the pilot's taking on the characteristics of a machine Is lost In this 
editorial change. 

The whole question of whether sex, violence and monsters should be retained In native literature for 
children Is a complex one that Is dealt with elsewhere (McGrath, In publication). What is of concern here Is that 
Inult writers be well served by those who edit them. Often, especially In poetry, editors tend to read too much Into 
fairly simple r^iaterial. For example, the song "Ptarmigan" by Umanatsiaq gives a delightful imaglstic picture of the 
bird In springtime, but the last two lines, "And right between its buttocks/Sat the sweetest little arse* (Lowenstein 51), 
can be- and probably was-misunderstood by the editor who was working with Knud Rasmussen's translations from 
Inuktitut to Danish. An "Itlq" on a person is a bottom; on a bird it Is the part that holds the tailfeathers. A bird's 
"pope's nose" or "parson's nose" is not what is generally understood by the word "arse". A ptarmigan's Itlq is an 
oily morsel much enjoyed by Inuit because it is literally sweet. 

This tendency for editors tc make the literal abstract Is also obvious in a modem poem, "I Ask of Thee" by 
Akulak. The poem takes the form of a traditional dialogue song between parent and child In which the boy asks his 
father about tho changes he sees happening around him. Tho child questions the nature of God, the reason for 
man's Inhumanity to 'nan, and, in the last verse, he asks why the animals they usually hunt have disappeared. The 
father's explanation is that It Is "the machines" that have caused the scarcity of animals; the editor has changed 
"the machines" to the more abstract concept "progress." Machines may represent progress, but surety that is for 
the reader to interpret, not for the editor to impose. 

With more native material reaching children every day, parents and educators must become aware of how 
to choose books by and about Inuit. Adapters like Houston and Cleaver understand the tradition from which t) ey 
are drawing inspiration, so their wori<s function In the same way that wori<s by storytellers like Amaitok Ipellie, Isa 
Smiler and Francois Quasa do. Editors like Maurice Metayer, Leonle Kappi and Dorothy Eber treat their authors with 
intelligence and respect, and Interpreters like Anne Hanson and Rose Jeddore consider carefully all the cultural, 
linguistic and aesthetic aspects of the prose and poetry they are translating. Editors and writers given the 
opportunity to work with native material must educate themselves so as to produce books as honest to the original 
material as they can possibly make them, and readers must become more critical of the processes by which stories 
and songs that originated In the camps of Seekooseelak and KIttigazurt reach us In the south on the printed page. 




33 



Tautungle Kubllutok. an artist and teacher from Rankin Inlet In the Hudson's Bay area, made a number of 
tape recordings before her death of stories that she thought would help non^lnult to understand her culture. The 
following account of eariy inuit contact whh white whaling crews serves as a cautionary tale for editors of native 
legends: 

The Big Ship 

In the olden days we were a very isolated people, but the people before us were even 
more isolated. We thought, and understandably so, that we were the only people on earth. Uttle 
did we know that there were more people, in the land of the Qablunaaq and all over. 

A group of Inult had their camp set up on the seashore. These people would go or. 
hunting trips by qaiaq ; the qajaq was the only thpe of boat they knew. They didt even imagiie 
that there could be anything different. 

One morning, a man w^t out of his tent and saw something at the waterfront. It was a 
massive structure with many wing-like forms that waved In the wind. Unbeknownst to the people, 
the thing had made its way Into the bay. "^e huge looming sails were frightening and as the 
nran did not have any way of knowing what It could be, he became afraid of it. 

This group of Inuit had a shaman. They summoned him quickly and helped him don his 
ceremonial fringe belt. Then they performed a ritual to try and gain an understanding of what was 
happening to them. The shaman said "These beings are not to be feared. They are people too, 
Just like us. They have bodies like us and they move about like us. The difference is only in the 
language that they speak. They are not threatening.' 

The shaman's insight did not seem to calm the people. He went on to explain that the 
stranger's purpose in coming was to find out more about the Inuit. When a crew member w; '-ed 
about on the ship's deck, the people were absolutely tenified. Then a crew member who was 
out on deck fixing the sails towered a dory down the ship's side. When the Inuit realized that the 
strangers were actually coming to shore, they all fled inland. The shaman was unable to convince 
the people that they had no reason to flee. As he was soon the only one left behind at camp, 
he went to join the others. Tfje Inuit group slept overnight up thera on the bare tundra. 

The next day It became evident that the big ship had left, the group proceeded back 
to the shore and to their tents. Oh my!! Their belongings! Their finely crafted tools, all their 
precious implements, had been taken away and replaced with unfamiliar items. There was somn 
strange, unappetizing food, and who knows what else. They had no idea what these things v/ere 
or how they could be used. 

The people felt incredibly sonry that they had lost their possessions. They didnl know 
that the exchange Kerns were, in fact, useful objects. Oh, how they regretted that the strange big 
ship now had all of their belongings; their snowknives, knives, bows and an-ows, and other tools. 
They had lost all of their hunting weapons to the big ship and felt deeply grieved. 

The epigraph of Peter Pftseolak's People From Our Side reads: "I am telling the tnje things I know. I am 
not adding anything and ! am not holding anything back." We must give careful thought to what we are doing 
before we allow editors of !nuH literature to add things or to hold things back; for it Is not always easy to identify 
what is of value in another culture. 

University of Western Ontario 



ERIC 



Wori<s Cited 

Ayamaq, John. Jean Ayaruaq's Autobiography fr^. inukthut magazine files, DJAN.D. Ottawa. 

•The Story of John Ayaruaq." North 16.2 (1969):1-5. 
Akulak. Father I Ask of Thee ts. inuktltut magazine files, D.I.A.N.D. Ottawa. 
— . •! Ask of Thee." Inukthut . Winter 1972:19. 

Breummer. Fred. Rev. of Harpoon of the Hunter, by Martcoosie. Canadian Geooraphlcal Joumal 83 (1971); fV«v. 
Cleaver. Elizabeth. The Enchanted Caribou . Toronto: Oxford UP, 1985. 
Houston, James. T Pcta'Liktak: An Eskimo Legend . New Yor1<: Harcourt, 1965. 

Kubluitok, Tautungle. "The Big Ship." Transcribed and translated from Inukitut by Janet McGrath Li. edited by Robin 
McQrath, May 1987. 

Lowenstein. Tom. ed. Eskimo Poems From Canada and Greenland: From Material Oriolnallv Collected by lOtud 
Rasmussen . London: Anchor, 1973. 

Markoosie. Harpoon of the Hunter . Montreal: McGiH-Oueens UP. 1970. 

— . Harpoon of the Hunter ts. Inuktltut magazine files, D.LA,N,D. Ottawa. 

— . Wings of Mercv . 1972. Montreal: Kativtk School Board. 1984. 

— , Wings of Mercy ts. Inuktltut magazine files. D.IAN.D. Ottawa. 

McGrath, Robin. "Monster Figures and Unhappy Endings in Inult Literature." Canadian Joi;mal of Native Education . 
31.1 (1987): In publication. 

Metayer. Maurice, ed. I Nullqak, Toronto: Peter Martin. 1972. 

Nanon^k, Agnes. Mce Tales From the lotoo . Edmonton; Hurtig. 198j. 

— . More Tales From the Igloo ts. Hurtig files, Edmonton. 

Pitseolak. Peter. People From Our SlJe: A Ufe Story Wrth Photographs by Peter PItseolak and Oral Biography by 
Dorothy Eber. Edmonton: Hurtig. 1975. 

Schwarz. Heibert T. Ellk and Other S >.o ric>s of the MacKenzie h\d\ Eskimos . Toronto/Montreal: McLeilend and 
Stewart, 1970. 

Stott, Jon C. "An Interview Wrth John [sic] Houston." Canadian Children's LHerature 20 0 980):2-16. 

Swinton. Nelda. The Inult Sea Goddess . Montreal: Montreal Museum of Fine Arts. 1980. 

Whitaker. Muriel A. "Canadian Indian and Eskimo Legends as Children's Literature." Children's Books In 

Translation: The Sftuatlon and the ProUems . ed. Gote Wingberg. Mary Orvfg and Stuart Amor. Stockholm: 
Almqvist and Wishell. 1977. 159-167. 




<:0 



35 



Cross-Culturalism and Inter-Generaiional 
communication in Children's Literature 
by 

Peter Hunt 

This conference~"Cross-Cu[turalism In Children's [jteratUfo"-3 based on an act of faith. 

I do not mean that 'Cross-Cu'Jturalism' does not exist, or has no place In "Children's Literature": quite the 
contrary. "Children's Literature" is always concerned with forming attitudes, providing views of the world and bases 
for allusion, simply because its audience is developing-and regardisss of didactic Intent. Nor do I mean that 
"Literature" should not have a place In the interaction of cuitures; any text must necessarily embody conscious and 
unconscious features of Its own culture, and therefore confirm or challenge the reader. 

Rather, the act of faith Is In the process of reading-in the capacity of text to transmit a message net just 
to one reader, but the same message to many readers-whole cultures to whole cultures. 

All practitioners of books and literature know that plurality is basic to reading; we cannot prescribe what 
meaning will be generated by any text for any person in any given circumstance. Theories of reception and 
response vary between Dem'da's view of "the impossibility of determining the text's true meaning" (Hall 108) to 
Holland's Ideas on replicating the self. Common sense tends towards Fish's theory that there is a commonality of 
meaning determined by the "reading community." from which there are less significant personal deviations. Thus are 
we able to (broadly) understand each other, and see much the same thing In a given text. The "reading community" 
is "a social construct whose operations are delimited by the systems of Intelligibility that inform it" (Fish 335). 

In other words, the meanings that are received from a text are controlled as much by the culture of the 
reader as the culture of the writer, and so when we speak of cross-cultural transmission we can in reality only speak 
of the appearance of transmission. 

This may be obvious, but it is particularly apposite to children's literature, because, in my view, the most 
important and difficult form of cross-cultural transmission-and one which underiies all others--ls that between adult 
culture and child culture. 



Intergenerational communication hss provided a rich vein for soclo-linguists, who have found important 
differences in expectation, meaning, a.id language patterns between young and old (Coupland). Childhood, as I have 
suggested elsewhere (Hunt 1985), Is very different from adulthood; not only does it involve rapid development (and 
shifts of perspective), but different perceptions and thought processes. It can be seen as a sub-culture or an anti- 
culture, which Is subversive and partakes of oral-based thought rather than text-based thought (Ong). Children have 
their own culture, which may well be cross-cultural: it is prior to all adult-perceived cultural differences. 

It could, of course, be argued that I am simply talking about sub-cultures v/hlch will be specific to any 
given culture. The Concise Oxford Qictionarv defines "culture as a "particular form, stage, or type of intellectual 
development or civilization," and I would suggest that the adult/child gap Is as wide, and perhaps even more 
fundamental than the black/white, male^female. US/Canadian, American/European divides. 

My argument Is that if we are really going to communicate between cultures, we must first recognize the 
difficulties inherent In the adult-writer/chlld-reader cultural relationship. It Is not sufficient to provide artifacts from 
contrasting cultures, or to write about other ways of life in simple terms. (One has only to think of the difficulty that 
most adults have in sustaining Interest in, say, eighteenth century children's 

books-which represent a cultural gap not just In their content, ' ut In their mode of transmission.) Nor should we 
assume that because we can elicit "con-ect" responses from a child-reader, that reader has absorbed the cultural 
message we wished to transmit. 

I would like to examine very briefly some of the adult/child cultural Cifferences, and I would like to treat 
them optlmistlcally~as challenges to our literary and critical thinking, and. perhaps, as sources of Insight Into cross- 



ERLC 



37 



cultural transmission In general. My categories are arbitrary and incomplete, largely because any inclivldual standpoint 
will, I am sure, provide many other possibilities, but they represent problems which we commonly ignore or avoid. 

Problems of Perception 

Childhood can be defined as a characteristic way of thinking. As W. H. Auden said of the Alice books, we 
must ask: "What insight do they provide as to how the world appears to a child?; and, second, to what extent is 
the world really like that?" (Philips 37). Ong's work suggests that oral cultures "sort" the world differently from 
written cultures, and that their story shapes are different. The work of Applebee and Crago suggests a mental 
sequencing and perception in the developing child which is strikingly similar to that of the "unsophisticated" proto- 
novel such as Defoe's Moll Flanders . (It is interesting, then, that novels for children tend to be diluted versions of 
the sophisticated adult novel, and may thus be quite inappropriate to the child mind.) 

The most violent clash between child and adult cultures may thus be at the point of meeting the book, as 
the embodiment of the written (adult) culture. All at once we are imposing upon (or teaching) a "story-shaped 
world," in which end Is an inevitable function of beginning, and vice versa, and children have to leam text-codes 
which are invisible to the skilled reader. Learning to cope with these text-based codes, and to integrate them into 
the child's culture is not the same as acquiring literacy. It represents a shift in mode of thought. 

People with small children, like myself, are constantly coming upon-or stumbling over-such conflicts of 
perception. Recently, I was reading Shirley Hughes's Up and Up . a wordless picture book with a close-sequenced 
cartoon-like set of illustrations with my 2h year-old daughter. In the story-or at least, the story as I had interpreted It 
in our previous thirty or so readings, a little girl tries to fly, using paper wings, and then balloons. The sequence 
with the balloons shows (1) little giri on the ground,(2) little girl rising off the ground, lifted by balloon, and (3) the 
balloons bursting on an overhanging branch. On the 31st reading, my daughter pointed to the balloons in (2). and 
said, ' Those balloons have not popped." The implications of such a statement should make the adult reader pause. 
Does my daughter see each picture as a separate event? And does that mean that she thinks that the book is a 
compendium of single events in the lives of 123 different little girls? 

As a literary critIC: I am prepared to accept that what I have just described is a commonplace to teachers 
of reading, or developmental psychologists. Bui. if that is so, why do I never find any references to such problems 
in the elegant descriptions and reviews of picture books which I read each week? And, more puzzling, what does 
my daughter think of me as a reader? Has she merely been patroniang my curious reading habits? We cannot 
assume that we share the same inner perception merely because it displays the same external response 

These problems of perception are closely linked to two other areas: 

Problems of Allusion, and Problems of Control 

It is commonly said that what is lost in translation is not merely tonal; it is the whole cultural substructure 
which gives meaning to the original text. To read, for example. Arthur Ransome's exemplary collections of Russian 
folk tales, is to be made aware of a mode of perception which is very different from say. the Grimms' tales. But 
whether we have approached any understanding of Russian culture, is more qussticiiable. We may know differences 
Intellectually, but. even if we fee[ them through the power of story, there is no way of telling whether we are feeling 
the culture, or the conflict or contrast with our own culture. Now that, as stated, may seem unanswerable, and 
therefore not worth saying, but it makes the point that we consistently underestimate the Importance of our cultural 
heritage in providing cues as to what to feel, as well as how to understand. 

Nor is this simply a question of acquired knr.\ dge of cultural facts. In the case of the child reader, there 
are Intertextual allusions which control the transmission of meaning. Let me take a totally random example. The first 
book on the shelf In front of me as I write Is Philippa Pearce's much acclaimed Tom's Midnight Garden , and the first 
sentence of that book Is: 




38 



If, standing alone on the back doorstep, Tom allowed himself to weep tears, they were 
tears of anger. 

How do we understand this sentence? It is quite a complex sentence, and thus it Implies a reader with quite 
advanced skills. In terms of reference to the external, Veal' worid, we also need to know what a "back doorstep* 
Is-not necessarily an obvious concept, evtn for those of the same local culture as the author; we need to 
understand the concept of anger and tears. Now, that Is not too difficult. No., perhaps. Is the text-code which we 
must grasp which says that more will be explained about "Tom," that he is a central character In whom we should 
take more Interest, and that this location will be filled out. But do we also see the allusion Inherent In the selection 
of the word "weep"-as opposed, say, to "cjy" (perhaps a more usual selection for collocation with children). The 
word weep-lt seems to me, as a falrfy widely read adult-cam'es a slightly nineteenth century or Victorian air; the 
redundancy of "weep tears" (what else?) signals the faintly ethereal to'ie which pervades the whole book; indeed, 
the whole sentence structure Is one wiilch calls up echoes of other jooks and the atmospheres the>* contain. 
In short, we underestimate the degree to which textual allusionc f,iter- and intra- and extra-) convey the "meanings" 
we take for granted. 

The problem of control , that is. the degree to which the oral narrator is initiated in the written text by 
authorial tone, is a complex one. Narratorial absence or presence, directness or Indirectness of presentation, 
showing or telling, are all elements which modify and influence the way in which any reader feels about a text 
(Chatman. Hunt 1984). Rose has, perhaps notoriously, seen the text-child relationship as a power stnjggle, but there 
is no doubt that the move from oral to written also throws up practical problems. 

Problems of Content 

Cultures can be defined by what they find important, by their attitudes to things-and indeed, linguistically, 
what words they have for concepts and distinctions. Child culture and adult culture can also be defined In this way. 
The naming of something which is significant in one culture may have no meaning In another culture. I am told, for 
example, that the concept of "weather" has little meaning in some parts of Canada, whereas the rather bolder 
concept of "dimate" has little meaning In England Whether you react to the word "snow" with excitement, or 
inaifference, or fear, depends on where you live-your whole cultural training and expectation. If we acknowledge this 
In general cultural terms, we might have less fear about Introducing concepts such as sex or death Into children's 
books. In the child culture (as far as one can generalize) the interest in sex might be much the same as the interest 
in monsters or puddles in the road: Interesting-and perhaps rather fun as a weapon in the counter-culture war. 
Similarfy with violence. It is only in the adult-culture that there is a pmrience about violence; in the child-culture it is 
exploratory and pragmatic. And the taboo of death, which adults bring with so much trepidation into the child's 
worid must, I think, be perceived very differently by the child Whether the child's reaction Is based on ignorance, or 
on a Zen-Romantic doseness to the elementals of birth and death, or on an underdeveloped ego, which has less to 
fose-the result Is the same: the child Is different . 

When we talk about cross-cultural communication, then, we must beware. Do we slice the cake of worid 
cultures vertically, as It were, Into separate cultural chunks (which contain men, women, and children), or do we slice 
It horizontally. Into layers (where ail men are different from all women and all children different from all adults)? Or 
some combination? As you will see. all the examples of adult vs. child cultures I have given are considerably 
complicated If we step outside our own "vertical" cultures to places where, for example, there are no doorsteps, or 
where there is no childhood It Is a difficult problem, and it is one we chouid face before we talk glibly about the 
ways In which cultures communicate. It should be dear that superficial knowledge of other peoples* cultures will 
often do no more than to reinforce prejudices or stereotypes. If this Is tnje of visible cultural differences, how much 
more Is it so of the Invisible differences, such as that between adult and child. Tme understanding of cross- 
culturalism, then, really does begin at home. 

University of Wales, Cardiff. U.K. 



C3 

39 




Works Cited 

Chatman. Seymour. Story and Discourse , Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1978. 

Coupiand, N. C. and J. Research project on Intergeneration Communication, University of Wales. Cardiff* UK. 
Fish, Stanley, Is There A Text in This Class? Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1980. 

Hall, Robert A- ■Deconstructing Derrida on Lcnguage" In Tra LinquistIca qenerala . Pisa: Pacini. 1985. 107-116, 
Hughes. Shirley. Up and Up . London: Bodley Head, 1979. 

Hunt, Peter. "Ne.TGt^;c Thcsr/ and Chi!drcr/s L^.crst^^^^^^ Children's LhcniVuVg Asscdstion Qu£^ter^/ 9.^(1 SSi^: 101 
4. 

— . 'Necessary MIsreadlngs: Directions in Narrative Theory for Children's Literature." Studies in the Uterary 
imagination . 18.2(Fa!l 1985): 107-121. 

Ong. Walter. Oralitv and Literacy. London: Methuen. 1982. 

Pearce, A. Philippa. Tom's Midnight Garden. London: Oxford UP. 1985. 



EI^IC 40 



Catechisms: Whatsoever a Christian Child Ought to Know 

by 

Patricia Demers 



Proscriptive lists and codes have fallen upon hard times. The pan-oting of "precept upon precept" (Isaiah 
28.10) has become as quaint as a strict adherence to Leviticus's innumerable "commandments" (27.3^). The most 
familiar type of catechesis and the one cited In the New Testament (Luke 1.4; Acts 18.25, 21.21; Romans 2.18; 
Galatians 6.6) is religious. And it is In the field of religious Instruction in particular, so the charge is levelled, that the 
reductive and deadly aspects of mere memorization are most cJamaging. Graham Greene has described the 
catechism's catalogue of "preposterous" questions and answers as "smug and explanatory: mystery like a butterfly 
killed by cyanide, stiffened and laid out with pins and paper-strips" ("A Visit to Morin" 71). In his play The Uvinq 
Room Greene emphasizes Father Brown's inability to help a giri in the throes of an affair with a manied man by 
having the priest admit that his "tcngue is heavy with the Penny Catechism" (5S). Yet my own response tc reading, 
and often discovering, catechisms leads me to look upon them as more than dusty relics or Imprisoning codification. 
At times they resemble the declension and conjugation paradigms that all of us have probably struggled with in 
second-language classes: a necessaiy grid by which to translate and Interpret. For a conference on the theme of 
Ovss-culturalism they represent the ways in wl "ch the practices of the earty church were transposed and adapted; 
they also reflect some of the possible variations on the founding moral tenets of children's frterature. 

Catechetical instruction, in the printed English tradition at least, was aimed at children who were never too 
young to leam-or, to sin. Unlike the lengthy baptismal preparation of adults in the catcchumenate of the first six 
centuries, catechesis in the Renaissance and later was a duty shared by parents and pastors. In A Shorte and 
fruitefull treatise of the profite and necessitie of Catechizing (1580) Robert Cawdray proved his thesis not only by 
citing the Book of Common Prayer and the curate's duties to "instruct and examine" but also by quoting frc... the 
promulgation of the Queen's high commissioners issued at Lambeth. May 15, 1576, to the effect "that al fathers and 
mothers, maisters and dames, shall sende their children and servants to the Churche every Sunday and holyday, 
with their Catechlsmes to bee instructed in the same." Thomas White's A Manual for Parents (1660) advised the 
gifts of the Bible and Catechism as "fittest to bee given" ("Epistle Dedicatory"), advice still endorsed a century later 
by the preacher-engraver George Burder, whose Eariv Retv (1777) held the "entertaining history of Master Billy and 
Miss Betsey Goodchild" whom the schoofrnistress Mrs, Lovegood rewards because of their diligence "in learning 
their catechism" (12). Predictably supporting the validity of an unordained ministry, J-^hn Bunyan underscores the 
need for parents to catechize their children through various exhortations. His A Familiar Catechism; or. Instruction 
for the Ignorant (1675) devotes a chapter to the discussion "of seeking salvation young." in which the answerer cites 
Biblical texts both to insist that God does indeed "punish little children for sin against him" and to clarify the grim 
option: "Either go on in your sins; or 'remember now your Creator In the days of your youth, before the evil days 
come.' Eccles. xii.l" (16). Positive and negat'r/e examples of parental guidance abound in his wori<; one of the most 
poignant scenes in The Life and Death of Mr. Badman (1680) is the deathbed catechizing of her children by the 
virtuous wife of Mr. Badman-whose continuous villainy contrasts with her piety and duty. Although the abundance 
of Greek and Latin terms bandied about by the unknown author of The Father's Spectacles to Behold his Children 
and the C hild's , . . to Kneel Before his Parents (1695) suggests an audience very different from Bunyan's, their 
directives are remaricably alike: "1st, To educate them in good discipline, as the word paideia signifieth. 2dly. To 
instruct them in divine knowledge" (3). 

Catechizing that was closely linked to discipline and obedience understandably became the central element 
in the cuniculum of eighteenth-century Charity Schools established for the educalion of wori<house children. One of 
the schools' eariiest and most articulate supporters, James Talbolt, buttressed his claims about religion as "the most 
proper Means" of knowing ' what is of the greatest Importance to our Happiness in this and the next Worid" with a 
particular adaptation of Locke's Tabula rasa : as Talbott argues about "the Business of Instruction" in The Christian 
School-Master (1707), 



... it mu$ considered that the Minds of Children, like blank Paper, or smooth Wax, are 
equally ca; of any Impression: The Use and Exercise of our Understanding advances 
by slower Degrees than that of our Limbs, and requires more Assistance from without, to 
guide and direct it. (17) 

/r 



ERIC 



41 



The school master's paramount duly is "to Imprint in the Minds and Memory of the children committed to his 
Instruction, the fundamental Doctrines and Duties of our holy Religion, as they are laid down in the excellent 
Catechism of our Church; a short but plain Summary of whatsoever a Christian ought to know and believe for his 
Soul's health." Talbott's endorsement of memorization as a good and "natural" (93) consequence of repetition 
parallels his view of childhood as a time of "Submission and Obedience, ... a State of Subjection to the will of 
those that are more capable to govern" (40-41). 

Throughout its history, in the catechumenate and later in the Tridentine period, the art of catechizing has 
been intricately connected both to a respect lor discipline and tradition and to a knowledge of the Creed and 
Scriptures. In the early church the presentation of the Creed-the text itseft-to the Competentes (or elect! , or 
illumfnandi) . graduates of the catechumenate who were approaching Baptism at Easter, was a cause for rejoicing and 
for profound ccntcrMplatlon of the mysteries involved. Speaking to "recent converts," St. Augustine fashioned the 
topic of "The Presentation of the Creed around a delicate yet precise simile: 

We call it Creed or svmbolum . transfem'ng the term by a kind of simile, because merchants 
draw up for themselves a svmbolum by which their alliance is held bound as by a pact of 
fidelity. Your union, moreover, is a spiritual fellowship, so that you are like traders seeking a 
valuable peari, that is, the charity which v/ill be poured forth in your hearts by the Holy 
Spirit who will be given to you. One makes progress toward this charity by faith in what is 
contained in the Creed. (Sermon 212, 117) 

Augustine was talking to adults and, in fact, like Basil and Gregory of Nazianzus before him, he, too, was baptized 
as an adult. But by no means was the moral education of the young overiooked; if it is not the largest subject ir.i 
patristiss it is probably because it was such a natural, taken-for-granted occurrence. One stim'ng defense, 
appropriate to cite becausa of the parallels between its jewel images and Augustine's, is John Chrysostom's Address 
on Vainglory and the Right Way for Parents to Bring Up Their Children (c. 388). Likening the child's soul to "a city 
but lately founded and built" Chrysostom traces the developn.cnt until the child sventually becomes a parent and 
begins to catechize his own children, thus contributing to "a golden cord". Later treatises in English are not as 
metaphoric, yet their emphases on the importance of the Creed and instruction are similar. The eighth of the Thirty- 
Nine Articles of the Church of England upholds the Nicene, Athanasian and Apostles' Creeds as "thoroughly to be 
received and believed" (Bicknell 147). Robert Abbott introduces his A Mother's Catechism for Her Children (1646) by 
distinguising rt from a sermon: 

. . .whereas preaching is a speaking unto men to in. struction . edification , and comfort , 
catechising is a speaking to men for instruction mainly: preaching is a dilating of one 
member of religion into a body; catechising is the contracting of a whole into a sum: 
preaching is for all sorts; catechising for the yong and ignoranL 

This "knowledge of the grounds of religion" encourages the learner to "mako an Hedge of Divinity^ to enclose all . . . 
readings, and hearings from the worid, within their proper bounds, for the set»:ng of . . . judgments, and raising up 

. . . affections insuperaLV-" 

The way to ensure the success of this protective contracting is *o tailor the material to the capacities and 
awareness of the worid of the child, one of the salient features insisted on by all catechetical theorists. Thomas 
Becon's A New Ca*echism. Set Forth Dialogue-Wise in Familiar Talk Between the Father and the Son , which was 
written during the reign of Edward VI, begins its lengthy discussions of repentance, faith, law, prayer, the sacraments 
and the offices of all degrees with the father's promise to his six-year-old-son that the talk will be "not of things 
which far exceed both thy age and capacity, but of such matters as be meet for children to know" (8). The title and 
contents of John Paget's A Pnmer of Christian Religion. Or a forme of catechising, drawne from the beholding Gods 
wort<s in the creation of the worid (1601) make clear his empirical, inductive bases; gathering lessons from every 
imaginable source urufer the sun, Paget always grounds his exercises in the familiar and the recognizable: 



As in a home-booke. which little children came, there bee letters in a paper within which 
appeare through the same: so under the blew Saphir of the firmament there is spread a 
sheete of royall paper written all over with the wisdome of God. (31) 

The kind of instruction John Bunyan formulates in A Book for Boys and Girls (1686) is deliberately drawn from 
domestic events and objects, thus complying with his pledge that "by their Play-things. I would them entice" (A2). 
One of the lengthiest of these Country Rhimes (Bunyan's subtitle) is the dialogue of the Spider and Sinner, in which 
the insect catechizes the backslider, who penitently admits "They learn may. that to Spiders go to School." 
Methodology has to be adaptable. Isaac Watts is shrewd enough to realize that the much-maligned set response 
could be abbreviated and that the "Scripture proofs" themselves could be omitted with, however, a clear pedagogic 
aim in vievv: "as a very delightful way of leading them to a more complete acquaintance with the holy scriptures" 
(vii). 

The three catechisms I have chosen to discuss in some detail, from the sixteenth, eighteenth, and 
nineteenth centures. show some of the diverse ways in which the foregoing common principles were adapted. 
Laurence Vaux*s A Catechism or Christian Doctrine. Necessary for Children and Ignorant People (15v .) Is the first 
English adaptation of the continental Tndentine manuals, especially those of Peter Canisius. Dorothy Kilner's The 
First Principles of Religion, and the Existence of a Deity, explained in a series of dialogues adapted to the capacity of 
the infant mind (c. 1787) is a most lively and challenging exchange in which the child is nothing like a submissive 
yes-sayer. Albert Lacombe's Catholic Ladder or Pictorial Catechism (1872). designed for work in the mission field, 
narrates all of Christian history through symbolic pictures. 

Circulated in the Elizabethan Penal Days. Vaux*s Catechism v/as one of the first English compilations of the 
catechetical tradition dating back to Cyril of Jerusalem. Ambrose and Augustine; and yet, despite its indebtedness to 
many sources and admitted borrowing from the work of the German Jesuit Canisius, the distinctive voice of the 
Recusant teacher and priest is hec'Td throughout Much of my own interest in this neglected catechism grew from 
the amazing contrast between its measured equanimity of tone and the upheavals and pain of Vaux's life. Warden of 
the Collegiate Church of Manchf,ster at the time of the passage of the Acts of Supremacy and Unrfomiity, in 1559 
Vaux fied first to Ireland and then to the Recusant community at Louvain to avoid interrogation by Royal 
Commissioners. He was a teacher of the children to lay exiles when his Catechism was first published In Louvain. 
As part of the large scale missionary expedition of 1580 to England. Vaux was captured at Rochester, imprisoned at 
Westminster, and, after 1584, In the Clink, in Southwark. where he died the next year~"a prisoner, but well content 
with [his] state" (Law Ixv). 

As impressive as the optimistic cheer of this inmate is the total absence of polemical statement in his 
Catechism. He candidly admits that a decree of the Seventh Lateran Council, charging schoolmasters "upon 
Sondays and holy days to instruct and teach their Schollers Christian Doctrine." caused him to feel "a great 
negligence in my selfe, that I had not done my duetie heftofore in bringing up my schollers." Vaux writes with such 
evident concern for the children's understanding and well being that he embodies all the features Augustine identified 
as characteristic of the ideal catechist: 

F». : we must drive out by gentle encouragement his 

excessive timidity, which hinders him from expressing his opinion. We must temper his 
shyness by introducing the idea of brotherly fellowship. We must by questioning find out 
whether he understands ghe First Catechetical Instruction , 43) 

His patient and thorough explication of the articles of the Creed, each supported with marginal Biblical citations, 
shows him closely attuned to the Augustinian advice of attempting "by dwelling somewhat upon them to untie, so to 
speak, and spread them out to view, and offer them to the riinds of our hearers to examine and admire" (Chapter 
3). While it is true that Vaux often presents a competent English translation of Canisius*s Latin, as, for example, in 
his definitions of Faith and a Sacrament, he also departs significantly from his Jesuit "source," as these contrasted 
pairs demontrate: 




/ >1 



43 



What Is the Church? 
It Is the congregation of 
all suche as are pro- 
fessours of Christ his 
fayth and doctrine, whiche 
is guyded under one, who 
next unto Christ is heere in 
earth their chiefest 
head and pastour. 



What is the Church? 
The church is a visible 
company of people, first 
gathered together of Christ 
and his disciples, continued 

unto this day in a per- 
petuall succession, in one 
Apostollcke faith, living 

under Christ the head, and in 
earth, under his Vicar, 
Pastour, and chiefe Bishop. 



it is a vertue geven us 
from God, whereby we iove 
God for his owne sake, and 
our neighbour for God's 
sake. 

(Canislus, A Catechisme 
for Catholiques) 



How must wfi honour Qod by 
charity? 

We must love God with all our 
hartes so firmety, that 
neither for feare nor 
flattery, prosperity, nor 
adversity, wee be carried 
away from God. And that the 
love of no creature remaine in our harts, but for God 
& Godlynes. Wrth al our souls wee must love god so 
faithfully, that wee hadde rather our soules should be 
severe<< from our bodle then from God. This love 
maketh all things light and easie: This love causeth 
the glorious martirs to suffer al kind of torments, both 
pacientlv and gladly for the fervent love of God. This 
ardent love unto God caused the blessed fathers in 
wildemesse to take greate paines & penance upon 
them in fasting and praying, weeping and mouming: 
For their meate and drinke they used dry bread & cold 
water, heaibes. rocies, and bari<es of trees: for their 
cloathing haire and sack-cloth, the cold earth for a 
bed: a hard stone for a pillowe: and were ready to 
suffer any crueil death for Christes sake: their harts 
were so kindled with a buming charity towardes God 
(11. 35-36) 



The differences are more than sylistic. Vaux's emphases on the line of apostolic succession and the virtue that 
willingly endures mortification and torment are tailored to fit an historical situation where both suppositions are being 
tested. From one perspective A Catechism or Christian Doctrine seems to be standard fare, inasmuch as it contains 
an exposition of the articles of faith, sacraments, commandments and precepts of the Church, uses the question and 
answer format-with the responses holding the Infomiatlon-and maintains an authoritarian formality, yet, considered 
alongside later forms of catechisn. Vaux*s wori< remains unique and simple: without the woodcut illustrations 
{fiqurata d'imaginn of Cardinal Bellarmine*s Dottrina Cristiana Breve (1597). without the clipped, epigrammatic style of 
Henry Tubervllle*s Dowav Catechism (1649). withut the sectarian harangue of Thomas Lye's anti-Papist A Plain and 
Familiar Method of Instructing the Younger Sort (1662), and without the compactness of Richard Challoner's 
Abridgement of Christian Doctrine (1772). In Its sheer expansiveness, with answers suited for declamation rather 
than memorization. Vaux*s catechism stands alone and apart. 

The gap separating the colloquial exchanges between Maria and her Mamma, in Dorothy Kilner's First 
Prindples . from the fornnal discourse of master and student In Vaux*s Catechism might suggest a vastly different 
understanding of catechesls. Although the chatterbox Maria sounds willful and almost rude by contrast to her 
docile. Renaissance counterpart, they are linked by a common adult desire to impart the fundamental elements of 



ERLC 



religion and belief in an unequivocai yet loving way. Maria's curiosity about basic concepts, such as the origins of 
people and objects, and the nature of Godhead, prayer and the Bible, spari<s all of the dialogues and also accounts 
for the distinctive emphases of a religious primer organized around this premise: 

Nobody can think a child of three or seven years old should be argued with as a 

grown person. Long discourses, and philosophical reasonings, at best amaze and 

confound, but do not instruct children. 



As an instructress Mamma is certainly not a know-it-all, and often she is flummoxed by her child's queries, 
which have the effect of backing her into a comer. 

Maria. Who made the Bible? 

Mamma. It has been made a vast number of years. 

maiKi. But VVmO iTUldO it? 

Mamma. Some very good men wrote it, that every body might know how to be good, and do what 
God pleased 

Maria. But how did those men know what God would please? 
Mamma. Because God directed and taught them what to 

write, and therefore they were sure it was what God pleased. 
Maria. How did God direct and teach them? 
Mamma. I don't know. 
Maria. Why don't you know? 

Mamma. Because i do not. There are a great many things about God, I cannot explain. 
Maria. I thought you knew every thing, Mamma. 

Mamma. Then, my dear, you was very much mistaken, for there is a great number of things I know 
nothing of, nor cannot understand. (24) 

Maria is a single-minded questioner, determined to extract a response that suits her; for instance, she demands a 
prompt and tidy answer about "where God Is": 

Maria. Why can't you tell me nov/? I want to hear now, and I want to know where God is, that I 
may see God (12) 

The child's frustration, in trying to attach a gender to God, is not dispelled by her mother's saccharine refusal to 
compare or speculate: 

Maria. If God is not man, is God a woman? or what Is God? 

Mamma. I never saw God: but I know that God Is neither a man or a woman, or like anything In the 
world. But i know that God is very kind and good, and loves all good people. (14) 

The candour and resilience of Marla-ln many ways a forerunner of Edgeworth's Rosamond-make her an endearingly 
real child, who admits being distracted in church ("always thinking about something else, and looking about") and 
wanting to say long prayers with a very pragmatic aim ("to ask God to give me things, and to make God love me"). 
Maria is proud of her acts of charity, but Is appalled by the "naughtiness" of poor boys, until her mother explains 
that their "fathers and mothers are out all day wort<ing very hard, to get a little money to buy them some victuals, 
and have no time to teach them" (43). With her believable middle-class lapses and prejudices Maria Is still a more 
enjoyable character than Insipid paragons like Mrs. Sherwood's Mary, who. In Stories Explgnatop/ of the Church 
Catechism (1817), enters mechanically and cravenly into one conversation after anothar with her godmother; Kilner's 
headstrong Maria Is definitely the initiator and animator of discussion. 

Lacombe's Tableau-Catechisme might seem at first glance very far removed from the texts of Vaux and 
Kitner. Yet this pictorial charting of salvation h'story was conceived with the same earnest pedagogy that brought 
the earlier catechism and dialogue into being. After eight years of careful preparation, and no doubt Innumerable 
experiments, the Oblate missionary allowed his Catholic ladder to be printed announcing in the subtitle that it had 
already bnon "used with success for the speedy ano czzy instruction of Indiana, children and uneducated people." 
In his Memoirs Lacombe clarified that the catechism had emerged from his wori< among the Cree and Blackfeet and 




<:-9 



45 



his attempts to enliven explanations with symbols drawn in the sand or sketched wHh charcoal on buffalo hide; the 
lithographed chart was a considerable improvement: 



At St. Albert ... I made with ink and paper a longer history with these pictures. It started 
at the Creation, and went down through Bible history to the coming of Christ, then through 
the history of the Church and All Life on our pilgrimage to Heaven. (Hanley 86) 



His endorsement of the power of the picture is as conscientious as Cardinal Bellarmine's, and also reverses the 
long-standing opinion, among Jesuit missionaries, that pictures were not an appropriate mode to begin to instruct an 
unbeliever. The first Jesuit Superior in Canada, Father Paul Lejeune, had decided-as early as 1637-to switch from 
pictures, or "change [his] battery," in attempting to explain the major episodes of the Bible to Makheabichtichiou, an 
Indian living near Quebec. (Thwaites X1, 157). Over two centuries later. Father Francis Blanchet, Vicar General in 
the iands west of the Rockies, re-instated the picture or representation as a powerful teaching device in his Sahale 
Stick; meaning "the stick from heaven" in Chinook jargon. It helped the catechist to tell the who;** Judaeo-Christian 
story with a single visual aid. Lacombe's Ladder was a development and refinement of Blanchet's Sahale Stick, for 
the Oblate's easily portable chart was not only more detailed but more consciously dualistic as well. 

The enlarged'poster-size versions (68 x 104 cm.) of Lacombe*s Tableau-Cat^chisme that have survived 
generations of use in Oblate-run residential schools for Indian and M^tis children are a real curiosity to the modem 
viewer. The catechism is a vividly coloured outline of the "fundamental mystery" and "most important facts per 
centuries" designed in a way that recalls a giant game of snakes and ladders. But there Is nothing frivolous about 
the sinuous paths of yellow and gray that frame the interior ladder-like measurement of black and red bars and 
circles, representing centuries and yearr (or days), respectively. V/hather the chau was cut lengthwise and taped to 
produce om long story, or mounted as a broad poster with the Biblical and post-Biblical accounts side by side, 
thret} features remain outstanding: the pictorial narratives are dualistic, typological and interconnected. Echoing the 
oldest extant manual of explicit catechetical instruction, the anonymous Didache fThe Teaching of the Twelve 
Apostles) of the second century, with its theme of the two ways, "One of Life and one of Death" (Schaff 162), 
Lacombe calls his two routes "voie du bien" and "voie du mal." The design and coloration of various different yet 
related events, such as the cloud encapsulation of the Sinai Covenant and the Crucifixion scene and the sacrificial 
altars separating Jacob and Isaac from the Worship of False Gods, indicate a typological frame of mind which has 
always been a fundamental ingredient of the catechetical enterprise, involving, in the words of Cyril of Jerusalem, 
tumtng "from the old to the new, from the figure to the reality." (Lecture xix, 144) That there are well-traveled paths 
connecting the Way of Good and the Way of Evil, along with hovering depictions of virtues and vices and 
appropriate angelic or demonic guides, shows that despite all the schematizing of this symbolic journey, the crucial 
and dynamic element of the individual will is never overiooked. 

These three multiform examples have, I hope, proven something about the resourcefulness and adaptability 
of this literary form. Conflated by Vaux, domesticated by Kilner, and simplified by Lacombe, the catechism Is a 
reflection of the state of children's literature in periods of development, establishment and dissemination. And yet the 
story is neither as tidy nor as predictable as such Baconian triads might imply Vaux*s catechism is an underground 
wori<, challenging the politically sanctioned belief of the day; Kilner's dia 4ue recognizes the Impertinence and 
wilfulness of children in a way that would have Incensed a critical doyenne like Mrs. Trimmer; and while versified, 
musical and variously nostalgic catechisms appeared in Victorian England, Lacombe dared to return bluntly and, what 
Is most amazing, non-verbally to basic catechetical principles. 

University of Alberta 



Abbot, Robert. Milk for Babes; or. A Mother's Catechism for her Children . London: Printed by John Legatt for 
Philemon Stephens, 1646. 

Augustine, Saint. The First Catechetical Instruction fPe Catechizandls Rudlbusl . trans. Rev. J. P. Christopher. 
Westminster, Maryland: The Nev/man bookshop, 1946. 



Wort<s Cited 



ERLC 



46 




— . Sermons on the Liturgical Seasons , trans. Sr. M. S. Muldowney. New York: Fathers of the Church, Inc., i959. 

Becon, Thomas. The Catechism of Thomas Becon . ed. J. Ayre. Cambridge: At the University Press, 1844. 

BIcknell, E. J. A Theological introduction to the Thirty-Nine Articles of the ^^rmrch of England . London: Longmans, 
1958. 

Bunyan, John. A Book for Boys and Girls; or Country Rhimes for Children . With a Preface by Bany Adams. New 
York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1978. 

— . A Familiar Catechism; or. Instruction for the Ignorant , ed. J. N. Brown. Philadelphia: American Baptist 
Publication Society, 1853. 

Burder, George. Eariy Piety; or Memoirs of Children Eminently Serious . London: Sold by H. trapp, 1777. 

Canlsius, Peter. Certayne necessarie Principles of Religion, which may be entitled, A Catechisme conteyning all the 
partes of the Christian and Catholique Fayth. 1578-9 . English Recusant Literature 1558-1640, ed. C. M. 
Rovers. Volume 2. Menston: The Scolar Press, 1968. 

Cawdray, Robert. A Shorte and fruitefull Treatise of the nrofite and necessitie of catechizing: that is, of instructing 
the youth, and Ignorant persons In the principles and grounds of Christian religion . London: Printed by 
Thomas Dawford, 1580. 

The Father's Spectacles to Behold his children and the Child's ... to Kneel Before his Parents . London' Printed 
by John Astwood, 1695. 

Greene, Graham. The Livlno Room. A Play in Two Acts . London: Heinemann, 1S53. 

— . "A Visit to Morin," A Sense of Reality . London: Bodley Head, 1963. 

Hanley, Philip M. "Father Lacombe*s Ladder,"* Etudes Obiates . 32(1973), 85-96. 

Kilner, Ooro^.hy The First Principles of Religion, and the Existence of a Deity Explained In a series of dialogues 
adapted to the capacity of the infant mind . London: Printed by John Marshall, n.d. 

Lacombe A Tableau-Cat^chisme. pour Tlnstruction Prompte et Facile des Sauvages. dcs Enfants et des Personnes 
ne sachant pas lire . Montreal: Llbrarie Beauchemin Limit^e, 1896. 

Laistner, M L W Christianity and Pagan Culture in the Latfer Roman E^npire Together with an English Translation 
of John Chrysostom's Address on Vainglory and the Right Way for Parents to Bring Up Their Children 
Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1951. 

Law, Thomas Graves, ed. A Catechism or Christian Doctrine by Laurence Vaux . Manchester: Printed for the 
Chethan Society, 1885. 

Paget John A Primer of Christian Religion. Or a forme of catechizing, drawne from the beholding of Gods works in 
the creation of the world . London: Printed for John Harison, 1601. 

Schaff Philip, trans The Oldest Church Manual Called the Teaching of the Twelve Apostles'. The DIdache and 
Kindred Documents in the Original . London: Henry Jenrard, 1885. 

Talbott, James. The Christian School-Master . London: Printed for F. C. and J. RIvIngton, 1811. 



ERLC 



Thwaltes, Reuben QoW, ed. The Jesuit Retations and Allied Documents , Cleveland: The Burrows Brothers, 1896- 
1901. 

Vaux, Laurence. A Catechism or Christian Doctrine. Necessary for Children and Iqnjrant People . S. Omers, anno 
1620. 

Ware, H. and P. Schatf, trans. S. Cvril of Jemsalefnt Catechetical Lectures . Oxford: James Parker and Company, 
1894. 

Watts. Isaac. The Second Sett of Catechisms and Prayers . Twelflh Edition. London: Printed for J. Buckland and 
T Longman, 1768. 

White, Thomas. A Manual for Parents. Wherein is set down very particular directions in faerence to the baplisinQ. 
correcting, instnjctinq and chusino a calling for their children . London: Printed for Joseph Cranford, 1660. 




48 



The Queer, the Strange, and the Curious in St. Nicholas ; 
Cross*Cutturalism in the Nineteenth Century 
by 

Greta D. Uttle 



R. Gordon Kelly's Mother Was a Lady has demonstrated the value of examining children's periodical 
literature of the late nineteenth century as a means of discovering the values promoted by sodety at ttst time. His 
focus Is on aspects of our own cult^jre and how they are advocated. Me does not touch on cross*cultural themes. 
However, the highly acclaimed St. Nicholas has numerous articles which Inform readers about the worid at large, 
about people who are not like the typical upper middle class children who subscribed to the noagazine. 

I thcught It v;^ou!d bo intcrGstlng to zoo juat hcv/ n:uch crcss-cu^jrd content titers v/ss In St. Nicholas and 
what kinds of attitudes toward othw cultures were being dssecnkitted to young people of the late nineteenth 
century. So I ojcmlned twelve of the first fifteen volumes of the magazine (l-IX, XI, and XV). For my Investigation I 
considered an item to be cross-cultural if It was set In another countiy, was translated from the folklore of another 
society, or explained the customs of another people. I Included American Indians and American Blacks as 
representative of other cultures, but did not Include Great Britain. Sometimes I was uncomfortable with the exd slon 
of Britain because the articles in question (such as "The Lord Mayor of London's Show" or "London MiikworTy;n") 
were deariy explaining an aspect of British culture the author believed the American audience to be unfamiliar with. 
Nevertheless, for the sake of consistency I did not include these as examples of cross-cultural content. As a result, 
my figures are probably conservative. I found myself making falrty artjitrsry decisions In considering some of the 
fiction when some of the characters were blacks, Indians or natives of other lands. If one of the major characters 
represented another culture, I counted It as an example of cross-culturalism. For example, In "The Fairport Nine," a 
serial about a ^aseball team, one of the players Is black and Is an active protagonist throughout the storv. If, 
however, the main characters were mainstream American or British, and their contact wHh the other culture vas 
Incidental, then I did not include the story. Since several of the serials In St. Nicholas are peripatetic adventures, 
there were frequent instances where one or two chapters of a story concerned another culture, but that setting or 
theme was not typical of the entire story, I did not Include them as cross-cultural mmples, so once again I think 
my counts are on the conservative side. 

For the twdve volumes between 1873 and 1888 that I examined, the percentages ranged from 15% to 23%: 



Volume 1 


19% 


Volume II 


17% 


Volume III 


21% 


Volume IV 


15% 


Volume V 


17% 


Volume VI 


18% 


Volume VII 


19% 


Volume VIII 


22% 


Volume IX 


15% 


Volume XI 


23% 


Volume XV 


17% 



For such consistent pattern of inclusion, we might suspect an editorial policy dictating a certam amount of cross 
cultural material. 



ERIC 



49 



Mary Mapes Dodge was editor of St. Nicholas from Its beginning In 1873 until her death In 1905. It Is 
widely agreed that hers was the guiding hand In forging the magazine's character. Her slated policies were as 
follows: 

1. To give clean, genuine fun to children of all ages. 

2. To give examples of the finest types of boyhood and girlhood. 

3. To Inspire them with a fine appredalion of pictorih' ^rt. 

4. To cultivate the Imagination In profitable directions. 

5. To foster a love of country, home, nature, truth, beauty, sincerity. 

6. To prepare boys and girls for life as It is. 

7. To stimulate their ambWons-but along normally progress^e lines. 

8. To keep pace with a fast-moving world In all Its activities. 

9. To give reading matter which every parent may pass to his children unhesitatingly. 

Although she does not directly state a policy related to cross-cultural content, at least two of her policies would 
contribute to the inclusion of cross-cultural material. The most obvious Is number eight, keeping pace with the world, 
but number six. too, preparing for life as It is, contributes to St Nicholas ' commitment to providing Inforrr^tion about 
other peoples and cultures. 

The articles and stories I looked at cover a full range of the components which comprise culture, v^ith 
special emphasis on those which have appeal to children. Typical artides about customs practiced In other lands 
include titles like these: "St. Nicholas Day in Germany," "How I kept the Chinese New Year," "Curious Customs at 
Easter," "Sorrti Oriental Sports I Saw," 'Amusements for Arab Children," and "Games and Toys of Corean Children." 
The music, food and clothing of other cultures also receive attention. "A Japanese Chlld-song" appears complete 
with sheet music. There are articles detailing the history and use of various musical instruments, such as "About 
Violins," and explaining dances like "Some Malayan Dances." "Some Queer Dishes" outlines a selection of the more 
Interesting and exotic food prepared throughout the world. "African Fashions" also describes the dothing and 
hairstyles of the NIam-Nlam people of West Africa. Japanese dress is discussed In "Blossom-Boy of Toklo" and In a 
pictorial study of "A Japanese Military Noble In Court Dress." "Various Headdresses of the Present Day" deplds 
hats wom by women iri sevefsl /European countries. 

Language received significant attention In St. Nicholas . In the early Issues passages in French and German 
were given for readers to translate. Those who sent their translations to th** editor were rewarded by seeing their 
names printed In a later issue. Samuel Chew (134) saw the practice as a ""doubtiess una^t^act^.'e feature" which was 
soon abandoned. However, dcf "Jte fewer readers* sending In their translations, the passages continued to appear 
for several years. Even after full scale translations were no longer asked for, the editor was stIH promoting foreign 
language skills. Volume XV contained a series known as "Pidures for little French (or German) Readers," which 
consisted of a half-page pidure or cartoon with a French or Qenman caption. In feature artldes about children from 
other lands, linguistic information figured prominently. "Blossc^m-Boy of Toklo" listed Japanese greetings, simple 
phrases and vocabulary for several everyday Hems. Different ./rii^ng systems were also presented-Egyptian and 
Aztec hieroglyphs as well as Arabic, Chinese, and Japanese scripts. The legends and myths of other countries 
appeared either Individually as in "Golden Hair A Russian Folk Story,^ or In series such as 'Italian Fairy Tales" and 
■Stories from the Northern Myths,' 

Religions other than Christianity and non-nud«ir family strudures recdve very little atteritlon. 'Mun^o 
Jumbo." a treatment of African ritual Is the exception. Most of the rites discussed even In that artlde are viewed as 
illogical supsrstrtion; however, the following proviso Is Induded: 




50 



Of course, all savage and heathen people do strange things in connection with their 
religion and laws, yet however odd and ridiculous some of them may seem to us, the people 
themselves bdieve them right and proper because they are so taught by their priests and rulers. 

As we can see, nineteenth century cross-culturatlsm is not free of bias, certainly not as It appears in St. 
Nicholas . There Is very little recognition that non-Christian religions even exist. Jews and Mohammedans are 
mentioned, but little effort is made to explain their beliefs. There is also bias In favor of European cultures as well. 
Germany and France are the leading sources for the cross-cultural stories, articles, and pictures I examined. 
Northern cultures fare better than southern, particulariy tropical ones. Ths Far East Is treated with care and respect. 
A reader is even taken to task for being critical of the Chinese in this editorial response: 

The best thing that could happen to you would be just what you so dread,-'to be taken to 
China." You might get used then to what you call "the dreadful slits of eyes that the Chinese 
have and those disgusting chopsticks," , . . they [the Chinese] consider them much more 
suitable and convenient than any implements we use in eating. To their view, the use of 
chopsticks is an evidence of superior culture; and they ii sist ihat the use of such barbarous 
instruments as knives and fori<s, and cutting or tearing the meat from the bones on the table, . . . 
are evidences of a lower order of civilization. 



While St. Nicholas stories and articles show the virtues of European cultures and sympathetically explain 
the sometimes strange ways of the Japanese and Chinese, such tolerance is not extended equally to all cultures. 
American Indians, for example, are described in this way: 



The Rute Indians are poor creatures. They hang around the Pacific Railroad stations 
and beg for money, or clothes, or anything, except soap, that they think they can get. They are 
always dirty and have a sullen look. ... But these Indians may grow up to be respectable . . . 
for . . . there are Indians upon whom white missionaries have exerted such a good influence that 
they are Industrious and thrifty. . . . 



In "An Indian Story" some children ask their grandfather who Is in the right and he responds, 'Perhaps the English 
were sometimes unjust In other matters, but is it not bettei, after all. that a people like them should have the country 
who could grow to be a great nation, than a ' Indians, who were only a little above the bears they killed and 
ate?" 



St. Nicholas , however, had Indian readers and the negative attitude toward Indians relaxed in later issues 
as shown In stories about noble savages such as Louisa May Atcott*s "Or^awandah," in which the Indian dies while 
saving the children of a white pastor who befriended him. These Indian readers wrote letters about themseives and 
their lives-a story, "Nedawi" by one of them even appeared in the magazine. Dodge called readers* attention to the 
story, "not only because it is a sketch from real Indian life, written by an Indian, but because the writer, 'Bright Eyes' 
Is a proof herself of the capacity of tlie Indian for education and the best enlightenment." A letter f:om Bright Eyes 
herself is included which ends this way: 'It would be so much better for my people If the white people had a more 
thorough knowledge of them, because we have feft deeply the results of their ignorance of us." 

Like Indians, Arabs, Africans and aboriginals of the South Padfic don*t fare well in the pages of St. 
Nicholas . Arabs "appear best 'A a distance; for soap Is not . . . fashionable." Africans are characterized as "richer 
In spare time than in anything else .... They're savages." Australian bushmen are called 'black rascals" and 
"blundering savages." Color is definitely a major issue, as this line from a poem about people of different cultures 
makes clear: "OhI let us be glad of our clear white skin . . . ." 

American blacks also suffer in many treatments of them, their language, and their way of life. Cartoons and 
pictures frequently feature them as buffoons. They are almost always presented speaking a non-standard variety of 
English. In "Dab Klnzer" Dick Lee, the black boy who Is Dab's "man Friday" in all his adventures, tries to speak 
"white folk's English" after his friends arrange for him to attend boarding school with them. H\s speech is described 
as having "every wcrd slowly and carefully uttered," Although many of the portrayals of blacks In St. Nicholas 




51 



stones follow the very stereotypes that modetn children's literature tries to avoid, there Is a clear effort to include 
blacks as a part of the sodety St. Nicholas seeks to build. Drawings depicting blacks are often included In issues 
which have no stories or articles featuring them. Furthermore, fiction with only peripheral black characters Is often 
accompanied by illustrations including those black characters. There is even evidence of some sensitivity to racial 
Issues, in her Jack-ln-the-pulpit section, Dodge is telling readers about a very funny book called "The Ten little 
Niggers." She Introduces it by offering to share "the thrilling story it Illustrates, If you'll allow me to change one little 
word throughout the potm, so as not to hurt anybody's feelings." The poem is then printed as "The Ten Little 
Black Boys." 

In its eariy years St. Nicholas definitely undertook to introduce its readers to the worid and its people. Its 
philosophy is probably stated rather cleariy in the final lines of "Queer People/ a poem about people from other 
cultures which appeared in 1876: 

These are a few of the folks we have found, 

How do you like their looks? 
If you're not able to travel around. 

You may meet them in your books. 
But, among the people tiiat we have seen. 

The queerest of all are those 
Who never notice their neighbors' ways. 
But live In ignorance all their days. 

Of fact which the whole worid knows. 

St. Nicholas may not have always preached tolerance for other peoples and cultures, but it surety advocated a 
knowledge of them. 

University of South Carolina 

Wori<s Cited 

Chew, Samuel. Fruit Among the Leaves . New Yori<: Appleton, 1950. 
Dodge, Mary Mapes. SL Nicholas , 1-9. 11, 15. 

Erisman. Fred. " St. Nicholas " in R. Gordon Kelly, ed.. Children's Periodicals in the United States . Westport, CN: 
Greenwood, 1983. 

Kelly, R. Gordon, f^other Was a Ladv. Westpot, CN: Greenwood, 1974. 

Roggenbuck, Mary June "St Nicholas" Magazine A Study of the Impact and Historical Influence of the Editorship 
of K4arv K/lapes Dodge . Diss. U of Michigan. 1S76. Ann Arbor UMI, 1987. 76-19,228. 

Sturges, Florence S. "The SL Nicholas Years," in Siri Andrews, ed.. The Hewins Lecttj.'-as: 1947-1962 . Boston: 
Horn Book, 1963. 



ERIC 



52 



The Clash between Cultural Values: 
Adult versus Youth on the Battleirield 
of I'overty 
by 

Diana Chlebek 

In her book on children's fiction and American cjfture in the first half of the nineteenth century, Anne Scott 
MacLeod raises the provocative question of intention ality: 

Any view of reality in children's literature is refracted through adult attitudes toward children and 
sodety, with the result that juveni^o stones are often as suggestive for what they leave out as for 
what they indude. Death and poverty, for instance, were a commonplace in the children's 
literature of antebellum America-but no child character was seen to defy authority successfully. 
(10) 

Early children's books were espedally energetic in enfordng a "Christian" view of poverty through allegories and 
parables that created an image of the poor as a class separate from the rest of sodety; this image was often 
reinforced by radal and ethnic prejudices that portray poverty as the peculiar burden of blacks, native Americans, or 
immigrants. 

Modem authors of juvenile realistic fiction address the issue of poverty in the child's wo rid from points of 
view that are opposed to the moralistic judgments in eariier children's literature. Until recently. Western sodety plied 
itself and its children with the sugared fantasies of Walt Disney, or cozy tales that focused on home and hearth. 
Not until the appearance of books such as Eleanor Estes' One Hundred Dresses was the issue of social 
discrimination arising from economic disparities squarely faced. From the first pages of the story, when Wanda's 
material and social status is described in school, Estes dearty shows that all children are victims of an insidious 
social stratification that is implicitly modeled on adult prejudices and values that spring up like toadstools in the 
course of the story: "Boggins Heights was no place to live. It was a good place to go and pick wild flowers in the 
summer, but you always held your breath till you got safely past old man Svenson's yellow house. People in the 
town said old man Svent^n was no good. He didn't woric . . ." (9). Maddie, one of the poorest giris in the dass, 
and a persistent tormentor of Wanda, eventually questions the values of the ped<ing order in her group, and, 
implicitly, in society at large. T>3 poignant narrative is filtered through Maddie's point of view In small flashbacks. 
When the girls pay a visit to Wanda's home and reconstruct the details of her impoverished but dignified life, a 
social message is conveyed clearly and unobtrusively. The contrast between the characters of the two little giris, 
Peggy-bnjsque and self-centered, Maddie-guilt-ridden and empathetic, presents a moral choice to the reader. There 
is a note of hope in the bitter-sweet ending, when contact with Wanda is partly established through her gift of 
pictures to the two giris, after she has left the community. The realization that a friend has been lost for good 
underscores the pressing need for tolerance, understanding, and generosity in contact witfi the underprivileged. 

Lois Lenski's observations of regional cultural differences prepare the way for an authentic social 
consciousness that goes far beyond abstractions and moralizing. Her message is truly democratic as she states in 
the Foreword to Cotton in My Sack : 

I have heard many conflicting points of view in cotton economy, but my primary concern was 
hu'man nature in action, controlled by an environment, (xi) 

The description of the Hutleys as a typical example of sharecropper mentality and material circumstances is 
dramatized by the common destitution of the rural ghetto. The Saturday spending spree in town acquires symbolic 
meaning: 

All the things they saw took on a shining glory because they were within their reach -nngs, gold 
watches, bracelets, jewelry, anythirg. ... "I can have that, 1 can have that," she kept saying to 
herself. "I can have all thebe things if I want them." (17) 




53 



The environment and the system are blamed for the economic miseries that piague the sharecroppers, yet the 
message at the end places the burden of fiscal responsibility on the individual. To some extent, the economic 
misfortunes create a ba^s for individual growth and communal understanding, as the IHutleys and the Shands 
gradually realize that their survival depends on mutual assistance* 

Ann Nolan Clirk expanded awareness of sodal drcumstances in children's fiction through a recreation of 
the values of other cultures. In Magic Money , she narrates the story of a Costa Rican boy's efforts to earn enough 
money to buy a present for his lonely grandfather. Although the author tries to convey such abstract concepts as 
money and work from the viewpoint of this particular culture, her depiction of a poverty-stricken country Is 
whitewash "^d by a Western bias that defines progress as upward rnoblTity based on cash values: 

This was the day when M^ma could buy Rosite shoes. Oh blessed Costa Rica! Good, Wnd 
countryl Its poor could dimb up step by step, into the worid the rich people lived. The poor 
could have shoes, houses, automobiles, anything that they could buy, K they could get the 
money. This was like that wonderful country called the United States* (37-36) 

By the time Aimee Sommerfeft's My Name is Pablo was published, the worid at large had gone through enough 
social and economic upheaval so that third-worid structures could be considered with greater equanimity and less 
ethnocentrism. In this novel, Pablo's plight becomes a symbol for the economic inequality in al! impovf^'shed 
countries: 



•When I was in Norway," Mrs. HariDo said, 'I had no Idea that there were slums like 
this. I had to come to Mexico-" 

'To Mexico!" interrupted Senor Ramon Indignantly. "As K there were slums only In 
Mexicol In Asia, Africa, the whole of Latin AmcnrpI Why, twc-thlrds of the worid is as poor as 
these boys." (128) 

What Ellis calls the rise of the woridng-dass story In the sixties in British children's fiction (79) has a 
parallel in American juvenile novels. These are contemporary counterparts of the Lens.^ regional stories In that they 
focus on the plight of the njral poor. Burch's Queenle Peavy examines social issues In terms of the emotional 
growth of Queenle as she learns to take responsibility for her actions and discovers that her father is a bad model, 
that her hopes for the economic future of the family involving him are false ideals. Although the story has some 
description of the grim effects of the Depression, such as the debilitating consequences of malnutrition on the health 
of Little Mother, Queenie's dassmate, the basic social message of the book is a conservative one. When Queenle 
becomes dislHusioned with those dose to her, poverty spurs her to action-it becomes linked with the humiliation of 
her family. She embraces an individualistic ethic: "Til make something of myselfl There's no telling what I can do if 
I try!" ('<51) 

Where the Lilies Bloom stresses a grimmer aspect of rural poverty: the dog-eat-dog mentality of a 
community trying to scrape rurvSval from the thin Appalachian soil. The Luther children Instinctively mistrust the adult 
community-for good reasons. When they demonstrate their economic self-suffidency by exploiting the riches of the 
land through wild-crafting, they must combat attempts by Kiser Pease and Mrs. McConnell to control the lives of the 
family. M?' ng money becomes a way of asserting their dignity, self-worth and freedom; charity Is seen as the worst 
fomi of servitude. Mary Call, the sun'ogate parent figure of the group comments dryly: "\ . .charity Is seldom of real 
sennca to those upon whom it is bestowed, and those who receive it are .ilways looked upon with suspidon'" (11). 
The struggle for survival matches the rhythm of the seasons in this environment, but ultimately \i Is the momentum of 
man's emotions in the fonn of Riser's desire for Devola, the lovely eldest Luther daughter, that saves the family, in 
the end, Mary Call's survival seems assured as she asserts her faith In education and in her Intelligence to make 
more money and escape the net of poverty that controls her fife. 

With the appearance of Sounder in 1969. the plight of the njral Southern black was made evident, with all 
the accompariyfng hon-ors that raclai bigotry had engendered. There Is an epic quality In the description of the 
courageous endurance of the famiVi but the boy's persistence In his search for father and dog shows a resistance 
that is In direct contrast to his mother's tradition-bound, fatalistic attitude of "We was bom to lose, I reckon'" (53). 




54 



I'- O 
CO 



Despite defeat of the father by poverty and by man's Inhumanity, the ending indicates that the boil's education has 
taught him to go beyond helpless acceptance of destitution and death. Virginia Hamilton's C. Hiqgins the Great 
magnifies the declaration of hope and pride In the race. Helpful forces from the outside, m the character of the 
black folklorist. and from within, In the form of M. C/s realization of his skills, show the black youth that he must 
stay and defend his birthrlgnt against the physical erosion of the slag heap, and the spiritual erosion of poverty and 
cultural despair. 

The problems of destitute urban children are closely lln. ' to those of minority groups, partlculariy Hispanics and 
blacks; linguistic and cultural differences arc added to those of an unstable economic status. In Thom6s Takes 
Charge , the struggle for physical survival as the children forage for themselves, after apparent abandonment by their 
father, produces an unexpected result: the emotional problems of Fernanda, the agoraphobic sister who has been 
sheltered for many years by an overiy-protective grandmother, are fiterally exposed to the light of day when the 
children take off on their own. The resourcefulness of Tom^s, confronted by specific economic choices to be made, 
emphasizes the need for a realistic attitude in the toughness of modem existence. The children eventually gain 
enough confidence In their ability to survive to question their need for adults: 

. . .Tomas ... felt warm and clean and not the least bit hungry. What If Fernanda was 
right, and Papa did not come back? They would live here forever, just like this? (71) 

John Rowe Townsend's novel, Trouble In the Jungle , deals with a parallel situation In an English ghetto. 
However, the sodal bureaucracy appears far less threatening than In Talbot's novel, where "Welfare" presents an 
omnipresent terror for Tomis and Fernanda. The adult guardians \n the British novel are simply neglectful, far Infer^cr 
to their child wards. Kevin, the child-nanrator of the novel, takes an important step toward emotional maturation 
when he realizes that his stepmother's wretchedness Is a burden for all society: 

The truth was. I realized suddenly, that Doris was simply not equal to things. It w£ a 
further development In my understanding. Poor soul. I thought, life's pretty grim for her. We'll 
have to cany her along somehow. (155) 

This reversal of roles is an accurate reflection of the social reafity In the ghetto, where the children of immigrants and 
unemployable or criminal parents learn to fend for thc^mselves eariy in life. 

Frank Bonham is a white author who presents an especially sympathetic portrayal of black youth In the 
urban ghetto. The Nitty Gritty portrays the black hero, Chariie. ns an ambitious teenager in conflict with both 
parents and teachers. He doesnt share his father's pessimistic view of education as a shaky ladder for black 
ambition; however, his white teacher's wamings against get-rich quick schemes only spur Chariie on to more greater 
risks, since he mistrusts the man's high evaluations of his capabllrties. As money becomes the price for escape 
from the Dcgtown ghetto, the desolate trash dump where the youth finds Items to sell Is transfomied Into a treasure 
trove. In the same way that the gart^age heap of food from the Market In Tom^s Takes Charge becomes a 
comucopla for the scrounging children. The reader Is caught up In Chariie's excitement, comes to see the grim 
activities as "golden opportunities." such as the sale of "smad<" or blood Iransfusions for cash. When his uncle 
abandons him, the greyness of Dogtown overwhelms the teenager, and his father's cynical reaction to the failure of 
the scheme threatens to crush tha boy: "'Oh, shoot', his father said, "What'd you think you was buying, U.S. Steel 
Stock?'" (149). Eventually his teacher's positive values inspire Chariie to the cDnstructhre self-direction needed to 
escape the ghetto. Instead of a focus on the efforts of an aspiring Individual, Bonham's Hey, Big Spender confronts 
the Issue of survival '^f an entire community. When the teenager Cool becomes the agent for Breathing-Man's one- 
man welfare project, he soon grows aware of the complications of sodal responsibility in dealing with poverty, and 
he eventually begins to share the community's view of the bureaucratic inefficiency of government charity: 

Public Welfare . . . clumsy nuichine dragging itself like a crippled elephant . . . hurting almost as 
many as it helped . . . (95) 

After Cool's aunt asserts the need to insure the survival and well-being of future generations through the 
establishment of a foster home, that Breathing-Man's "magic money" finally starts to have a ben ^:lal effect upon the 




55 



E9 



ghetto. Perhaps this vision of money as a catalyst for ever-expanding social good Is an overty-rosy solution to 
poverty, but It does underscore the need fcr a balanced pictuie of both extrinsic and Intrinslo causes of economic 
conditions. Modem children's authors challenge an era when adults tried to foist their social prejudices on children 
under the mask of "teaching"; by contrast, Lenski, the Cleavers, and Bonham, amongst other contemporaiy writers, 
probe social conflict at all levels of culture, no matter how painful the revelations may be for both child and adult. 

Central Michigan University 



Worths Cited 

Armstrong. William H. Sounder . New Yoric: Harrow. 1969. 

Bonham, Frank. Hey. Bio Spender . New Yoric: Dutton, 1972. 

— . The Nitty Gritty . New Yoric Dutton, 1958. 

Burch, Robert. Queenle Peavy . New Yori<: Viking. 1966. 

Clark, Ann Nolan. Magic Money . New Yori<: Viking. 1950. 

Cleaver, Vera and Bill. Where the Lilies Bloom . Philadelphia: Uppincott. 1969. 

Ellis, Anne W. The Family Story in the 1960*s . Hamden. Conn.: Archon, 1970. 

Estes, Eleanor. The Hundred Dresses . New Yori<: Harcourt, 1944. 

Lenski, Lois. Cotton in My Sack . Philadelphia: Lippincott. 1949. 

MacLeod, Anne Scott. A Moral Tale: Children's Fiction and American Culture: 1820-1860 . Hamden, Conn.: 
Archcn, 1975. 

SommerfcH, Aim^e. My Name is Pablo. New Yori<: Criterion. 1966. 
Talbot, Chariene. Tom^s Takes Charge . New Yori<: Lothrop. 1966. 
Townsend, John Rowe. Trouble in the Jungle . Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1969. 



CO 

56 



Fanny Fern and the Culture of i^': 
by 

Anne Scott MacLeod 



"Fanny Fern" was the pen name used by Sara Payson Willis Parton, a determined, outspoken woman 
whose writing was extremely popular in the middle of the last century. She was bom Sara Willis In 1811, dau^^hter 
of Nathaniel Willis, founder of the Youth's Companion , a long-lived juvenile periodical established in 1827. !n 1838, 
Sara mam'ed Charies Eldredge, who died of typhoid in 1847, leaving her penniless, with two children to support. 
After a period of severe financial struggle, she made a maniage of convenience which soon proved disastrous. The 
mam'age ended within a few yea:s, and Sara was on her own again. 

Daughter to one editor and sister to another (and abandoned by both after her divorce), she tumed to 
writing to support herself, using the pseudonym "Fanny Fern." She wrote In a variety of forms, including novels, 
children's stories and magazine articles, all of which quickly found an enthusiastic audience. By 1856. when she 
mam'ed James Parton, "Fanny Fern" was sufficiently established as a writer to be offered $100.00 a week to write a 
regular column for the New 'orikjledger. The Ledger column, published weekly from 1856 until her death in 1872. 
was her most characteristic » ri<. consisting as it did of short sketches and essays full of social comment, most for 
a general public, some addressed to children. Parton's writing for children Is usually damned as her worst, and 
there's no doubt that it is painfully sentimental-lachrymose, as one critic put it. Yet in her sketches and stories 
about children is a wealth of information, not only on the wretched condition of poor children in the New Yori< of her 
time, but about the emotional impact on American society of urban poverty. The anger, the fear, even the 
sentimentality of Parton's writing about the children of poverty was representative of the response of many Americans 
to the discovery that a culture of poverty had established itself in the land of promise, a culture that destroyed 
children and. through children, threatened the future of the country. 

In mid-nineteenth century America, as in the present, the problems of the age were more concentrated In 
Ne*,v Yori<. Heavy waves of immigration between 1840 and 1860 deposited thousands In the city who had neither 
skills, nor resources, nor even health and hope. There were few government agencies to help; wori<houses, 
almshouses, and penitentiaries siphoned off only the most desperate and the most vicious of the city's destitute. 
The rest remained, housed in slums, exploited as cheap labor (if they had ''"ck enough to find wori< at all), a blight 
on the city, a menace and a reproach to the respectable. 

The problems were not entirety new, of course; industrialization had been proceeding apace since the 
1830s, as had immigration of unskilled laborers. In the major industrial centers of the United States, an urban 
proletariat was already a reality by 1850. Yet consciousness of urban poverty, and especially consciousness of its 
grim intractability, seem to have reached a new high in the 1850s. Above all, an awareness of the children of 
poverty and of their potential effect on the social order began to surface with increasing frequency, in both popular 
writing and children's literature, in the 18f.0s. 

And In fact, the children of the urban poor were hard to ignore. They lived on "the streets and the docks 
and the woodpiles . . .very naturally," as Charies Loring Brace observed, since their homes were too wretched to 
bear (330). They were the highly visible, "little blue-lipped and barefooted children on the pavements" the Youth's 
Companion described (28.52(1855): 207); they were children who had "no one to care for them, and [who spent] 
their lives In the street, or In comfortless sheds and outbuildings, where you would think no human being could live 
(29.33(1855): 140). 

Sara Parton wrote often of these waifs, addressing the chiia'en as well as the adults of more affluent 
classes. If her style was overstated, the destitution she chronicled could hardly be. 

The poor, Fanny Fem told her "dear little readers," "live huddled together in gan-ets and cellars, half- 
starved, half-naked and dirty and wretched beyond what you, in your pure and happy homes, could ever dream of" 
(Little Fems 94). A little giri in one of her stories was "so filthy dirty-so ragged, that she scarcely looked like a 
human being" ... her hand *so bony it looked like a skeleton" (Little Fems 48). To add to their miseries, the 
children of the poor were sometimes abused and often exploited by their parents. Clara's mother sent her out each 



ERIC 




57 



morning to beg, 'or if she couldnt beg, to steal-but al any rate to bring home something unless she wanted a 
beating. Poor little Claral-all alone threading her way through the great, wicked dty-knocked and jostled about, so 
hungiy-so tlred-so frightened!' (Little Ferns 49). 

The pathetic children in Parton's fiction were meant as samples, not oddities; they represented the 
thousands of city urchins growing up in abject poverty-'wretched' Is the word Parton uses again and again to 
describe them. While her compassion was genuine, Parton, like many of her contemporaries, saw the situation of 
these children as more than just a tragedy for them: It was also a danger to the whole society. Poor children 
learned vice earty. In the slums of New Yori<, Fanny Fern told her child readers, "[children] are taught to be wicked 
. . . they are whipped and beaten for not being wicked." A street boy, she pointed out In her column, might be "a 
boy In years, but a man in vicious knowledge" (Little Ferns 98). 

Ch^ries Loring Brace shared both her view and her alarm; he called the homes of New Yori<'s poor 'nests 
In which the young fledglings of misfortune and vice begin their flight," warning his fellow citizens that the fledglings 
would soon become 'the dangerous classes' (65). The Children's Aid Society he founded in 1853 was an effort to 
prevent the awful harvest an uncaring society seemed to be sowing for the future. Twelve years later. Fanny Fern 
was still writing about the problem, in the same terms. She visited a slum, which she described as "a little piece of 
hell.' adding 'how can those children ever get a chance to grow up anything but penitentiary inmates?' (New York 
Ledger 25 June 1863: n.p.) 

What Parton and Brace (and many other Americans) were observing was the sociology of urban. Industrial 
poverty, They were recognizing that poverty could and did create a culture of its own, setf-perpetuating, resistant to 
reform, Impefvlous to sporadic private charity, and deeply destructive of orderiy society. They saw that poverty often 
begot more poverty, that misery could Induce, not an effort to Improve, but the lassitude of hopelessness. They 
understood that suffering could be deeply corrupting. "Yes-Clara's mother was very cruel.' Parton wrote, "but God 
forbid, my little innocent children, that you should ever know how hunger, and thirst, and misery, may sometimes turn 
even that holy thing-a mother's love~to bitterness' (Little Ferns 40). 

To recognize the culture of poverty was not necessarily to sympathize with its victims. The association of 
pauperism and vice hardened as many hearts as it mefted with compassion. Mid-century authors. Including authors 
of children's stories, spoke often of the 'vicious poor," the 'wicked poor." who. "when congregated together, make 
poverty an excuse to sin." The writer who called hersdf "Aunt Friendly" stiffened when she faced the "dreary alleys" 
of the cities where "the poor and the wicked are huddled together, and grow poorer and more wicked as the long 
days go by" (5). Contemplating the vices of the poor, some found rt easy to blame the victims for their plight. 
"Extreme want and the degradation of squalid poverty," wrote one author, "are generally confirmed to the vicious, the 
indolent and the grossly improvident." "Idleness and beggary." remariced T. S, Arthur, "are next door neighbors to 
vice." (Maggie's Baby 36) 

Even Parton's responses were mixed. Her own experience of Impoverishment colored her view of the 
miseries she saw in New Yori<. Her heart went out quickly to women and children, helpless as she had fett herself 
helpless, In a society where only men had real economic power. She considered women "an abused 
class; ... life for most women Is a honid grind." she wrote (New Yori< Ledger 23 March 1860). She was less kindly 
disposed toward men. Rich or poor, men had the advantage over women and children, and Parton had small 
sympathy for those who brought their dependents low by dissipation, neglect of duty, or laziness. Her 1864 picture 
of a New Yortc slum is graphically revolting, but the reader's empathy for the Inhabitants mns a little cold when It 
meets Parton's characterization of the men. 



There were slaughter-houses with pools of blood In front, and round which ambolled [sic] pigs 
and children; there were piles of gart^ge In the middle of the street, composed of cabbage 
stumpo, onion skins, potato paring, old hats and meat bones, cemented with cinders and 
peneta^ed by the sun's rays, emitting the most beastly odors. Uncombed, unwashed giris, and 
ragged, fighting vdds swarmed on every door-step, and emerged from ran'ow. slimy alleys. Weary, 
worn-looking mothers administered hasty but welkimed slaps at draggled, neglected children, while 
fathers smoked, and drank, and swore, and lazed generally. 



ERIC 




58 



This is a long way from the glimpses of poverty to be found in early nineteenth century children's books. 
Then the poor were widows or orphans or honest working men In temporary trouble. Then the appeal was to 
individuals who as Christians and citizens gave to the poor-and took in return their gratitude and their blessings. 



By mid-century, however, such simplicities were clouded with doubt. Besides Parlon's jaundiced view of 
the male sex, what comes through in her sketch of a slum is the shade of despair that maiked even sympathetic 
commentaries on urban poverty in the 1850s. Not only was there nothing genteel about this scene, there //as also 
nothing of the humble-and grateful-air about its victims which might make charity rewarding. These wretches were 
neither poor-bul-clean nor hard working-but-unfortunate. They were dirty, disorderly, immoral and unambitious. They 
were not in temporary need, but deeply mired in the self-perpetuating culture of poverty and their hopelessness 
induced a reciprocal pessimism even in those who wanted to help. 

Parton was sympathetic, but she had few realistic solutions to propose In her stories about the children of 
poverty. Sometimes wealthy strangers adopted her pitiful fictional waifs. Sometimes, her little Bennies and Betseys 
and Claras founa temporary benefactors who proved that "bright angels yet walk the earthMhough what happened 
the next day and the day after, Fanny Fem did not say (Little Ferns 49). Mostly, they died, in the snows of the 
streets or in the squalor of the slums, a reproach to the society that could not or would not help them. Sara Parton 
represented a dilemma of her time. She saw that chronic poverty was fundamentally a social problem, yet she 
belonged to a generation still strongly committed to individual moral responsibility, both for and by the pour. Even 
as she used her stories to criticize a social system. Parton appealed to individual conscience, trying to reach the 
hearts of her countrymen with sentimental tales of the suffering and death of little children. Like Dickens before her 
(though far less memorably), Parton made fiction about the children of poverty a vehicle for social protest. She 
hoped that a society roused to concern would find a way to save the children, if not the already doomed adults of 
the urban underclass. But the growing understanding of her time of the complex culture of urtjau poverty, an 
understanding she shared, cast a shadow over easy optimism. Simple Christian charity seemed no match for the 
moral decay that was the companion of industrial pauperism, and Parton was not alone In doubting that institutions 
were Ideal places for children to grow up (Little Ferns 47-51), For twenty years, "Fanny Fem" a<pressed herself, 
vividly, angrily and sentimentally, about children caught up in a cycle of physical destitution and noral degeneration, 
but without finding answers. Her stories for and about children show a mind divided, as her society was divided, 
betw^ compassion and despair at their plight. 

University of Maryland 

Wori<s Cited 

[Arthur, T. S.] Maggie's Babv and Other Stories . Philadelphia: n.p. 1852. 
"Aunt Friendly." Poor Little Joe . New Yori<: Anson D. F. Randolph, 1860. 

Brace, Charies Loring. The Dangerous Classes of New Yori< and Twenty Years Among Them . New Yorf<: Wynkoop 
& Mallenbeck, 18!2. 

Parton, Sara. Little Ferns for Fanny's Little Friends . Auburn, NY: Derby and Miller, 1854. 
— . New Yori< Ledger 23 March 1860. 
— . New Yori< Ledger 25 June 1883. 
— . New Yort< Ledger 25 June 1864. 



ERLC 



€3 

59 



S'oth and Thrift; or. the causes and correctives of social inequalltv . Philadelphia: American Sunday School Union, 
1847. 

Youth's Companion . 28.52 (1955): 207. 
29.33 (1855): 140. 



ERLC 



Crossing and Double-Crossing 
Cultural Barriers in Kipling's Kim 
by 

Judith A. Plotz 

Kipling's Kim Is arguably the greatest cross-cultural achievement In children's literature, arguably, as NIrad 
Chaudhuri has called it, "the finest story of India" ever presented to Western readers (47). Yet as a frankly 
colonialist wor1<, however loving, Kim embodies the dilemma of all cross-cultural wor1<s in which one culture is 
normative, tK » other supplementary. Can the two cultures be pre3ented as manifesting equal humanity? Must a 
colonialist fiction invo^e a diminution of humanity through what JanMohamed has called the "Manichean allegory" 
which "orientalizes" every member of the supplementary culture nto a faintly comic foreigner. Into an "Other"? Both 
in its great successes In presenting the fullness of Indian life and in Its failures of reciprocity between East and West, 
Kim Is an illuminating example of cross-cultural colonialist fiction. 

Kim has been praised as the most richly inter-cultural of Kipling's wor1<s. To KInkead-Weekes, Kim 
"embodies the urge to attain a deeper kind of vision, the urge not merely to see and know from the outside, but to 
become the 'other*" (217). To JanMohamed, the book "overcomes the bam'ers of racial difference better than any 
other colonialist novel" (78); to McClure, the Kipling of Kim "is able to see beyond the horizon of his times and 
portray a worid of yet to be realized interracial harmony" (168). To Thompkins, Kim is doubly a "chain-man," for he 
Is a link, "& bridge suspended for the passage of understanding between two tem'tories of Kipling's heart" (24). 

Kimball 0*Hara, as an adolescent inhabitant of the border territory between childhood and manhood, is a 
great crisscrosser of boundaries. In some ways he is deeply Indian-fluent in Punjab, eloquem in Urdu, at home in 
Muslim and in Hindu dress-but of course he is not Indian: 

Kim was English. Though he was bumed black as any native; though he spoke the 
vemacular by preference, and his mother-tongue In a clipped, uncertcln sing-song; though 
he consorted on terms of perfect equality with the small boys of the b^izar; Kim was 
white-a poor white of the very poorest. (3) 

Nor Is he exactly English either. Not only was his first English teacher a German, (162) but both Kim's parents were 
Irish^ a heritage the nanator uses to explain the boy's curiosity ("Irish enough by birth to reckon silver the least part 
of any game" [61]) and a heritage which mar1<s his kinship to the colonized as well as the colonizers. Kim's father, 
the alcoholic sergeant tumed opium addict, was also something of a cultural boundary crosser for he was both 
Roman Catholic and Freemason (^/, 183). 

So flexible are the boundaries of Kim's identity-"What am I? Mussulman, Hindu, Jain, or Buddhist?" (234)- 
that he seems to don a new consciousness with each set of new clothes. Sometimes he appears In "Hindu kit, the 
costume of a low-cai<ti street boy" (7) or moves invisible among crowds as "a Hindu urchin in a dirty turban and 
Isabella-coloured clothes" (27). Sometimes he is a young sahib in "a white drill suit" (204), sometimes "a Eurasian 
lad . . . In badly-ftting shop-clothes" (240). With Mahbub All Kim Is from the first, "externally at least, a 
Mohammedan" (214) and is eventually rewarded with a splendid set of Pathan clothes, appropriate border-garb with 
the explicitly Afghan, northern Indian, and even Russian elements: 

There was a gold-embroidered Peshawur turban-cap, rising to a cone, and a big turban- 
cloth ending In a broad fringe of gold. There was a Delhi embroidered waistcoat to slip 
over a milky-white shirt, fastening to the right, ample and flowing; green pajamas with 
twisted silk waist-string; and that nothing might be lacking, russia-Ieather slippers, smelling 
divinely, with arrogantly curied tips. (279-280) 

Though he knows or seeks to know all the castes of India, he Is bound to none and drawn to all. Kim chnies 
conviction both as an "asii-smeared . . . wild-eyed" faquir and as the Buddhist lama's faithful chela . But even at his 
most Buddhist, with his "sad-coloured, sweeping robes, one hand on his rosary and the other In the attitude of 

ERJC 



benediction,' Kim reminds the English narrator of nothing so much as the very English "young saint of a stained- 
glass window' (320). 



The orphan child of white parents, Kim h also the adoptive child of many substitute parents. As Lionel 
Trilling notes, Kim "is full of v;onderful fathers, 5*11 dedicated men in their different ways, each representing a different 
possibility of existence" (123). Kipling's own father is the model for the Lahore museum curator. Father Victor of the 
Mavericks (who knew Kin's real father) paternally entrusts the boy to Colonel Creighton who. along with Lurgan and 
Hurree Babu, acts as Kim's father in the art and craft of the Great Game. Equipping Kim like a Pathan even to the 
"mother-of-peari, nickel-plated, self-extraciing .450 revolver," Mahbub Ali calls him "my son" and gives him an 
affectioncta paternal blessing: "please God, thou sl;alt some day kill a man with it" (280-281). The lama returns 
from the brink of death and of triumphant merging Into the Grea*. Soul in order to rescue Kim as the "Son of my 
Soul" (473) from bondage to the Wheel. There is a maternal presence as well. The Sahiba nurses Kim with all a 
mother's affection and Kim gives her a son's gratitude: "'Maharanee,' Kim began, but led by the look in her eye, 
changed it to the title of plain lov9-*Mother, I owe my life to thee'" (453). Indeed Kim regards all India as his family. 
When asked "And who are thy people," he replies, "This great and beautiful land" (222). 

All India, especially that which is out of bounds, seems Kim's province. Kim habitually moves in and out of 
restricted areas, delighting In "the stealthy prawl through the dar1< gullies and lanes, the crawl up a water-pipe, the 
sights and sounds of the women's world on the flat roofs, and the headlong flight from housetop to housetop unc'er 
cover of the hot dari<" (6). His first appearance "in defiance of municipal orders, astride the gun Zam-Zammah" (3) 
is, as Kinkead-Weekes ha!> noted, "emblematic" (216): English Kim sits where his playmates, Hindu Chota Lai and 
Muslim Abdullah cannot. While the other boys fear the new and unfamiliar lama, Kim delights in novelty and plunges 
into the museum. Kim is continually moving in and out of secluded precincts, venturing in and out of restricted 
areas in defiance of various municipal and cultural orders. In Lucknow. Kim rides high in the cab as a sahib, but 
breaks decorum to leap down into "the road headlong, patting the dusty feet" of his lama (198). Kim moves in and 
out of school, now a sahib In a white drill suit, now a wondering native. He almost moves In and out of his own 
skin, sometimes as pale as his Irish genes dictt^te, sometimes as dari< as \hf fierce sun and the dyes of the bazaar 
can make him. He Is a border violator who riskily intrudes into the army camp and later, at much greater risk, into 
the "mysterious city of Bikaneer" (278) which he clandestinely maps. 

Just as its protagonist Is a crosser of borders, so does the novel Kim Incorporate diversity. The epigraph 
to chapter 8 praises "Allah Who gave me two/Separate sides to my head" (214) and that to chapter 14 pays tribute 
to the power to hear cue universal human meaning in many languages, many creeds: 



This haiTnony of multitudes Is further promoted by the structure of the wori< as a road novel. The Grand 
Trunk Road spreads all India before Kim and the reader 



And truly the Grand Trunk Road is a wonderful spectacle. It runs straight bearing with it India's traffic 
for fifteen hundred miles-such a river of life as nowhere else exists In the worid. . . . There were new 
people and new sights at every stride-castes he knew and castes that were altogether out of his 
experience. They met a troop of long-haired, strong-scented Sansls with baskets of lizards and other 
unclean food on their backs. . . . Then an Akalsl, a wild-eyed, wild-haired Sikh devotee in the blue- 
checked clothes of his faith, with polished steel quoits glistening on the cone of his tall blue 
turban. . . . Here and there they met or were overtaken by the gaily dressed crowds of whole 
villages. . . . Kim was In the seventh heaven of joy. The Grand Trunk at this point was built on an 
embankment ... so that one walked, as It were, a little above the country, along a stately conldor, 
seeing all India spread out tc left and right. (94-104) 



My brother kneels (so saith Kabir) 



To stone and brass in heathen-wise. 



But in my brother's voice I hear 



My own unanswered agonies. (410) 



ERIC 



62 




This clear emphasis on the glorious multiplicity of Indian life makes It possible to read Kim as a cross* 
cultural Bildunqsroman In which the adolescent's long-sought Identity Is achieved through a synthesis of the 
multitudinous experience of "all India spread out to left and right* and of the many modes of being offered by his 
Indian and British father-substitutes. In such a reading, Kim Is the Ideal Anglo-Indian, the 'Idealized embodiment of 
what Kipling would have liked an inhabitant of British India to be" (Kettle 214), be a good British subject as well as 
a loving son of India because so clearty Identified with the wholeness of India in a way no Individual Indian-bound 
by caste or religion -could ever be. 

This buoyantly cheerful cross-cultural reading, however, suppresses ICm's coming-of-age In the role of a 
spy, a secret agent. The rules of the Great Game force on Kim a role that impedes fully human communion between 
him and the Indian worid. 

Kim's temperament as It Is put to use by the British excludes him from true fellowship with India. Kim Is 
above all a watcher. He Is repeatedly characterized as one who sees unseen. He Is a watcher in the shadows, 
"lithe and Inconspicuous" (6), "like a shadow" (22). Repeatedly "Kim watched . . . considering and Interested" (23); 
Kim "kept his watchful eye" (51) or "v/atched between drooped eyelids" (116). He regularty stations himself out of 
sight to watch others. At the museum he Is the hidden observer "Kim laid himself down, his ear against a crack In 
the heat-split cedar door, and, following his instinct, stretched out to listen and watch" (13). In Mahbub All's camp, 
Kim, unseen, spies on the spy searching the tent: "Kim with one eye laid against a knot-hole In the planking . • • 
had seen the Delhi man's search through the boxes" (42-43). After delivering the message to Crelghton, "flat on his 
belly lay Kim" (62) to watch the British officers. Again luridng In shadow "behind the thick trunks in the cool dari< of 
the mango-tope" (130), then "belly-flat" by the mess-tent door (137), Kim watches the Mavericks. 

It is his watchfulness that mari<s Kim as truly British. In the worid of Kim the British are the masters of 
clear vision. It Is the English museum director who gives the lama a marvelous pair of spectacles: "How scarcely do 
I feel themi How cleariy do I .seel" (31) It is the English museum director who sees and comprehends all Asia as 
he presides over photographs even of the lar *'s distant Tibetan monastery, even of the "little door through which 
we bring wood before winier. And thou-the English know of these things?" (14) It Is the Englishman who presides 
over the "mighty map," compiled by Europeans, on which he points out to the learned old Buddhist "the Holy 
Places of Buddhism" (15). Colonel Crelghton and Hun-ee Babu watch India overtly through the Ethnological Survey, 
covertly through the Secret Service. Kim by Instinct is also an ethnological surveyor; he leads the lama Into the 
museum with the exhilarated sense that "he Is new" (11) and therefore something "to Investigate further precisely 
as he would have Investigated a new building or a strange festival. . . . The lama was his trove" (22). District 
Superintendent Strickland, also of the Secret Service, Is so Indefatigable a watcher and so persuasive a tempter that 
he gets the Sahiba. the embodiaent of Mother India, to remove her veil (124). The English in Wm see all the worid 
unveiled; they "know of these things" (14). The English are scientific Investigators, the knowers, the masters of 
ethnography; the Indians are the known, the seen, the collected materials of ethnography, the mere objects of 
scrutiny. 

In training for the Great Game, Kim learns to cultivate his natural watchfulness so as to see without being 
recognized as an English boy or as a conscious looker. He must learn to see without provoking response; he must 
always perceive what he looks at as Other, never allowing his own humanity to be engaged In a reciprocal gaze. 
During the encounter In which Mahbub All first recommends \Qm to Crelghton as a candidate for the Game, the 
three look at each othen 

[Kim] gazed imploringly at the clear-cut face [of Mahbub Ali] In which there was no 
glimmer of recognition; but even at this extremity It never occun-ed to him to throw himself 
on the white man's mercy or to denounce the Afghan. And Mahbub stared deliberately at 
the Englishman, who stared deiiberatdy at Kim, quivering and tongue-tied. (178) 

Here Kim watches Mahbub who watches Crelghton who watches Kim. None acknowledges the humanity of the 
other ("no glimmer of recognition") but each contemplates the other as an object for possible use and control. 
Assessing vision such as this Is what enables a surveyor, a "chain-man" such as Kim becomes, to nwp and thereby 
control new tenitory: "by merely marching over a country with a compass and a level and a straight eye," o boy 



ERIC 



63 ^ ' 



could 'carTy away a picture of that country which might be sold for large sums" (267). The surveying, controlling, 
acquisitive "straight eye" mar1<s the ethnographer and the spy. 



Kim*s natural aptitude for seeing Is matched by his equal resistance to being seen and controlled. The 
resistance is partly manifested in his talent for disguise: Kim can pass as a low-caste Hindu street boy. a Muslim 
ostler, a crazed faoulr , or the lama's disciple. More strikingly, however, Kim is designated as an agent of raro 
promise when he withstands Lurgan's controlling hypnotic vision. As "the only boy I could not make to see things" 
(203), Kim resists becoming the object of Lurgan's vision; he will not consent to see the ^ jken jar as whole: 



"Look! It is coming Into shape," said Lurgan Sahib. 

So far Kim had been thinking In Hindi, but a tremor came on him, and with an effort 
like that of a swimmer before shar1<s, who huris himself half out of the water, his mind 
leaped up from a darkness that was swallowing it and took refuge In-the multiplication 
table in English! 

"Look! It Is coming Into shape," whispered Lurgan Sahib. 

The Jar had been smashed-yes, smashed-not the nuiive word-he would not think of 
that-but smashed Into fifty pieces, and twice three was six, and thrice threo was nine, and 
four times three was twelve. He clung desperately to the repetition. The shadow-outline 
of the Jar cleared like a mist after rubbing eyes. There were the broken shards; there was 
the split water drying in the sun, and through the cracks of the veranda showed ail 
nljbed, the white house-wall below-and thrice :*/elve was thirty-six. (251-252) 



Kim's resistance to Lurgan's mastery Involves shifting from a yielding accepting Indian consciousness lo his resistant 
Isolated British consciousness which Is associated with the reductrveness and the control of arithmetic. Clear vision 
In Wm belongs to the British-to the rcdm of rationality, numeration, isoiatlon, and control. But this clear vision 
involves throwing off any reciprocity and mutual recognition. 

What further impedes Kim's participation In the thoroughly reciprocal cross-cultural worid Is the conditional 
nature of almost all of his relationships. Though Trilling may be right that the "charm" of each of the several 
surrogate-fathers possessed by Kim is that "the boy need not commit himself to one alone" (123), this charm Is also 
something of a curse. The "fathers" are almost all "father-figures' or "father instruments' io be used to further 
specific aspects of Kim's education and Initiation Into the Great Game. When Father Victor praises Creighton as "a 
good man" for aiding the boy. the ethnographer-spy candidly responds: "Not In the least. Don't make that mistake. 
The lama has sent us money for a definite end" (185). Creighton too seeks the boy for a definite end, a use, and 
not out of hunan kindness. To his British trainers, Kim Is a mere agent, highly valued for his function but only for 
his function. Though with Mahbub All Kim develops from disposable jtensll to cherished near-son, the threat of 
mutual betrayal remains present throughout the relationship: "Wilt thou some day sell my head for a fe,v sweetmeats 
if the fit takes thee?" (327) :,1ahbub asks Kim. 

Kim's dearest relationship, ultimately presenting Itsalf more as a duty than an lnterestir<g Investigation. Is that 
with the lama. Yet that cherished relationship Is nlso tumed to the purposes of the Gr^iat Game. Kim manipulates 
the lama, urging hk't to travel Into the mountains, much as Mahbub All and Creighton have manipulated Kim. The 
lama's spiritual search is tumed to the ends of the Game. That Kim loves and, even while loving, betrays the lama; 
that he can use him as an object even as he loves him as a father, shows that the boy has fully mastered the 
tradecraft. He has intemalized the duplicity that makes him a perfect spy; but the double burden of loyalties 
precipitates his breakdown after the descent from the mountains. 

Kim's breakdown and recovery at the close of the novel are open to conflicting Interpretations. On the one 
hand, it may be suggested, as Blackbum has argued, that the adolescent Kim Is at last taing bom into his long- 
sought adult Identity which synthesizes the values of both thr cultures he has known and served and that the boy, 
In Mahbub All's formulation, 'sure of Paradise, can yet enter Government sen/ice" (467). Yet, on the other hand, the 



ERIC 




64 



breakdown may suggest that the boy has broken under the unendurable burden of two cultures which carnot be 
reconciled. Though Kipling does not everywhere take this view, in Kim he makes plain that real cultures are not 
simply spectacles "for to admire an* for to see" but complex sets of binding obligations (Verses 356). The killa of 
letters weighs Kim down with his obligations to the British way; the heavy body of the old lama weighs Kim down 
with his obligations to the Asiuf* way. The British duly, appropriately enough, is written, formal, abstract; the Asian 
duty is fully embodied in a be'oved person. Together they are too much. Kim*s strength suddenly gives out under 
this double burden of equally inoperative, equally heavy duties. The closest Kim has come to being both a perfect 
Indian and a perfect Briton is In being a perfect spy; but it Is this state of cross-cultural double-cross that breaks 
him down. Though Kim recovers, the recovery promises no synthesis. Indeed the novel stops abruptly-'jt" 
stopped, Kipling told his father about the end of the novel (Something of Myself l37)-as if to cut off any vision of 
an adult Kim living successfully in two worlds, as if such a prospect were unimaginable. 

George Washington University 



John Le Carre has acknowledged the influence of Kim on his distinguished espionage novels in which 
love, betrayal, and game-playing are intertwined. The protagonist of Le Carre's most recent book, A Perfect Spy 
(1986), is Magnus Pym, a charming betrayer of ever>1hing he most loves. Pym's name and characteristics suggest 
that Le Carr6 perceives him as a grown-up "great Kim." 



Blackburn, William. "Internationalism and Empire: Kim and the At. of Rudvard Kipling." Proceedings of the Sixth 
Annual Conference of the Children's Literature Association. U of Toronto. March 1979 Ed Priscilla Ord 
\ .anova: Villanova UP, 1980. 78-85. 

Chaudhuri, Nirad. "The Finest Story about lndia~ln English." Encounter 13 (April 1957): 47-53. 

JanMohamed, Abdul R. "The Economy of Manlchean Allegory. The Function of Racial Difference m Colonialist 
Literature."" Critical Inquiry 12 (Autumn 1985): 59-87. 

Kettle, Arnold. "What is Kim?" The Morality of Art . Ed. D. W. Jefferson. NY: Barnes & Noble. 1969. 210-221. 

Kinkead-Weekes, Mari<. "Vision in Kipling's Novels." Kipling's Mind and Art. Selected Cntical Essays . Ed. Andres 
Rutherford. Stanford: Stanford U P, 1964. 197-234. 

Kipling, Rudyard. Kim. The Writings in Prose and Verse of Rudyard Kipling 19. New Yo.-k. P::„uLer*s, 1916. 

— . Something of Mvself . New »'ork: Doubleday, 1937, 

— . Verses 1889- 1896 . The Writings in Prose and Verse of R idyard Kipling 11. New Yori<. Scribner's, 1916. 

McClure, John. 'Problerr»atic Presence. The Colonial Other In Kipling and Conrad." The Black Presence in English 
Li terature . Ed. David Dubydeen. Manchester: Manchester U P, 1985. 154-167. 

Thompkins, J. M. S. The Art of Rudyard Kipling . Lincoln: U of Nebraska P, 1959. 

Trilling, Lionel "Kipling." The Liberal Imagination . 1950. Garae*i City, NY: Doubleday, 1953. 120-129. 



Notes 



Wori<s Cited 



ERIC 




65 



Adolescents as Instruments of Change: 
The English^language Novel Set in Post-independence India 

by 

Meena Khorana 

The colonial tradition glamorized by the novels of Rudyard Kipling and Dhan Mukerjee is perpetuated by 
both contemporary Western and Indian authors writing in English. The realities of post-independence India determine 
the content of the adolescent novel set In India. Soon after Independence from the British in 1947, Prime Minister 
Nehru's cabinet laid out elaborate Five Year Plans to ensure a government-controlled industrial development. The 
attempts of Tagore and Gandhi to re-discover the roots of Indian culture could not withstand the Western orientation 
of the En^isii-speaking elite. Since only two percent of (he literate population uses English as its first language 
(Singh 112), authors woo Wesfem readers who are still fascinated by "exotic" India. "Some Indian writers, fiJlly 
aware of this appeal, exploit it, piling on local colour, explaining and expatiating upon Indian customs, detailing 
recipes of Indian dishes, describing sarees and outlining the colourful rituals of an Indian wedding" (Williams xvi). 

These divergent trends make social and national progress a compellir;g theme in children's novels by both 
Western and Indian writei's. The adolescent protagonists, mainly boys, become the vehicles through which this 
Inherited colonial legacy is reflected. The novel thus becomes didactic and highly stereotypical. Each novel has a 
definite agenda; whether it Is to promote education, technology, medicine, or a more modem outlook, It is the young 
hero who is burdened with fulfilling it. 

The setting of most of these novels is rural. When a book does have an urban locale, rt Is set in the 
poverty-stricken areas. The novels are hence a sociological investigation into village attitudes. Reporter Jjke, authors 
catalog the features of village life-child maniages, drought, dependence on the monsoons, and superstitions against 
technology. Despite these deplorable conditions, there is a strong opposition to progress by the older generation. 
Passive acceptance and a reluctance to change their traditional ways make villagers unfit t(j survive In modem times. 
"What can I do if God is angry with us? Man cannot change His will" (Life of Keshav 9) s the typical attitude. In 
each novel the young hero overcomes opposition and finds a successful means of bringing prosperity to his family 
and becomes a symbol of hope to his community. 

A major theme in these novels is the education of village youth. With a literate population of only 2^5 
million, or 36 percent of the total population, the lack of educational facilities in villages is a prime hindrance to 
progress. As in her eariier novel. Ramu. the Story of India . Indian scholar and author Rama Mehta narrates c village 
boy's quest for education in The Life of Keshav . Education comes to the village of BedIa when a school teacher 
gives night classes in Hind. Kechav, the hero, is an avid student and he realizes the possibilities of learning. His 
dream of going to a proper school h fulfilled when a rich benefactor sponsors him to go to a school in the city of 
Udaipur. At first there is opposition from his mother because acquiring an education imposes a rather long period of 
economic dependence. Keshav doesn't get enough time from his household chores to do .his schoctworic and 
burning oil to study at night is expensive. "'School, school, that Is all you think abouL What good is your Isamlng 
to us if you can't share the responsibilities of the household? Throw those books Gside', said Ganga reaching out 
to snatch them from his hands" (74). Once Ganga sees the future job possibilities for Keshav, she makes untold 
sacrifices to fulfill his dream. 

To Keshav himself, education has been at best a mixed blessing. He is teased cruelly by the rich city 
boys for his village attire vAd because he is mam'ed at the age of fourteen. His education alienates his village 
friends and, but for Ajay, the son of his benefactor, the vast social and economic gap prevents him from making 
friends at school. With hard work he comes first when he graduates from high school. When the novel ends, the 
author hints that Keshav might go to engineering schooL 

*^welve-year-oId Raman In " What Then. Raman?" is not so lucky. He is forced to assist his mother when 
his father goes to the city to look icr a job. His father understands his dream of becoming a scholar and promises 
Raman that he can resume school once there is money: 'It is important to dream as well as to woric. When I was 
your age I, too, dreamed of becoming more than a v/oodcutter like my father before me. That is why I wanted you 
to go to school when you were old enough, so that for you it might become more than just a dream" (36). When 




70 



67 



Raman confides hi.) dream to the missionary teacher from America, she chcHjnges him to think of what he will do 
with his education. 

The authc ' also broaches the issue of giris' education. With nearly eighty percent illiteracy among women, 
the missionary tn>o to counter the argument that girls don't need to read and write because they will eventually get 
mam'ed. 'But it will not be wasted. They will many and keep house, it is true, but they will teach their children. . . . 
And then too, Raman, m our school we teach many things besides reading and writing: how to farm, and how to 
raise better crops, and how to build new houses; and for girls, how to prepare better meals, now to care for those 
who are ill ... ' (12). Raman is convinced and he starts teaching his young sister and her friends. His life takes 
on a new meaning when he remembers "the heaciy sense of satisfaction each time he finished a lesson with Vasanti. 
each time he saw the knowledge growing in her and knew that it was he who helped it to grow" (162). 

The Day the River Spoke, a short fictional work by Kamala Nair, also has the education of village girts as 
its theme. Young Janu is a typical village girl: she looks after siblings and helps her mother with the housework, but 
she also has an inquisitive mind. She wants to know why young fish in the paddy fields turn to frogs, why yellow 
spiders hide in yellow flowers, and where the river goes. Yet no one allows her to study k^ecause the fruits of 
education are distant and, in the case of giris, unrecognizable. The murmurous voice of the river offers her a 
solutbn: *Seems to me little giris can as much as little boys. . . . You just skip along one morning and sit 
there in the school and listen to what*s going on, and maybe the teacher will let you stay." The teacher is so 
impressed by Janu*s clever answer to a difficult question that he persuades her father to let her attend schoc' 
Janu is ecstatic and vows that she will open her own school for village girls. 

Another recun-ent theme is the introduction of technology in Indian villages: scientific methods of fanning, 
distribution of high yield seeds, promise of dams and canals, and the use of tractors and other equipment. 

Anita Desai's The Viltaqe by the Sea is set in Thul, a fishing village near Bombay. The presence of a 
tractor loaded with pipes presages an end to the "peaceojl" village life for the older generation, but it becomes a 
symbol of hope for younsoters who are disenchanted with poverty and a lack of ready cash and steady jobs. They 
have abandoned fishing, the trade of their fathers, and their only salvation is in working for the proposed fertilizer 
factory. Hari, the protagonist, is divided between th3 two options: the traditional way with its starvation and 
perpetual want or working in the factory for regular wages, with its inevitable loss of land, independence and, 
perhaps, human dignity. Hari sees no hope at home with a dninken, ineffectual father, a sick mother, and two 
sisters to provide dowries for. Bitter and discontented, he makes a daring bid to enter the adult worid in a 
meaningful way by njnning away to Bombay. 

On leaving Thul, Hari's mind expands; e n the bullock-cart driver who gives him a ride has heard of the 
unlikely word "fertilizer." Ths driver understands that due to overpopulation the old economy has to change. "Now 
we want everything to come from the shops, ready made. No more spinning of yam, no more grinding of wheat at 
home-no more making of ccw-dung cakes or compost" (71). 

In Bombay, Hari sees a different type of human misery-overcrowding, filth, child labor, beggary and crime. 
He takes what the city can offer him-a job in a third-rate restaurant and training in watch -men din g-and longs to 
return to his village. He S5v3s enough money in one year to star*, a watch repair shop In an industrialized Thul and 
a small poultry farm that his sisters can manage. The book explicates the Darwinian theory of survival of the fittest. 
Hari and the villagers have to adapt just as the city pigeons have done. "The wheel turns and turns and turns, it 
never stops and stands still" says Mr. Panwallah. "You are young. You can ch^inge and learn and grow. Old 
people cannot, but you can. I know you will" (129). 

Hari's journey to Bombay has gained him an identity, maturity and economic in* dependence. As an 
affirmation of technology he returns to hi:, village by bus and then annoints himself with the sweet waters of the well. 
"He felt like a new person, like someone who had emerged from a tightly shut box and now saw the light and felt 
the breeze for the first ilms. He could have been newly bom -a butterfly emerging from a cocoon" (140). He returns 
in time for the festival of Diwali; !^xe ^he hero of the epic Ramavana . his return symbolizes domestic happiness anc 
material wealth. 



68 



Medical treatment is another aspect of life in fndia that is depicted in books for children. The village b 
each story Is without a doctor and the people rely on home remedies, burning red chilies to exordse the evil spirits, 
praying to the goddess, or visiting the medictna man for cures. In each case, the authors remind the reader that it 
Is the medicine obtained from the city doctor that has cured the patient. When Gulab has a severe attack of 
jaundice, the doctor scolds Keshav: "What good are you if you donl use your intelligence? You know, don't you, 
that village medicines gotten from the midwife are useless? Next time use your education" (Keshav 177-178). The 
villagers of Thul are similarly at the mercy of the 'sharp looking" medidne man. His arrogance, his pills and potions, 
the author tells us, "pave him the air of a magidan, or witchcraft" (Viilaqe 51). In spfte of the food, attention, and 
payment of a silver ring, all he gives them is holy ash. The mother is cured only when she is admitted to the 
nearest city hospital where she is gr/en free treatment for anemia. 

Two novels by Aimee Sommerfeit, who spent a few years in India, deal with the lack of medical facilities for 
India's poor. In The Read to Agra thirteen-year-old Lalu takes his younger sister Maya on a 3Q0-mile journey to Agra 
to get treatment for her failing eyesight. At first, the father opposes the plan with: "God will never allow Maya to go 
blind unless it is ordained that she shall go blind" (26), but the grandmother encourages Lalu to take this bold step. 
After encountering a series of stereotypical situations that one assodates with India-cobras, camels, pe^orming 
bears, thieves and even a maharajah's son on an elephant-they reach Agra only to be rudely turned away by the 
hospital gatekeeper. As they leave the city in disappointment, they are helped by the UNICEF and WHO crew who 
are distnljuting free milk and medicines to the lepers and the poor. Astonished at such generosity, Lalu is 
condescendingly told that "Far, far away from here there is a country where everyone has plenty of food. ... If 
some child or other in that far-away country decides that he doesn't want an ice-cream cone and gives the money to 
UNICEF instead . . . then you will get a glass of buffalo milk" (175). Nurse Astrid then introduces Lalu and Maya to 
the Indian lady doctor who takes charge of their board and lodging and Maya's treatment. "'1 think,* said Dr. 
Prasad, 'that India is the worid's most unfor'.unate country rf she can'* wen help her own children" (178). Lalu's 
story is continued in the sequel The White Bungalow where the author places Lalu in an all-or-nothing choice 
between traditional village life, which he now considers worthless and the profession of a doctor. 

These adolescent heroes are, thus, the harbingers of a new age for their families and communities. This 
faith placed in Indian youth reflects the promise of a New India after 200 years of foreign domination. Adolescence, 
a transitional phase from childhood to adult thus becones a metaphor for the moment of change for India. Most of 
the books discussed above follow the home-adventure-home pattern in the initiation of male protagonists into society. 
Hari, Lalu, Keshav and Raman are recognized as adult members of society not by assimilating the values of the older 
group but by rejecting them, just as newly-independent India hoped to be accepted by the world community. 

These adolescents, though interesting and admirable in their detemiination to reach their goals, are, 
nevertheless, one-sided. We see them only in their sodological roles. Other aspects of adolescence, such as 
interest in the opposite sex, rebellion against parents, conflict.*; between Western and Indian sodal values, topeclally 
in the area of dating and an'anged maniages, which would te more relevant to the urban, welMo-do reading audience 
in India, ars not even mentioned. 

Ultimately, it is the real-ties of publishing for children in India that determine the content of the books 
written by Indian authors and force them to seek a Western audience. Even though u^dia is the world's seventh 
largest publisher of books, only three percent ct the books are for children (Nair, 'Promoting" 1), hence, publishing 
for children is not economically feasible. Once publlshinijj for children ^jains maturity, specialists in the field hope that 
authors will avoid imitative writing and draw on the cultural heritage, based on a synthesis of science and 
philosophical content of social traditions and customs prevailing in different regions of the country (Gupta 1). 

Coppin State College 

Wor1<s Cited 

Arora, Shirley L. "What Then. Raman?" Chicago: Follett, 1960. 

Bibliocraphy of Children's Books Published In Ind ia. New Delhi: Childrsn's Book Trust, 1983. 



ERLC 



Desai, Anita. The ViilaQe by the Sea. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1985. Heinemann. 1982. 

Gupta, Brahm P. "Meeting the Challenge of Education Through LIteratuie for Children." Wrtter and Illustrator 5 
(1986):1-2. 

Mehta, Rama. The Life of Keshav. a Family Story from India . New Yor1<: McGraw-Hill, 1969. 

— . Ramu, A Story of India . New Yorf<: McGraw, 1966. 

Nair, Kamala. The Day the River Spoke . New Delhi: National Book Tnjst, 1978. 

"Promoting Children's Books in the Republic of India." Printed for Children: World Children's Book Exhibition . 
Munchen: K. G. Saur, 1978: 9. 

Singh. Tejeshwar. "Publishing in India: Crisis and Opportunity". Publishing In the Third Worid: Knowledge and 
Development. Portsmouth, New Hampshire: Heinemann, 1985: 111-130. 

Sommerfdt, Aimee. The Road to Agra . New Yorie Criteiion, 1961. 

— . The White Bungalow . New Yorie Criterion, 1964. 

Williams, Haydn Moore. Studies in Modem Indian Fiction in English . Vol. 1. Calcutta: Writer's Workshop 
Publication, 1973. 




70 



Virginia Hamilton's Symbolic Presentation 
of the Afro-American Sensibility 
by 

David L Russell 



Virginia Hamilton is most vexing when, in the midst of meticulously-detailf*'' ^alistic description, she 
introduces elements which sorely try her readers* credulity. Take, for instance, the inarvelous solar system created 
by Mr. Pool for Junior Brown in a forgotten basement room of the school, or the intrusion of the ghost of Brother 
fiush into Tree's otherwise uneventful life. Not all critics graciously accept these fanciful tums of plot, David Rees, 
for one, complains of the ghost's presence in Sweet Whispers. Brother Rush : "The use of the supernatural seems 
like a cheap short cut to give Tree knowledge: the author should have found a more convincing way of imparting 
informal^on . . (182). On the other hand, Rees applauds M. C. H'goins. the Great (176), even though that woric 
contains material neariy as fanciful. Paul Heins has remari<ed that Hamifton herself "is not sure whether she h 
realist; acti:ally, she often fee*- that she is a symbolist One might call her an inventor" (347). Hamilton has, 
perhaps, invented her own kind of fiction, which is espedally suited to her penetration of the Afro-American character 
and to her exploration of the Afro-American experience. Hamilton's books are-as is so much of adolescent fiction- 
stories of survival, of people leaming to get along in the worid. Her fiction is not so much a vehicle of social 
protest, as is that of so many black writers, but rather it is th.» impassioned portrayal of individuals in the process of 
getting along in the worid. Through her use of symbolism, this process unfolds as an almost mythic enactment of 
the Afro-American wiL ;nd means for survival. 

In M. C. Higqins. the Great (1974), Hamilton effectively created a symbolic presentation of her concept of 
the Afro-American sensibility, in which survival is achieved through the hero's coming to \ent\s with two fundamental 
precepts: realizing the importance of his cultural heritage, which infomis him that he has something worth 
preserving, and understanuing the importance of the sense of community, which assures him that his plight is not a 
singular one and success depends upon individuals striving together. Through these two precepts, the hero 
acknowledges the will to survive, imparted by thb past, and the means to survive provided by the communal spirit of 
the present He thus becomes capable of initiating positive action and inspiring others to Join him in that action to 
face the future. In Hamilton's vision of the Afro-American sensibility, the hero is ennobled through acknowledging his 
past and through accepting the communal spirit (significantly not through undertaking an individual heroic effort). 
Consequently '-••"nan existence is given meaning finally by dedsive and deliberate action. 

To find the sources of this vision, we mcy benefit from what Janice E. Hale has said of African culture: 
"Two guiding principles characterize the African ethos: survival of the tribes and the oneness of being. A deep 
sense of family or kinship characterizes African social reality" (48). Hamilton's characters typically find their identity 
to be inextricably tied to that of their fan^iV- The African tradition is in sharp contrast to Western culture which has 
generally elevated individualism over the bonds of family. The Afro-American eniphasis on these ties was certainly 
fostered by the more recent historical experience of slavery, which frequently deprived blacks of any meaningful family 
structure, making family perhaps more fervently craved in the Afrc-American cultui^ tradition. By extension, as the 
family heritage Is crucial, so is the tribal heritage, or one's roots in general. Among the most Important steps a 
social group must take to establish its identity is the celebration of its history, the glorification of Its origins. For the 
individual, this means grasping an understanding of the motivations ' J desires of one's ancestors. In a similar vein, 
the sense of community is frequently stronger in the black culture than In the white. This may result from a natural 
tendency for members of an oppressed or minority group to bind together, as well as from the African sense of 
"oneness of being" which denies the extremes of Western Individualism. Rudh^e Sims speaks of "a traditional 
awareness of the ties that bind disparate members of [black] families and communities together" (70). The ties that 
bind the black cotnmunlty are at once more intense and more enduring than the communal relationships typical of 
white American society. 

In M. C. HiQQ inn. the Great . Hamilton illustrates symbolically the coming to tenns with these two cultural 
precepts enabling her hero to assert himself by the novd's conclusion. On the surface, little happens In the novel. 
A mere 48 hours pass in the book's 220-plus pages, and In those 48 hours, a boy. living on an Isolated mountain, 
watches over his younger siblings while his parents wori<, shares moments with a filend from a nearby hill, and 

ERJC 



meets two Strang ers-a wandering girt, Lurhetta Outlaw, and a folk music collector, the "dude" Lewis. The exhaustive 
detail seems further to Impede the plot, yet the lack of momentum Is appropriately suggestive of M. C. Higgins' own 
Inability to act-an inability he must overcome in order to join the ranks of the survivors. 

The opening chapter is permeated with aerial imagery; everything seems to soar upward. "Mayo Cornelius 
Higgins raised his arms high to the sky and spread them wide," the novel begins, "he was M. C. Higgins, higher 
than everything" (9). Later on, he and his friend. Ben Killbum, are, in fact, airborne, swinging on vines (16). M. C. 
goes up "Sarah's High Path" (22) to his mountain home, "a great swell of earth rising to outline the sky" (25). But 
the ultimate image is, of course, M. C.'s forty-foot pole and "its spariding h^'ght" (26). From atop this pole, M. C. 
can sit on a bicycle seat, pedal two tricycle wheels and sway through the air and daydream. There on his pole, 
pedaling and swaying, he is "truly higher than everything on the outcropping" (29). There he has the pleasant 
"s€»nsation of falling free . . . (29). His thoughts drift to his ancestress, Sarah, who first came to the mountain. He 
imagines Sarah's first sighting of the mountain: "Then she saw it. It climbed the sky. Up and up. Swelling green 
and gorgeouc" (30). The effect of this compounding of aerial imagery is that of exhilaration, freedom-curiously, the 
very effect we often expect from a conclusion rather than a beginning. 

The freedom provided by the soaring pole is temporary, at best, and largely illusory. While swaying on the 
pole, M. C. "began to feel sick. Going to lose my balance up here" (29). he can pedal furiously, but wherr he 
stops he is still fixed upon the pole. The pole's symbolism is augmented when M. C. learns with surprise that it is 
not, as he had believed, exclusively his pole, a gift from his father, Jones, for swimming the Ohio River. It is, in fact, 
a grave mari<er for "Everyone of Sarah's that ever lived here. ... The pole is the mari<er for all the dead" (96). 
Suddenly, the pole is transformed in M. C.'s eyes and in ours. It no longer symbolizes his escape from the worid 
beneath, his temporary freedom, but rather it becomes a mari< of his heritage and an anchor. Our attention Is drawn 
away from that curious, and impractiail, bicycle seat at the pole's top, and toward the sanctified ground below, 
where in a literal sense M. C.'s ancestral roots lie. Virginia Hamilton once said of her native Ohio, "[It] is sun-eal to 
me now. The past is fixed into symbol; my home is the warmth of clan and race. This fine valley soil is both 
freedom and internment" (Commire 99). True freedom is not found In escaping from one's heritage, but in embracing 
it. 

But this embrace is complicated fc M. C. because his ancestral home Is threatened with destruction from 
a cieeping strip-mining spoiL He acquires a sense of direr.tiort with the aid of the two strangers. Through the 
"dude," M. C. comes to examine his cultural identity. Lewis refuss;; to fulfill M. C.'s dream of making his mother a 
recording ster, which would have allowed the Higgins family to escape their threatened home. Instead, Lewis, it 
turns out, is a preserver-not a promoter~of the rural life enjoyed by the Higginses. He realizes that to make Banina 
Higgins a performing star would also be to destroy her ingenuousness, and undoubtedly her soul. Lewis reveres, as 
does Jones, the family's mountain heritage, and he is compelled to record Banina Higgins' fajled voice because "I 
must, like my father before me" (213). Lewis is driven by the example of his forebears, by his roots, although he 
does not comprehend Jones' wish to remain on a mountain threatened by imminent collapse: "Stubbomn s. 
Ignorance. . . . Like seeds sprouting from generation to generation," he laments (213). But we all must understand 
our heritage in our own way, and Lewis, the outsider, brings tlie necessary objectivity to M. C. with which he can 
appreciate th^ special qualities of his own heritage. 

It Is through another outsider, Lurhetta (significantly sumamed "Outlaw"-an example of Hamilton's 
unabashed, symbolic use of names), that M. C. begins to understand the importance of community. With Lurhetta. 
M. C. visits the Killbums, even though Jones has forbidden him to go there. The Killbums are red-headed with six 
fingers on each hand, and six toes on each foot (striking symbols of the clans' oneness of being, not retribution for 
the sin of inbreeding). They are a wondrous clan and the entire description of Kill's Mound moves into the sun'eal. 
At Kill's Mound, M. C. and Lurhetta see a "snake rolling away from them down a runner bean row. ... It had taken 
its tail In its mouth and run off like a hoop. Grinning, Ben [Killbum] sidled up to it, careful not to step on any 
runners. He stuck his arms through the circle the snake made and lifted it, a dari< wheel, still turning" (184). 
Detailed with utmost seriousness and realism, this Is, nevertheless, sheer fantasy. The Killbum place is teeming with 
life, albeit bizan-e. The property Is virtually choked with living things-fruits, vegetables, snakes and children. It is a 
vital, happy place. Perhaps the m'" it marvelous discover/ the visitors make is the great net~a kind cf giant 
trampoline In which the multitudinous Killbum children can safely play. As an Image, the net stands ir distinct 



erJc 



contrast to M. C.'s pole: the pole supports a lone Individual high above th*? earth, while the net embraces a 
community of childrer» close to the earth's bosom. Rather than restraining the children, the net pemiits them greater 
freedom of movement along with comforts and security. It Is the value of community, of interpersonal relationships, 
and of the wamith and strength of communal bonds that M. C. finds on Kill's Mound. Isolation, for which M. C. 
exhibited a decided preference at the novel's outset, is cleariy to be understood as g shortcoming, as is his 
aimlessness. symbolized by his futile pedaling, his expending energy and getting nowhere. It is the aimless energy 
of earty adolescence which must, with maturity, be hamessed and directed In productive ways if one is to be a 
survfvor In the adult worid. 

It Is Lurhetta who spurs M. C. to action. She is a person of bold action, as her underwater swimming feat 
clearty-and almost fatally-demonstrates. M. C/s efforts to Impress Lurhetta go-as they do so often In adolescence- 
unrewarded. Lurhetta departs without a goodbye, but not without leaving a parting memento-her knife. M. C. finds 
that knife and it becomes for him a symbol of action. With the desire to preserve his family heritage (instilled by his 
parents and reinforced by Lewis) and the will and means to action given him by Lurhetta, M. C. can now take 
positive steps against the impending disaster threatening his home. He begins building a wall of earth and sto.^e as 
a bamer against the sliding spoil. The closing chapter abounds in language suggesting the esrth and solid ground. 
"His pants were muddy to the knee" (224). "He dragged his feet" (225). "He searched the ground" (225). "He 
gouged a hole in the side of [a hill], but he had no anger strong enough for murdering hills. He could feel their 
rhythm like the pulse beat of his own blood rushing" (228). It Is this anger which he finally channels into positive 
action, and the book, which is so full of relative inactivity, ends with considerable zeal. By the novel's conclusion, 
an entirely new imagistic pattem has emerged-a pattern both opposite of and complementary to the opening 
chapter's soaring aerial imagery. The earth imagery was introduced eariy in the book-M. C.'s bedroom is a cave 
dug into the side of Sarah's Mountain and is at once womb and tomb, nurturing him in his ancestral land and 
isolating him from the worid. M. C.'s connection to his ancestry is seen in yet another symbol: his great- 
grandmother Sarah's name was originally McHigan, a name bearing a striking resemblance to "M. C. Higgins," and 
we have the same sense of coming full circle on Sarah'r Mountain. Jones once muses about the mountain, "It's a 
feeling . . . . Like, to think a solid piece of somethip;, oig belongs to you. To your father, and his, too. . . . And 
you to it, for a long kind of time" (72). 

When M. C. finally gets that feeling , he discovers that strength comes not from madly pedaling and 
swaying a forty-foot pole and pursuing vaporous dreams,but in descending from the pole and soiling his hands with 
reality. Through the acknowledgement of his family heritage and his acceptance of the communal spirit, he can find 
in himself the determined will to action. The symbols of the concluiiion are striking. The communal spirit Is 
strengthened when M. C.'s brothers and sister join in building the wall. When Ben Killbum, once regarded as an 
outcast by M. C.'s family, is welcomed in the effort, a new communal bond is cemented. Finally, when Jones brings 
the tombstone of the matriarch Sarah to reinforce the wall, M. C.'s enterpriap is sanctified by the spirit cf his family 
heritage. Taking this spiritual and cultural strength derived from his herftace-which is the past-and the moral and 
physical strength found in the sense of community-which Is the present-M. C. Higgins can forge a positive an 
deliberate action shaping his future. Now his claim to the title, "the Great." is justified. 

Contrary to Rees' opinion that "it Is not a he py ending" and that the wall represents a ^jtile attempt to 
stave off childhood (175), the conclusion contains mi i that is positive and hopeful. It matters not that the wall is, 
in fact, an inadequate defense against a crumbling juntain. Hamilton doet> not intend that we interpret the actions 
of the final chapter on a more realistic plane than we had viewed, fo* example, the forty-foot pole, the Killbums' 
wonderful net or their six fingers and toes, or the snake hoop. To read this wort< as pure realistic fiction is to miss 
the more enduring truth for which Hamilton Is striving. M. C.'s valiant efforts are a fitting prelude to the main 
preoccupation of adulthood, and building the wall represents his movement away from childhood and not an attempt 
to stave it off. What matters is the affirmation demonstrated by the deliberate action taken in the face of adversity. 
And if the hero can only say, with T. S. Eliot's persona, "These fragments I have shored against my ruins," perhaps 
that is no small accomplishment-many do far less. Hamilton's nost salient message speaks to humanity's resilience 
and instinct for survival, and through symbolism her characters transcend their mJjndane sun'oundings and achieve 
something like mythic proportions. M. C. Higgins Is a distinctly Afro-American hero who must come to tenns with 
his own cultural identity in order that he may embari< on his struggle for survival. In M. C.'s waking to the 




73 



knowledge of himsetf, he speaks to all humanity, and his struggle for survival Is part of the same great labor acted 
out dally by each one of us. 

Fern's State College 

Works Cited 

Commire, Anne. Vol. 4 of Something About the Author . Detroit: Gale, 1973. 

Hale, Janice E. Black Children: Their Roots, Culture, and teaming Styles . Provo, UT: Brigham Young U P. 1982. 
Hamilton, Virginia. M. C. Higgins. the Great . 1974. New York: Deil, 1983. 
Heins. Paul. "Virginia Hamiltn." Horn Bc ok August 1975: 344^. 

Rees, David. Painted Oeseft> Green Shade: Essays on Contemporary Writers of Fiction ior Children and Young 
Adults . Boston: Hom Book, 1984. 



Arabic Detective Fiction for Adolescents 
by 

Sylvia Patterson Iskander 



Detective fiction, especially In series, is a favorite.' among young readers In the Arab worid. The Middle East 
has several series comparable to the Stralemeyer Syndicate books In the detective stories of The "hree Adventurers 
and The Four Adventurers, written by various authors, and lh<* Five Adventurers, perhaps the b^-s. of the series, 
written primarily by Mahmoud Salem. A book In each series is nun-ently being published monthly ic: Cairo In modem 
standard Arabic, rather than the Egyptian dialect, perhaps In order to expand the audience beyond Egypt. These 
formula stories of approximately 15,000 words, usually concluding with a puff for the next book in the series, are all 
set In Egypt. Dennis Porter's belief that Western detective fiction is a "valuable barometer of [a] society's ideological 
norms" (1) is also accurate for Eastem fiction. 

The latter series have all the hallmarics of detective fiction for the young: improbably young heroos and 
heroines solving crimes which adults have not been able to unravel; past villainy limited to smuggling, theft, or 
pertiaps kidnapping, but usually not murder or ten-orism; the dilution of cun-ent danger (Fisher 280, 278, 283); the 
affumation of moral order; the belief in deductive reasoning; and the creation of a culturally acceptable hero. 

The sequence of events that define a detective story includes the crime, its discovery, the search for clues 
(some red hemngs), the recognition of the criminal, the chase and r!:pii:''e, and the final explanation. Young readers 
with prior experience in the genre especially enjoy the contrast between the "safely familiar" and the "tantalizingly 
new and different" (Billman 37), i... arity of the crime, the clever solution to a common crime, the developmen* of 
suspense, and the pleasurable arousal ot the reader's emotions (Porter 236). As Anne Scott MacLeod has scJ, 
"The real protagonist of [formula fiction] Is the reader; the real plot is a satisfying vicarious experience that also-and 
not incidentally-conveys messages the reader wants and is able to hear" (129). Both E«»stem and Western tales 
affirm their readers' beliefs; indeed, "the persistence of certain recognizable national culu al traditions within the large 
corpus of detective fiction" is, according to Porter, "remarioble" (127). I not only agree, but also propose to demon- 
strate how the cultural differences permeate aspects of the characterization, the action, and the methods for creating 
suspense. 

An Egyptian story differs by its expansive cast of characters from a Nancy Drew mystery. In The Mystery 
of the international Smuggler and The Mystery of the Dead End Street , two of the more than two hundred books In 
The Five Adventurers series, the five protagonists lunge in age from seven to- fifteen. The oldest, Tawfiq, whose 
nickname Takhtakh appropriately means "tubby," excels In logic and ratiocination; he bears no stigma In the Middle 
East for being a little overweight. His companions, two sets of brothers and sisters. Mohib and Nousah, Atif and 
Lozah, do not possess the same Intellectual prowess. The girls, Nousah and Lozah, play small roles, not because 
of their sex, but because of the difficulty of sustaining roles for five detectives. The two, who serve traditional female 
functions such as preparing food, nevertheless, accompany their brothers, indicating a move toward female equality. 
Occasionally, they even contribute to a mystery's solution; for example, in The Dead End Street the detectives know 
that a key was used in a robbery, but the keeper of the keys is innocent of any wrongdoing. Nousah's theory that 
the key was duplicated some months earlier when the keeper was on vacation and had a substitute proves con-ect. 

The males* behavior is a model of decorum, indicating respect for the girls and each other. The dialogue 
reveals a lack of competition and jealousy among the youths, unusual by American standards. When an infrequent 
disagreement occurs, quiet discussion with some deference shown to Takhtakh as the smartest resolves the issue. 

This behavior Is probably no more unrealistic than some other assumptions behind juvenile detection, such 
as child sleuths solving crimes that adults cannot solve. Margery Fisher enumerates the child-investigator's natural 
advantages for detection: "curiosity, an eye for insignificant details, the power to !uri< unseen and an awareness of 
environment as intense as that of a policemen on the beat" (284). One child investigator extraordinaire is Alia, a 
principal character In The Three Adventurers series. Called "the mother of Ideas," Alia bases her theories on careful 
attention to detail and ratiocination. In The Phony Policeman , her observation of the tight coat and short trousers on 
a pL^'ceman leads the detectives to believe he might be the phony officer they seek. Alla's role equa's, or even 
surpasses, that of her brothers. She could be an Eastem Nancy Drew, except for the danger factor. Always 




75 



accompanied by someone, her brothers, cousin, or cne to four police officers, who respect her ability but feel the 
need to protect her. Alia Is never in Jeopardy, the protection of females being Integral to Moslem society. When Alia 
deduces that trailing the gang's messenger will lead to the gang, "Everybody looks at her with appreciation, respect, 
and admiration. Colonel El-Amari [a high-ranking policeman who doubtless already knows the shadowing technique] 
says, \vhat a sharp glri you arel*'. Such high praise for Alia's deductions sounds patronizing to some American 
readers, but the Egyptian author seems to respect Alia sincerety. Thus female roles are not stereotyped In these 
stories, but glris are not quite as free as Western females. 

The relative balance of action to thought also distinguishes Western from Eastern detective fiction; In the 
West more exciting events happen to the central characters, and the theoretical solving of the crime receives less 
emphasis; in the Egyptian series, ratiocination predominates over the few "dangerous" adventures of the protagonists, 
such as the stranding of the youthful detectives In The international Smuggler when a storm tosses their boat upon 
a lake shore and the brief capture and imprisonment In a villa of the heroes, but not the heroines. In The Dead End 
Street . 

Because of the Intense interest in plot and suspense, characterization usually p(ays a lesser role In 
detective fiction. V^t even here differences in development refiect some of the society's values and beliefs, such as 
the myth of the hero. The detective stoiy "celebrates traditional heroic virtues " d expresses many of the attitudes 
associated with an Ideology of hero worship" (Porter 126). The detective/hero Is the one through whom the reader 
lives vicariously and whose values the reader tries to emulate. For example, Nancy Drew's roadster, the epitome of 
American middle-class materialism, represents one such value. In Eastern detective stories this type of materialism is 
absent, for the criminal may travel by Peugeot or Rithmo (an Italian-made car), but the heroes go by bus, bike, or 
small car, such as a Volkswagen-the usual modes of travel by the middle class. No doubt Takhtakh and the others 
are middle to upper class because they live in a villa, employ a maid, and possess a telephone, phones still being 
fairty uncommon in Egypt except in the major cities. The hero with whom the Eastern child reader Identifies Is not 
only middle class, but also modest, well-mannered, usually quiet and thoughtful; the Western reader sees Nancy 
Drew as middle class, yet charming, curious, headstrong, willing to take chances and face danger. The hero's 
qualities are culturally determined; In fact, the Eastern hero follows the tradition of the British detective novel of 
manners more than the American detective novel of adventure which led to the hard-boiled tradition in adult detective 
fiction. 

Different as the heroes are, a belief in deductive reasoning and the establishment of moral order are 
universal, even though the laws and the notion * criminality may differ from society to society. Crimes such as 
murder, theft, kidnapping, and smuggling, however, seem to be abhorred by all cultures as anti-social acts. An 
Intemational syndicate excites both Eastern and Western readers; the five detectives solve The Intematlonfi! Smuggler 
through the dlscoveiy of a most unusual cartridge, shot from a very large gun. A secret opening, deep In a water 
well, leads to a series of caves where members of an international smuggling team have hidden stolen pharaonic 
statues. The gradual discovery and the cold and hunger of the stranded sleuths engage the reader's empathy and 
anticipation. 

Since tales of detection are gold from the po<nt of view of the sleuth(s), whom the readers are expected to 
trust as impllcltly as they would a fairy tale's narrator, and since the Issues are cleariy divided between good and 
evil, we ordinarily neither meet the criminals nor empathize with them; their motivation, obviously money, is not even 
mentioned. They are shadowy figures, stock representatives of evil, Egyptians whose leader Is, however, an 
American, John Kent, an Inversion of Westen fiction, which often employs dart< and swarthy villains, perhaps Middle 
Eastern in origin. 

The Dead End Street requires a more sophisticated reader to perceive that a friend of the detectives 
participated as a gang member In a daring payroll robbery. Mr. Karam, who offers to keep watch for the criminals 
since they disappeared somewhere in his neighborhood, perhaps in the villa across the street, fools most of the 
youthful detectives and readers alike, but Takhtakh keeps his own watch and traps Mr. Karam, whose in-depth 
portrait opposes the generic tradition of relative anonymity for the criminal and thus challenges the reader. 




ERIC 



76 



Developing suspense challenges the authors, the different techniques used being a principal contrast 
between the stories undar examination. Traditional methods for developing suspense, such as delaying the action 
through descriptive passages, dialogue, authorial intrusion, or the inclusion of details about everyday life, are 
employed by both groups of authors. Both create suspense through the giving and the withholding of information. 
The Arabic stop/, however, probably includes fewer red hem'ngs, more repetition than American readers like, and 
more characters whose portraits are almost Flemish In detail. Because the characters are seldom alone, perhaps 
indicative of the large families and the crov/ded conditions in many Egyptian cities, the author must identify the 
speeches by speaker and perhaps by listener. The plurality of characters, each required to speak on occasion, 
produces frequent intemiptions and tedious rf»'*'"ration. 

Another type of delay for suspense occurs In chapter 1 of The Dead End Street when Takhtakh meets 
Inspector Sami: 



T: "Something must have happened in Ma'ady [a Cairo suburb].' 

IS: "I have news-fifty thousand Egyptian pounds worth!' 

T: "Don't you want to have a cup of coffee before we talk?" 

IS: "Indeed, I left my house without having anything." 

Takhtakh leaves and asks the maid to make a cup of coffee. Tnen he phones his friends . . . 
and asks them to come to his house after telling them about Inspector Sami's presence* 

When the maid serves the coffee, the four friends come and greet the inspector warmly. It 
has been quite a while since they last saw him. After his first sip of coffee, the inspector commences 
talking. 



This meeting with Inspector Sami Is typical of many gatherings that enable the youthful detectives to 
discover crimes, pool information, formulate moves, and deduce solutions. The suspense is generated from the delay 
caused by \hfj polite Inquiry about the coffee, the request to the maid, the phone call, and the serving of coffee~all 
before any further explanation of the fifty thousand pounds. The Arab reader's patience contrasting with the 
American child's de.nand for action is indicative of ihe slower pace of life in Middle-Eastern society as compared with 
that of America. 

The r.uoted passage also revea.s the importance in Middle-Eastern culture of welcoming and serving guests 
prior to condu ^ting bv ss, and it emphasizes the importance of attention to elders and their positions, for 
throughout the series each officer is accurately and repeatedly addressed by his appropriate title. 

In conclusion, tricca Egyptian detective stories reflect their society's attitudes about family, females, 
authority, materialism, hospitality, and manners. Verisimilitude is obvious In the slower paced stories, generated by 
many methods of delay. Youthful Amencan readers would probably find the plethora of characters, the emphasis on 
polite behavior, the repetitious dialogue, and the lack of fast paced action enoLs^n to reject these books, but to 
readers interested in hermeneutics, logic, subtleties of detection and ratiocination, and Eastern culture, they are most 
provocative. 

University of Southwestern Louisiana 



Billman, Carol. "The Child Reader as Sleuth." Children's Literature in Education 15.1 (1984). 30-41. 

DiYanni. Robert. "The Expectations of Genre. A Review of The Pursi n of Crime by Dennis Porter." Children's 
Literature Quarteriv 8.3 (1983): 32-33. 

Fisher, Margery. "The Sleuln-Then and Now." The Quarter 'oumal of the Library of Congress 38.4 (1981). 277-84. 



Works Cited 



ERIC 




77 



MacLeod, Anne Scott. "Secrets in the Trash Bin: On the PerCfinlal Popularity of Juvenile Series Books." Children's 
Literature In Education 15.3 (1934): 127-40. 



Porter, Dennis. The PursuK of Crime: Art and Ideology In Detective Fiction . New Haven: Yale UP. 1981. 

Salem, Mahmoud. The Five Adventu. : in thp Mystery of the International Smuggler . Adventure No. 22 in The Five 
Adventurers .Series. Cairo: Dar El-Ma*aref. 1985. 

— . The Five Adventurers in the Mystery of the Dead End Street . Adventure No. 27 in The Five Adventurers Series. 
Cairo: Dar El-Ma'aref, 1986. 

Snyder, SyMa B. "On the Edge of Your Chain Choosing Mysteries for Children." The Bu»etin: Newsletter of The 
Children's Literature Assembly of the National Council of Teachers of English 11.2 {^)^35): 11-14. 

Wali, Esamat. The Three Adventurers in the Mystery of the Phony Officer . Adventure No. 161 in The Three 
Adventurers Series. Cairo: Dar El-Ma*aref, 1986. 



ERIC 



78 



''Circling the Square: the Role of Native 
Writers In Creating Native Literature for Children" 

by 

Jamen H. O.ellert 

In a bnof but insightful essay on tne ^speoal tensions and dynamics which have charactenzed Nacive/non* 
Native relations in Canada. Jon Stott of (he University of Alberta adapts the ancient symbol Incorporating the circle 
and square found In Tibetan, Indian, and Chiijese emblems In order to explore the nature of the conjunction of these 
tv/o cultural forces of Canada anci North America. Stott suggests that squares and circles symbolize the European 
and Native cultural Influences of !;orth America, and adds that In a figurative sense, 

the histo.7 of North America during recent centuries has been dominated by an attempt tc square 
the drcie. ... All that Is symbolized by the checkerboard pattem of prairie landscapes has been 
dominant; Enp!ish law, political structures and religious beliefs have been superimposed on the 
land and the people. All that is symbolized by the circle-tribal organUrational patterns, spiritual 
Ideals, and artistic patterns-has been attacked as outmoded, primitive, and foolish. Squares have 
been Imposed on circles, destroying the configurations the latter or pushing them underground 
where they could neither be seen nor be effective. (2) 

Jon Stott 's metaphor Is chosen advisedly. Not only do circles represent a fundamental existential concept for Native 
peoples-a truth reflected in everything from their paintings to their tribal meetlngs-but the reference to attempting Mo 
square the circle* is a cogently appropriate con-elative for the European ho^^emony over all aspects of Native life and 
the resultant shifting demographics which have had the ultimate effect of discouraging any real sense of relevance or 
pride in the Natives* view of their own cultural heritage. Signiflcantly, as Stott notes, one aspect of Native life which 
has suffered from the imposition of non-Native values on Canadian Native peoples Is the artistic. It Is notable that 
along with the more publicized areas of Native concerns such as aboriginal rights, self-govemance, land and resource 
claims, and high mortality and morbidity rates, the Native leaders of Canada and the Canadian government have 
recognized the need to revive and redevelop Native languages, literature, art, music, and customs. Such attention Is 
v/arranted, and perhaps most partlculariy warrr^nted in respect to Canadian children, for the presentation of limited or 
biased views of the Native experience to children in their formative years Is fraught with danger. 

This danger Is recognized by many who are directly involved in Native art and literature In Canada. For 
example, the author and illustrator, George ClutesI, stresses that his versions of West Coast Indian tales are more 
than an exercise in casting a nostalgic eye back to a nearty forgotten culture of a once carefree people. Instead. 
Clutesi sees his art as performing a critical dual role In Canadian society, in which non-Indians might better 
understand the culture of the true Indian, and Natives might return to their art to counteract the dubious 'ctviliztng* 
influences of alien cultures. Clutesi goes so far as to suggest that the attenuation of Native art and literature "could 
be part of the reason so many of the Indian population of Canada are in a state of bewilderment today* (12). What 
I wish to explore here is to what extent Clutesl's concerns have been and are being redressed In respect to works 
which might be read and studied by Canadian children, jr. to return to the drcle-square .metaphor, to ask this 
question: has there been any circling of the square in works to which Canaocn childret^ are exposed? In 
addressing this question, I especially v/|sh to offe: some comments on the role Native writers have pla*"»fi and are 
playing In this process. 

A survey of the wide spectrum of literature about Natives which Canadian children might encounter reveals 
three roughly chronological phases of development; that in which Natives are stereotyped as savages (noble and 
othen/vise); that in which non-Natives attempt to depict the Native experience more realistically; and finally, {rM in 
which Native writers relate their perceptions of their own culture and history. The first phase noted, whicii began as 
eariy as the first decade of the eighteenth century In America with the "Decrfieid Captivity Nanatlves* and which 
ultimately Altered down through numerous well known wori<s read by children In both the United States and Canada, 
is by and larfc characterized by highly generalized, exaggerated, and usually stereotypical depictions of the Native 
reality. The portraysl of Natives In literature and various derivative media available to children as either nobility 
incarnate or more often as bloodthirsty heathens bent on sadistic treachery aimed at good Christian folk Is one 
which mor adult readers would o1:>iniss as blatantly false. However, to what extent chlldreri would recognize the 

ERIC „ 82 



falsity of such charactenzations is another matter. Moreover, for children who spend innumerable hours in front of 
the silver screen or the family television watching cavalry troops, resolute pioneers, and redoubtable mountain men 
overcome the menace of the red skinned devil, any reiteration In print of such h^pefbole is a matter for concern. 

In the second phase of the development of Native literature to which Canadian children are exposed it can 
be seen that if not always the results, at least the intentions of these non-Native adaptors are more constructive than 
those of writers from the first group noted in one critical way. they demonstrate a conscious attempt to re-create 
Native realities in their wor1<. Although a dedication to this principle by no means assured for adapters, the attempt 
to offer the essential spirit and flavour of Native ,He has become the sine Qua non of most literature written about 
Natives In Canada today. 

While time does not allow me to discuss these non-Native writers in f ny detail, I would suggest that many 
of their works, because of a fidelity to European fairy tale models and to a style and expression more consistent with 
such models, the rightness of tone, language, and characterization amenable to Native stories is seldom present. On 
the other hand, a book such as Christie Hams's Raveii's Cry , which won the Canadian Library Association's book 
of the Year Award for Children's Literature in 1967, is a clear example of how the myth, legend, and history of Native 
peoples can be incorporated into a convincing work of historical fiction without sacrificing the realities of the original 
peoples. What is clear in Hams' work is that she succeeds in freeing herself from the domination of European 
philosophical, religious, and artistic influences, lu spite of the successes of a writer such as Christie Ham's in 
treating Native sources, as Agnes Grant of Brandon University notes in an article oii five "cultural awareness" books 
on Native life in Canada written for children by non-Natives, "the question 'How would this book have been written 
by a Native person?' :hould always luri< at the back of the reader's mind" (68), Happily, in recent years, som? 
answers to Agnes Grant's critical questions have been made available. 

Many of the challenges and p^-oblems with which non-Native adapters of Native stories must deal apply 
equally to Native writers, of course. Recalcitrar^t source material, translation complications, the required degree of 
adaptation and embellishment, the intrusions of philosophies and art forms inconsistent with Native culture, and 
appropriate L .els of diction-all must be considered by any writer treating indigenous sources. Other questions arise, 
however, which apply to Native writers in a somewhat more spe:;ialized v/ay. One such query, implied by Agnes 
Grant in her closing thoughts on the cultural awareness book'j alluded to ah^ve, is *//hether Native writers have 
something to offer > . . readers not available in books wrr'.ten by non*Nativ65, ^ :nnd concomnaiit concern is 
posed by Jon Stott: a Native writer using a European language and a European ficlioral genre limited by these in 
communicating his materials? (4). In attempting to ansv.er these questions, I shall emphasize the stories and 
criticisms of three current Native writers: Maria Camp'jell, Basil Johnson, and George Clutesi. All three can well 
serve to demonstrate the particular role oi the Native/ writer whose wori<s are read by children. 

Maria Campbell, a Metis, was bom in 1940 in Northem Saskatchewan. She has written four books, one of 
which i:, in autobiography eniHled Half-breed ; her three other books arf-" oKen read by children. These three wori<s, 
People of the buffalo, ' ''♦ le Badq_er and the Fire Spirit , and Riel's peop le are all sensitive explorations of the Native 
Canadian experience, /eople of the buffalo stresses the idea of the hsrrnonious relationship between Nature and 
man, a theme obvicusiy important to Campbell since it again appears in Riel's people . In an interview recorded in 
1979, Campbell explains why this concept has particular relevance for hen "Even with my own people, we are losing 
a lot of that. It is important for all of us. If we don't realize that and we don't do something to conserve or 
oreserve what we have, we are going to lose it all, just destroy it" ("A conversation with Maria Campbell" 19*20. 
Little Badger is a re-creation of the timeless and universal legend of the attainment of the gift of fire, framed by the 
story of a young contemporary Indian giri's visit to her grandparents' mission home. Campbell Is not ^n\y relating 
another legend, however; she is exploring the importance and tenuousness of the Natives' link with the past. The 
experiences of the young giri are realistically presented, although the themes transcend the specific setting of the 
Canadian prairie. In Riel's people . Campbell's primary emphasis is on the r^io-^onccrtingly real plight of the M6tis, 
who as half'breeds, are tom between the two dominant cultures of t^e Western plains region of Canada. 

In each of these three books, whether Campbell Is emphasizing the oneness of all life, the Native peoples* 
links with their traditions and past, or the more specific ramifications of being a M6tls half-breed in modem Canada, 
it is difficult to imagine a non-Natrve bringing the same degree of Insight and feeling to these ihemes. Campbell is 

ERIC 



still tied to the land of Northern Saskatchewan; In the 1979 interview cited above, she states that she has a "spiritual 
feeling* for the land and returns to her birthplace whenever she is really feeling "weak" (16). In her treatment of the 
M^tis* plight in Riel's people . Campbell reveals that as she wrote and relived some of the incidents in the story, 
"there were parts . . . where I just wept* (20). To retum to Agnes Grant's question on the unique contributions to 
be made by Native writers, it Is unlikely that few non-Native writers, whether consulting records In archives or 
interviewing tribal elders, could duplicate Campbell's perspective. 

In hk' introduction to his tales of the West Coast Tse-shat people (9-14). George Clutesi explains how his 
stories can transmit the traditional manners and mores of his people to young readers. Clutesi stresses that the 
tales in his collection emphasize ideas such as the profound pride of his people, their reliance on physical and 
^'^iritual strength, their reverence for Nature, and their concept of a universe shared by all living things, Clutesi also 
r- -ks on the structure o'^ his stories, and underscores the Indians* belief in the magical powers of numbers (for 
V^^A Coast tribes the number was usually four) and ceremonial procedures and customs. In addition. Clutesi 
argues that the repetitive situations and phrases common to many tales are linked to the emphasis on moral 
didactidsm inherent in the original oral versions which were intended to be committed to memory. 

The tales themselves are simply presented, suggesting that Clutesi is directin*] these fundamental Native 
beliefe and concepts at the pre-adolescent reader in particular. Thus in a typical story, which combines the 
traditional theme of the human quest for fire with an explanation of "why the inside of the deer's knees are black," 
the irreprossive appeal of Ah-tush-mit. Son of Deer, who steals fire from the feared wolf people, renders Clutosi'o 
celebration of strength, cunning, endurance, and unrversal altruism, unobtrusive. As illustrated in Maria Campbeil's 
stories for children, what for most non-Nati^ e writers is a two-step process (learning about the traditions and beliefs 
and them presenting them), for the Native writer is often an instinctive, restorative retum to his or her roots. This 
one-step process applies to Clutesi as well as to Campbell, and the primary consequence is that his stories for 
children are conveyed with an easy wit and humor, with appropriate detail, and above all. with a sure sense of the 
original oral versions. 

In the preface to his collection of Indian stories, the Ojibway writer and scholar, Basil Johnson, suggests 
precisely what it is that a Native writer can offer to non-Native and Native readers alike. Like Gecqe Clutesi, 
Johnson begins with a fimi understanding of his own heritage, or. as he defines it, "the sum total of what people 
believe about life, being, existence, and relationships" (7). Also like Clutesi, Johnson perceives his stories as 
beneficial to both Native and non-Native readers. For the fornier. the tales are "one way of perpetuating and 
enhancing the bequest of our forefathers; for the latter, they are "a means of s.iaring that gift with those whose 
ci ure and heritage may be very different but who wish to enlarge their undecstanding" (7). But perhaps most 
significant of all-and it Is here that a Native writer's perspective might well be differen* from that of a non-Native- 
Johnson views the stories not merely as anthropological depositories of information and attitudes, but as an 
inextricable part of the existence of the Native peonies. Ke writes, "but it is not enough to listen or to read or to 
understand the truths contained in stories; according to the elders the truths must be lived out and become part of 
the being of a person. The secrch for truth and wisdom ought to lead to fulfillment of man and woman" (7). It is 
this element of self-actualization, of developing through the stories (so obviously a part of the orally rendered 
versions) which is instinctive with writers such as Johnson, Clutesi. and Campbell and so often foreign to most non- 
Native writers. For example. Johnson's viston of the human cycle of life and death, as presented in his tale The 
Path Vi/lthout End , is unmistakably clear and convincing because the vision and the tale spring from the same 
impulse for him. Tl'is story on the acceptance of destiny and death as symbolized through the anguished search of 
a young brave for his dead lover has an immediacy and resonance because for the writer, th** story is more than an 
adventure involving supematural beings: it is instead, closer to an accepted article of faith. 

To retum to the two questions asked at the beginning of this brief review of these representaV 'e Native 
writers: the sensitivity, insight, and artistic skill of the writers such as the three discussed here would support the 
contention that Native artists have perspec».\^es on Issues and concepts affecting Native peoples which make their 
v/rilings invaluable to young Canadian readers. As to the matter of the liabilities of Native writers having to use an 
alien language and adopted fictional genres to communicate thdr materials, it should be recognized that any 
rendering in English of a Native language, oral story is at best a corpromise. But like Plato's philosopher, the 



ERIC 



Native Interpreter is deddedly closer to the "ideal" than are most who approach the stories from another ojfture. 
another perspective, a;id often with another motive. 

liikehead University 



Campbell, Maria, little Badger and the Fire Spirit . Toronto: McClelland and Stewart Limited. 1977. 

People of the buffalo . Vancouver Douglas and Mclntyre, 1976. 
— . Rrel's people . Vancouver Douglas and Mclntyre, 1978. 

Clutesi. George. Son or Raven Son of Dear . 1967. Sidney, B. C: Gray's Publishing Ltd., 1975. 
Grant, Agnes. "Bridging the Cultural Gap." Canadian Children's Literature 31-32 (1983): 63-68. 
Johnson, Basil. Olibwav Heritage . Toronto: McClelland and Stewart Limited. 1976. 
Stott. Jon C. "The Circle and xhe Square." Canadian Children's Literature 31-32 J983): 24. 
— . "A Conversation with Maria CampbelL" Canadian Children's Literature 31-32 (1983): 15-22. 



Worics Cited 





82 



Julie of the Wolves and DooscnQ ; The 
Cultural Conflict Between the Inuits and 
the Dominant American Culture 
by 

Mary Uckteig 



In 1986, Gary Paulson received the Newbery Honor Award for Doqsonq , Thirteen years earlier, Jean 
Craighead George received the Newbery Award for Julie of the Wolves . These two books are of particular interest 
to the topic of cross-cufturalism In children's literature. Both books deal with clashes between two cultures of North 
American people: the Inuit culture of the North and the dominant culture of the Western Hemisphere. The purpose 
of this paper is to discuss this cultural clash and to observe the Importance of Inuit songs and Inuit ways as we 
note the contrast with Western culture. 

Julie of the Wolves is a story set in Alaska. Jclie, a young Inuit girl, is running away from an arranged 
marriage. Her goal is to go to San Francisco to stay with her pen-pal. When she becomes lost on the tundra, she 
befriends wolves In order to survive. She eventually finds her father, who she thought was dead, and must race the 
truth that he is not the way she remembered him. This requires thai she make a decision about the place-both 
geographic and cultural-where she belongs. 

Russel in Doqsonq also lives in the Inuit culture. As he approaches manhood, he becomes aware of a 
restlessness in himself. In addition, he is concerned about the fact that the Inuit culture is being debased by 
Influences from the Western culture, called "the Outside" by Russel. Realizing his son's restlessness, Russel's father 
sends him to see Oogruk, the shaman, to seek help. Russel asks Oogruk how to get the song back, those Inuit 
songs that are the symbol of the truth. As Russel's father says, "Sometimes words lie-but the song is always taie" 
(Paulson 11). Oogruk suggests they must live the right way to get the songs back. Russel's response, "1 will," 
comes from him without knowing he is speaking, but he realizes his destiny is to become a song. Thus, his quest 
is one to rediscover the old ways and become a song. Leaving with Oogruk and Oogruk's dogs, he completes a 
journey across the tundra and finds his song. 

The major similarity of these plots is the fact that a central character, living in two cultures, confronts the 
changes in his native ways as these are influenced by a culture from the outside. As an aside, rt is worthwhile to 
note that cultural conflict Is the theme of other books of children's literature. Moon Shadow in Draqonwinqs by 
Lawrence Yep, for example, must face the conflict between his Chinese background and the American culture In San 
Francisco in the earfy 1900's. Similarfy Shirley Temple Wong of in the Year of the Boar end Jackie Robinson by 
Bette Bao Loid, realizer^ the differences between Chinese ways and the values of the dominant Western culture of 
Brooklyn, New Yori<, in the ia40's. Likewise, Cassie Logan, a Black American In Roll of Thunder. Hear My Cry by 
Mildred Taylor faces the prejudice of a white society in rural Mississippi during the Depression. In tnese three 
stories, as in Julie of the Wolves and Doqsonq , young people of one culture feel the effects of living with the 
Western culture. But Moon Shadow, Shirley Temple Wong, and Cassie Logan are ull different from Julie and Russel 
in that they have moved or have been moved into the Western culture while Julie and Russel have stayeu in their 
own land, and the Western culture has come to them. This is a significant difference, I believe, because the very 
environment of Julie and Russel seems to cry out for the maintenance of old ways and to resist the changes being 
imposed on it. The tension between two cultures is, therefore, even more dramatic than in the other stories. 

In addliion to the cultural conflict that is faced In both Julie and Doqsonq . there are other similarities. Both 
are third person stories, both have one central character, young Inuits (one male, one female). Both stories are 
linear they begin at one place and anive at a different place, not returning to the place where they started. Other 
aspects of the journeys are similar the hunger, the weariness, it\e dangers, and the Importance of hunting with 
some successes, even though against great odds. The goals of the journeys are different. At the outset, Russel 
has no panicular goal, but he feels he must go. At the end of the story, we know that Russel has reached his 
goal, not necessarily a goal of place, but the goal of his destiny: that is, the destiny to become a song. At the 
beginning, Julie has a goaMhe goa' being to live in San Francisco~but when the story ends, we do not know what 



her goal is. 



ERIC 



83 




On their Journeys, these characters change, as these are journeys from innocence to experience. Both 
characters are caught between childhood and adulthood, between Inuit culture and the Western culture. The 
journeys provide some contrasts. Russel is going north, Julie Is going south; Russel is running away from the 
Western v/orld, Julie Is running to it; Russel's journey takes place in winter. Julie's in summer. Interestingly, the 
penis of winter (cold and storms) for Russel are no greater problem than the perils of summer for Julie. As Julie 
says, •! am lost and the sun wlli not set for a month. There is no North Star to guide me* (George 10). So Julie is 
waiting even though she knows where she wants to go, while Russel Is running, sometimes in what seems like a 
fury, even though he has no particular place/destination in mind. 

During these journeys, they learn about themselves and about the worid-the joumey from innocence to 
experience is, of course, a lesson in living, a study of the human condition. And their particular world views are 
affected by dual cuKural influences. The contrasts are displayed to the reader in different ways. Let us first look at 
Julie . 

Jul!** '3 somewhat ambivalent about these two cultures; for example, on page 8 we read, "She spoke half in 
Eskimo, half in English, as rf the instincts of her father and the science of the gussaks . the white-faced, might evoke 
some magical combina* 

tion. . . She cleariy understands the differences in gussak ways and Eskimo ways, ar^d throughout the book, the 
reader is exposed to both. Julie says, for example, "Wolves do not eat people. That's gussak talk" (George 8). 

For Julie, the Western culture seemed all right In the summer, but in the winter the Inuit ways were crucial. 
After all, as we find out in a flashback, she had asserted her Inuit ancestry when her parents had called her Julie 
(her summer name), and "she had stomped her foot and told them her name was Miyax. I am Eskimo, not a 
gussak!" (George 81) 

The cultural dash is shown to the reader in other ways and frequently without conment. We see the 
trappings of DEWS (the Distant Early Warning System) set up by the government and hear the scientists who have 
come to the Arctic, proclaiming to the Inuits: "We now know lot about living in the cold" (George 91). This must 
have seemed a curious comment to the Inuits who had survivec* the cold for centuncs. And we are shown the 
effects of the invasion of the West, "boats, oil dmms, tires, buckets, broken c^;s. and rags and bags. . . ." (George 
92), as well as the influence of alcohol. 

The influence of the West most devastates Julie when she realizes that the gussak hunters, shooting from 
airplanes, are killing-not for the food and the need of the animal, not even for the bounty, but simply killing for killing. 
At thai point, she must reject t^ ^ West and her joumey to San Francisco. "The pink room is red with your blood . . 
. I cannot go there" (George 1»^>;. 

Julie comes to see the value of the Inuit ways: 
The old Eskimos were scientists too. By using the plants, animals and temperature, they had changed the harsh 
Arctic into a home, a feat as Incredible as sending roc''"** to the moon . . . (George 121). 

Lst us now turn to the presentation of the V/estem worid as it is shown in Doqsonq . Here the nan'ator's 
presentation u more direct. We are presented, likewise, with Russel's reaction. As earty as the second paragraph 
of the book, this fact is presented: the government house v. here Russel and his father live is refen-ed to as small- 
s.'4een by twenty-where the familiar sounds "grated like the ends of a broken bone" (Paulson 3). The nine pages of 
Chapter One present nine negative images of the transplanted Western culture In this Inuit village. This concentration 
of negative images Is accompanied by Russel's thoughts about them. For example: his father smoked ciga-rettes- 
product of the Outside-and the resulting cough . . . "tore at Russel ... and It meant something that did not belong 
on the coast of the sea In a small Eskimo village. The coughing came from th2 Outside, cani from the tobacco 
which came from the Outside and Russel hated it" (Paulson 4). 

On the same page (the 6th paragraph of the story), Russel rpiiects on the snowmobiles. "To fourteen-year- 
old Russel the whine of them above the wind hurt as much £s the sound of coughing. He was coming to hate 
them, too" (Paulson 4). 




84 



S7 



The reader does not begin this story with any suggestion there Is strength to be found in Outside. In 
Julie , the understanding of the contrasts comes out of the story while In Doqsong the contrasts come from the 
narrator's description. These different presentations can probably be explained by considering the focus and climax 
of the stories. And the focus and climax of both books concern the cultural conflict and the Importance of Inuit 
song. 

We must now turn our attention to the place of Inult songs in both stories. Russel*s story Is a search for 
a song, and the song Is the climax of the story. To find the song, he must return to the "old ways* explained by 
Oogruk. The conflict of the cultures, the rejection of influences from the Outside, and the acceptance of Inult ways 
penneate the story until we end with the song. 

In Julie , the climax comes when Julie realizes the conflict of the cultures. / s references to cultural conflict 
pemneate Doqsong , song itself permeates Julie . And, as cultural conflict is the climax In Julie, song is the climax in 
Doqsong . In Julie of the Wolv es there are at least twenty-one references to rhythm, song, dance as Julie's natural 
response to the rhythm of her work, her circumstances, and the landscape. 

Both stories end in songs. In the final passage of Julie of the Wolves , Julie sings a sad song of the 
passing of *he seals and whales; she had come to terms with the fact that "the hour of the wolf and the Eskimo is 
over" (George 170). As seen throughout the book, Julie makes literal use of song. Russel's song i$ the song that 
Russel has earned through the completion of the hero quest. It is mo**^ a symbolic song than the songs of Julie. 
The song he sings is a personal song and symbolizes a retum to the Truth of the Old Ways. It is likewise the story 
of his journey, the story of his initiation, the song of his discovery, and of his becoming the song. 

While the enoi>;gs (both songs) are similar, the story climaxes are very different. In Dogsong , the climax is 
the song. In Julie , the climax comes several pages eariier when Amaroq, the mighty wolf, is killed. This din tax Is 
accompanied not by a song, but a dramatic scream of disbelief: "... I don't understand, I doni understand. la 
vun qa vun qa , she cried, Pisupa gasu punga . She spoke of her sadness In Eskimo, for she could not recall any 
English" (Goorge 142). While the song is the final climax in Dogsong . the conflict between the cultures is the final 
climax in Me. She becomes convinced. Russel left on his journey convinced of the conflict; Julie arrives, in a 
tragic sense, where Russel had starter The reader shares the sorrow that "the hour of the wolf and the Eskimo is 
over." Our joumey through Julie and Doqsong is at an end; it is an ending without a clear resolution. 

Both Julie's and Russei's stones end in questions. The reader does not know, anymore than Julie does, 
where she belongs. While Russel has arrived at a destination and completed an initiation, the reader still must 
wonder how Russel wi!' adjust tc life in this northem village. And so, our joumey ends with questions as well, for It 
is impossible to suggest solutions to a conflict in progress. 

In keeping with the spirit of these books/joumcys, let m«i end this paper by raising some questions. Since 
both of these books present stories with equivocal endings, this seoms appropriate. I realize that raising these 
questions might suggest that I have answers to them. Let me assure you that this is not (he case. 

Question Nur One. Both of these stones present cultural conflicts between inuit and Western culture 
written by non-lnuit autnors. Would this culture clash be presented in the same way by an inuit writer? 

In considering this question I am reminded of Eves of Dari<ne88 by Jamake Highwater, who wrot a bo ok 
about a main character faced with a clash of worid views. His main character, Yesa, is a Native American of the 
North Plains of the United States. Yesi' confronts great turmoil in his life because of ''icreasing European settlement. 
When others suggest the situation Is hopeless, he responds, 

. . there is something we can do. . . . We can learn so much that we can outsmart them! We can 
becon.e so wise In their own knowledge that we can rise above them. We can teach our people everything we 
le&m, until we are no longer strangers in our own land. We can do all of this so wo can learn to survivel And then 
how proud we will be to have kept our grandmothers alive within usi That is what we can dol (Highwater 161) 



ERIC 




85 



Question Number Two, Both stories present young people who oeen determined to hang onto old ways 
«*hen presented with new ones. These young people ere more determined than the older generations of their 
families. Are the young more likely to resist change than their parents are? 

And one more question might be considered. Does the Introduction of Western ways necessarily diminish 
Inult ways? While visiting the Northwest Tem'tories pavilion at the EXPO 86 In Vancouver. I was struck by a quote 
from an Inult that appeared there: "... It is often said that we are no longer Inult because we drive skiddos and 
use outboard motors. . . . However, you must ask yourself if a fanner is l^ss of a fanner because he uses a tractor 
instead of a horse" (Abjumannjal 1979). 

Yes, we must ask ourselves these, and many other unanswerable questions as well. And we must thank 
Gary Paulson and Jean Craighead George for presenting works of literature that tell stories that prompt questions for 
us to consider, for unanswered questions demand more thought than answered onea.- 

University of Nebraska at Omaha 

Works Cited 

George. Jean Craighead. Julie of the Wolves New York: Harper. 1972. 

Hlghwater, Jamake. Eves of D a r1<ness . New York: Lothrop. 1985. 

Lord, Bette Bao. In the Year of the Boar and Jackie Robinson . New York: Harper. 1984. 

Paulson. Gary. Dogsonq . New York: Bradbury. 1985. 

Tayior, Mildred. Roll of Thunder Hear Mv Cry . New York: Dial. 1976. 



Yep, Lauren- Draqonwinqs . New York: Harper. 1975. 



Florence Crannell Means: 
Cultural Barriers and Bridges 
by 

Celia Anderson 



When children's author Florence Cranneii Means died in 1980, she had written more than forty books in 
which she had championed the cause of cross-culturalism in the United States. Problems concerning ethnic, 
religious, or class prejudices are central to virtually ail of her work. From 1919 when her first book, Rafael and 
Consuelo . was published, she wrote straightforwardly throughout her long career about f\/lexican-Americans, blacks, 
migrant workers, American Indians, and other groups not readily accepted by mainstream society. Long before the 
issue-oriented books of the 1960's, Means had pioneered this tenitoiy. 

Her heroes and heroines from various backgrounds all have a pioneer courage to seek out a better life. 
However, her characters' ability to win acceptance against great odds has elidted the criticism that some of Means' 
happy endings are "too pat" (reviews in the New York Times and Library Joumai) . She has also been accused of 
writing some books that ar3 "too unhappy to sustain the Interest of the young" (rev. The Saturday Review 13 Nov. 
1954: 94). The truth lies somewhere between. Perhaps her most challenging and ultimately her best works are 
those that emphasize the difficulties more than «he successes of minority groups. The subject that f\/1eans dealt with 
most powerfully, and in a manner that Is certalr.y not "too pat," is the dilemma of the American Indian in the United 
States. One of her last books. Our Cup Is Broken (1969), contains an analysis of the tragic problems that are bred 
when a mixture of cultures has come about through conquest and patronage rather than through a free exchange 
among peoples. 

■"^or years I have spent as much time as possible among the Hopi and Navajo Indians," Means has said, 
"visiting a great many other tnbes besides. I have gained a Hopi name, Taw&honsi» and a Hopi granddaughter'" 
(Kuznets and Haycroft 216). Her Indian stories, which Include Tangled Waters (1936), Whispering Giri (1941), 
Shadow Over Wide Ruin (1942), Peter of the Mesa (1944), The Rains Will Conr.e (1954), and Sunlight on the Mesa 
(1960), In addition to Our Cup is Broken , are the most sombre series among her works, perhaps because of this 
dose knowledge. 

The proverb of the rigger Indians from which she has taken her title Is printed at the opening of Our Cup 
is Broken and forewams the reader that this will be a realistic rather than an Idaalized version of Indian life: 



The story of the heroine of Our Cup is Broken . Sarah Tuvenga (Indian name, Nawamana) bears out this 
proverb. A shy, undersized but cherished only child of Hopi parents who die when she Is twelve, Sarah is taken to 
Kansas by a principal and his wife, and raised and educated there. When she is twenty, a Romeo and Juliet 
romance with "the prized son of the town's richest banker" (Cup 44) Is determinedly blocked by . oth Sarah's 
guardians and the young man's rich parents. 

As a result a heart-wounded Sarah secretly leaves her college and retums to her native village at First 
Mesa. She is famished for the tribal ways and the golden lignt of the mesas, starved for the happy peace she knew 
at her mother's house. She finds theso, and a job with the field nurse, but also finds more poverty, dissension and 
discomfort that she remembered 

And then "One bright Sunday aftemoon when she felt her life empty like a ilried gourd" (Cup 106), she 
goes up alone to her mother's house, seeking peace In the beauty of Its newly restored state-and Is raped. A 
pregnancy results from this single Instance, but the young Hopi mar, as a member of her trib&; clan, cannot many 



in the beginning God gave to every people 



a cup of clay, and from this cup they 
drank their life. They all dipped in the 
water, but their cups were different. 



Our cup is broken now. It has passed a ly. 




87 



her. The tabus of white society had earlier prevented her marriage to the wealthy young man in Kansas and left her 
feeling dishonored; now the Hop! tabus subject her to the public dishonor of bearing a child out of wedlock. 

Sorrow mounts for Sarah when her baby daughter loses her eyesight through the lack of the simple 
remedy of silver nitrate. Continuing to live at her mother's house with only her daughter Missy, after a year of hard 
work, illness, and cesperate loneliness, Sarah succumbs to the wishes of family and friends and mames Bennie, a 
presentable young Hopi man. It is not a love match on her part, but Sarah yeams for Hopi ways and acceptance 
by her tribe. She is, however, not skillful at native tasks that are second nature to the other Hopi women on the 
Mesa. And the Hopi customs work to Sarah's harm. Because new brides are overworked for the first month of a 
mamage, crouching and grinding the com for the pika . her second pregnancy leads to a stillbom son, and a further 
cooling in the marriage. 

But Sarah stubbomly refuses to leave the village and house where she was bom even though Bennie is 
tempted to join some Hopis who are banding together and taking advantage of a government offer of money to buy 
land in a more fertile and less eroded area. Only after near tragedy, when, distracted by the derisive remarks of a 
young tourist who reminds her of her Kansas lov she forgets her blind daughter Missy long enough for the child 
to fall unhurt off the edge of a mesa, does Sarah decide that a permanent life here will not change for the better 
•She, Sarah, was living in her mother's house, and it had never looked more serenely beautiful, not even to the 
homesick dreams of her years in Finch [Kansas]. Yet she was like one camping ovemlght, and if she were to stay 
here for days or months or years, they would be makeshift days or months or years" (Cup 227). 

The young couple make ^vo decisions: to try to have another child and to leave First Mesa and build a 
better life. Sarah muses about the tract of land where they will be settling sn old military banacks "with nothing 
beautiful or restful to the eye" Cug 229). "Could the Hopis make it homelike? The satisfying loveliness which they 
had possessed througr. ^entunes had grown slowly, out of a way of life. They would be unskillful in transplanting it, 
if indeed they could transplant it at all" (229). Means closes the book wrth this question hanging. The Indian 
provpi) is fulfilled, the adobe house of her mother, cmmbllng when Sarah retumed, then repaired, will crumble again. 
The clay of the Mesa cannot contain the tribe forever. 

Means has woven some major themes into this book she wrote at the culmination of her long career. We 
have already seen ♦he thread of nostalgic longing for a simple, love-filled childhood, symbolized by Sarah's stubbom 
clinging to her mother's house. We have seen the courtship tabus, which strand Sarah in a nether-worid. After her 
rejection by the white culture, Sarah had "needed to be part of the tribe, as a sheep needed to be part of the flock, 
and would die if separated from it" (Cup 106). But that oneness is more difficult than she had expected, she feels 
"no more a part of Hopiland than she had been a part of Kansas" (106). Sarah Is a person who, rather than being 
enriched by exposure to two cultures, is ground between them. 

Means most cleariy elucidates such conflict between cultures when it centers on religious beliefs and 
rituals. The Hopis have a long tradition of worship and cannot understand why the v/hite missionaries, wnose 
stcf'e*? and theorios the Hopis respect, cannot respect theirs. It is a misunderstanding that goes back centuries in 
our hemisphere, Benjamin Franklin in his "Remarks on the Savages of North America" (1784), tells the story of a 
Swedish minister who "Saving assembled the chiefs of the Susquehanah Indians, made a Sermon to them, 
acquainting them with the p^ncipal historical Facts on which our Religion Is founded; such as the Fall of our first 
Parents by eating an Apple** (Franklin in Mott and Jorgenson 515-16). The Indians thank him and then relate the 
story of the coming of agriculture, in which the then starving hunting tribe beholds "a beautiful young Woman 
descend from the Clouds, and seat herself on that Hill, which you see yonder among Ihe Blue Mountains" (516). 
When the Susquehanahs share their kill with her, she rewards them: 

"Where her right hand had touchec' the Ground they found Maize; where her left hand had 
touch 'd It, \he^ found Kidney-Beans, snd where her Backside had sat on it, they found Tobacco." 
The good Missionary, disgusted with this idle Tale, said, "What I delivered to you was sacred 
TnJths; but what you tell me Is mere Fable, Fiction, and Falsehood." The Indian, offended, 
reply'd, "My brother, it see.tis your Friends have not done you Justice In your education; tl y 
have not weil instnjcted you in the Rules of Common Civility, You saw that we, who understand 



ERIC 



88^1 SI 



and practice those Rules, believ'd all your stories; why do you refuse to believe ours?" (Franklin, 
in Mott and Jorgenson, 516) 



In Our Cup is Broken . Means echoes this conflict. The Hopis admire Miss Lundquist, th« missionary, and 
"They were Inclined to approve of her God, and many of them would have paid Him tribute If she had not insisted 
on their caw?ing aside all their old ones as a preliminary' (Cup 19). Sarah instinctively grasps the connection that 
exists among m^lhs found round the world. Attending a Christmas celebration at the mission, she notes that "the 
Indian Christians presented a pageant which related the coming of the Christ Child, somewhat as the [Hopi] 
ceremonials related the coming of the clans to the mesas" (Cup 28). Later, tom between the two religions and 
cultures, Sarah admits to herself that she "preferred the Christian God to Masau'u the Bloody-Headed" (Cup 140). 
But she Is offended by the narrowness, the ethnocentriclty of the Christians: 

But here again she drew back from the ideas of the Mission Marys, who called Masau'u 
the Devil and the Hopi Devil-Worshippers. Masau'u might have some malicious qualities, but 
fundamentally he was merely the god of the Underworid, Sarah knew. And when Miss Lundquist 
tumed indignantly away from even the sight of a kachina mask, she dealt a wound, since the 
kachinas were precious to the Hopis. (Cup 140) 

This conflict reaches its climax when the Hopi artifacts that Sarah found in a sealed closet in her mother's house 
are, in spite of their antiquity and beauty, bumed by her Uncle Abraham, who, though converted to Christianity, has 
tribal right to them. 

Sarah, Miss Dayton (the field nurse), an archaeologist from a museum, and the pagan Hopis are all 
hom'fied by this action, equally, even if for different reasons. But Means does not allow us any such easy reactions 
in this book. Throughout the story, the Hopis blame witches for illness and misfortune, when viruses, bad weather, 
and simple ignorance are the real culpnts. .Miss Lundquist inveighs against the superstitions and tabus: "'All the 
old Hopi ways-you've got to get rid of them all, if you ever-'" (Cup 118). Yet the old men feel that "Only if they 
earned out every requirement with exactitude, cou'd the ntes which had preserved their small people from the bnght 
mists of antiquity down to the dusty present continue to preserve them" (Cup 121). Their rituals predate 
Christianity; "church and mission and the small Christian settlement" are "dropped like a handful of pebbles at the 
foot of the mesa" (Cup 76). The sympathetic Nliss Dayton asks, "'Why can't they [the Christians] \ei the poor 
people alone about their souls? . . . Give them sanitation, yes. Give them education, yes. But let them keep their 
worship"' (Cup 105). Hearing this, "Sarah fumbled with the question whether they could go on making prayer sticks 
and dressing like kachinas after they were educated" (105). 

But the Hopis are not philosophically unsophisticated. When Sarah in her ninth year is initiated into the 
Kachina Society and le. ms the shattenng secret that the god like masked figures she had trembled before dunng her 
childhood, and who were presented as real gods, are familiar villagers, nothing more, she feels "as if the earth ha', 
melted under her feet" (Cup 32). Seeing her remain "silent and without spirit" her father takes her to John, the Kik- 
Monqwl . a wise leader in thf tnbe. In a beautiful passage the Kik-Monqwi reassures her: 

This thing of the kachinas . he said, was more than it looked on the outside. Those whom Sarah 
saw were impersonated by men, true. But while they were go.^ig through the ceremonies, the 
very spirit of the Supematurals was breathed into them so that for a while they were the 
kachinas . And so the people came close to touching the fringes of the kilts of the gods. And 
this was good not only for t Hopis but for the whole of the wori'^, unwilling though it was to 
receive from the despised handful. (Cup 32) 

it was John, the wise man, the Kik-Monqwi . who had advised Sarah to go with the school principal and 
his wife when her parents died, because the couple were good people. He was among the first who spoke , her 
on her retum to First Mesa, saying, "so often we Hopis ct;oose the wrong things to bring back to the mesas. . . . 
May you choose well, granddaughter" (Cup 97). 



ERIC 



At first Sarah has brought back the wrong thing. No, she has not brought cheap furniture, useless 
gadgets, or discontent with simple ways, but she has brought back a paralyzing negative atthude toward the outside 
worid. If the Mesa were not already a ghetto created by past laws and continuing custom, she would have wished 
it so. 't Is not until stung by the insulting attitude of the handsome young tourist whom she momentarily mistakes 
for her lost Kansas love, that she realizes she will never be whole unless she has the courage to deal with the 
worid beyond the inssa. One of the rituals that she trembled before as a child was the Night of the Giants, when 
masked "giants" came to each household threatening to eat the children as punishment for misdeeds. The parent's 
part in this ritual was to promise the giant food in place of the child. Now Sarah Is the parent, and she and Bennle 
must buy off the very real giants of poverty and prejudice and ignorance that threaten the future of their children. 
That they must leave their HopI village, and sadly sacrifice part of their long heritage In order to do this, is an 
indictment of the powerful society that barricaded Native Americans into areas too small and impoverished to sustain 
a race with the courage to survive and grow. 

It is bridges, not banlers, that we need. We have only to pick up a newspaper any day and read of North 
Ireland, South Africa, or Howard Beach to leam that cultures too often work at cross purposes rather than crossing 
over to each other. Florence Crannell f^eans knew the problem very well. She said of her own wori<, "The books 
about minority groups have had varied motrvations-more than any other the desire to introduce cne group of people 
to another, who otherwise might never know them, and so might regard them with the fear which is bred of lack of 
knowledge, and which in its tum breeds the hate, the prejudice which I have seen blazing out in destructive force'" 
(Commire 155). If Means' message Is "too unhappy to sustain the interest of the young," then God help the cause 
of cross-culturailsm, and God help the fate of the human race. 

Eastern Connecticut State University 

V/ori<s Cited 

A. B. M. Review of The Rains Will Come . Caturdav Review 37 (Nov. 13, 1954): 94. 

Assorted Sisters . Rev. New Yori< TTmcs . (Nov. 30, 1947): 47. 

Commire, Anne. ed. Soniethino about the Author . 1: 154-55. Detroit: Gale. 1971. 

Frankiin, Benjamin. "Remari<s Concerning the Savages of North America" (1784). In Benjamin Franklin , eds. Frank 
Luther Molt and Chester E. Jorgenson. New York: American. 1936. 

Hugh, Sr. Mary. Review of Borrowed Brother . Library Journal 83 (Oct. 15, 1958): '*'S79. 

Kunltz, Stanley J. and Howard Haycroft. The Junior Book of Authors . 2nd ed. New Yort<: Wilson. 1951. 

Means Florence vCrannell. The Moved-Outers . Boston: Houghton. 1945. 

Our Cup Is Broken . Boston: Houghton, 1969. 



90 



Censers as Critics: 
To Kill a Mockinc^bird as A Case Study 
by 

Jill P. May 



Censors in the United States have traditionally had problems when evaluating the tneuis of realistic fiction. 
Their inability to deal with another person's interpretation of real life issues has caused them to ban such diverse 
authors as Judy Blume, Robert Cormier, and Mark Twain. Often their accusations conc3ntrate on language, racial 
groups, sexual scenes, e.ntl-establishment attitudes which they deem somehow "un-American." These people do not 
deny an author's ability to tell a story. Instead, they wish to suppress cultural interpretations which they feel are 
harmful to "the moral fiber of America." 

The "critical" career of To Kill a Mockingbird is a late twentieth century case study of how such censorship 
wori<s In young adult literature. When Harper Lee's novel about a small Southern town and its prejudices was 
published in 1960 it received favorable criticism in professional journals and the popular press. Thus, though 
Booklist 's reviewer called the book "melodramatic" and noted "traces of sermonizing". Booklist recommended It for 
library purchase, commending Its "rare blend of wit and compassion* (September 1960: 23). The eariy reviews did 
not suggest that the book was young adult literature or that it belonged in adolescent collections. And so their 
discussions never suggested that the book had strong language or unusual violence which was beyond the scope 
of a young reader. Instead, they praised To Kiil a Mockingbird as a worthwhile interpretation of the South's then 
existing social structures. 

In 1961 the bwok won the Pulitzer Prize Awad, the Alabama Library Association Book Award, and the 
Brotherhood Award of the National Conference of Christians and Jev/s. It seemed that Harper Lee's blend of family 
history, loCc.. custom, and restrnined semionizing was important reading. Since the narrator was an adult 
remembering events that happened when she was a young giri between the ages of six and nine. To Kill a 
Mockingbird rapidly moved into Junior and senior high school libraries and classrooms. 

By the mid-sixties To Kill a Mockingbird had a solid place in junior and senior high school American 
liteiBture studies. However, once its use was discovered by Soutnem parents, its solid place in the curriculum met 
with strong disapproval. Sporadic lawsuits arose. In most eariy casis, the complaint against To Kill a Mockingbird 
was voiced by conservatives. Probably they were objecting to the story's candid portrayal of Southern white 
attitudes. This was not the issue typically raised, however. Instead, censors crrticized the book in general terms, 
objecting to the use of profanity, sex scenes, and immorality. In Hanover County, Virginia, for instance, the School 
Board declared the book "immoral" and sought to have it removed from county public schools. When the ruckus 
surfaced with national r.sws coverag'S; th^ School Board withdrew its criticism, claiming that the Incident "was all a 
mistake" (Newsletter on Inteliectual Freedom , March 1966: 16). To these eariy censors the problem with Harper 
Lee's bonk rested in its entire immorality. 

If one looks at their claims, the censors seem to be accurately assessing the book. Indeed, every major 
censor's objection-that the book contained profanity, that the black/white relationships depleted implied that white 
bigotry was widespread in the south, that religious hypocrisy was suggested, that a rape case was explicitly detailed, 
and that there were several violent scenes throughout the story-can be corroborated. The scenes which Harper Lee 
chose to picture are not ones of carefree childhood. Even the playful activities of the children are not totally 
innocent. Often Lee shows the children busy trying to deceive or defy adult authority. In the end, however, these 
eariy censors were reluctant to deal legally vith the real issues which concerned them. To conservative Southerners 
it seemed smarter to label the book ai'^d hope it would disappear from the schools than to legally confront the 
issues raised in Harper Lee's narrative. And so the book stood up against this first onslaught of criticism, without 
facing a major fight in the U.S. court system. 

The second round of criticism surfaced in the late seventies and eariy eighties. This time the censors came 
from the Midwest and the East. In Vernon, New Yori< a minister threatened to establish a private Christian school 
because the public school libraries contained "filthy, trashy sex novels" such as The Red Pony and To Kill a 
Mockingbird . (N ewsletter on Intellectual Freedom , May ): 62). And finally, blacks began to censor the book. In 



ERIC 



91 




a widefy reported case, three black parents on Indiana's Wan-en County Human Relations AQ>i<ory Council resigned 
because school authorities refused to remove the book from Wan-en junior high school classes. The book, they 
argued, "represents Institutional racism' (Newsletter on inteiiectuai Freedom . May 1980: 62). While calling To Kill a 
Mockinoblrd 'trash' nwiy seem ludicrous to many, the accusation of racism Is harder to deny. Even the positive 
Image of the children Is man-ed when they awke comments that reflect white bigotry. Scout calls blacks 'niggers'* at 
one point In the novel, and Jem says that Mennonltes have beards because 'their wives like for 'em to tickle 'em 
with their beards" (147). 

But the book is not a propaganda piece: It Is an historical novel that has relevance for new readers. It Is 
an accurate picture of a hermetic little Southern town. Isolated and regional In Its attitudes. It Is the story of three 
children growing up In a time when old regional values are challenged, but we are left unchanged. And because the 
attitudes of the general townspeople remain basically static throughout the book. Harper Lee's novel Is unsettling. 
The story Is effective because Harper Lee'a U.S. fendscape has been past reality, and because readers sense that 
old Southern attitudes remain. 

An author of realistic fiction, Lee uses time to show that Scout Is maturing In a community whose cydic 
events have been fomied by folkways and popular culture Into an established, unquost'onable pattern. The plot 
unfolds In a circular time cyde, reflecting the town's unchanging sodai attitudes. The story's events are framed In 
the seasons, starting with the deathly heat of summer when Scout Is almost six and ending In the decaying season 
of fall. There is no sudden birth of Idealism among the people. Set In the time of F.D.R., Lee writes: 

There was no huny, for there was nowhere to go, nothing to buy and no money to buy It with, 
nothing to see outside the boundaries of Maycomb County. But It was a time of vague optimism 
for some of the people: Maycomb County had recently been told It had nothing to fear but fear 
Itself (11). 

Lee combines the circular structure of time and the regional scene of Isolation to shov/ *ie reader that her 
characters are trapped Into a scene they cannot or will not change. Three of the book's white adults face this 
unchanging worid, and they seem pov/eriess to stop the flow of events. Attlcus Finch, his manled sister Alexandra, 
and Miss Maudle, the Finch children's neighbor and confidant, are models of Southern aristocratic attitudes. They 
are also relics of a time past. Interpreters of society, and established Southern citizens who pay attention to 
Southern deportment. 

Miss Maudle Is described as 'a widow, a chameleon lady who worked In her flower beds In an old straw 
hat and men's overalls, but after her five o'dock bath she would appear on the porch and reign over the street In 
magisterial beauty' (43). She is the most outspoken of the three adults, and she Is the one who seems to 
understand the problems that come with growing up In a dosed Southern sodety. She set\ little events as major 
changes. When Attlcus loses his lawsuit for Tom Robinson, Miss Maudle Invites the chlldrer In and explains that 
Attlcus has represr:tz-H what Is Christian behavior, whether he won or lost, and that he has >^ed Southerner? In 
Maycomb take a bauy-step toward the future (197-198). Later, she responds to Alexandra's los« of composure by 
assuring Alexandra that Attlcus Is trusted and supported by 'people In this town with background", and then she 
straightens up, returns to the afternoon church drde, and serves "dewberry tarts" (216). Miss Maudle lives Inside 
Southern sodety, quietly holding her tongue and role playing the Southern lady. She might seem eccentric to some 
of her neighbors with her funny gardening hats and prim ways, but she never allows anyone except Attlcus and the 
children to see her rebellious personality or hear her disapproval of Gouthem Ideals. Throughout time her behavior 
remains controlled and sensible. Outwardly she seems accepting of the small town mores Imposed upon her. The 
story's children, however, know better. In their presence she explains Southern Baptists, saying, "Foot-washers 
believe anything that's pleasure Is a sin. . . . Thing Is, foot-washers think women are a sin by definition. They take 
the Bible literally, you know" (45). And when the children wonder why their father Is a sharp-shooter who refuses to 
cany a gun. Miss Maudle explains, "If your father's anything, he's dviiized In his heart. . . . People In their right 
minds never take pride In their talenis" (93). 

Alexandra Is the true believer In the south's decadent moral ways. She spends her time showing the 
children that nothing changes socially. When Scout deddes that 3he vAW go to her black maid Calpumla's house for 



92 o r: 




a visft, her aunt retorts, "You may ijot" (127). When Attlcus tells the children In front of Calpumla that Braxton 
Bragg ■de3pises Negroes' Aunt Alexandra waits for the inald to leave the room. Then she says, "Don*! tall< like that 
In front of them . . , ft encourages them. You f<now how they talk among themsefvirs" (145). And when Gcout 
decides she will be frierds with Walter Cunningham, her aunt Y/on*t aHow ft. "HI tell you why," she explains, 
"Because-ho -Is trash, that's why you can*t play with him" (205). To her the old values are uncompromisingly right. 
And through her the children can see that time will not change anything as long as the "wrong dements" are not 
allowed to bo equals with their betters. 

The children's perspective of Southern Justice Is shaped by their father, the aduft of the story who remains 
trapped by the Southem attitudes toward change and disorder. A lawyer. Altlcus Is aware of the society he lives In, 
and he Is bound by fts traditions. Harper Lee tells us that Atticus's younger brother tied Maycomb County, and 
than goes on to say that Attlcus stayed in Maycomb because, 'he was Maycomb County bom and bred; he knew 
his people, they knew him, and because of Simon Finch's Industry, Attlcus was related by blood or marriage to 
neariy errery family in the town" (11). Throughout the book Atticus !s described as atypical of other men In the 
town. Scout explains, 'He did not do the things our schoolmates* ."athers did: he never went hunting, he did not 
play poker or fish or drink or smoke. He sat in the living room and read" (85). Attlcus Is an Intellectual sun-ounded 
by common folk who allow him his idiosyncrasies of leaming and books because h@ comes from an old-line of 
aristocracy-he Is a Finch from Finch's Landing. His ancestors raised cotton and had slaves. Atticus's own attitudes 
toward blacks are those of a man more comfortable with past values, left unquestioned by law or by protest. He 
says that he had hoped to get through life without having to take a court case based on black/white mores, and he 
declares that he expects to lose the case. After the trial, when the black man Is found guilty of rape in testimony 
based upon very circumstantial evidence, Attlcus answers his son's plalnt^e *riow could they do .1, how could 
they?" by saying, "TheyVe done It before and they did It tonight and they'll do It again" (195). Attk n ' - ">^l 
paternalistic white man who will help blacks as well as he can but who believes that in the "^d littix> r;e done \o 
change southerners. He acknowledges tha ut-right exploitation of blacks Is wrong. And so, when he f/lscusses 
Tom Robinson's fate with Jem, Attlcus expla "There's nothing more slckennij to me than a low-grade white man 
who'll take advantage of a Negro's Ignorance" (202). 

Black attitudes are also trapped by the cultural structure. Atticus's black maid grew up at Finch's Landing 
and knew Atticus's father. Old Mr. Finch gave Calpumla the BIb'e she leamed to read from. And. true td the 
tradition of the servants of aristocracy, she became one of less than one-half dozen blacks whj uO'jld read In all of 
Maycomb. In tum, Calpumla reHects the aristocratic house slave's attitude towards all blacks' being able to ieam 
when she says, "You're not gonna change any of them by talkin' right, theyVe got to want to Ieam themselves, and 
when they dont want to le&m there's nothing you can do but keep your mouth shut or talk their languap^* (118). 

It Is the predictability of the seasons which bends the everyday routine of these penple with the realization 
of Southem stagnation and keeps the story's dramatic sense of Injustice from disrupting the narrator's mood. The 
adult dramas of mad dogs, riront porch gossip, and courtroom trials tcke place in the summer. !^ the fall and the 
winter the children go to school. In the school's paradoxical worid, weak-minded teachers misjudge vagrants and 
declare that HKIer Is a dictator, that democracy is better, to a classroom of children who watched a black lose his 
rights through the town's system of justice during the summer. The institutionalized system of education Is not a 
place that fiils Scout's memories or that confirms her Ideas. It is an Institution that fosters mistrust and deceit. In 
the end, school Is a place Scout endures. Her life Is filled with the summer and Its urama, with her brother's 
attltudesi and her father's trial. She watches her brother flail out In anger against the Southem 'Justice," and sees 
her father's inability to affect Southem bigofjy. She watches events pass by without changing attitudes or cultural 
pattems 



ERLC 



Lee's slow-moving Southem drama meets Etenor N. Hutchens's standards for a novel shaped by time. The 
secjrfty of small town predictability Is Juxtap*..,^a tc i rigidity of the cuKural values. As tension between the two 
builds, the reader's understanding of the town's logic evolves. The white citizens' ^tsndards for their future rise from 
past InstKutlons. Their ancestral fears of free blacks persht and are onV superfidally buried. Their real fear of a 
future wrought with change finally surfaces through the chllciren lypica! of the old understanding that "old families 
are best," that the south has a peculiar sodal system based on family position, Jem explains to Sc^ut, "The thing 
about ft Is, oer kind of folks dont like the Cunninghams, the Cunninghams dont like the F'v&Hs, and the Ewelts hate 



93 



and despise the colored folks' (207). And finally. Scout says to her father that sometimes it is best to Ignore the 
wrong doings, explaining that Arthur Radley's heroic actions are best covered up. Thus, the reader sees Scout 
accept Southern logic. Scout knows from experience that telling the real tale of attempted murder and of subsequent 
justice wouldnl help Boo Radley in the end. It would simply bring a trial and new gossip for him. without any 
change in his existence. A mature nine-year-old. Scout says. "Ifd be sort of like shooting a mot.rjrigDird, wouldnl 
it?" (251). Thus Lee suggests that Southern Justice fails for those who are "different." 

Hutchens caHs this development of drama through "the sense of period, openly exploited in the historical 
novel" cyclic, and explains that the author Is successful because time is carefully woven Into the drama until the 
reader feels a sense of shared experience (Spllka 61). The scene painted need not be one the reader delights In 
reading about, bul it Is one that seems real for the contemporary reader. It Is this appeal which caused Harper 
Lee's book to be controversial. In the case of To Kill a Mockingbird the adult readers who sought to ban the book 
were reacting to those unsettling scenes in the book as If they were present day sltuaibns. Thetr reactions were to 
problems they felt stifl persisted. Their anger Ignored the significance of Lee's reference to the spedfic era in To Kill 
a Mockingbird. Lee's scene Is one from the past; it Is based upon a chikJ's memories of real events. 

When Harper Lee was five years old. the Scottsboro Trial began. In one of the most celebrated trials, nine 
blacks were accused of raping two white women. The first trial took place in Jackson County. Alabama. All nine 
were convicted. Monroeville. Lee's home town. 'Jiew about the case. Harper Lee's father was a lawyer during that 
time. Her mother's maJderi name was Finch. Harper Lee attended law school, a career possibility suggested to 
Scout by well-meaning adults in the novd. 

Scout Finch feces the reaffties of Souths society within the same age span that Harper Lee faced 
Scottsboro. The timeline is also the same. Although Lee's father was not the Scottsboro lawyer who handled that 
trial, ho was a Southern man of honor reialed to the famous gentleman sokiier, Rob&t E. Lee. it is I8<ely that Harper 
Lee's father was the author's model for Atticus Finch and that the things Atticus told Scout were the kinds of things 
Ama Lee to^d his daughter. The attitudes depk:ted are probably the ones Harper Lee grew up wHh. both In tenns of 
famHy pride and snr^all tov/n prejudices. In this sense, the book must not be evakjated sknply as realistic fiction. It 
must be recognized as historical fictk>n whk>h brings to life a child's reactions to injustice. 

Scout tells of a time past when white people would lynch or convict a man because of the color of his 
skin. And she suggests through her careful descr^tion of a town with a static cydic pattern that events might 
remain unchanged throughout time. She implies that the fc>fgotjy of the past could cradle new bigotiy. Literary critic 
Theo D'Haen has explained that the life of a Sterary woric continues when it remains* "part of the ongoing activities of 
that worid" (4). To KM a Mockingbird brings the South 's past and the reader's present attitudes kite account. As 
the chHdren in the story nriature. they lose their Innocence. So must the reader. The reader teams that predfctability 
is not safe, and that change Is unavoidablo. It b this new knowledge that frightens the censors. They are unwilling 
to acknowledge that Lee's scene ever happened. They want to believe that everything In U.S. history has woriced 
out "happlly-ever-after," and they hope to show children the greatness of the countiys past. As adults they do not 
want children to deal wKh the realities of history. 

Fear of discovery causes "moral" adults to ban books. These same adults would deny the child's right to 
interpret, to discuss, and to evaluate. Censors act because the^' believe that chHdren cannot determine right fi'om 
wrong. Or they act because they do not acknowledge that the author's need to share and the reader's right to 
interpret keep sodety from becoming a place where 

"There was no huny, for there was nowhere to 
go. . . . Nothing to see outskie. . . . Nothing 
to fear but fear Itseif.' (11) 



ERLC 



Wor1<s Cited 

Theo D'Haen. Text to Reader A Communicative Approach to Fowles. Bnrth. Coitazar and Boen , Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins, 1983. 

Elanor N. Hutchens. "An Approach Through! Time." In Towards a ^oetic of Fiction . Mark Spilka, pd. Bloomlngton: 
Indiana UP, 1977. 

Harper Lee. To Kilt a Mockingbird . Philadelphia: Uppincott. 1960. 

Newsletter on Inteflectual Freedom. Chicago: ALA, 1960-1985. 



ERLC 



95 



Safety in the Structures of Art: 
Bemelmans' Madeline Books 
by 

Jackie Eastman 

In his many works for both children and adults, Austrian emigrant Ludwig Bemelmans captures a zest for 
living and a vibrant sense of the cosmopolitan. His best known books, the five featuring the adventures of little red- 
headed Madeline, bring the culture of France and England to the English-speaking children on this side of the 
Atlantic. In a sophisticated impressionistic art styte reminiscent of that of Raoul Duty, Bemelmans captures famous 
dtyscapes and rural aspects, as well as a multitude of details about the daily lives of Europeans. Images of the 
Eiffel Tower, Sacr6 Coeur Cathedral, Buckingham Palace, parks and gardens, sidewalk artists, outdoor caf6s, 
vegetable stalls, and doubledecker buses bring a new world to a young child who has never traveled, Bemelmans* 
genius in these books lies not only, however, in the multiplicity of fascinating foreign details; it lies also In the 
organization which he brings to this material. By ccrnmunlcating dearly that his books are ■ert," ne reassures the 
child reader that she may participate in wild adventures in foreign lands w^hout experiencing any overwhelming sense 
of danger. Cleariy, Bemelmans' impressionistic art style and rtiymed poetry contribute importantly to this separation 
between "real" life and the worid of "story." Perhaps more subtly, Bemelmans uses a number of visual and verbal 
structures both to establish this aesthetic distance and to create an underiying sense of order. 

The conflicts in the Madeline books range from the ordinary to the fantastic, from the annoying to the 
dangerous. In the first book, Madeline , a Caldecott runner-up for 1940, the drama centers around Madeline's 
appendicitis attack and midnight rush to the hospital. Madeline's Rescue , the 1954 Caldecott winner, moves quickly 
from the crisis which inspires its title-Madeline's near drowning in the Seine River-into arguments concerning 
Genevieve, the dog who saved Madeline's life. In Madeline and the Bad Hat (1956), a new character, Pepito, breaks 
a cardinal rule in the canon of childhood-kindness to an:mals-and suffers disastrous consequences before leaming 
his lesson. In Madeline and the Gypsies {1959;, a friendly gypsy drcus kidnaps Madeline and Pepito. In the last 
book, Madeline in London (1961), not only Madeline but Miss Clave! and all the giris leave Paris, flying to London to 
visit Pepito in his new home. The horse which they present to Pepito bolts and dashes about London with 
Madeline and Pepito on his back.^ 

Structures which create aesthetic distance constantly protect Bemelmans' child reader from the fear, anger, 
sadness, or worry which such adventures might arouse. A scene from his 1937 Newbery Honor Winner Golden 
Basket suggests the essential perspective of the readers of his Madeline books. Shortly after the story opens, the 
two main characters, Celeste and Melisande, peer out a window of the Golden Basket Hotel Into the dty square of 
Bruges, Belgium, as moming breaks on the first day of their visit. At this point, Bemelmans" text suggests the 
separation between the viewer and the view which so dearly informs his Madeline books: 

Tnrough this window the little giris were looking for the first time in their lives into an altogether 
new worid, with a new language, new policemen, pastry shops, and lampposts. Even the horses 
and doge and clouds seemed different. Only the sparrows and pigeons looked the same as they 
did anywhere else. The children were cold. They dosed the window. (15) 

Bemelmans gives the reader of the Madeline books the security of distance enjoyed by Celeste and 
M.Hisande as they look into an "altogether new worid," by deariy establishing that these wori<s are "art"; they are 
not life itself, but a separate, well-ordered, familiar stmcture based on Rfe. First of all, as the child opens a Madeline 
bock, the end papers provide a literal "window" into the worid of "story"-a framed picture capturing its essence. 
The opening frame invites us in; the final end papers, identical in each case to the first, communicate the sense that 
Madeline's worid continues without us. Psychologically, we may partidpate In what goes on here while remaining 
apart; we may choose to look through the window, but, like Celeste and Melisande, we may dose it whenever we 
want to. 

Bemelmans depicts a worid of childhood where both time and space are carefully ordered. The famous 
couplets with which each book begins establish a prescn'bed space for each of twelve little girls: "In an old house 
in Paris that was covered with vines/ Lived [my emphasis] twelve little giris in two straight lines. In two straight lines 

® on 

ERLC ,j 



they broke then* bread/ And brushed their teeth and went to bed" (Madeline 1-5). The Identity of Madeline herself 
derives from this order "the smallest one was Madeline" [my emphasis. 12]. And her height detennlnes her 
placement: She will always walk at the back of line, next to Miss Clavel. and sleep at the end of the row. 
Regularity n«rks not only the spatial anangement. but also the activities ot these Kttle girls: net even the weather 
dlsmpts their schedule: "They left the house at half past nine In two straight lines In rain or shine" (9-11). Even 
when they fly to London, they manage to step off the plane on time: "Welcome to London, the weather's fine. /And 
it's exactly half past nine" (Madeline In London 9). 

Berr.elmans uies the daily schedule of his characters, which doubtless min-ors to some extent that of his 
child reader, to establish the starting and hiding points of his stories. "Twelve Frttle giris In two straight Pnes" 
emerge for a Vi-aJk on or near page one; and, with the exception of the first book, Madeline , where Madeline herself 
Is away In the hospital recovering nicely, ail "tvs'elve little giris In two straight lines' are home In bed by the end. 
This nanative paitem--leaving home for adventure, returning home to security-characterizes much of the literature for 
young children; we see it In such storfes as Hansel and Gretel. The Tale of Peter Rabbit , and Where the Wild Things 
Are, to name only a few, Bemelmans* use of this nanative .structure signals to the child reader that she is 
comfortably in the familiar worid of "story." Even though our heroine may faH in the Seine or charge about London 
on a mnaway horse, we know that she will be safely tucked into bed by ths3 end. 

In addrtion to adhering to the traditional nanative pattern of leaving and returning home, Bemelmans 
establishes his own verbal and visual formulae which likewise signal "open" and "close" to his reader. These serve 
not only to enhance the sense of containment-the separateness from "reatTty"-of each Indivkiual book, but also to 
increase the reader's pleasure as she encounters the famifiar f* mulae from one book to the next. In Madeline , 
Bemelmans devotes the first fifteen pages to creating the elements of setting and character which he compresses In 
one single page of each of the four subsequent books. As with the end papers. Bemelmans* frames~be they of 
wood, as in the case of Madeline's Rescue , or of autumn leaves, as Madeline and the Bad Hat- create cesthetic 
distance. In Madeline and the Gypsies Bemelmans places the story elements up and down the right and left hand 
sides of the page '.i a manner reminiscent of a medieval manuscript. RnaKy. on page one of Madeline In London , 
each of the twelve little giris holds up a picture of a story element-"old house In Paris," "that was covered with 
vines," "twelve little giris In ♦wo straight lines," and so forth, deariy signaTing to the reader that s\\e now enters a 
familiar world of art. 

Just as Bemelmans opens each story fonmulalcally. so too does he dose each ki ways predictable from 
one book to the next. He establishes the basic pattern in Madeline: "They went home and broke their bready 
Brushed their teeth and went to bed" (36-37). Frequently, Miss Clavel says a fkial goodnight, tums out the Hght, 
and doses the door. In Madeline , Bemelmans uses the narrator's vdce, the visual image, and even the size of the 
print to remind his reader that this has been after aX only a story: "And she tumed out the fight and dosed the 
door, and that's all there Is-there Isnt any more [my emphasis]." The quadruple frame of page margin, sky, wall, 
and doorway, and the steadily dinwiishing height of the print visual^ remforce the nanrator's hsistence that we are 
leaving the worid of art. In the subsequent stories. Bemelmans varies this partem to hitroduce humor and to provide 
a condusion appropriate to the adventures. For instance, at the end of Madeline and the Bad Hat « the giris and 
P'^ito. now friends, wave to each other across the courtyard as they brur.h their teeth. At the conduston of 
Madeline and the Gypsies , the safdy-retumed adventurers have inspired aH the little giris to do acrobatic tricks on 
the beds. And in Madeline In Lond on, Bemelmans even indudes the giris' new pet, the wayward horse: "They 
brushed his teeth and gave him bread, [my emphasis] And covered him up and put him to bed. .. . And she 
tumed out the light und dosed the door. There were twelve upstairs, and below one more.* Of the five Madeline 
books, only Madeline's Rescue does not end with a pteture of Miss Clavel h the donnitory. Instead. Bemelnwns 
chooses to depict the twelve puppies-bom during the night-as they will soon appear on an outing. Signifk:antly, 
only In this book does he Indude the words "The End" on his non-formulaic final Bkjstration. thereby Indicating e 
definite condusioruto the worid of "story." 

Bemelmans' marked use of symmetry throughout the Madeline books not only signals their status as "art." 
but also establishes a basic sense of order within which disorder may be securely contained. In an ertlde entitled 
"On the Problem of Symmetry in Art," Dagobert Frey writes that "Symmetry slgniftes rest and binding, asymmetry 
motion and loosening, the one order and law, the other art3itrarine&s and acddent, the one fonnal rigkJfty and 



ERIC 



98 




constraint, \\e other life, play and freedom" (quoted In Weyi, 16). We have already seen that Bemelmans enhances 
the inherent symmetry of a book opened out flat with Identical end papers Inside the front and b?.ck covers. The 
opening and dosing actions of the stones are likewise symmetrical: returning home Is a mln-or Image of leaving 
home. Additionally, Bemelmans composes a great many of his illustrations symmetrically, sometimes framing the 
balanced architecture of Parisian edifices with sky and trees. 

Finally, one of the most striking aspects of symmetry Is the nearty symmetrical repetition of the symmetrical 
Image of "twelve little giris In two straight lines." Bemelmans places this pattern throughout each book In a manner 
which, if we were to Imagine all of the pages spread out In one long strip end to end, might suggest a repeating 
border design. It Is true that Bemelmans does not use this Image at perfectly regular Intervals nor In precisely the 
same direction each time. Nevertheless, behind the slightly asymmetrical but very frequent repetitions of this 
symmetrical pattern, we sense symmetry as the norm to which as^anmetry must return. 

Frequently, Bemeinians changes only one element of this twehre^jart Image as a means of drawing our 
attention to tiiat which In Frey*s terms exhibits "life, play, and freedom"-ln other words, to Madeline herself. For 
Instance, Madeline's tears are all the more noticeable In this Image In that she differs from eleven other Identical 
elements In the design. In an Illustration from Madeline's Rescue , only the lower right-hand bed-that Is. Madeline's 
bed-has acquired paws and a tail, and only Madeline smiles, while the others look glum. Frequently, Madeline 
distinguishes herself by tuming around or getting out of line. Yet the fact that the line Is there to get ou^ of 
establishes a pervading sense of "rest" and "order'-to use Fre/s terms-which contains and controls the many 
scenes of asymmetry and disorder. The twelve puppies which Genevieve adds to the ranks do not create chaos; 
instead, they enhance the complexity of a previously established Image, while maintaining Its symmetry. 

Because editors felt that the first Mad^ine was too sophisticated for children, Bemelmans did not succeed 
in publishing it until fi/c years after Its completion. Yet the success of the five books has proven the editors' fears 
to be groundless. I have suggested that the formal structures of framing, a familiar nanatlve pattenn enhanced by a 
fomiulalc opening and dosing, and the repetition of the image of "t//clve little giris ki two straight lines" which so 
dearty designate the books as art-not life-contribute greatly to this success. For the child reader these structures 
provide a comfortable aesthetic distance from which she may relax and enjoy the exotic-a window onto what In 
Golden Basket Bemelmans calls "an altogether new worid. with a new language, new policemen, pastry shops, and 
lampposts" (15). They are the cage which permits Madeline to "Pooh-pooh" the tige**. Furthermore, the dominant 
sense of order established by the symmetry of these structures creates a worid of "story" In whteh we may feel 
throughout the security expressed by our reliable protectress at the end of Madeline an d the Bad Hat; "And as 
Miss Clavel turned out the HghtJShe said, 'I knew rt would all come out right.'" 

University of Alabama 

Note 

^1 am not considering in the paper Madeline's Christn^as. a considerably shorter wcK: which was originally published 
as a book insert In the 1956 McCall's Christmas Issue and reissued In book form by Vikint, Press In 1985. 
Bemelmans was at wori< on his sixth Madeline book at the time of his death in 1962. 

Wori<s Crted 

Bemelmans, Ludwig. Golden Basket . New Yori<: Viking. 1936. 

— . Madeline . New Yorfc Simon & Schuster, 1939; London: Verschoyle. 1952. 

— , Madeline's Rescue . New Yoric Viking. 1953; London: Verschoyle. 1953. 

Madeline and the Bad Hat . New Yoric: Viking, 1956; London: Deutsch, 1958. 
— . Madeline and the Gypsies . New Yori<: Viking, 1959; London: Deutsch. 1959. 

er|c 



— . M ndeitne In London . New York: Viking, 1961; London: Deutsch, 1962. 
Weyl. Hefmann. Svmmettv . Princeton: Princeton UP, 1952. 



Kenneth Morris and The MablnoQion ; 
The Welsh Influence on Children's Fantasy 
by 

C.W. Sullivan III 



1 



The medieval Welsh stories published as The Mabinoqion do not amount to a large book, and the oldest 
segment, the Four Branches of the Mabinogi (dating from about the tweifth century in written form but centuries older 
In oral tradition). Is smaHer still, some eighty pages in translation. The Anglo-Welsh author, Kenneth Morris (1879- 
1937), ^rguabty the first to use materials irom the four Branches in children's fantasy, Is an almost-forgotten (or at 
least seldonvstudied) figure in the history of children's fiction. Yet, without Morris and The Mablnoglon . 
contemporary children's literature might not include Uoyd Alexander's The Chronicles of Prydaln , Nancy Bond's A 
String In the Harp . Susan Cooper's The Dark is Rising series, Alan Gamer's The Owl Service , and a number of other 
books (including some of the Arthurian stories) based less direcljy on these Welsh sources of materials and style. 

Although regarded as 'among the finest flowerings of the Celtic genius and. taken together, a masterpiece 
of . . . medieval European literature, 'the materials which make up The Mablnogion were completely translated Into 
English only three times prior to 1950 (Jones and Jones ix). l^dy Charlotte Guest made the first complete 
translation in the 1840s; T.P. Ellis and John Uoyd, using a newly-discovered manuscript, translated The Mablnoglon 
in 1929; and Gwyn Jones and Thomas Jones made a translation in 1949. Interestingly, several new translations- 
including a revised version of the Jones and Jones translation (1974), Jeffery Gantz's The Mabinogion (1976), Patricia 
Ford's The Mabinogi (1977), (and Gwyn Jones and Kevin Crossley-HoIIand's Tales From The Mabinogion , Illustrated 
by Margaret Jones (1984)-hp.ve appeared recently, and their publication could be a response, in part, to the 
popularity of the Mabinogion -based fiction of Alexander, Cooper, Bond, and the rest. 

The Mabinogion itself is something of a cuhural stew, containing, as It does, materials which can be traced 
to sources In mythology, legend, folklore, or history. The oldest materials, the Four Branches, contain mythological 
elements which are untraceably old, going back, perhaps, to the beginnings of the Ceitic civ'ilization and containing 
obvioLS references to an ancient matriarchal and matrilineal culture and mythology. In addition, most translations 
indude a number of other prose tales tied to the Four Branches only by their date of written compoa'tlon, their 
Welsh sources, and/or their inclusion in the same medieval manuscript or manuscript collection. The 'Four 
Independent Native Tales' and the 'Three Romances,' as Jones and Jones called them (vii), were certainly 
composed in a more recent oral tradition than the Four Branches and have vary little mythology about them. The 
'Native Tales' draw heavily on folklore; the 'Romances,' medieval in style as weH as in content, draw on legend, 
especially the Arthurian legend. And the Taliesin materials, 'The Tale of Gwion Bach' and 'The Tale of Taliesin,' 
both of which deal with the sixth-century bard, are included in a few translations. 

The existence, nature, and extent of a Celtic influence on subsequent cultures and literatures has been the 
subject of considerable debate, some of it acrimonious, for almost a century and a half. In the tatter half of the 
nineteenth century. Ernest Renan, Matthew Arnold, and William Butler Yeats all argued for a pervasive Celtic Influence 
on subsequent literatures. Their efforts were compromised, somewhat, by the political and social overtones of the 
tum-of-the-century Celtic Revival and were also denigrated by the majority of Victorians who, as L.P. Curtis, Jr., 
recounts in Anglo-Saxons and Celts: A Study of Anti-Irish Prejudice in Victorian England (1973), were definitely anti- 
Celtic and quite convinced that nothing good or valuable could have come from people with a Qettic ancestry. 

As the twentieth ceittury has progressed, fortunatelv, scholars have begun to recognize the quality of the 
ancient Irish and Welsh literatures, have begun to assess the pcssibiiity of a Cettic Influence, and have even come to 
respect some of Matthew Arnold's insights on the subject. Patrick Leo Henry and James Travis have documented 
con'espondences between eariy Celtic and English pootry, and Martin Puhvel has suggested a Cettic Influence on 
'Beowulf.' Wiillam Rees and Nora Chadwick comment on possible social and political influences the Celts might 
have had on the Anglo-Saxons. Lucy Alan Paton, Vernon Harward, Helaine Newstead, John Revel Relnhard, and, of 
course. Roger Sherman Loomis are among those who have attempted to establish Ceitic Sources for much of what 
appears in the later Continental and British Arthurian materials. Arthur Johnston discusses a William Blake painting 
which seems to have been influenced by a Welsh triad, and Robert Hubach suggests that Taliesln's poetry nmy have 
had a shaping effect on Walt Whitman's. And there are mo^-e. 




101 




But Httle has been done, to date, to organize the research into the CeHic Influence or to make the public- 
general or scholarly-aware of the extent of this sort of research. It may be that there are still some traces of the 
Victorian prejudices against all things Cettlc; but it is more likely that the scholarly community, at least, it so oriented 
toward the Mediterranean myths and legends-the Greef. and Roman materials-as literary influences that they have 
given little serious thought to the other myth systems-the Celtic and Scandinavian, for example-as possible literary 
influences. Moreover, the obvious Cettlc and Scandinavian influences on popular literature make it even less likely 
that they would be considered worthy of study as influences on "serious" litefature. And perhaps that Is why the 
Welsh influence on children's fantasy has been deaK with so passingly and why the earliest authors, like Kenneth 
Mom's, have only been glanced at. 

That Kenneth Monis should have been the first to explore the Welsh materials and use them In children's 
fantasy is not surprising. He was "right" for that task in many ways. First, he was Welsh and was a native speaker 
who knew the materials well. Second, a stay in Dublin In 1986 had introduced him not only to a number of young 
writers and mystics (including Ye js, George RusseH, and EKa Young), but also to the Theosophical Society of which 
he was to be an active member, living and teaching at the Point Loma, CaHfomla community, for the rest of his life. 
The Dublin experience and the Society membership certainly encouraged him as a writer and also inspired him as a 
mystic (Zahorski and Beyer 169-170). Finally, his wori< as a teacher in the Point Loma community pave him an 
awareness of the teenage audience for which his two fantasy novels. The Fates of the Princes of Dvfed (1913) and 
Book of the Three Dragons (1930), were initially written. 

Mom's's use of nvaterials from The Mabinoolon is distinctive. Reduced to the simplest terms, what Morris 
does Is to use some of some materials from the Four Branches and interweave them with materials of his own 
creation or wKh rrwterials from other, generally Welsh, sources. He is not using a plot from The Maqinoglon as the 
outline for his story and then expanding it into a full-fledged novel as do AJan Qamer and Evangeline WaKon. He 
does not rely on his primary source that directly. Nor does he, a& do Lloyd Alexander and Susan Cooper, create an 
essentially-original fantasy (and fantasy worid) with its own characters to be fl^hed out by characters and motifs 
from The Mabinoaion . He does not stand that far away from his sources. In The Fates of the Princes of Dvfed his 
interweaving is quite obvious and, occasionally, heavy-handed; in Book of the Three Dragons he is a surer and 
smoother author. 

The Fates of the Princes of Dvfed is based on the First Branch of The Mabinoqion. and all of the events of 
that Rrst Branch appear in the novel. In Monis's hands the roughly twenty pages of the original story, "PwyH Prince 
of Dyfed." become about one hundred pages of text; the rest of the 300^ge novel consists of materials Morris 
created and developed to complement and flU out v/hat he had developed from the original. For exampSe, the year 
between the first and second wedding feasts of PwyH and Rhlannon is described In a sentence or two In the First 
Branch, but In his novel Monis creates a rninor quest to occupy Pwytl for that year. 

Before he can appear at the second wedding feast, Pvt^ must acquire a nrMgic, unfiHable sack or basket. 
In The Mabinoqion Rhlannon simply supplies him with one, but In The Fates cf the Princes of Dvfed Pwyil must go 
on a tradKional, forrDUlalc quest-not unlike the quest of an Arthurian knIght-to find the object. With just three days 
left Pwyfl and his men come upon an old man ki need, and following Rhiannon's instruction to not pass by a sorrow 
untl it is lightened, they stop to help. There are three tasks to be done on three separate days by three different 
men, and PwyH, doing his share on the last day. cHscovers that the basket he has been given to gather apples In is 
the object he seeks. The traditional folktale object, the unfillabte basket, and the tripMy of the episode have 
widespread sources in folktale and legend; Morris uses them here, and oiiiers elsewhere in The Fates of the Princes 
of Dvfed . to augment the material he develops from the original. 

For the reader who knows The Mablnoqton . though, Morris's first novel can seem somewhat choppy (even 
though the style remains consistent) as recognteably First Branch sections alternate with sections of Morris's own 
creation In an almost building-block configuration. BooC. of the Three Dragons . Morris's second novel and sequd to 
the first. Is much smoother. Although each book is based on a Branch of The Mablnooion . Morris does not depend 
so heavily on his source material for the structure of his second noveS as he (M for the structure of the firsL In 



ERLC 




fact, thoro are only two segments from the Second and Third Branches-tho burying of the h «d of Bran the Blessed 
and the learning of three crafts-which are Identifiable In Book of the Three Dragons, and both segments have been 
changed somewhat from the original. 

Although it Is also possible to argue that Manawydan's quest In the second novel Is patterned after the 
quest of the main character, also named Manawydan. in the Third Branch, those similarities may only be the 
/ similarities that all traditional quest nan^tives share. Other matadals. however, do have Identifiable Welsh sources 
outside of the Four Branches: the ydiow calfskin mat which transports the sleeping Manawydan to the court of the 
gods in Book of the Three Dragons is based on the yellow oxskki mat from "The Dream of Rhonabwy," the 
description of the court of the gods comes from "The Dream of Macsen Wledlg," and the sword so sharp It can 
draw blood from the wind can be traced, along with many other Items and characters, to "Culhwch and ONven." 

It is not only Monis*8 ability to weave these Welsh Celtk: materials (and his own materials) Into a smooth 
whole that makes him an important fantasy writer. It is also "the high language embodying the thenw that carries It 
[the noveQ along" (Bisenieks viii). In fact, one of the few critics to comment on Morris, Ursula LeGuin-herself a 
respected fantasy author-equates Morris with E. R. Eddison and J. R. R. Tolkien, terming all three "master stylists" 
whose characters speak "with genuine Elfland accents" (77,78). And It Is not Just that Morris Is a master stylist. ' 
LeGuIn continues, it is also that style Is fantasy, 

because In fantasy there is nothing but the writer's vision of the worid. ... A worid where no 
voice has ever spoken before; where the act of speech is the act of creation. The only voice 
that speaks there is the creator's vok;e. And every word counts. (05) 

Thus LeGuIn asserts. Book of the Three Dragon s 'is a skigulariy fine example of the recreation of a wori< magnificent 
In Its own right (the Mablnogion) " (81). Monis »s Important, then, as a stylist and as an author who uses his source 
material well. 

it is the climax of Book of the Three Dragons which best Hkistrates Morris's ability. Martial skills are of 
Kttle importance In this novel and fade almost completely away toward the end as Morris chooses to enr)piiasi7e 
bardk^ sk^s-storyteHIng, singing, and harping. Manawydan uses these skiHs, skHls whk:h the Welsh Celts have 
aJways held In high regard, to overconw his foes. By teHing them stories untH past mWnight, Manawydan keeps 
Tathal Cheat-the-Ught and his daughter ftwn trapping him and turning him Into stone; and by teliing stories, 
Manawydan distracts Qwlan Cat's Eye, the Sea-Thief, and then recovers the nrwgic Harp of Alawn. Armed now with 
the Harp (rather than a sword), Manawydan makes the traditbnal descent Into he! to restore order the stone 
waniors are released, the Gmmbled Kings are restored, and the sleeping Drukis are wakened. 

This series of scenes does not come from The Mablnooten but does integrate one of Its 
characters, Manawydan, with several other traditk>nal elements. One of these, the tMidency of 
events to occur in threes. Is evident in the three challenges that Manawydan nnjst overcome at 
the end. The Journey to and the ordering of h^, which Manawydan must acconr)pK8h to bring 
the worids of men and gods Into balance again. Is a tmdKkmal motif In both andent literature and 
mythok)gy; and the emphasis on bardic skHls Is also trBdltk>nal. Monis Interweaves these 
traditional materials, netf, them into a ptot largely of his own devlskig (within traditional formulas), 
and presents a conrtpleted whole in high fantasy style. (SuMvan 542) 

If there needs to be more detaHed analysis of how and wlv^ various authors use materials from The 
Mablnogion and other Welsh sources, the fictton of Lloyd Alexander, Nancy Bond, Susan Cooper, and Alan Qamer Is 
certainly sufUctent evidence that they do use Welsh materials, that the Welsh n>aterials have had a definite infiuence 
on recent children's fantasy, in addWon, Kenneth Morris's Influence on the wa]^ tradltk>nal materials can be used in 
fictbn Is Important. First, he uses the source materials consdentkxisly; that is, he Is careful not to vk>tate the 
integrity of the original stories and characters when he uses them ki his novels. Monls's PwyH of Manawydan Is not 
just a name from The Mabinooion but a character from The Mabtnookm who behaves, ki Monls's novel, much the 
same as he did ki the original. In fact, ki scenes from the novel whk:h ware not ki the origkial Welsh stories, Pwyil 
and Manawydan retain thefr Mabinogion- based characters. Second, Monis is knportant because the material he 



105 

103 



general characteristics of mythology, legend, and folktale; and the reader who does not know The Mablnoolon will be 
unable to tell which segments came from the Welsn story and which came from Mon1s*s Imagination. 

Morris, therefore, set the style and the standard for the use of Welsh Celtic materials in children's fantasy. 
If we look at the best of the recent authors who have drawn on the Welsh materials for their fantasies-Alexander. 
Bond, Cooper, and Gamer, for ex:ample-we find that same conscientious use of the Welsh materials and that same 
consistent creation of now materials first found In the novels of Kenneth Monis. The Mabinoqion has been an 
important Welsh Celtic source for recent writers of children's fantasy, and Kenneth Morris showed those writers how 
to use it. 

East Carolina University 

^Some of the research for this paper was conducted at the University College of Wales, the National Library of 
Wales, and the Children's LKerature Research Centre, ail ki Aberystwyth. Wales on grants from the Children's 
Literature Association, East Carolina University, the Southern Regional Education Board, and the St. David's Society 
of New Yorlc. 

Wor1<s Cited 

Alexander, Lloyd. The Chronicles of Prvdain . 5 vols. New Yor1<: Holt. 1963-1968. 

Arnold, Matthew. On the Study of Celtic Literature (and) On Translating Homer . 1866. New Yoric Macmillan, 1913. 

Bisenieks, Dainis. Introduction. The Fates of the Princes of Dvfed . By Kenneth Monis. North Hollywood. CA: 
Newcastle, 1978. 

— . "The Welsh Myth In Modem American Fantasy." Anglo-Welsh Review 24 (1974): 130-34* 
Bond, Nancy. A String in the Ham . New Yoric: Atheneum, 1977. 

Bromwich. Rachael. Matthew Arnold and Celtic Literature: A Retrospect. 1865-1965 . London: Oxford UP, 1965. 

Chadwick. Nora. "The Celtic Background cf Earty Anglo-Saxon England." Celt and Saxon . Ed. Nora Chadwick. 
Cambridge: UP, 1964. 323-52. 

Cooper, Susan. The Daric is Rising . 5 vols. New Yoric: Harcourt (vol. 1) and Atheneum (vols. 2-5), 1965-1977. 

Curtis, L. P., Jr. Anglo-Saxons and Celts: A Study of Anti-Irish Preiudice in Victorian England . Beri<eley: U of 
Califomia P, 1968. 

Ellis, T, P,. and John Uoyd, trans. The Mablnogion . Oxford; Clarendon, 1929. 

Ford, Patrick, trans. The Mablnogion . Berkeley: U of Califomia P, 1977. 

Gantz, Jeffery, trans. The Mablnogion . New Yori<: Penguin, 1976. 

Gamer, Alan. The Owl Service . 1967. New Yori<: Ballantine. 1981. 

Guest, Lady Charlotte, trans. The Mablnogion . 1835-49. London: Dent, 1906. 




104 



ERIC 



Heniy, Patrick Leo. The Eartv English and Certic Lvric . New Yoric Barnes & Noble, 1967. 
Hubach, Robert. "Waft Whitman and TaHessln.' American LItefatura 18 i^BA7): 329-31. 

Johnston, Arthur. "WJIIIam Blake and The Andent Britons*.* The National library of Wales Joumal XXil (1981-1982): 

Jones, Qwyn, and Kevin Crossley-Holland. Tales from The Mabinoglon . Woodstock, NY: Overtook, 1984. 
— , and Thomas Jones, trans. The Mabinoglon . London: Dent, 1949. 

Klefer, Bart>ara. 'Wales as a Sotting for Children's Fantasy." Children's Literature In Education 13 (1982): 95-102. 

LeGuIn, Ursula. "From Elfland to Poughkeepsle." The Language of the Nioht . Ed. Susan Wood New Yoric 
Beridey, 1982. 73-86. 

Loomis. Roger Shemian. Cehlc Mvth and Arthurian Romance . New Yori<: Columbia UP, 1927. 
— . The Grail From Cehic Mvth to Christian Symbol . Cardiff: U of Wales P. 1963. 
— . Wales and the Arthurian Legend . Cardiff: U of Wales P, 1956. 
Monris, Kenneth. Bbook of the Three Dragons . New Yori<: Longmans, 1930. 
— . The Fates of the Princes of Dvfed . Point Loma, CA: Aiyan Theosophlcal P, 1913. 
Newstead, Helalne. Bran the Blessed in Arthurian Romance . New Yori<: Columbia UP. 1939. 
Raton, Lucy Allen. St udies in the Fairy Mythology of Arthurian Romance . New Yoric Franklin, 1960. 
Puhvel, Martin. "Beowulf and Celtic Tradition . Waterioo, Ont.: Wilfrid Laurier UP, 1979. 

Rees, William. 'Suivlvals of Ancient Celtic Customs In Medieval England.' Angles and Welsh . Cardiff: U of Wales 
P, 1963. 148-68. 

ReJnhard, John Revel. The Survival of Gels ?n Medieval Romance . Halle A. S.: Max NIemeyer, 1933. 

Renan, Ernest. "The Poetiy of the CehIc Races.' Vol. 32. Harvard Classics . 50 vols. 1854. New Yoric Collier, 
1910. 143-91. 

Sullivan. 0. W. III. " The Fates of the Princes of Dyfed and Book of the Three Dragons ." Survey of Modem Fantasy 
Literature . Ed. Frank N. Magili. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Salem. 1983. 

— . "Nancy Bond and Welsh Traditions." Children's Utemture Association Quarteriy 11.1 (1986): 33-37. 

— . "Traditional Welsh Materials In Modem Fantasy." Dragon's Tale; The Joumal of the Welsh National Centre for 
Children's Literature 2 (1985): 2-12. 

Travis, James. "The CeWc Derivation of *Somer Is Icumen In'." Lochlann 6 (1974): 128-35. 

— . Eartv Cehic Versecraft . Shannon: Irish UP, 1973. 

Walton, Evangeline. The Mabinoglon Tetralogy . 4 vols. New Yori<: Ballantine, 1970-1974. 



105 



Yeats, William Butler. The CeWc Element In Uterature/ Ideas of Good and Evil , by Winiam Buller Yeats. London: 
Buiten. 1003. 270-95. 

Zahorski, Kenneth, and Robert Boyer. ASexander. Watton. Monis: A Primary and Secondary Blbllooraphv . Boston: 
Q. K. HaH. 1061. 



er|c 



106 



Fairy Tale as Myth/Myth as Fairy Talo 
by 

Jack Zipes 



When we think of the fairy tai-3 today, we priiiiariiy think of the classical fairy tale. We think of those fairy 
tales that are the most popular In the Western world: Cinderella , Snow White . LHtle Red Riding Hood . Sleeping 
Beauty . Rapunzet . Beauty and the Beast . Rumpeistiltskin . The Ugly Duckling . The Princess and the Pea . Puss In 
Boots . The Frog King . Jack and the Beanstalk . Tom Thumb . The Little Mennaid . etc. It Is natural to think mainly of 
these fairy tales as If they had always been with us. as If they were part of our nature. Newly written fairy tales, 
especially those that are Innovative and radical, are unusual, exceptional, strange, and artificial because they do not 
conform to the patterns set by the classical fairy tale. And. If they do conform and become famHiar, we tend to 
forget them after a while, because the classical fairy tale suffices. We are safe with the familiar. We shun the new. 
the real innovations. The classical faky tale makes h appear that we are aN part of a universal community with 
shared vakres and norms, that we are a)f striving for the same happiness, that there are certain dreams and wishes 
which are In'efutable. that a particular type of behavior win produce guaranteed result, like living happily ever after 
with lots of gola In a marveious castle, our castle and fortress that wlii forever protect us from inimical and 
unpredictable forces of the outside world. We need only have faith and bedeve In the classical fairy tale, just as we 
are expected to have faith and believe in the Amerk:an flag as we swear the Pledge of AKegiance. 

The fairy tale Is myth. That Is, the dassteal fairy tale has undergone a process of mythteization. A/iy fairy 
tale In our society. If it seeks to become natural and eternal, must become myth. Only innovative fairy tales are anti- 
mythical, resist the tide of mythldzation. comment on the fairy tale as myth. Even the dassIcaJ myths are no longer 
valid as Myths wHh a capital M but with a smaH m. fnat is, the classical myths have also become kieoiogk^ally 
r»7lhlcized, de-hlstorldzed, de-pollticized to further the medgemonic Interests of the bourgeoisie. As we know from 
Roland Barthes. myth is de^oKtldzed speech. 

Myth Is a typa of speech defined by its kitentk)n much more than its Rteral sonse; and that In 
spite of this, its intention Is somehow frozen, purified, eternalized, made absent by this literal 
sense. ... On the surface of language somethkig has stopped moving: the use of signification 
Is here, hiding behkid the fact, and conferring on it a notlfykig k)ok; but at the same tkne, the fact 
paralyses the intention, g^ves it somethkig JSke a malaise producing immobility: Ln order to make it 
Innocent, it freezes K. This Is because mythi Is speech sto!en and restored . Only speech which 
is restored Is no k>nger quite that which was stolen: when It was brought back, it was not put 
exactiy In Ks place. It is this bdef act of larceny, this moment taken for a suneptitkHis fakkig, 
whteh gives myth its benumbed k)ok. (124-25) 

The fairy tale, whteh has become the my^hified classical faky tale, Is kideed petrified in it^ restored 
conste{latk)n: K is a stolen and frozen ctilturai good, or Kulturgut as the Qennans might say. What belonged to 
archaic societies, what belonged to pagan tribes and communities was passed down by word of mouth as a good 
only to be hardened kito script. Christian and patriarchal. It has undergone and undergoes a motivated process of 
revision, re-ordedng, and reHnement. All the tools of modem kidustrial sodety (the prkitlng press, the ncdio, the 
camera, the film, the record, the vkieocassette) have made thek- mark on the faky tale to make It cSassteal uHknately 
in the name of the bourgeoisie whk^h refuses to be named, denies kivoivement; for the faky tale must appear 
harmless, natural, eternal, ahistodcal, therapeutk:. We are to Hva and breathe the ckssk^ faky tale as fresh, free air. 
We are ted to believe that this ak has not been contamkuted and pdkited by « sodal dass that not name itself, 
wants us to contkiue beHevkig that aH ah* Is fresh and free, aS faky tales sprkig from thk) ak. 

Take Sleepkig Beauty. Her story is frozen. It appears to have aiways been there, and wHh each rising 
sun, she, too, wiil always be there, flat on her back, with a prince hoverir over her, kisskig her or about to kiss 
her. in Charles Penault's ver8k>n we read: "The prkice approached her tr«mblkig, and feM on his knees before her. 
The enchantment was over; the princess woke. She gazed at hkn so tenderfy you would not have thought It was 
the first time she had ever seen hkn. 'Is it you, my prince? You have kept me waiting for a long tkne" (64). 



ERIC 




107 



In the Chndren*3 and Household Tales of the Brothers Grimm, we read: •Finally, he came to the tower and 
opened the door to the smaH room In which Brier Rose was asleep. There she lay, and her beauty was so 
maivelous that he could not take his eyes off her. Then he leaned over and gave her a kiss, end when his lips 
touched hers, Brier Rose opened her eyes, woke up, and tooked at him fondly" (189). 

Just the presence of a man in the Perrault version of 1698 Is enough to break the enchantment and revive 
the princess. The Grimms added the kiss In 1812 to bring her back to life. And generally speaking, it Is the 
Grimms* version which has become frozen Into a bourgeois myth. In our day Its consummate representation Is the 
Disney ftn adaptation, which m^de many myths out of the already bourgeols'rfied fairy tale. Here Sleeping Beauty as 
a housewife-ln-tralning sings "some day my prince will come," and the prince as 'the great white hope," not unlike 
Rocky, does battle with the black forces of evil. Disney was a mythcpanlac in the broadest sense of the word, and 
m his hands, Sleeping Beauty assumed many mythic components: 

1) Women are all naturally curious, and, as we know, curiosity kills cats and even sweet, innocent 



2) Men are daring, persistent, and able to bestow life on passive or dead women whose Irves cannot be 

fulfilled until rescued by a prince. 

3) Women are Indeed helpless without men, and without men they are generally catatonic or comatose, 

eternally waiting for the right man. always in a prone, death-like positron, dreaming of a glorious 
marriage. 

4) Male energy and will power can restore anything to life, even an immense realm in a coma. We just need 

the right man for the job. 

These are still the mythic messages of Sleeping Beauty today. The an dent, communal signification Is 
buried and lost. The tale's history and wisdom are made speechless by the icslored, symbolic constellation that 
was first molded In script back in the 17th century. Whatever the tale enunciated hundreds of years ago Is less 
important than the myth it has become and its mythic components which are singled out and issued in 
unconsdonable reprints. We find replications of the classical version everywhere, in advertisements, in daily 
enbJtments on the streets, and in our homes. 

Yet, just as the dassical fairy tale could not totally rob the andent folk tale of Its signification, the myth 
cannot rob the classical fairy tale of the Utopian impulse of the fairy tale. There Is something historically Indelible 
about the Utopian wish for a better Rfe in a tale first told even though we may never know when it was first told. 
The myth which Is artifidal can only live because the essence of the andent folk tale refuses to die. The myth is 
also a fairy tale that cannot abandon its andent Utopian origins. 

Sleeping Beauty is not only about female and male stereotypes and male hegemony; it Is also about death, 
our fear of death, and our wish for Immortality. Sleeping Beauty Is resurrected. She triumphs over death. As the 
eternal brier rose, she rises from the dead to love and to fulfill her desires. The rising from the dead Is an uprising, 
an attack on the borders of mortaHty. After her uprising, Sleeping Beauty will know how to avoid danger and death, 
as she does Indeed In the aftermath of the first sequence In the PerrauK version. Once awakened. Sleeping Beauty 
Is the knowing one, and we know, too. 

The first-told fairy tale Imparts knowledge about the worid and illurr^lnates ways to better It In antidpation of 
a better worid to be created by mankind. It Is wise and sincere in tendency, and no matter How hardened and 
Ideologically dassical It becomes. It retains a good deal of Its original wisdom and sincerity. Each Innovative re-teliing 
and re-writing of a well-known tale in the cultural heritage is an independent human act seeking to align itself with the 
original Utopian Impulse of the first-told tale. On the other hand, the myth is pretentious and deceitful. It seeks to 
distort the Utopian essence and tendency of fairy tales by making "Ideographs' out of them. Myth lulls to sleep, to 
complacency. The andent folk tale, however, remains awake beneath the Intended perversion. 



princesses. 



ERIC 



106 




But the dasslcaJ fairy tale's knowing and knowledgeable core, awake as It Is, will not be realized as long as 
myth fetJshlzes It as a commodfty. The myth can only be seen again as fairy tale when the mylh Is estranged. This 
means that the frozen constellation must become unfamiliar again; It must be thawed by innovative tales that 
disassemble the used components of knovrfng and knowledge and reassemble them into antl-mythic stories. 

The revival or resun'ectlon of Sleeping Beauty, our symbolical figure of hope against the forces of death, 
cannot occur for us in the classical version today, for Its sexist dosure, Its pristine heterosexual and patriarchal 
resolution Is a coffin of another kind. The resun-ection must take place, take Its place outside the mythic frame'*vork 
in such re^xeations as Anne Sexton's Transfoimations , Jane Yolen's Sleeping Ugly , or Olga Broumas* Beginning with 
O. Both Sexton and Broumas, In particular, seek to break the prison house of male discourse. Sexlon writes: 



I must not sleep 
for while asleep I'm ninety 
and think I'm dying. 
Death rattles ki my throat 
Eke a marble. (111) 



She questions whether the awakening is an awakening and thus opens our eyes to the desperate situation of 
women, whose "resun-ected" lives may be just as bad as their deaths. 



Whereas Sexton is overly pessimistic in her "transformations, " ' as is stridently optimistic in her version of 
Sleeping Beauty and flaunts sodet/s taboos. 

Crty-center, mid- 
traffic, ! 

wake to your public kiss. Your name 
is Judith, your kiss a sign. 

to the shocked pedestrians, gathered 
beneath the light that means 
stop 

In our culture 

where red is a warning, and men 

threaten each other with final violence: I will drink 

your blood . Your kiss Is for them 

a sign of betrayal, your red 

Hps suspect, unspeakable 

liberties as 

we cross the street, kissing 
against the light, singing. This 

is the woman I woke from sleep, the woman that woke 
me sleeping. (62). 

Such innovative poetic adaptations make the fairy-tale genre more fluid. They start again as tales that 
revitalize the tradition of first-told tales, rather than freezing H. lnnovatr;c tales explore the domiant potential or the 
classical tales to bestow knowledge on us, and unlike myth, they free andent knowledge in the name of the author, 
who is not afraid to declare her or his allegiance. Innovative fairy tales take sides, are partial, name their dass 
allegiance. Then question the illusion of happiness and universairty In the dasslcal tales and make us realize how far 
we have yet to go to bring the antidpatory illuminations of concrete Utopia to fulfillment. They do not deceive with 



What voyage this, little girf? 
This coming out of prison 
God help - 



this fife after death? (112) 



ERIC 




109 



thdr symbols ond metaphors but Blurdnate. ^Once upon L fee" in the dawlcal fairy tale refers to the point In the 
past that wao a genuine begmnlnj^. There was no myth then, and 3veii thjugh myth Is the dominant fomi of the 
fairy tale today, H cannot freeze ths genuine beginning forever. Once upon a time keeps shining, and its rays seep 
through the mythic constelJation to tell the tale rqain on its own terms, on our own new ter^ns that embody that 
which has yet to ccmo. The mylh-despite itsuT -urges us to do this as a fairy ta!e that has not compictc-ly forgotten 
its Utopian origins. 

University of Florida 

Works Cited 

Barthes, Rdand. Mythologies . London: Granada, 1973. 
Broumas, Olga. Be^iinning with 0 . New Have: Yale UP. 1977. 

Grimm, Jakob and Wiihelm Grmn. Tha Complete Falrv Tales of the Brothers Grimm . Trans. Jack 2pcs. New Yoric 
Bantam, 1987. 

Penrault, Charles. The Fahy Tales of Charles Renault . Trans. Angela Carter. New Yoric Avon, 1977. 
Sexton, Anne. Transforrotbns . Boston: Houghton. 1971. 



ry 

110 



Abstracts of Papers 
Presented at the Fourteenth Annual Conference 

of 

The Children's Literature Association 



Cross-Cuftural Perspectives in the Translation of Children's Books: Erich Kflstner's Emil und die Detektive 

This paper compares the English and French translations of Erich Kfistner's Emil und die Detektrve . A 
translator of children's literature often makes a choice between the Impcrtance of the cultural setting and the author's 
moral or lesson. If a foreign setting makes a work Inaccessible to children, who often prefer to read only about their 
own culture, it may be changed to help assure popularity or financial success. However, if literature serves to 
present children with their first cross*cultural experiences, a translator should work to preserve the foragnness of a 
work. These two translations of ErnH Hlustrate both perspectives. The elements discussed are place and proper 
names, Idiom and metaphor, wordplay, and nicknames and derogatory expressions. The English and French versions 
are compared with the original as well as with each other. 

Catherine C. Baumann 
University of Minnesota 



Scott O'Deil's Island of the 9iue Dolphins . Jean Craighead George's Julie of the Wolves and Whitley 
Striefaer's Wolf of Shadov/s are three novels for young readers that challenge Western cultural traditfons' paradigm of 
civilization vs. wilderness, a paradJgm that projects the wfidemess as chaotte and moraHy debased and thereby 
Justifies civilization's exploitation of the natural wild. Through their various nanative modes-ranging from the hope for 
social integration in comedy, to personal Isolation in tmgedy, to the bondage of a nuclear winter in Irony-all three 
authors show the destructive consequences as the male power structure operates through the paradigm. They 
contrast that negative Impact with perceptions of native peoples, Eskimo and native Americans, who are and were 
defeated by dvKization. However, a new alternative emerges In the three novds through the perceptions f id actions 
of the female protagonists. Through tha'r relation with natural and living things, the reader discovers an Inversion of 
the traditional paradigm: the wolf has the heart that civilization lacks. 

Hamlda Bosmaftan 
Seattle University 



The Israeli equivalent of the Caldecott medal is the Ben Yitzchak prize for distinguished illustration of 
children's books, awarded every two years in cooperation with the youth ^ing of the Israel Museum In Jerusalem. 
This paper focuses on some of the winners of the award In order to trace themes in Israeli children's books over a 
ten-year period. How has the Image of himself and his place In society v/ith which the chiki Is confronted changed 
as sodety itself has changed? By means of what knages are the family, the kibbutz, the dty. Immigrants, religion, 
Arabs, America and the v/ider worid "out there" represented? How do these books negotiate opposing lmpuIses~on 
the one hand towards nostalgia for a simpler life, twpresented at times by the family, at others by traditional religion 
and at still others by the kibbutz (v^h Its rejection of the traditional family structure, religion and urt)an culture in 
favor of the Ideal of physical labor and the cohesive power of the group)-and on the other towards a complex 
confrontation with modem fffe expressing Itself through the wish to cxptore the interior Hfe and the worid beyond 



The Heart of the Wolf and the Disorder of Civifization 



Ten Years of Israeli Children's Literature: 
The Ben Yitzchak Awards 




ERIC 



111 



Israel's borders? It wHI be the suggestion of this paper that In formulating their selections, the judges have chosen 
books which offer children not only a high quality of illustration and a variety of Iheme, story and perspective which 
permits the child to experience some of the tensions of Israeli sodety, but also, iri some measure, a way to come to 
terms with the choices and possibilities fostering Individuation and social development which are generated by and 
available to the inhabitants of any truly open sodety. 

Ruth Gonen 

Israel Museum, Jerusalem 

Lynne Rosenthal 
Mercy College 

Pura Belpr^ moved from Spanish language-dominant Puerto Rico (whose people have had U.S. citizenship 
since 1917) to English language-dominant mainland U.SA In 1920. Noting the dearth of Puerto RIcan folklore In 
children's literahjre, she rendered ihlrty-five traditional folktales she had heard as a child Into written English fomi and 
arranged for their publication for mainstream American children. They reflect the diversity of the Indian, Spanish, and 
African ethnic backgrounds. BelprS incorporated details of local color. Four illustrators portrayed these Puerto Rican 
characteristics carefully, while three others did Rttle research. A pioneer In retelling the Puerto Rican folktales, Pura 
Belpr§ remains the single contributor in the field. 

Karen Nelson Hoyle 

U. of Minnesota. Minneapolis 

"Just Stories;* Swedish Writers and Moral Fiction 

Swe:^sh children's books, seldom discussed in English4anguage critidsm and often not widely available In 
libraries here, offer an interesting fusion of fonn and content, especially with regard to moral teaching. Beckman, 
Sven WemstrOm, and Maria Gripe, show how very different writers acknowledge and validate a teaching function as 
part of the creative act. Studying writers of other cultures is essential for an understanding of aesthetics as well as 
for a valid praxis. 

Nancy Huse 
Augustana College 

Hope Among the Ruins: Notes \tjf*z:'i a Nudear Critidsm 
of Children's literature 

"Nudear crilldsm'-the application of theories of literary critidsm aid rhetoric to the fictional representation 
of nuclear warfare-is receiving consid&*abIe attention from critics of literature tor adult audiences. Because of the 
potential survival value of the topic and because of the growing number of children's and young adult ficttonal titles 
treating nudear warfare, I propose to develop a basis for nudear critidsm of children's literature. Through a survey 
of some of the recent critical discussions of the topic and spedal attention to Robert Swindell's Brother In the Land . 
I arrive at some guidelines or principles that may help to bring these books into critical perspective. 

Millicent Lenz 

State University of New Yori< at Albany 



Los Nortenos: We Are All Americans, or 
The Problems of Finding literature for ChHdren About Hispanlcs 



The author details the problems of locating good literature about Hispanic, or more specifically, Mexican- 
American culture. Hispanlcs do not share with the English-speaking worid a reverence for the written word, and do 
not appear to be producing a hidden treas'iry of literature which can be shared either In the university classroom or 
In dascrooms for children. Even though Hispanlcs constitute the fastest-growing minority group In the United States, 
and In some areas of the country actually fomi the majority, thetr culture Is not being handed on, either to their own 
children or to the children of other ethnic groups, In literature. 

Ruth MacOonald 

New Mexico State University 



Pleas for tolerance are often supported by the conviction that people everywhere are basically the same. 
This paper explores the cuttural an'ogance of such assumptions, by exnlonng first how they cause writers to 
misrepresent other cultures, and then how they cause readers to as^dme that specific and surprisingly limited 
versions of reality actually represent universal truth. An analysis of (he limited reality of Judy Blume's Superfudqe 
suggests that the novel seems to express a unrversai reality to niwny of its readers simply because It min-ors the only 
fictional reality they are comfortable with-the worid as commonly depicted in television situation comedies. A 
consideration of the relationship between that fictional worid and our own real one reveals how popular ^{turc 
fosters cultural an'ogance, and suggests why those brought up on television and books like Superfudqe often find 
more conventional literary na natives so aifficult. 

Peny Nodelman 
University of Winnipeg 



The purpose of this paper, on the one hand, is to investigate the literary use Maurice Sendak made of 
Jewish traditions mled by matrilinearity, by the lunar calendar, and by the conception of divinity as Word and Music. 
It Is also to show, on the other hand, how the illustrator. In what his "master" Henry James called "that sacred back 
kitchen of the artist," could fuse traditional pattems with the themes bon-owed from Intemational literature. More 
precisely in this respect, we mean to point out a vary Important literary source that Sendak never mentioned. This 
book Is no other than J. H. Ewlng's The Brownies and Other Tales and as well try to show. It helped Sendak to 
build the plots of his famous picture book trilogy. 

We'll proceed in our analysis with the help of C. L6vl-Strauss*s structural method which seems particularfy 
fitted for the task, since both the author of The Raw and the Cooked and that of In the Night Kitchen shared with 
thtir love of music and common Jewish origins a very keen relish for "cooking." As one very well knows, "cooking" 
in the French anthropologist's book Is but a metaphor for the cultural processes that enforce socialization, and so 
we'll consider the tasks symbolically laid upon Sendak^s heroes In the light of traditional rituals. As It will soon be 
obvious, the Illustrator's stories were less designed as humorous satires on the Victorian system of education than 
as playful fantasies. The artist, however, never lost sight of the well-being of a child that stands In his books as the 
tnje spokesman of modem humanism. Love for music, anyhow, fills his narratives, like Mahler's wori<s, with the 
meny echoes of all "The Songs of the Earth." 

Jean Perrot 
University of Paris 



Cultural Arrogance and Realism In Judy Blume's Superfudqe 



The Elaborate Cooking of the Child or Maurice Sendak's 
Intemational Back Kitchen In Three Jewish Recipes: 
The Moon, the Mother and the Music 




ERIC 



113 



The Chicago Gypsies : At Home in the Worid 



' The Chicago Gypsies : At Home In the Worid' is an analysis of a play for young (and old) audiences by 
V. Glasgow Koste. The protagonist, ten year old Chariey, is a member of a theatrical "tribe." In December, 1931, 
she and her parents are stranded for a month at Fort Dodge, Iowa, and the play explores Chariey's search to 
discover how she, as an outsider, can forge a place for herself In a culture which Is alien to her, and which regards 
her as a potentially dangerous outsider. The play dramatizes the Important truth that you dont have to cross any 
national borders In order to bump up against, or cross, cultural boundaries: that hotels and houses; youth and age; 
moving on and staying put; the sanctuary of the dressing room at Intermission and the baitaric wilds of the 
playground at recess; and Chicago, Illinois and Fort Dodge, Iowa, can present rich possibilities for a»*tjral 
antagonisms and exchanges. In addition to the cross-cultural, Intergenerationa! themes of the play, the paper 
discusses The Chicago Gypsies as a drama of individuation. 

Pamela A. Rooks 
Iowa State University 



Though presumably designed for an adult audience, the movie King Kong presents a number of dimensions 
useful to a cross-cultural consideration of children's literature. Recalling Maurice Sendak's vivid recollection of the 
power of the movie over his own youthful Imagination, we can regard the film as a kind of modem fairy tale: 
building on the story of the Beauty and the Beast, itself a late rendition of the Wild Man myth, and combining 
elements derived from classics of American literature, like Moby Dick and mere popular counterparts, from 
Bun-oughs* Tarzan of the Apes to D.W. Griffith's movie, Birth of a Nation , the story of King King Incorporates a 
consistent sequence of mythic elements that helps to explain its long-lived popularity and power. Moreover, by 
tracing the literary allusions to their sources, we car' see the extent to which the Itminal terrain of children's literature 
pervades "adult" literature as well, the definith^^e diffe/ence being the willingness, even the necessity, that literature 
designed for adults accommodate a tragic vision. 

John Seelye 
Universrty of Florida 



When two cultures aoss, the nexus is most often a homeless land with Its chlWren feeling less than whole 
because they are caught between two mln-ors-two ways of sieelng-each presenting a different Inrwige of the self. 
This duality gives rise to both emotional conflict and stories-stories about the confHct itself and about the creatp/e 
act of storytelling-stories the child must hear and tell If the conflict is to be resolved. Four novels for children, each 
told In the voice of a cross-cultural child, exemplify this symbiotic retalionship: Arilla Sun Down by Virginia Hamilton; 
Child of the Owl and Sea Glass by Laurence Yep; and Annie on mv Mind by Nancy Garden. As they listen to the 
stories of other searchers and experience the act of telling itself, these four cross-cultural narrators begin to create 
their own inclusive Identities-thelr Inner homes. And, as they tell t>elr own autobiographteal stories of their search 
for self, they each evolve from a "they" defined through the eyes of others to an "1" of self-definition and inner 
strength. 

George Shannon 
Eau Claire. Wisconsin 



Where ths Wild Things Are: King Kong as a Fairy Story 



Making a Home of One's Own 
Cross-Cultural Children and Children's Literature 




ERIC 



114 



Cross-cutturaKsm In Ann PeHowdki's Novets 

Anne Peiiowski's four novels are based on her own farv^ and center on the Hves of four generations of 
Wisconsin farm glris of Polish descent. They are set at about thirty year Intervals from 1876 to 1967. The stories 
have livety and memorable characters, plenty of action, and significant themes. Their styfe Is sprightly. In addition, 
they show very weW cross-culturaHsm between PoKsh and American cultures. 

Marilyn J. Solt 

BowKng Green State University 




115 



Other Presentations 



PANEL: Literary CritScisrn: A Reality in Elementary Classrooms (Literary 
Criticism K-6} 

An official programme of the ChLA committee on Literary Criticism in the Classroom. 

Glenna Sloan, Missouri Western State College 

Joan Glazer, Rhode Island College 

Peter Roop, Appleton, Wisconsin 

Richard Van Dongen, University of New Mexico 

PANEL: Many Books, Many Voices: A Panel on Canadian Children's Books 
Kathy Lowinger, Executive Director of the Children's Book Centre 
Linda Sheppard, editor 

PANEL: Translating Cultures?/Traduir0 une cuKure? Translating Canadian and 
Qu6bec Children's Uterature/Traduire la Iitt6rature enfantine du Canada et du 
Qu6bec 

Barbara Godard, Professor and Transl^or, York University 

Marie-Andr6e Clermont, translator 

Pauls Daveluy, author editor and translator 

Frances Morgan, translator 

PANEL: Approaches to Narrative In International Children's Literature 
Peter Hunt, University of Wales, Cardiff 
Don Pemberton, Victoria College, Australia 
Rod McGillis, University of Calgary 

WORKSHOP: Bring 'em Back Alive: Traditional Tales in Contemporary Classrooms 
Geoff Fox, University of Exeter 

WORKSHOP: Legends of Natural Phenomena in Folklore: 
The Cross'Cultural Aspects of the Pourquoi Tale 
Darwin L Henderson, University of Cincinnati 
Ellen M. Lynch, University of Cincinnati 

WORKSHOP: Never Too Young: Novel Study In the Early Elementary Grades 
Jon C. Stott, University of Alberta 

Christine Doyle Francis, Educational Consultant, Hartford, Connecticut 

Novels to be discussed: Fantastic Mr. Fox . Grade 1; Lost and Found , Grade 2; 

R amona and Her Father . Grade 3 

WORKSHOP: How to Select and Evaluate African and Africs'n-American Children's 
Literature 

Dr. E. Curtis Alexander, E.C.A. Associates, Chesapeake, Virginia 

WORKSHOP: Literature for Children and Young People in a Multi-Cultural Society 
Taimi M. Ranta, Illinois Stata University 

Laura E. Gowdy, Professor, Milner Library, Illinois State Univeniity 

WORKSHOP: The Quest, The Journey, The Rsturn: Heroes and Wayfarers in Story. 
A storytelling presentation of how hero stories influence the lives of children and an 
inquiry into why they appear in every culture. 

Merna Ann Hecht, children's librarian, Seattle Public Library, freelance storyteller 

i n 

116 




