DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 423 543 



CS 216 508 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

ISBN 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Susag, Dorothea M. 

Roots and Branches : A Resource of Native American 
Literature- -Themes , Lessons, and Bibliographies. 

National Council of Teachers of English, Urbana , IL. 

ISBN-0-8141-4195-1 

1998-00-00 

327p . ; Foreword by Joseph Bruchac . 

National Council of Teachers of English, 1111 W. Kenyon 
Road, Urbana, IL 61801-1096 (Stock No. 41951: $18.95 
members, $25.95 nonmembers). 

Books (010) -- Guides - Classroom - Teacher (052) -- 

Reference Materials - Bibliographies (131) 

MF01/PC14 Plus Postage. 

* American Indian Culture; * American Indian Literature; 
Annotated Bibliographies; Class Activities; Lesson Plans; 
Literary Genres; Secondary Education; *Stereotypes ; Units of 
Study 

*Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 



This resource book offers teachers an opportunity to learn 
and to teach about Native American literature in context. Starting with a 
discussion of themes, rationales, and subthemes, it moves to an examination 
of the historical and literary contexts that frame the literary work of 
Native peoples. Lessons, units, and activities in the book keyed to grade 
level offer practical support. Detailed annotated bibliographies direct the 
teacher to other resources- -historical , cultural, and educaticrial . Appendixes 
address geographical contexts, historical context, stereotypes, cultural and 
spiritual contexts; and list North Central regional publications and 
commercial resources. (RS) 



* tV li'k'k'k'k'k'k'k'k 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 






=» *7 3%^ fl 






Eft 



^ Y> '■ '5 

A-q 

"ik J y ■ • + ^ 












m x 



-'#r:' 



SMHj 



I o« u ?^ OCPAW ™CNTO^ COOCATION 

I u ice ol Educational Research and improve men 

EDUCATIONAL resources information 

CENTER (ERIC) 

™ This document has been reproduced at 
r eceived Irom the person or organizatior 
originating it 

O Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 

I * Po,n, s ol view o' opinions stated in this docir 
! do not necessarily represent official 

j OE Rl position or policy 









PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 



H 






TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



O°0 









yw 

VSA/ 

WV 

vw 



Cv 



■v; «, 



•\ 






/ 









Foreword by Joseph Bruchac 









Roots and 
Branches 



O 

ERLC 

hmatfHHaaaa 



3 



NCTE Editorial Board: Pat Cordeiro, Colette Daiute, Bobbi Fisher, 
Brenda Greene, Richard Luckert, Bill McBride, Alleen Pace Nilsen, 
Jerrie Cobb Scott, Karen Smith, Chair, ex officio, Peter Feely, ex officio 



Roots and 
Branches 



A Resource of Native American Literature 
Themes, Lessons, and Bibliographies 



Dorothea M. Susag 

Simms High School 
Simms, Montana 



National Council of Teachers of English 

1111 W. Kenyon Road, Urbana, Illinois 61801-1096 



O 

ERIC 



5 



] 



Prepress Services: Precision Graphics 
Staff Editor: Zarina M. Hock 
Interior Design: Doug Burnett 
Cover Design: Precision Graphics 
Cover Art: Jack Real Bird 

NCTE Stock Number: 41951-3050 

© 1998 by the National Council of Teachers of English. All rights reserved. 
Printed in the United States of America 

It is the policy of NCTE in its journals and other publications to provide a 
forum for the open discussion of ideas concerning the content and the 
teaching of English and the language arts. Publicity accorded to any partic- 
ular point of view does not imply endorsement by the Executive Commit- 
tee, the Board of Directors, or the membership at large, except in 
announcements of policy, where such endorsement is clearly specified. 

A portion of the royalties from sale of this book will be given to Montana 
tribal libraries. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Susag, Dorothea M. 

Roots and branches : a resource of Native American literature 
themes, lessons, and bibliographies / Dorothea M. Susag. 
p. cm. 

"NCTE stock number: 41986"— T.p. verso. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 0-8141-4195-1 

1. American literature-Indian authors-Study and teaching - 
-Outlines, syllabi, etc. 2. Indian literature-Study and teaching- 
-Outlines, syllabi, etc. 3. American literature-Indian authors- 
-Themes, motives, etc. 4. American literature-Indian authors- 
-Bibliography. 5. Indian literature-Themes, motives, etc. 

6. Indians in literature— Bibliography. 7. Indian literature- 
-Bibliography. I. National Council of Teachers of English. 

II. Title. 

PS153.I52S8 7 1998 

810.9'897— dc21 98-45105 

CIP 



This book was typeset in Palatino and Avant Garde by Precision Graphics 
of Champaign, Illinois. Typefaces on the cover and spine were Indus tria 
and Syntax. The book was printed by Versa Press of East Peoria, Illinois. 




6 



V 



HMWBWW'lEigl 



Contents 



Foreword: The Places Where the Stories Camp vii 

Preface xi 

Acknowledgments xv 

Permissions xvii 

Introduction 1 

1. Themes, Rationales, and Subthemes 10 

2. Historical and Cultural Literary Contexts 36 

3. Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 52 

4. Bibliography of Resources for Teachers 102 

5. Bibliography of Anthologies 124 

6. Bibliography of Native Literatures 140 

7. Non-Native Authors and Their Stories 

about Native Americans 213 

Appendix A: Geographical Contexts 239 

Appendix B: Historical Context 246 

Appendix C: Stereotypes — Sources and Definitions 253 

Appendix D: Cultural and Spiritual Contexts 259 

Appendix E: North Central Regional Publications 267 

Appendix F: Commercial Resources 288 

Author 296 

About the Cover 297 

Index 298 




7 



vii 



Foreword: 

The Places Where 
the Stories Camp 



My story is out walking around. My story is a forest person of the old 
times, one who wears clothing made from moss and a belt made out of 
ashwood withes. And here is the place where my story chooses to camp. 

In rough English translation, those are the words Abenaki storytellers 
often used to begin the telling of a traditional tale. The story 
approaches the listener, not just as a collection of words, not as an 
abstraction, but as a living being, one who remembers and is about to 
share. 

I have long been impressed by the memory of stories. I do not 
mean the way humans remember stories — impressive as that is. 
Complicated stories actually seem to be easier to remember than sim- 
ple facts. It is as if our brains have been hot-wired to hold the form of 
a story more securely than almost anything else and the telling of sto- 
ries can be found at the heart of every human culture. 

In this case, however, when I speak of the memory of stories, I 
mean the way stories themselves remember the things that individu- 
als (and nations) find it so easy to forget. Those lessons of moral con- 
duct, of humility and of courage, of survival itself are held firm in the 
story's grasp. The old stories, those tales that have truly become tra- 
dition, are not just interesting for people to hear — they are as neces- 
sary as breath itself, the sacred breath that carries the words of life. 

When we speak of "Native American" or "American Indian" 
cultures we are speaking of not just one single way of life, but gener- 
alizing about hundreds of extremely varied cultures stretching over a 
vast expanse. Unless we are out walking this land, we tend to forget 
the real geography of this continent we live on. One of the great mis- 
takes made in the past by teachers and writers alike has been to see 
the Native peoples of America as simple "Indians," vanishing, irrele- 
vant, locked into a distant past. (One of the true services of this book 
is to counter such stereotypes and provide access to a deeper under- 
standing of a multiplicity of Native American cultures through the 



O 

ERIC 



8 



<6 



VIII 



Foreword 



words of Native people themselves.) Yet there is one generalization 
that can be made about our more than 400 different American Indian 
nations. We all share a deep respect for the power, a power that often 
can only be described as sacred, of stories. Language, in the living 
shape of a song or a story, makes things happen. 

It is for this reason that many Native people are uncomfortable 
with the words "myth" and "legend" being applied to our stories. 
For many people, myths and legends are seen as frivolous, untrue, 
parts of childhood meant to be left behind like a belief in "Never- 
Never Land." But our stories are, even when they are humorous, far 
from irrelevant. They are true in the deepest sense of the word, true 
because they are alive. True because they know more than we do. As 
a storyteller I am always telling people that I do not learn stories, I 
learn from stories. I do not just tell stories, I listen to them as they tell 
themselves to me, as I loan them my voice. So I find myself referring 
to that vast body of songs and stories, the oral ( and written) literatures 
of the Americas, as traditions. 

The coming of Europeans to the western hemisphere brought, 
among other things, a sustained assault upon Native cultures. Our 
cultures were often either ignored as irrelevant (or nonexistent) or 
attacked. Our living traditions, both oral and written, were threat- 
ened with purposeful destruction. Over 400 years ago, in Mexico, 
Spanish priests collected thousands or written books, the Codices of 
the Mayan and Aztec nations, piled them up, and burned them. In 
the United States, as recently as two decades ago. Native children 
were sent to boarding schools where the speaking of Native lan- 
guages, the singing of traditional songs, was forbidden. Despite it all, 
though much was lost, much survived. It survived not just because of 
the tenacity of Native people but because of the necessity of those tra- 
ditions. 

And, interestingly enough, those traditions did not just survive 
in their original forms. If I might make another generalization about 
Native American cultures, it is this: Native American cultures have 
consistently displayed an ability to absorb and incorporate new 
things. (In terms of material culture, consider the way the horse — 
absent for thousands of years from the continent — became the heart 
of Plains cultures less than two generations after that beautiful ani- 
mal's reintroduction by the Spanish.) Early on, as early as the Euro- 
pean occupation of Peru, Native people began to write in European 
languages. The American Indian as a writer in Spanish, English, and 
French is not just a phenomenon of the twentieth century. 

Today, when we speak of Native American literature we are 
speaking about both a deep oral tradition and a strong, varied body of 
written literature that has been recognized around the world. How- 
ever, perhaps more than any other body of literature, contemporary 




9 



Foreword 



[ 



ix 



Native American writing is based upon, indebted to, and deeply 
aware of the original tribal traditions that went before. Story still 
remains the beating heart of American Indian literature. 

It is especially because of the primacy and the importance of 
stories that Native American literature is of such value to teachers 
and this book is such an important guide. The form of story is such 
that it draws the listener or the reader in. It creates interest. The pur- 
pose of the story is to communicate on a number of levels. To teach. 
That dual role of the story as entertainer and teacher has never been 
more needed in the classroom. 

The lessons taught by so many Native American stories, both 
traditional and contemporary, have never been more needed in our 
classrooms. The stories remember histories that others have forgot- 
ten. They teach us again the importance of community and generos- 
ity, the importance of the individual ,and the balancing virtues of 
courage and compassion, self-respect and self-control. The strength 
of women, the true values of family, the recognition that we human 
beings are not alone in the world but part of a complex and interde- 
pendent web of life are themes easily found — not once, but again and 
again. 

There is so much to say, but it is better to hear it in the stories 
themselves. This book will be, I am certain, an extremely useful 
beginning point. It can tell you where to look if you want to find 
those places where, as my elders put it, "the stories camp." Come 
with open eyes, open ears, and, most of all, an open heart and the sto- 
ries will welcome you into their lodge. I have spent most of my life on 
the story trail and I can assure you that it is a good journey. Wli- 
pamkaani, nidobak. Travel well, my friends. 

— Joseph Bruchac 
June 1998 / Moon of Strawberries 



0 

ERIC 



10 



xi 



Preface 



Roots and Branches: A Resource of Native American Literature Themes, 
Lessons, and Bibliographies began with my increasing frustration over 
trying to make regional literatures available to my students. The pro- 
ject formally began in the spring of 1992 when I left my English 
teaching position at Simms High School for one year, having 
received the 1992-93 Christa McAuliffe Fellowship for Montana for 
my proposal, "Personal Connections in Time and Place Through 
Native American Literature: The Development of a Study of Native 
American Literature for Montana Students from Kindergarten 
through Twelfth Grade." 

At the start, several educators suggested that a resource for 
using Native American literature would develop fairly easily since 
"there wasn't much out there." They were right. The lists in catalogs 
from major publishing companies and distributors featured limited 
selections of legitimate and culturally relevant texts. One catalog 
listed under "Native American" the Chinese American novel The 
Woman Warrior, by Maxine Hong Kingston. I also found that most 
teachers I surveyed were relying on popular storybooks and novels 
by non-Native authors. But once I began visiting the seven Montana 
tribal communities — Blackfeet, Crow, Flathead (Salish/ Kootenai), 
Ft. Belknap (Assiniboine/Gros Ventre), Ft. Peck (Assiniboine /Sioux), 
Northern Cheyenne, and Rocky Boy (Chippewa/Cree) — I found life- 
times of volumes of oral and written resources. On my first visit, 
Blackfeet Tribal Education Director Harold Dusty Bull handed me a 
printed bibliography twenty pages thick and said, "Tell me what's in 
these books." That was the beginning of the bibliographies in Roots 
and Branches. 

Although I have tried to establish an objective position 
throughout my research and writing, I must admit my own ethnic, 
cultural, geographical, and educational biases have influenced the 
philosophy, form, and content of this resource. Born and raised in 
the suburbs of Chicago, two generations removed from Norwegian 
immigrants, I had little previous personal experience with Native 
American cultures and peoples. For twenty-six years I have lived on 
the Eastern Front of the Montana Rocky Mountains, the ancestral 
home of the Blackfeet people and more recently the Metis, exiles 





xii 



: 



~ i 

Preface 



from Canada. Here I have been teaching secondary language arts 
for the last twelve years to students of mixed heritages. A fourth 
have Native ancestry, predominantly Blackfeet, Sioux, Metis, and 
Chippewa /Cree. 

In each community there were those who challenged the right 
of non-Indians, such as myself, to use their stories or cultural philoso- 
phies in public school classrooms, saying, "Story is vital to our 
cultural survival." Others, sometimes sitting at the same table, 
expressed their concerns that "the truth must be told about who we 
are!" I am grateful for the challenges because they have forced me to 
re-examine my own motives and values. Consequently, throughout 
my research, I have felt a tremendous responsibility to first of all 
respect tribal people, their children, their cultures, and their tradi- 
tions, and to make every possible effort to avoid any further exploita- 
tion through this project. 

Roots and Branches: A Resource of Native American Literature 
Themes, Lessons, and Bibliographies represents the voices of many. As I 
struggled to find a way to reflect those voices, it became clear that I 
only confused readers. Therefore, I wish to point out clearly here that 
when I use the first person throughout the text, I am in fact relying on 
many other voices who have helped me learn. Still, I can only speak 
from my own experience with students, with Montana Native people 
in particular, and with published historical and critical resources I 
have read. I have applied whatever experience that represents to 
texts included in this resource. 

I am most reminded of my own limitations as well as the limi- 
tations within these pages whenever I reread Sherman Alexie's poem 
"Native American Literature" in Old Shirts and New Skins, especially 
when I read the following ten lines: 

Because you have seen the color of my bare skin 

does not mean you have memorized the shape of my ribcage. 

Because you have seen the spine of the mountain 
does not mean you made the climb. 

Because you stood waist-deep in the changing river 
does not mean you are equal to me 2 . 

Because you gave something a name 
does not mean your name is important. 

Because you sleep 

does not mean you see into my dreams. 

— Sherman Alexie 

I am still non-Indian, granddaughter of Christian Norwegian 
and Swedish immigrants, halving been indoctrinated primarily by the 




12 



Preface 



xiii 



stereotypes in movies, television, and Western novels, and having 
been raised apart from traditional Indian cultures. In no way can I 
own their stories, nor can I claim to give them voice. In truth, I cannot 
teach Native American literatures. But I can affirm their right to be 
heard and read, and with the help of many other educators, I have 
made available sources for those stories within this text. Roots and 
Branches. 



— Dorothea M. Susag 
Simms High School 
Simms, Montana 



ERIC 



13 



XV 



Acknowledgments 



For the last six years, at the University of Montana, with tribal peo- 
ples from across the state, and with numerous educators and authors, 
I have been privileged to study North American tribal histories and 
cultures. Native American literatures, and the writing of language 
arts curricula. I am greatly indebted to those whose vital contribu- 
tions have made this publication possible. 

b The Department of Education and the Christa McAuliffe Fellow- 
ship Program, which provided the initial funds for study. 

■ Dr. Murton McCluskey, Joseph Bruchac, and Denise Juneau, who 
read and responded to a number of complete drafts, graciously 
answering my many phone calls; and Beverly Slapin, who pro- 
vided expert attention and meticulous detail to the entire draft. 

■ The Montana Advisory Council for Indian Education and the 
Northern Cheyenne Tribal Council, who provided written letters 
of support; tribal elders, leaders, and tribal college personnel who 
encouraged me and entrusted me with materials they considered 
especially relevant for their children, as well as for children out- 
side their communities: Minerva Allen, Tim Bemardis, Bob 
Biggard, Norma Bixby, Julie Cajune, LeRoy Comes Last, Judy 
Davis, Harold Dusty Bull, Elsie Geboe, Long Standing Bear Chief 
(Harold Gray), Kevin Howlett, Tony Incashola, Leonard Littlewolf, 
Dr. Joe MacDonald, Sharon Magee, Victor Miller, Peggy Nagel, 
Jennie Seminole Parker, Bob Parsley, Linda Pease, Margaret Perez, 
Dr. Janine Pease Pretty on Top, Anita Scheetz, Joyce Silverthorne, 
Loren Stiffarm, Ron Terriault, Dr. William Thackary, and Curley 
Youpee. 

■ Principals, teachers and students who graciously responded to my 
requests for information regarding what literatures are available 
and what they believe would benefit young people: Marge Abbott, 
Jeri Azure, Ron Belcourt, Marj Berlinger, Peggy Beswick, Laura 
Bleazard, Diane Boley, Jeanette. A. Borchert, Carol Capps, Bill 
Chambers, Bernadette Dimas, Silvia Denny, Deana Dolberg, 

Sandra Evenson, Carole Filler, Josephine Corcoran, Jay Eagleman, 
Megan Fite, Alan Gardipee, Pam Geboe, Stacy Gordon, Bonnie 
Granbois, Laura Hafer, Kathy Hess, Pam Jackson, Heidi Juel, Stan 
and Carol Juneau, Denise Juneau, Eileene Karge, Peggy Kimmet, 
Roberta Kipp, Laura Lake, Laura Lowe, Pat Littlebird, Linda 
Littlewolf, Sharon Magee, Karin Morrison, Myma Mitchell, Tom 




14 



xvi 



Acknowledgments 



Mollgaard, Sandra Murie, Laurie Nelson, Elaine Neese, Herman 
and Randee Pipe, Avis Prentice, Tim Rosette, Frances Russette, 
Warren Schwartz, Mel Sergeant, Carol Single, Francine Small, 

Diane Spencer, Bill Stops, Rusty Tatsey, Daisy Three Irons, Ken and 
Theodora Weatherwax, and Wilma Windy Boy. 

■ The University of Montana professors who shared in the vision 
and guided me through the research and writing: Dr. William 
Bevis, noted authority on Western American and Montana litera- 
ture; Dr. Beverly Chin, past president of NCTE and professor of 
English education; Dr. Richmond Clow, professor of Native 
American studies; Debra Earling, writer of fiction and poetry and 
professor of Native American literature; Dr. Lois Welch, former 
chair of the Creative Writing Department; and Dr. Bonnie Craig, 
director of the University of Montana's Native American Studies 
Program from 1991 to 1997, when cancer took her life. 

■ My colleagues in education, friends and relatives who provided 
invaluable encouragement, support, collaboration, and feedback 
time and again when I asked several to read — and reread — drafts 
of sections and chapters: Marge Abbott, Clara Beier, Jan Clinard, 
Margaret Eller, Megan Fite, Laurie Henthome, Donna Miller, 

Sandy Nypen, Holly Pepprock, Dawn Sievers, Diane West-Mott, 
the Board of Simms High School, the administration and staff, my 
students at Simms, and the students of Poplar School who pro- 
vided inspiration to me and written responses to many texts and 
lessons included in Roots and Branches , my own grandchildren, my 
mother, Louise Harrisville, my daughter and her husband, Lori 
and Hugh Maxwell, both educators, and my husband, Sylvan 
Susag, a career counselor in Poplar on the Fort Peck Reservation. 
For their encouragement and continuing support over the last six 
years, I am most grateful. 

■ The NCTE Editorial Board and editors Dawn Boyer, Michael 
Greer, and Pete Feely, who believed in such a project and con- 
tributed profoundly to its completion with their encouragement, 
advice, and direction; and Zarina Hock, NCTE staff editor, and 
Precision Graphics under the direction of Kirsten Dennison, for 
their meticulous reading and suggestions in the final preparation 
of the manuscript. 

To these and to others I may have failed to mention who have 
also shared in the vision, to those who have contributed their own 
voices and translations to my rethinking and rewriting, and to those 
who believe in the undeniable right of all people to tell their own sto- 
ries and the right of all children to hear and read the stories of their 
heritage, I dedicate this work. 



15 



xvii 



Permissions 



We gratefully acknowledge the permission to reproduce the follow- 
ing materials. 

p. 3: "Just the Other Day" by Lizabeth Staber (Blackfeet). Used by 
permission of the author. 

p. 4: Owl poem and drawing used by permission of William Darby. 

p. 13: "Remember," from the book She Had Some Horses by Joy Harjo. 
Copyright 1982 by Joy Harjo. Used by permission of the publisher, 
Thunder's Mouth Press. 

p. 16: "My Family" by Delia Spotted Bear, Physical Education 
Teacher at Pretty Eagle Catholic School, St. Xavier, MT. Used by per- 
mission of the author. 

pp. 16-17: "The Bighorn River" by Len Plenty. Used by permission of 
the author. 

p. 17: "A Circle Begins" by Harold Littlebird (Laguna / Santo 
Domingo Pueblo). Used by permission of the author. 

pp. 17-18: "we are a people" by Lance Henson. Used by permission 
of the author. 

pp. 28-29: "The Girl Who Loved the Sky" by Anita Endrezze, from at 
the helm of twilight (Broken Moon Press), 1992. Used by permission of 
the author. 

pp. 32-33: "Sure You Can Ask Me a Personal Question" by Diane 
Burns. Used by permission of the author. 

pp. 47 — 49: "Introduction to Native American Literature" by Sherman 
Alexie, from Old Shirts and New Skins. Used by permission of Ken- 
neth Lincoln, General Editor of Series, UCLA. 

p. 47: "Sending a Voice" by Kenneth Lincoln, from Native American 
Renaissance. Used by permission of the author. 

pp. 93-94: Lakota cosmology reprinted from Lakota Myth by James R. 
Walker, edited by Elaine A. Jahner, by permission of the University 
of Nebraska Press. Copyright 1983 by the University of Nebraska 
Press. 

pp. 240-241: Map entitled Native North America reprinted with per- 
mission from the map's author, Michael J. Caduto, © 1996, All Rights 
Reserved. The map is originally found on pages xiv and xv of Keepers 
of Life: Discovering Plants Through Native American Stories and Earth 




1 Q 

•A J 



XVIII 



Permissions 



Activities for Children by Michael J. Caduto and Joseph Bruchac 
(Golden, Colorado: Fulcrum Publishing, 1996). 

pp. 242-245: Maps taken from Native North American Literature. 
Edited by Janet Witalec. Copyright © 1994, Gale Research, Inc. 
Reproduced by permission. All rights reserved. 

p. 260: "Educational Philosophy of the Assiniboine and Gros Ventre 
Tribes" used by permission of Tribal Education Committee, Ft. Belk- 
nap Agency. 

p. 261: Sioux philosophy used by permission of Sung' Gleska. 

p. 262: "Blackfeet (The Pikuni Way)" written by Long Standing Bear 
Chief. Used by permission. 

p. 263-264: Crow (Absorka) philosophy used by permission. 

p. 264: Kootenai philosophy used by permission of Patricia 
Hewankorn, Director, Kootenai Culture Committee. 

p. 264: Flathead Culture Committee Philosophy used by permission 
of Antoine Incashola. 

p. 265-266: Cheyenne philosophy used by permission of Jennie 
Parker, Northern Cheyenne Tribal President. 




17 



1 



Introduction 



PQQf§ jp StOrV Why teach Native American literatures? Eight years ago in my 
' Freshman English class, a quiet and slight girl, with long hair, 
braided and banded, would softly move into her seat, near the 
front but off to one side. Day after day, her downcast eyes and 
firm-set mouth would say, “Leave me alone." If she spoke at all, it 
was in quiet, short responses. But when she wrote, she told stories 
of her brother's attempted suicide and stories of a nephew, just 
under two, who had smothered to death the previous summer. She 
told of her mother's drinking, of her eight siblings, of an absent 
father, and she sometimes told of her cousins — many of whom 
were also mixed bloods — living one hundred miles north on the 
Blackfeet Indian Reservation in Browning, Montana. Betsy wrote 
poetry, too. “Feelings on paper," she called it, feelings upon feel- 
ings, barbed and penetrating, filling page after page, no matter 
what the assignment. 

As a sophomore, Betsy enrolled in our Montana Literature 
class. We sat in a circle, but her chair wanted to turn out. Still reluc- 
tant to share with the class, she found the seminar format threaten- 
ing. But she wanted an A. So when her turn came to present her 
experience with Percy Bullchild's telling of the Blackfeet story, 
"Napi and the Sun's Leggings" in The Last Best Place: A Montana 
Anthology, she moved to stand behind the podium. From there she 
told us about Napi, the Blackfeet transformer and culture hero 
whom Creator Sun had entrusted to take care of life on Earth. Napi 
is "always roaming about for adventure or mostly for food" and 
always ends up "doing something foolish." In this particular story, 
Napi repeatedly tries to run away with a pair of “red-winged 
woodpecker feather fringed leggings," yet every morning he 
wakes to find himself back in the same tipi where he has first 
found the leggings, back in the tipi of Creator Sun who gives Napi 
a final warning: “There is a restriction on those red-winged wood- 
pecker feather fringed leggings of mine and if that restriction isn't 
complied with, you shall find out the consequences. . . . Remember 
and take my advice to you, don't wear them just any time, unless 
your heart is all given to your Creator" (Bullchild 1990, 47). But 
Napi disregards Creator Sun's warning, and, for the sole purpose 




O 

ERIC 



13 



2 



i i 

Roots and Branches 



of admiring himself, he puts on the leggings. As soon as Napi's feet 
touch the ground, the dry grass begins to burn, and he can escape 
only when he jumps into the creek. At the end of her retelling, 
Betsy shared the most important values she found exhibited in this 
story — honesty and respect. Then, with wide eyes and a still cau- 
tious smile, she closed her presentation and said, "Percy Bullchild 
is my relative." 

From that day I watched Betsy's head lift to smile and inter- 
act with her classmates, who carried their own varieties of mixed 
heritages. She was moving into an older new world, confirming an 
identity rooted in place and story. And the other students' 
responses to her "Indianness" grew more and more positive, evi- 
dence of their growth as well. From the stories they read of her 
Blackfeet people, they learned that Indian means much more than 
staggered falls down bar-front steps, much more than "eighteen 
money"* spent fast on friends and family, and much more than 
fatherless children with smudged faces. Each student began to 
realize that being Indian can mean valuing personal sacrifice, 
respect for others, and generosity. It can mean knowing the 
absolute necessity of community and the intimate connection to 
place, knowing the importance of law within ancient tribal texts, 
and knowing the actual interdependence of all things living. Being 
Indian can mean Blackfeet, Cheyenne, Crow, or any of more than 
500 different Native societies in America today. All of the students 
began to realize that many of the strong Native cultural values 
they had found in story were present — or missing — from their own 
lives. At the end of the year, one of Betsy's classmates wrote, 
"These stories have certainly destroyed many images I've had of 
the Old West, images drawn by movies and books, invariably writ- 
ten by whites." 

When Betsy was a senior, I heard about her telling Napi stories 
to her teammates on the volleyball bus. Voices and visions from her 
ancestral landscape — not generated and not taught, but affirmed in a 
public school classroom — had helped to provide her with a positive 
identity and with the spiritual strength to survive both her real and 
imagined fears. The Blackfeet stories she had read and heard in class 
had also proved the significance of her relationship with her aging 
Blackfeet grandmother. Last year, Betsy shared with me this poem 
she had read at her grandmother's funeral. 



* Although the situation may differ from tribe to tribe, on the Ft. Peck and Blackfeet 
Reservations, "eighteen money" refers to claim money, lease money, per capita pay- 
ments based on tribally-owned enterprises, or tribal money that is held in trust by 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) until the person is eighteen. 




19 



Introduction 



3 



Just the other day 
I met a woman 

who entranced me with her Napi tales 
her voice wise with age 
pulling me into the story 
Just the other day 
I held her hand 

Singing Silent Night softly to her 
till her eyelids heavy from fatigue 
slowly slid shut 

Just the other day 

I had to say good-bye 

to a woman I had met not so long ago 

my memories held locked away 

inside my mind 

my eyes puffy from tears 

my soul hurting for our loss 

my heart relieved for now, 

there is no more pain in my 

Grandma's soft brown eyes. 

— Lizabeth Staber (Blackfeet) 

Why teach Native American literatures? The answer is rooted 
in story. A few years ago, in preparation for reading a play about Nor- 
wegian immigrants, I asked my freshman students to talk with their 
parents and grandparents about their ethnic or national origins and 
about the circumstances of their ancestors' immigration to America. 
A few students argued, unwilling or afraid to communicate with 
either parents or grandparents, while others expressed their frustra- 
tion with the assignment because they were certain no one at home 
would know about "immigration" or "ancestors," "places or stories." 
Eventually they accepted the assignment, and I prepared to assign 
parts for reading aloud when William, in the last seat, middle row, 
raised his hand. He asked, "Does Indian count?" 

Does Indian count! Struck with the painful irony in his words, 
I stood speechless, overcome with contradictory emotions of shame, 
relief, and gratitude for the simple yet powerfully complex question 
that suddenly exploded into multiple voices and images before me. 
"Did the Indians' migratory patterns make them immigrants?" "Did 
the forced removal of Indians from their ancestral lands to prisoner- 
of-war camps and reservations make them immigrants?" "Do my 
ancestors' deaths from starvation and disease count?" "Do the 
'places and stories' of my mother's people count?" "If Indians count, 
how do they count?" "Does my mother and her dark skin count?" 
"Do the boarding school experiences of my mother, my father, my 
grandparents and great grandparents count?" "Do I, sitting in the 
fourth seat, third row, with my less-than-average grades and my 



Just the other day 
I met a woman 
with so much life and vigor 
I watched her sit for hours 
hunched over buckskin beading 
her coal black hair streaked 
with gray 

her hands working patiently with 
the needle 




20 



4 



Roots and Branches 



atypical thinking patterns, count?" "Does my confusion over my 
identity — white, brown, Scottish, Chippewa /Cree, son of the moun- 
tains and son of alcohol — count?" "Do my feelings of frustration, 
anger, shame, pride, hope, and joy count?" 

Like nearly a fourth of our students in this small Montana com- 
munity, over one hundred miles from the nearest reservation, 
William is Native American, a mixed-blood, of Turtle Mountain 
Chippewa /Cree ancestry. He has hidden his Native heritage and has 
denounced its value to his peers, hoping to avoid insult and ridicule 
from those who would associate him with "lazy, irresponsible, 
drunken savagery." But on this day — hoping not to hear the same 
answer he and his ancestors had heard for hundreds of years — 
William raised his hand and asked, "Does Indian count?" 

Later in the school year, William, age 14, wrote and illustrated 
the following poem: 



An Owl 
night sitting 
our sick 

die he 

that we 
that 



Hoots in 

on a branch watching 

souls; and when 
reports to our 
are gone 
he lifted 



the 

over 

we 

family 

and 

us to heaven. 





21 



Introduction 



5 



When I asked him to share with the class how he had heard 
this story — a story similar to one I had heard from a Chippewa/Cree 
woman the previous year, William smiled and said, "My mother told 
me, and her mother told her, and her mother told her, and . . . that's 
how I know this story" 

At the end of the unit, we posted William's poem on the class- 
room wall with other students' poetry. The following week, in an 
essay response to reading Mourning Dove: A Salishan Autobiography, 
Amanda, age 16, commented, "another value of [Indian peoples] is 
their culture and the way their traditions are followed and respected. 
As I read [William's] poem, I realized that the spiritual aspect has 
never left the tribe's beliefs." 

Why teach Native American literatures? In an Indian litera- 
ture class at the University of Montana, I listened to Salish /German 
poet Debra Earling talk about the ways "education changes the 
story of your life." I wondered about our educational system in 
America and the ways that education has affected young people of 
Native heritage, especially those who are separated from their 
ancestral landscapes and communities. If their experiences in our 
public school classrooms have the power to change the stories of 
their lives, what happens to children who don't hear the stories of 
their own people? And if they do, what happens when their teach- 
ers and texts in the public schools regard those stories as inferior, 
obsolete, representing wrong values of property and government, 
and representing inadequate means for survival? What happens to 
children whose public education is rooted in an alien culture? How 
do the stories of their lives change? What do they learn to value, 
what do they learn to reject, and what do they learn about survival 
when they don't ever hear or read about the suffering, loss, and 
endurance of their own people? How do they establish positive 
identities for themselves when voices within their culture are 
ignored, twisted, and suppressed, and when voices outside their 
culture decide for them who they are and who they should become? 
What happens to the relationships among children from differing 
cultures within classrooms? Do the children from the dominant cul- 
ture develop an understanding of and respect for the similarities as 
well as the differences among all peoples? Or do they learn to prac- 
tice discrimination against all cultures different from their own? I 
know the answers to these questions — I see their faces at school 
each day. 

Today more than ever before, many educators recognize the 
undeniable right of children to locate their identities in the stories 
and experiences of those who have gone before, and the right of all 
young people to experience the storied landscapes of surrounding 
peoples and cultures. Consequently, educators are requesting more 
literatures from multicultural resources. To meet this growing need. 




0 0 



6 



[ 



Z Z) 

Roots and Branches 



publishing companies are mass-producing textbooks and literatures 
by and about American Indian peoples. 

However, this increased production and availability of 
resources has not eased the classroom teacher's selection process. 
Instead, the challenge and responsibility for presenting meaningful 
and appropriate Native American literatures to students of all ages 
and races has become more important, yet increasingly more diffi- 
cult. So much of the new literature represents non-Native cultural 
voices and is written and promoted apart from any specific tribal or 
cultural context. Also, many of the new, as well as the older popular 
literatures, eclipse truths about Native American peoples and rein- 
force negative stereotypes, which deny the individuality and the 
humanity of Indian peoples. Whenever we use books and stories that 
fail to represent American Indian experiences honestly, we risk per- 
petuating a dangerously racist cultural isolationism. 

I realize the power of those stereotypical images whenever I 
encourage my non-Native students to search for truths outside the 
boundaries of their history books, because they frequently grow 
tense and defensive. However, I have also watched that tension dis- 
solve as they learn to expose and challenge the popular "Indian" 
stereotypes as well as the stereotypes they themselves live with every 
day. I have watched the shadow continue to fade whenever young 
people such as Betsy, William, and Amanda hear and read stories told 
and written by Native Americans themselves, especially those writ- 
ers and storytellers from the Native students' own cultural heritages. 
And when students like Betsy and William bring their rooted stories 
into the classroom, I watch the shadow disappear. In the 1994 publi- 
cation Crossing the Mainstream: Multicultural Perspectives in Teaching 
Literature, Eileen Iscoff Oliver provides an excellent, exhaustively 
researched rationale for the study of multicultural literatures by all 
students. She writes: 

Everyone — the many students of color across our country and every- 
body else — is entitled to know the history and pain and beauty of the 
world as it has been recorded by artists who come from all of the 
strands that make up American literary society. . . : May we read, 
learn, and grow from these experiences and teach our students to do 
the same. (Oliver 1994, 11) 

Why teach Native American literatures? All our students, espe- 
cially those from mixed family, cultural, or ethnic heritages, struggle 
to establish individual and unique identities. Nevertheless, by facili- 
tating their growth and understanding of themselves and the worlds 
around them, teachers can help them confront life with personal dig- 
nity, with compassion for themselves and for others, and with hope 
for a meaningful future. Through Native American oral and written 
literatures, students can develop a sincere appreciation for the artistic 



O 

ERIC 



23 



Introduction 



7 



r 



expression and for the validity and serious complexity of each Native 
American's personal, cultural, and historical experience, while they 
also can learn to say with conviction, "Yes, Indian counts!" 



Philosophy, 
Scope, and 
Challenge 



In his introductory essay to Native North American Literature, Joseph 
Bruchac writes: "Clearly, the contemporary North American Native 
experience is a varied one, and the Native writers of Canada and the 
United States share in the complexity of that experience, just as they 
share in the richness of the many traditions which make up North 
American Native literature today It is a tree with many branches, a 
tree that grows on the plains and in the mountains, in the deserts and 
in the cities, a tree which is, through it all, still rooted strong in this 
land" (Bruchac 1994, xiv). Out of respect for the "rooted" and complex 
experiences of Native people. Roots and Branches — a resource among 
many — has been written with the following philosophy in mind: 

To respect Native voices who speak from a tribal ethnic conscious- 
ness as well as from an awareness of the European American cultural 
impact on them and on their peoples, and to support each student's 
search for his or her cultural ties to ancient and contemporary writers 
and storytellers. 

Roots and Branches is a resource of themes, lessons, and bibli- 
ographies from many cultures and regions. Although the length of 
the bibliographies prohibits an extensive list of recommended uses 
for the selections, suggestions for use with other literatures and with 
themes normally covered in language arts programs are incorporated 
in several annotations. Also, Roots and Branches recognizes various 
contexts from which these literatures have grown. The three maps in 
Appendix A provide an introduction to geographical contexts where 
teachers can find the current location of tribes and reservations as 
well as the approximate location at the time of European contact. The 
brief history of federal Indian policy in Appendix B provides a sum- 
mary of significant dates, events, and their consequences for all peo- 
ple of Native American ancestry. This is especially important since 
most of the literatures from the last two hundred years reflect the 
impact of these polices on individual lives. The stereotypes defined in 
Appendix C are an essential context to recognize, because the prolif- 
eration of negative and unrealistic images, beginning with the first 
European contact, has impacted the lives of all Native Americans and 
has prevented non-Native people from knowing the truths about 
Native Americans as individuals. In Appendix D, the Montana tribal 
philosophies provide strong contradictions to the stereotypes defined 
in Appendix C. Although they are examples of spiritual and cultural 
contexts that can especially assist students who read Montana-based 
literatures, teachers and students in other areas may use them as 



ERIC 



24 



8 



: 



Roots and Branches 



examples of what they can discover in their own regions and commu- 
nities. Since Roots and Branches began with the seven Montana tribal 
cultures and communities, a list of Montana regional publications is 
included in Appendix E. As a result of ancestral and forced migration 
patterns, of federal boarding school and relocation programs, and of 
non-Native encroachment into Native lands, the Montana peoples 
share cultures, stories, histories, and relatives with Native peoples 
from across America and Canada. Consequently, the list grew to 
encompass not only texts and themes from Montana and from the 
Northwest, North Central, and Plains regions, but from all over the 
North American continent. 

Reading beyond my own cultural and literary boundaries, I 
found it necessary to investigate the critical landscapes and traditions 
of Native American cultures. Chapter 2, "Historical and Cultural Lit- 
erary Contexts," represents the summary of my research and experi- 
ence with these literatures and cultures. In no way can this summary 
speak for all Native American traditions, nor can it address all read- 
ers of Native American literatures. Instead, I hope that teachers and 
students who use it as a guideline will establish their own under- 
standings and comparisons as they hear and read literatures from 
their surrounding Native cultures and landscapes. 

There are limitations to this book. Since it cannot provide com- 
plete cultural contexts for each work, teachers have the responsibility 
to educate themselves and to encourage and support their students' 
own research as they use Native American literatures. In fact, the 
search is continual and critical. Whenever possible, research should 
begin with the important primary resources: individuals in local 
tribal communities, such as elders. Native educators, tribal education 
directors, tribal culture committees, tribal colleges, and Native Ameri- 
can studies departments in regional colleges and universities. Stu- 
dents can listen to tribal leaders tell about the role of story in their 
communities, and teachers can invite oral historians, elders, and tribal 
storytellers into the classroom to teach students about their cultural 
philosophies as well as contemporary issues in their communities. 
When making connections with tribal peoples, educators should 
respect the right of all people to be reimbursed for their expertise. 
Watching Montana Native peoples give tobacco, beaded pins, blan- 
kets, and star quilts, as well as monetary gifts, I have observed the 
great respect they have for the practice of honoring individuals who 
share themselves for the benefit of the community. 

A note about terminology is in order here. I have used the 
terms "Native American" and "Indian" interchangeably for two rea- 
sons. Many people regard "Indian" as a derogatory misnomer — 
"Columbus's mistake" — and they prefer to use the term "Native 
American," in an attempt to "set things right" and to demonstrate 
long-neglected respect. On the other hand. University of Montana 




25 



Introduction 



9 



professor Debra Earling maintains that Native people, having sur- 
vived five hundred years of genocide, alienation, and discrimination, 
have given dignity to the term "Indian." Since most Native people 
regard themselves first as members of tribal nations and second as 
"Native American" or "Indian," I have made references in Roots and 
Branches to specific tribal affiliations of individual storytellers and 
writers whenever possible. However, accurate identification of nation 
names is also problematic because the French, Spanish, and English 
conquerors and the agents of the federal government mistranslated 
and misnamed them. Today, many of those misnomers, such as 
Sioux, Gros Ventres, and Crow, remain "legal" and familiar. As I 
attempted to resolve these issues for the purposes of this book, I 
relied on publishers' and distributors' designations, on references 
within the texts themselves, on whatever individual storytellers and 
writers called themselves, and on Native consultants. As a result of 
my effort to rely primarily on designations within or in association 
with individual texts, occasional spelling variations exist within this 
resource. I have also avoided assigning what some scholars might 
consider "culturally appropriate" nation names, especially when the 
texts or writers themselves suggest differences. 

Roots and Branches does not pretend to be the ultimate scholarly 
work on Native American literature. In no way does it address all the 
issues that derive from teaching specific kinds of literatures, but read- 
ers will find in this book lists of works by individuals who have made 
major contributions to the critical study of Native American literatures. 

For teachers across the continent reading this text, I hope it will 
stimulate the desire to walk through areas unfamiliar (and yes, scary) 
to them in order to broaden their own and their students' world 
views. I hope it will help teachers find ways to integrate Native 
American literary traditions into language arts classes, as well as pro- 
vide access to resources that will increase teachers' and students' 
awareness of the Native American contributions to our national liter- 
ary history. I also hope that other books will be written from a variety 
of geographical areas, specifically respecting their particular and 
unique tribal cultures. 

Works Cited Bruchac, Joseph. 1994. "A Living Tree with Many Roots: An Introduction to 

Native North American Literature." In Native North American Litera- 
ture , ed. Janet Witalec. Detroit, MI: Gale Research, Inc. 

BuUchild, Percy. 1990. "Napi and the Sun's Leggings." In The Last Best Place: 
A Montana Anthology , eds. William Kittredge and Annick Smith. 
Helena: The Montana Historical Society Press. 

Oliver, Eileen Iscoff. 1994. Crossing the Mainstream: Multicultural Perspectives 
in Teaching Literature. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of 
English. 




O r> 
C O 




1 

Themes, Rationales, 
and Subthemes 



How can teachers in public-school classrooms bring together litera- 
tures from diverse Native and non-Native cultures? Despite the mul- 
tiple perspectives between cultures and among individuals within 
cultures, we all share the experience of being human, needing sur- 
vival and security, affection, belonging, and, at the highest level, self- 
actualization. A thematic approach to teaching literature provides 
opportunities for students to recognize such similarities between 
themselves and other human beings from different cultural circum- 
stances. At the same time, the thematic approach can facilitate our 
students' understanding of the diverse and sometimes contradictory 
underlying assumptions that inform the stories they hear and the lit- 
eratures they read. It is important to remember, though, that the fol- 
lowing themes are not intended to separate literatures into finite 
categories or tidy boxes where certain books "fit." With their prevail- 
ing concept of interconnectedness. Native literatures especially resist 
such structures. The themes in this resource merely represent a pat- 
tern of organization that teachers from various cultures might use to 
help their students cross the barriers of time and culture. 



Theme: 
Remembering 
the Old Ways 



Central to all Native American cultures is story. Riding on the story- 
teller's breath, through image, word, and silence, is a vision — circling 
through the imagination and spirit of listeners to unite them all in 
"the old ways," a common experience of living value. Central to the 
concept of story is the practical action of remembering, keeping in 
mind or remaining aware of the values most necessary for survival. 
According to Joseph Bruchac, in his introductory essay to Native 
American Stories, the old ways, the "knowledge that native people 
obtained from thousands of years of living and seeking balance," was 
taught in "two very powerful ways. The first way was through expe- 
rience, the second through oral tradition, especially through the 
telling of stories" (Bruchac 1991). 

Although the vocabulary, values, and means of transmission 
may differ, the old ways concept can apply to all peoples and cultures 



[ 



Themes, Rationales, and Subthemes 



11 



with which our students might identify. Possessing spiritual and 
social values and visions, cultural communities "remember," trans- 
late, and transmit those traditions through the spoken and written 
word. However, new challenges facing each generation require that 
such traditions be clarified and reevaluated for their usefulness. Too 
often, though, non-Native individuals and institutions have sup- 
pressed Native voices and then presumed the right to perform the 
task of clarifying and reevaluating the old ways for Native people. 
This practice has resulted in serious misconceptions and consequent 
educational practices that have perpetuated distorted images of 
Native Americans for hundreds of years. For example, in classrooms 
across the continent, many teachers limit their teaching about Native 
Americans to the study of petroglyphs (the early writings or descrip- 
tive art of indigenous peoples) and to the study of Native uses of ani- 
mals, herbs, and roots. Calling these "the old ways," the way Indians 
"used" to live, these teachers emphasize the Indians' sole reliance on 
nature for survival, a practice that many contemporary people, both 
Native and non-Native, regard as primitive and obsolete. In many of 
these same classrooms, teachers use Native stories and cultural prac- 
tices to communicate the notion of culture as artifact, interesting as 
history but literally dead. 

But literatures and personal testimonies from contemporary 
Native Americans demonstrate the contradiction of such views. In 
his Foreword to Bruchac's Native American Stories, N. Scott Momaday 
discusses the relevance of the "storyteller and his art." 

In general, stories are true to human experience. Indeed, the truth of 
human experience is their principal information. This is to say that 
stories tend to support and confirm our perceptions of the world and 
of the creatures within it. Even the most fantastic story is rooted in 
Our common experience; otherwise, it would have no meaning for 
us. ... In the presence of these stories we have an affirmation of the 
human spirit. It is a just and wondrous celebration. (Momaday 1991) 

The following women featured in the 1993 publication. Women 
of the Native Struggle: Portraits and Testimony of Native American Women, 
remember their old ways and prove the relevance of traditional values 
for life today. 

People should go right down to their own roots and learn from 
there, learn from their own beginnings. — Olivia Pourir, Lakota (Far- 
ley 1993, 66) 

(Quoting a holy man) Every step you take on Earth should be a 
prayer.— -Charmaine White Face, Oglala Lakota (Farley 1993, 60) 

We do not separate our spirituality from reality; they are the same. In 
Our Lakota beliefs and ways, medicine people are chosen by the 
spirits. — White Face (Farley 1993, 68) 



12 



Roots and Branches 



[T]here was reciprocal respect of other people's ways. . . . You didn't 
take their way or force your own way on them. I think that is the 
greatest example of how to live in a multicultural world. — Donna 
Chavis, Lumbee (Farley 1993, 71) 

This is home. This is the land here. As a mother, it is important for me 
to have my children here . . . they are going to know their center . . . the 
whole connection — the community, the history, the stories. . . . They 
have roots and hopefully they will have wings to go along with those 
roots. — Chavis (Farley 1993, 85) 

Many of the voices included in Women of the Native Struggle dis- 
cuss beliefs and traditions that are similar to each other. Nevertheless, 
teachers and students must respect connections to specific cultures 
whenever they read these testimonies and use stories reflecting the 
old ways. This is especially important because these ways are still 
being communicated in all cultures through written literatures, 
through ceremonies, and through oral tradition — the primary vehicle 
for transmitting culture, for sharing values, for explaining natural 
phenomena, and for teaching survival skills. 

Why should young people from differing cultures study the 
theme "Remembering the Old Ways"? Public schools today must pre- 
pare students to live in a technologically complex world where com- 
munication systems, labor force requirements, and family structures 
continually change. Today, many young adult Americans leave home 
to establish new values and new traditions, moving as often as every 
five years. Divorce is also more common today; according to one 
source, "the most widely cited recent estimates of future divorce risk 
are well over 50%" (Weiten and Lloyd 1994, 283). As a result Ameri- 
cans of all ages — including over 70 percent of our students — stand to 
experience fragmentation, loneliness, and alienation from each other. 
Even ten years after a divorce, "children appeared to be even more 
vulnerable [than their parents], often harboring internal fears of 
betrayal and rejection that carried into their own intimate relation- 
ships in adolescence and early adulthood" (Wallerstein and Blakeslee 
1990, 11). Our earth also suffers from centuries of abuse, and the hope 
of a living and supportive environment for future generations is 
threatened. In response to the current situation, many traditional 
Native American people are saying that now is the time when the old 
ways are needed to restore harmony and balance within all creation. 

We recognize our relationship to the past and to our future because 
they are the same thing. This is a cyclic way of viewing things. . . . 
Our view is very different from what has become the industrial or 
North American world view. America is a country that was founded 
on and continues to be rooted in a frontier mentality. "The West" is a 
state of mind — a belief that you can always move forward and there 
will always be a new frontier to go to. . . . We must learn to live in a 




29 



[ 



Themes, Rationales, and Subthemes 



13 



society that is based not on conquest but on survival. This is not just 
an Indian issue; it is an issue that relates to all of us. — Winona 
LaDuke, Mississippi Band Anishinabe (Farley 1993, 98) 

Along with traditional Native people, many scholars, political, 
economic, and religious leaders, and social scientists today are sug- 
gesting that despite our differences, we must realize our interdepen- 
dent relationship to the rest of creation. The holistic, interdependent 
and cyclical, universal, and very personal world depicted in the fol- 
lowing poem by Joy Harjo (Creek) is not a new idea — it is the old 
way of many Native American cultures. 

Remember 

Remember the sky that you were bom under, 
know each of the star's stories. 

Remember the moon, know who she is. 

Remember the sun's birth at dawn is the 
strongest point of time. Remember sundown 
and the giving away to night. 

Remember your birth, how your mother struggled 
to give you form and breath. You are evidence of 
her life, and her mother's, and hers. 

Remember your father. He is your life, also. 

Remember the earth whose skin you are: 
red earth, black earth, yellow earth, white earth 
brown earth, we are earth. 

Remember the plants, trees, animal life who all have their 
tribes, their families, their histories, too. Talk to them, 
listen to them. They are alive poems. 

Remember the wind. Remember her voice. She knows the 
origin of this universe. 

Remember you are all people and all people are you. 

Remember you are the universe and this universe is you. 

Remember that all is in motion, is growing, is you. 

Remember that language comes from this. 

Remember the dance language is, that life is. 

Remember. 



— Joy Harjo 

The following is a list of traditional lessons and values exhib- 
ited in many of the selections that are listed in this resource. 

■ a respect for and trust in the wisdom of elders 

■ a respect for the power of the elements 

■ a respect for the interdependent relationship between human 
beings and things of the earth 

■ the value of the contributions of even the smallest ones 



O 

ERIC 



30 



[ 



] 



14 



Roots and Branches 



■ the values of wisdom, courage, bravery, respect and compassion 
for others, personal sacrifice, humility, and commitment to rela- 
tives and to community 

■ the value of the artist to a community 

■ the value of using ingenuity to solve problems 

■ the value of creating well-being among all people and being 
responsible for preserving the life of the people 

■ the value of stories, the way they are linked to the landscape, and 
the way they remain the substance and life of the people 

■ an appreciation for the consequences of foolish and self-indulgent 
behavior, disobedience, pride, jealousy, anger, competitiveness, 
and excess 

■ the importance of gratitude and ceremony 

■ the importance of being satisfied with who we are, what we have, 
and what we can do 

■ the importance of being wise and cautious 

■ the importance of understanding the ways conflicts must be 
resolved before people can live at peace with one another 

■ the importance of an intimate and vital relationship between 
young people and their elders 

■ the importance of the spiritual connections among all aspects of life 

■ the importance of being a unique individual while maintaining a 
responsibility for the community 

Thanks to storytellers, writers, publishers, and teachers who 
have shared their gifts of story, Native and non-Native teachers and 
students today may also participate in this storytelling tradition and 
benefit from Native insights into human nature and the surrounding 
universe. In her book Tonzveya and the Eagles , Rosebud Yellow Robe 
(Lakota) tells the growing-up experiences of her father, Chief 
Chauncey Yellow Robe. She includes a few of his favorite "age-old 
and well-loved stories, some frightening, some sad, some funny," as 
well as the following words of wisdom: 

People all over the world have their own way of life, but through 

their stories we find that we can understand them and live with them. 

Do not isolate yourselves, you will learn from others. (Yellow Robe 

1992, 116) 

Through the gift of Native American story, children and young 
adults today can learn to overcome fragmentation and alienation as 
they participate in the old ways. By reading these literatures and lis- 
tening to traditional stories, children can learn to experience positive 
connections with others and to actively care about the relationships 
between themselves and their environments. 




31 



[ 



] 



Themes, Rationales, and Subthemes 



15 



Subthemes: 
Remembering 
the Old Ways 



Although the following suggested subthemes may be used at any 
grade level, the following order represents an increasing level of con- 
ceptual and literary sophistication. 

Origin of Natural Phenomena Stories: stories about natural phenomena 
such as warm winter winds, sunflowers, and the Big Dipper 

Tribal Creation Stories: stories about transformer-culture heroes such 
as Iktomi, Gluscabi, Napi, and Coyote, who find homes for their peo- 
ple, who help human beings get along, and who use their power to 
make the world safe 

Tribal Culture Hero Stories: stories of trickster/transformers such as 
Iktomi, Gluscabi, Napi, Coyote, Ve'Ho, Old Man Coyote, Scewene, 
Raven, and Nanabosho, who not only create but suffer from the dan- 
gers of too much pride and foolish and self-indulgent behavior 

Specific Tribal Culture Hero Stories: stories of a particular culture's 
trickster/ transformer figure 

Historical Stories: biographies, memoirs of historical figures, and sto- 
ries about historical events, which emphasize the strength of 
ancestors to meet challenges 

Poetry, Legends, and Longer Contemporary and Traditional Stories: stories 
about both internal and external conflicts, which are resolved when 
personal, communal, and spiritual values of the old ways are 
remembered and practiced 



Theme: 
At Home 
Within Circles 



As soon as the new class of freshmen walks through my door every 
September, I realize the importance of "circles" in life. Having left the 
security of buildings many of them have known for eight years, hav- 
ing moved into a new school where seniors taunt, jab, step on, and 
slander them in order to establish their power, these freshmen create 
circles of peers, who will surround and defend them against all such 
dangers. In response to the Individuals with Disabilities Education 
Act, many schools are practicing Responsible Inclusion, where stu- 
dents with special needs are brought into the circles of general class- 
rooms. Even more practice Cooperative Learning, where students 
work together to achieve common goals. But many students in these 
same classrooms have forgotten the importance of other necessary 
circles in their lives. Few have more than one family meal — without 
the television — per week. Few ever converse with grandparents, and 
few participate regularly in religious worship or ceremony. At the 
"grown-up" age of fourteen, many have also left behind the daily rit- 
uals of love's circles — hugging and kissing — and teachers have 
learned to practice keeping their distance to protect themselves from 
charges of abuse or molestation. 

Traditional Native stories, as well as contemporary Native lit- 
eratures, affirm the importance of family and home, even as they rec- 



16 



Roots and Branches 



ognize the ways these families may differ. Janine Pease-Pretty on Top 
(Crow), President of the Little Bighorn College, says: 

But you know Crows measure wealth a little differently than non- 
Indians. . . . Wealth is measured by one's relatedness, one's family 
and one's clan. To be alone, that would be abject poverty to a Crow. 
(Contrary Warriors 1985) 

Public school teachers can use Native American literature to 
validate the unique importance of each child's family and extended 
family, to validate a home within a particular landscape, within a 
spiritual and earthly environment. While a student at Haskell Indian 
Junior College in Lawrence, Kansas, Delia Spotted Bear (Crow) wrote 
the following poem about her separate, but still-present, family at 
home in Montana. 

My Family 

My mom is by the table, beading a belt. 

My dad is sitting, watching the television. 

My two brothers are playing basketball outside. 

My oldest sister is out on a date. 

My second-oldest sister is reading a book. 

My little sister is out visiting our cousins. 

I'm asleep on the couch! 

I'm able to sleep 

because I know my family is all around me 

— Delia Spotted Bear 

Traditional Native stories also stress the importance of viewing 
the natural world as friend or relative. Our young people already 
know the meaning of the words environment and recycle , whether it's 
pop cans, plastic bags, or trees — they know. Public service messages 
on television. Boy Scout campaigns to collect newspapers, and the 
efforts of parents and teachers have stimulated an awareness of their 
obligation to protect the environment. But Native stories and contem- 
porary literatures can provide opportunities for teachers to extend 
environmental awareness in young people, where they can develop a 
sensitivity and responsibility which goes beyond mere obligation to 
establish an ethical framework for problem-solving and decision- 
making activities. The following poem demonstrates such respect for 
the intimate interdependency between humans and nature. 

The Bighorn River 

The Bighorn River flows 
through the reservation. 

As it goes, it meets the 
Little Bighorn. They are like 
a big brother and a little 
brother together. 



0 



c 



] 



Themes, Rationales, and Subthemes 



17 



The sound of it makes 
the reservation special. 

It seems as if it protects 
the reservation with happiness 
and care. The reservation 
knows it has a close friend 
and that's the river. 

The river wants to flow 
to all the four winds but 
knows it can just flow one way 
with the same wind. 

— Len Plenty (Crow) 

Selections emphasizing the importance of grandmothers and 
grandfathers, of fields and drums, of rivers and flying eagles in the 
circle of the world, of ancestors and their continued presence, and 
selections that represent reminiscences of communal activities can be 
used to teach this theme. 

A Circle Begins 

in the surround of snow-touched mountains 
a circle begins 

in a meadow by a snow melt creek 
where hands weave a house of thin green saplings 
it is a way of song 
a way of breathing 

a pure womb to center oneself through sweat 
a way of blessing and being blessed 
a circle of humility, prayer and asking 
and there are no clocks to measure time 
but the beating of our singing hearts 

— Harold Littlebird (Laguna Pueblo) 

Harold Littlebird's poem, "A Circle Begins" and Lance Hen- 
son's "we are a people" both capture the experience of the individual 
being centered within landscape, within community, within cere- 
mony, and within the past, present, and future. 

we are a people 

days pass easy over these ancient hills 
i wander near a moccasin path overgrown with 
rusted cans and weeds 
i stand in the forest at sunset waiting for 
a song from the rising wind 

it is this way forever in this place 
there is no distance between the name 
of my race 
and the owl calling 




34 



] 



18 



Roots and Branches 



nor the badgers gentle plodding 
we are a people bom under symbols 
that rise from the dust to touch us 
that pass through the cedars where 
our old ones sleep 
to tell us of their dreams 

— Lance Henson (Cheyenne) 

Through this literature, teachers can facilitate the growth of 
their students into responsible, caring adults. When students hear 
poems and stories expressing respect for parents and grandparents, 
respect for surrounding landscapes, the value of gifts from relatives, 
and the importance of even the smallest person's responsibility to the 
community, students from all cultures begin to share similar stories 
and to write poems in honor of grandparents. As teachers share 
Native American poems and stories, young people can leam when to 
trust, how to cooperate, and how they can help create a community 
where all members may feel secure. 



Subthemes: 
At Home Within 
Circles 



Circles of Relatives: poetry and essays that emphasize the important 
presence of grandmothers, grandfathers, and ancestors in the lives of 
young people 

Circles in Landscapes: poetry, essays, and stories that exhibit circular 
symbols such as drums, dances, wheels, fields, birds in flight, and 
seasons 

Circles in Gifts: poetry and stories about the importance of gifts and 
"returning the gifts" 

Circles in Life: poetry, stories, and novels that emphasize the cycle of 
life in the community and the way Native people work together 

Circles in History: memoirs and biographies about nineteenth and 
twentieth century individuals who lived in community 

Circles in Literature: stories by contemporary writers, such as 
Momaday, Vizenor, Welch, Bruchac, and Erdrich, that exhibit the 
interaction between oral cultural and literary traditions and Western 
literary themes, motifs, and symbols 



Theme: 
Change and 
Growth 



All of us who teach have watched our students experience various 
conflicts with families, peers, teachers, coaches. We have also 
observed the negative effects of serious conflicts we might never wit- 
ness: after gym class, Brian teases Amy about the size of her breasts; 
an older teenager, carrying beer in his pickup, offers Robert a ride 
home from practice; Yvonne, at thirteen, is pregnant; two brothers 
lose their father in a plane crash, and five years later their mother dies 
of cancer; Jerry has practiced with the basketball team every night 
after school, but he never plays more than 45 seconds in a game. 



ERIC 



35 



Themes, Rationales, and Subthemes 



] 



One way we address these conflicts in the language arts class is 
to provide units on the themes "Growing Up," "Rites of Passage," or 
"Change and Growth," where students read stories and poems fea- 
turing protagonists who resolve such conflicts within themselves and 
with others. But students' responses to these literatures vary dramat- 
ically, depending on gender, race, culture, and/or different family 
situations. This is especially true with literatures about Native Amer- 
icans by non-Native authors, since many of the popular storybooks 
and novels reinforce negative stereotypes, denying the individuality 
and humanity of Indian peoples. When we explore texts such as The 
Indian in the Cupboard, The Education of Little Tree, and Soun Tetoken: 
Nez Perce Boy, by non-Native authors, and compare them with texts 
by Native authors, we can see how the cultural biases of authors can 
influence their characters' motivations and behaviors. Texts by 
Native authors, with more realistic Native characters and situations, 
can help students develop a knowledge of various Native American 
artistic expressions and personal and historical experiences, which 
counter negative stereotypes. These texts can also provide opportuni- 
ties for students to understand themselves and their conflicts. 



First published in 1980, The Indian in the Cupboard, by English 
writer Lynne Reid Banks, is one of the most popular "Indian" books 
today. The white boy, Omri, changes and grows through his experi- 
ences with "Little Bear," a plastic toy who comes alive. From regard- 
ing these little figures as curiosities, as extensions of himself and of 
his own imagination, Omri grows to respect their right to a life of 
their own. But the book presents serious problems for Native readers 
and for non-Native children who don't know much about the Iro- 
quois culture. According to The Indian in the Cupboard, a real Indian 
exists only in the past, values scalping and war, and needs to be 
taught language, morals, and responsibility — by the white boy. This 
Indian inspires fear in white men, and he eats and moves like a 
predatory animal who can't survive without the help of a white man 
(Banks 1988). 

Lakota writer Virginia Driving Hawk Sneve portrays a very 
different picture of Native children. Set in South Dakota, Sneve's The 
Chichi Hoohoo Bogeyman (written in 1975) is, like The Indian in the Cup- 
board, a contemporary story, but the protagonists are real Native chil- 
dren, three cousins, who encounter a "weird creature" while 
exploring an old fort. They name it after the figures that the Hopi, 
Sioux, and European Americans might use to scare children into obe- 
dience. ("Better watch out, or the Bogeyman will get you," my uncle 
would say.) They eventually learn from their grandfather that this 
creature is a person, "a deaf mute — [who] can't hear or speak and is 





20 



c 



Roots and Branches 



retarded." It is a story of adventure, of loyalty to peers, of the danger- 
ous consequences of disobedience, of the effects of negative stereo- 
types on Indian children, and of the strength of traditional Hopi and 
Sioux values and beliefs. In Sneve's book, the three girls come into 
conflict with each other and with their parents and grandparents, but 
by the end of the story they have changed and grown to understand 
the importance of responsibility, of honesty, and of compassion for 
those who are different (Sneve 1993). 



Ken Thomasma's book Soun Tetoken: Nez Perce Boy, published 
in 1984, portrays change and growth in a six-year-old Nez Perce boy 
who is adopted by Chief Joseph's brother. But the story is also typical 
of many "Indian" stories by non-Native writers. In a polarized world 
of Indian versus White, Soun has no conflicts with other human 
beings, unless they are white. After the Noble Savage stereotype, 
Soun proves his courage and bravery in the face of bears, wolves, and 
rushing waters, accomplishing extraordinary feats at an unusually 
young age. The most serious problem for young readers is that this 
book, like others by Thomasma, fails to portray real people with 
whom they can identify and instead perpetuates the belief that Indi- 
ans are artifacts (Thomasma 1984). 

The 1992 publication Morning Girl, by Michael Dorris (Modoc), 
is also regarded as historical fiction. Providing strong contrast with 
Thomasma's books, it is a story about the lives of two Taino children 
on a Bahamian island in 1492. Twelve-year-old Morning Girl is 
"always doing things in her dreams, swimming or searching on the 
beach for unbroken shells or figuring out a good place to fish." Star 
Boy, her brother, sees "everything so upside down from [her]." These 
opposing views result in conflicts between the two children, normal 
conflicts. "[Star Boy] messed up the niceness for me. Just being him- 
self, he was too loud: making jokes when he should be serious, talk- 
ing when he should listen, running when he should sit. ..." In a 
world many children will recognize as similar to their own. Morning 
Girl and Star Boy change and grow as they explore the secrets of 
nature, pretend to see the world as rocks and fish, safely hide from a 
storm, miss the new baby sister "who had never come home," disap- 
point their parents and each other. At the end, they welcome Colum- 
bus and his men, "the strangers . . . who had decorated their faces 
with fur and wore shiny rocks on their heads". Dorris doesn't pre- 
tend that Columbus's arrival was positive; he knows his readers are 
aware of "the rest of the story" (Dorris 1992). 



The Education of Little Tree by Forrest Carter, first published in 
1976, was promoted as an autobiography of an orphan who learns the 



21 



I 

Themes, Rationales, and Subthemes 



ways of Cherokee Indians from his grandparents in Tennessee. There 
is much controversy over the social and racial heritage of the author. 
Research suggests, and his wife has stated publicly, that he was not 
Cherokee at all but a former Ku Klux Klan member. "According to 
those who knew him before he died in 1979, the author was really Asa 
(Ace) Carter, a former speechwriter for Alabama Governor George 
Wallace and a notorious white-supremacist leader" ( Newsweek 1991). 
But more importantly, the characters in The Education of Little Tree 
betray the non-Native voice. There is a scene on a bus where white 
people ridicule Little Tree and his family. Little Tree remains ignorant, 
assuming that the giggling of white people on the bus represents 
"friendly" attitudes. A Blackfeet educator commented about this pic- 
ture: "No Indian child I know would misunderstand the laughter of 
white people; we learn very early to recognize ridicule." Throughout 
the text, the young boy never expresses anger toward those who dis- 
criminate against him, but as he grows, he develops the ability to per- 
fectly communicate with nature and Mother Earth, escaping the 
realities most Indian children today experience (Carter 1991). 

By contrast, the autobiographical essays of Zitkala-Sa 
(Gertrude Simmons Bonnin, Yankton Sioux) contain stories that more 
realistically represent the experiences of five generations of Native 
children. Moreover, in American Indian Stories, first published in 1900 
in The Atlantic Monthly, the child behaves like children today from 
many different cultures. In the first essay, the child argues with her 
Yankton mother and rudely ignores her warnings about the white 
men who want to take the child to boarding school. Her mother says, 
"Don't believe a word they say! Their words are sweet, but, my child, 
their deeds are bitter." 

A thousand miles from home, the child soon realizes the chal- 
lenges this change presents, and readers can identify with her natural 
response. When loud bells replace the quiet sunrise, and scissors dare 
to "gnaw" her braids, the child refuses to "submit" and hides under 
her bed until she is "dragged out . . . kicking and scratching" and is 
"tied fast in a chair." Alone in the night she "[moans] for [her] 
mother." When a "dear classmate" dies, she grows "bitter" and cen- 
sures the white caretaker "for cruel neglect." When she is brought in 
from play for "some misconduct," having "disregarded a rule which 
seemed needlessly binding," she is "sent into the kitchen to mash the 
turnips for dinner in a large glass jar." With "fire in [her] heart," she 
works her "vengeance" in "hot rage" and breaks the jar. Despite these 
experiences with forced assimilation at the eastern school, Zitkala-Sa 
values the education she receives, and "against [her] mother's will," 
she continues her schooling to become a teacher. 

While the three essays in American Indian Stories portray a child 
disrespectfully resisting adult controls, they also prove that stirring 
memories of a mother's traditional ways, memories of a Dakota 



ERIC 



33 



22 



c 



Roots and Branches 



landscape, memories of Iktomi tales around the campfire and their 
lessons in the ways of deceivers, and an education in reading, writ- 
ing, and European American ways, can all help the boarding school 
"captive" change and grow. From the child who disobeys her mother 
and seeks bitter and "triumphant revenge," she grows to desire rec- 
onciliation with her mother and a reasonable "new way of solving 
the problem" (Zitkala-Sa 1985). 



The above texts illustrate challenges and growth experiences 
which cross many cultures because they represent what it means to 
be human, but the way these young people grow through these chal- 
lenges may be more culturally specific. Throughout the world, dis- 
tinct cultural communities also practice formal ceremonies or rites of 
passage, such as graduations and marriages, that symbolically repre- 
sent change and growth. In the Lakota tradition, the Hanbleceya or 
vision quest is a ceremony for boys, and the Ball-Throwing Cere- 
mony is traditional for girls. Formal ceremonies, such as the Jewish 
bar mitzvah or the Christian confirmation or baptism, might not 
accompany all change experiences, but family and peer communities 
recognize the symbolic significance of events such as first hunt, first 
win, first love. Still, young people's most significant experiences with 
change and growth will occur when they can value their own identi- 
ties, especially within their cultural communities and surrounding 
landscapes. The following excerpt from Kimberly Kai Rapada's essay 
demonstrates the growth she achieved when she realized the impor- 
tance of personal, familial, and cultural pride. 

I didn't need the looks on the outside; it didn't matter. I had what 
counted, what was inside. . . . Now, if there is a hurdle of any sort, if I 
don't necessarily fit the society's role, I fight for what I believe to be 
equal. Like Billy Mills and Chief Joseph, I want the Native American 
people, including my family, to be proud of me; but more impor- 
tantly, I would like to be proud of myself. (Rapada 1992, 19) 

Although these rituals and experiences might change from 
generation to generation, they represent necessary stages of change 
and growth in the lives of all people. Stories, novels, and autobiogra- 
phies listed under this theme feature situations in which children and 
young adults can experience growth when they encounter problems 
and find resolutions to conflicts within themselves and with others. 

Grief Stories: poems and stories in which young people encounter 
personal rejection, moving away, or the loss or death of a relative 

Vision Quests: both traditional and contemporary stories of young 
men and women who experience visions and learn the value in per- 
sonal sacrifice 



Subthemes: 
Change and 
Growth 



o 

ERIC 



39 



Themes, Rationales, and Subthemes 



23 



Theme: 
Between Two 
Worlds 



Hunting Stories: stories about young men who learn how to hunt 
from fathers and grandfathers 

Lessons in the Wisdom of Elders: stories and novels that demonstrate 
the sometimes tragic consequences of ignoring, and the wisdom in 
following, the advice of the elders 

Transformation Stories: tricks ter /transformer or culture hero figures in 
traditional and contemporary stories 

At a time when it is vital that different groups find common ground 
for the establishment of positive communication and resulting peace, 
it is also valuable to focus on the differences and conflicts between 
people and within individuals. The Assiniboine tell a story called 
"Bandit the Raccoon," which Minerva Allen includes in the Bilingual 
Materials for children on the Ft. Belknap Reservation. 

One day Bandit and some children go to town, where a store- 
keeper gives Bandit a banana. The next day Bandit returns without 
the children, and he takes another banana. But because he is alone, 
because he is different, not a child, he is arrested and jailed for steal- 
ing. And here the story ends: "Bandit looked like a bandit alright, 
standing behind the bars. But he was only a raccoon." 

Like so many traditional Native American stories, "Bandit the 
Raccoon" carries meanings for all grade levels while addressing a 
central issue — racial and cultural prejudice and discrimination. Com- 
ing from his native culture and now living as a "minority" in an alien 
culture. Bandit exists between two worlds. Misunderstanding the 
rules, he suffers serious consequences when the storekeeper, a mem- 
ber of the dominant culture, delivers mixed messages. In the follow- 
ing essay, Murray Stonechild (Cree) similarly explores the tensions of 
living between two worlds. 

Being Indian today is what you as an Indian make of it. You can live 
the traditional ways of yesterday or you can blend in with today's 
white society. But remember, you cannot wash the color of your skin 
away. But you can wash the pride of being Indian away, only if you as 
an Indian want to. 

To me, being Indian is the same, but being in a different environ- 
ment. You "have to" get an education today. Yesterday, you "had to" 
fill your quiver with arrows. Today, you "have to" fill your head with 
knowledge. Yesterday, you "had to" hunt and gather food. You "had 
to" set up camp and have strong, steady poles. Today, you "have to" 
get a job, pay bills, buy food, rent or buy a home. 

But today it's much easier. You have welfare, food stamps, hand- 
outs. And you have alcohol. Yet, it's much harder. If you can survive 
in today's society and maintain your soul self, and if you can do these 
things and know who you are as a person, you are a true warrior. 
(Stonechild 1992, 13) 



ERIC 




■ K * 



24 



~1 

Roots and Branches 



Despite two hundred years of nationwide efforts to establish a 
"melting pot" society and to force assimilation into the dominant West- 
ern European culture, America remains multicultural and multiracial, 
a composite of diverse minorities. Within these minorities, individuals 
search for personal identities while they encounter insensitivity, intol- 
erance, and hostility from the dominant culture. Hirschfelder and 
Singer, in Rising Voices, regard these conflicts as "harsh realities," 
which begin as soon as children are old enough to watch television and 
read books, where they are confronted with distorted messages about 
Native Americans in advertisements, movies, clothing, and toys. 

Brian Willis, a sixteen-year-old Mississippi Choctaw, describes 
his experience with the "between two worlds" conflict in his essay, 
"A World Within a World." 

I live in a world within a world. My world consists of a proud Indian 
heritage. The other world is full of high technology, futuristic ideas, 
and huge corporations. My world is called the reservation. It may not 
have fine hotels and penthouses, but who needs these things on a 
reservation? On the reservation, everyone is equal in some way or 
another. We have the same color skin, the same language, and the 
same beliefs. (Willis 1992, 57) 

It is not only minority children who suffer the consequences of 
such a polarized world. When adults of any culture move, divorce, 
remarry, and combine families, children experience the conflicts of 
living between two worlds. Even in the best situations, these children 
also may receive messages that teach them to feel shame when they 
feel a natural affection for the absent parent or for their previous 
home. Believing they must reject one world for another, they ask, 
"Who do I belong to?" and "Where do I fit in?" and they carry their 
loss and accompanying anger into adulthood. 

Many writers and storytellers from the late nineteenth century, 
as well as contemporary authors, articulate the two-world conflict 
experienced by both adults and young people. However, not all of 
them carry the tension and its negative consequences into adulthood. 
Brian Willis, at the end of "A World Within a World," suggests a tradi- 
tional resolution to the conflict: 

As the Choctaw tribe heads into the coming years, we may leave the 
reservation, but we cannot relinquish our heritage. My heritage is 
something that will remain important to me until the day I die. (Willis 
1992, 57) 

Rather than escape or surrender, Willis affirms the primacy of tradi- 
tional values as he and other Native American young people con- 
tinue to live between two worlds. 

The value in focusing on the "between two worlds" theme is 
clear. When teachers use stories and poems featuring this theme, and 




41 



[ 



Themes, Rationales, and Subthemes 



] 



25 



when they establish an atmosphere where all experience is regarded 
as valuable and real, young people can learn to develop insight into 
their own lives while they work towards positive conflict resolution. 



Subthemes: 
Between Two 
Worlds 



Home and School: stories and poems that represent cultural adapta- 
tion experiences for Indian children 

Old Ways and New Stories: stories that portray Native Americans in 
their initial experiences with the encroachment, technology, behavior, 
and value systems of European Americans 

Worlds within a World: stories and poems where the dangers which 
accompany the clash between differing value systems and ways of 
life are recognized and resolved 

School , Home and Away: stories about boarding school experiences 
and the effects on individuals and communities 

Who Am I?: novels, stories, and poems which articulate the "two 
world" conflicts between relatives, peers, communities, cultures, 
races, and generations, and which demonstrate the impact of those 
conflicts on the individual's search for a personal identity 



Theme: 
Cultural and 
Personal Loss 
and Survival 



One of the most common stereotypes of Native people is the "van- 
ishing American." The following comments and statistics represent 
small shadows of the geographical and cultural disintegrations — and 
staggering genocide — that have contributed to this stereotype. 

In the 1830s, just one of many Indian Removals resulted in deaths of 
up to 8,000 Cherokee men, women, and children on the "Trail of 
Tears." (Champagne 1994, 150) 

Between 1836 and 1870, the Mandan and Hidatsa in central North 
Dakota lost "as much as 90 percent of their population, leaving only a 
few hundred survivors." (Champagne 1994, 154) 

[Between 1850 and 1880,] California militia and self-appointed vigi- 
lantes indiscriminately [hunted] down and [killed] thousands of 
peaceful California Indian men, women, and children. ... In less than 
30 years the Indian population in California [declined] from over 
100,000 in 1850 to just 16,000. (Champagne 1994, 176) 

In 1887, approximately 140 million acres were owned in joint tenure 
by the Indians of the United States. The Allotment Act [Dawes Act] 
set up procedures which resulted in the transfer of some 90 million 
acres from Indian to white owners in the next forty-five years. 
(McNickle 1973, 83) 

They made us many promises, more than I can remember . . . they 
kept but one. They promised to take our land, and they took it." — an 
old Lakota Sioux warrior ( Reservations 1995, 45) 



] 



26 



Roots and Branches 



Sometimes at evening I sit, looking out on the big Missouri. The Sun 
sets, and dusk steals over the water. In the shadows I seem again to 
see our Indian village . . . and in the river's roar I hear the yells of the 
warriors, the laughter of little children as of old. It is but an old 
woman's dream. Again I see but shadows and hear only the roar of 
the river; and tears come into my eyes. Our Indian life, I know, is 
gone forever. — Buffalo Bird Woman, Hidatsa (Nabokov 1978, 231) 

By 1900, the wanton destruction of buffalo, bear, deer, and fish, 
forests, and rivers and the epidemics of disease, alcoholism, and 
poverty all contributed to the belief by non-Native people that Native 
peoples were the 'Vanishing Americans." In truth, genocide had 
done its work. According to Elliot West, in The Way to the West : Essays 
on the Central Plains , "During the four hundred years after 1500, some 
say, the aboriginal population of North America dropped by more 
than ninety-five percent, while others say sixty or seventy percent. 
Whichever is accurate, this was the greatest die off in the human 
record" (West, 86). From the estimated Indian population of 10 to 20 
million in 1492, only 237,196 remained in 1900. 

But the theme of cultural and personal loss and survival, which 
is especially present throughout contemporary literatures, proves the 
fallacy in the "vanishing" stereotype. Refusing to be silenced, story- 
tellers and poets like Elizabeth Cook-Lynn live to "'consecrate' his- 
tory and event, survival and joy and sorrow, the significance of 
ancestors and the unborn" (Cook-Lynn 1987, 59). They recount the 
memories of ancient cultural ways and trace the journeys of so many 
Native people who are fighting to preserve sacred ancestral lands. 
Most importantly, it is the storytellers and the poets who bear witness 
to the tenacity and power of the human spirit. 

The history of Indian loss — and survival — is not limited to 
collective stories of massacres and lost homelands. Indian parents 
and grandparents also suffered the very personal loss of children. 
From the late nineteenth century to the mid-twentieth century, chil- 
dren were separated from their families and communities and 
taken to Indian boarding schools, sometimes for as long as ten 
years and across thousands of miles, for the sake of "civilizing" 
them. For generation after generation, the old ways, cultural values 
and beliefs — and language — together with the meanings of 
"belonging" and "home," were lost. A character in Linda Hogan's 
Mean Spirit says, "they have gone to school and returned with lives 
full of holes" (Hogan 1990, 217). Patricia Riley, in her introduction 
to the "Schooldays" section of Growing Up Native American , 
describes this common denominator of all Native peoples: 

Punished for speaking their native languages, ill fed and brutally 
treated, these children often emerged emotionally and physically 
scarred. Personal courage, memories of family and home, and love 



Themes, Rationales, and Subthemes 



27 



for one another allowed these young Native Americans to endure 
and resist the efforts of those who meant to destroy their tribal identi- 
ties. (Riley 1993, 116) 

Despite the recoveries Native communities have experienced, 
writers like Paula Gunn Allen (Laguna /Sioux) and James Welch 
(Blackfeet/Gros Ventre) testify to the continuing power of genocide 
and cultural and personal loss, while their words demonstrate the 
still stronger will to survive and prevail. "The impact of genocide in 
the minds of American Indian poets and writers cannot be exagger- 
ated. It is an all-pervasive feature of the consciousness of every 
American Indian" (Allen 1982, 39). 

With the following very personal yet historical confrontation of 
loss, James Welch begins his nonfiction work Killing Custer > a narrative 
of the Battle of the Little Bighorn from the Indian perspective. Here he 
wanders into the landscape and memory of his great-grandmother. 
Red Paint Woman, a survivor of "Baker's Massacre" on the Marias 
River. There, 173 of Heavy Runner's "friendly" band — women, chil- 
dren, old men, and those already dying of smallpox — "traveled to the 
Sand Hills, the resting place of departed souls" (Welch 1994, 42). 

I remember wondering, as I wandered across the wasted flat [in the 
valley of the Marias River to the backup of the Tiber Dam reservoir], 
what the village must have looked like on January 22, 1870, the day 
before the [Marias Massacre or Baker's Massacre]. . . . Normally, there 
would have been a few children outside playing with buffalo-rib 
sleds or small bows and spears. . . . But it was a camp of death 
already. Smallpox, the white scabs disease, the white man's gift, had 
visited the Pikuni camps that winter. (Welch 1994, 42-44) 

Continuing his story, Welch succeeds in "killing" the myths of 
Custer and his comrades and enemies, and with dark irony bears wit- 
ness to the surviving spirit of Indian people and the universal condi- 
tion of all humanity. 

The outcome of the Indian wars was never in doubt. It is a tribute to 
the Indians' spirit that they resisted as long as they did. Custer's Last 
Stand has gone down in history as an example of what savagery the 
Indians were capable of; the massacre on the Marias is a better exam- 
ple of what man is capable of doing to man. (Welch 1994, 47) 

The last lines of James Welch's historical narrative profoundly 
demonstrate the prevailing strength of spirit despite the odds: 
"Before he died. Black Elk called up a rain shower out of a blue sky in 
an effort to nourish the roots of the withered sacred tree. The Indian 
spirit was, and remains, hard to break" (Welch 1994, 286). 

The theme of cultural and personal loss and survival is uni- 
versal. When fifty students in a consolidated rural high school in 
Montana were surveyed, the results proved these students also lived 





c 



] 



28 



Roots and Branches 



"lives full of holes." Over 70 percent were not living with both their 
natural parents; with no standard other than gut feelings, most could 
not explain how they knew what was right and wrong; most rarely ate 
meals with the whole family together and without the entertainment 
of television; most had no idea of their ethnic heritage, and of those 
who did know, few could tell stories about ancestors even two genera- 
tions removed. Those with Native American heritages were reluctant 
to admit that fact out loud. Some had difficulty pronouncing the tribal 
name. These were contemporary young people who could write page 
after page about what disturbed them: loneliness, personal rejection, 
physical and mental abuse, premarital sex, sexual harassment, drugs, 
terrorism, the deaths of children and relatives, war, and the power of 
those who would control them. Like young people today from all cul- 
tural backgrounds, these students deserved to read and hear the sto- 
ries of how others experienced loss and how they survived. 

To be sure, most Native American writers are telling stories 
that reflect the impact of their common histories on past and present 
lives. But they are also telling the stories of personal and communal 
loss and survival that are common to us all, stories and poems repre- 
senting what it means to be human. The literary expressions of these 
poets vary in tone from joy to irony, to passion, to anger, to bitterness, 
such as in "The Girl Who Loved the Sky" by Yaqui poet Anita 
Endrezze. After experiencing the childhood joy of "best friends," the 
speaker suffers such profound sorrow and loss that she finally sees 
"the world clearly," holding a flame of "bitter" awareness. 

Outside the second grade room, 
the jacaranda tree blossomed 
into purple lanterns . . . 

Inside, the room smelled like glue. 

The desks were made of yellowed wood, 
the tops littered with eraser rubbings. 

. . . There, I learned 

how to make butter by shaking a jar 

until the pale cream clotted 

into one sweet mass . . . And there, 

I met a blind girl who thought the sky 
tasted like cold metal when it rained 
and whose eyes were always covered 
with the bruised petals of her lids. 

She loved the formless sky, defined 
only by sounds, or the cool umbrellas 
of clouds. On hot, still days 
we listened to the sky falling 
like chalk dust. We heard the noon 
whistle of the pig-mash factory, 
smelled the sourness of home-bound men. 




45 



[ 



Themes, Rationales, and Subthemes 29 



Subthemes: 
Cultural and 
Personal Loss 
and Survival 


I had no father; she had no eyes; 
we were best friends. The other girls 
drew shaky hopscotch squares 
on the dusty asphalt . . . 

Alone, we sat in the canvas swings, 

our shoes digging into the sand, then pushing, 

until we flew high over their heads . . . 

I was born blind, she said, an act of nature. 

Sure, I thought, like birds bom 
without wings, trees without roots. 

I didn't understand. The day she moved 

I saw the world clearly: the sky 

backed away from me like a departing father. 

I sat under the jacaranda, catching 
the petals in my palm, enclosing them 
until my fist was another lantern 
hiding a small and bitter flame. 

— Anita Endrezze 

Despite a history that has resulted in victimization and geno- 
cide for millions of Native peoples, writers today are refusing to 
admit defeat and to accept the image of "Indian as artifact." Instead, 
they continue to insist on their right to define for themselves who 
they are as they restructure their lives from the fragments of the past 
and the present. Many, like James Welch, Anita Endrezze, and Linda 
Hogan, tell their own stories of cultural and personal loss and sur- 
vival, which can benefit all young people; these are stories of spirits 
that "remain hard to break," stories of people who "come together for 
a healing." 

The sharp smell of burning sage added to their comfort. . . . The peo- 
ple were silent. They were small in the world and they knew it. Their 
human woes were small. Their time was short. They didn't want to 
live their lives eaten up with grief. . . . When it was all dark the 
singing began. . . . The people took faith, took heart, in the sounds 
and the sparks, and the occasional cool brush of air that entered the 
room like a hand, touching every person on the shoulder or the head 
or on the skin of a hand. (Hogan 1990, 216) 

Era or Time Period: for example, Patricia Riley's Growing Up Native 
American , has four sections: "Going Forward, Looking Back," which 
includes the concept of living in two worlds while maintaining an 
awareness and connection with original language and culture; 
"Nineteenth Century"; "Schooldays"; and "Twentieth Century" 

Specific Geographical Areas , Cultural Systems , or Historical Events 

Separation from Relatives , Landscapes , Cultures , Pride , Self and Spirit: 
stories featuring separation and its subsequent effects, such as loneli- 
ness, abuse, death, disease, alcoholism, poverty, and suicide 


ERIC 


48 



30 



Roots and Branches 



Means of Survival: stories highlighting the awareness of ancestors and 
values, reconciliation and home, a sense of the spiritual, and humor 

Specific Native Cultural or Literary Traditions: images and sound pat- 
terns; heroes; integration of oral tradition, historical events, and the 
present; and the trickster and transformer motif in contemporary 
texts 



Theme: 
Lifeways and 
Stereotypes 



Each of us, no matter what our cultural or racial background, has a 
way of viewing and interpreting the meaning of our surroundings. It 
is our world view, our lifeway, our bias, functioning as a pair of per- 
manently tinted glasses which we resist removing unless strongly 
encouraged or provoked. Culturally and racially determined, our 
world view defines our relationship to the universe as a whole. It also 
defines the values of all things material, spiritual, animate, and inani- 
mate, for ourselves and for others as well. 

Frequently, our world view results in ethnocentrism, the atti- 
tude of regarding our own culture as central, superior or inferior to 
other cultures. Although this may positively manifest itself in a per- 
sonal and communal pride, a negative side of ethnocentrism can result 
in evaluation, judgment, and rejection of different cultures and races. 
This is racism, which Ardy Bowker (Eastern Cherokee) describes as 
being "perpetuated through a system of unequal power relationships 
in private and public institutions and is manifested in the form of prej- 
udice, discrimination, and stereotyping" (Bowker 1993). 

So what is the relationship between world view, ethnocen- 
trism, and stereotypes? Stereotyping may be defined in several ways, 
but in all cases, stereotyping frequently occurs as a result of our 
ethnocentrism, when we need to describe cultures and individuals 
outside ourselves while we continue to wear our tinted glasses. 
Stereotyping occurs when our own bias or world view outlines the 
shape of another person or group or culture. Stereotyping occurs 
when we permanently lock people into the position or image we see, 
and, according to one dictionary, stereotyping occurs when members 
of a group develop and maintain a simplified and standardized con- 
ception or image of themselves or others, and "invest that image with 
special meaning" ( Random House 1967). We might also say that stereo- 
typing occurs when someone else tells "my story about me." Another 
way of talking about stereotype is to consider it myth, "an unproved 
collective belief that is accepted uncritically and is used to justify a 
social institution" ( Random House 1967). A myth is not entirely false 
and not entirely true, but it reveals much about the values of those 
who believe the myth or rely on the stereotype. 

Why and how should intermediate level students, as well as 
older students, read and learn about stereotypes? "Some stereotypes 
have no basis in fact, while others may be based at least on a small 



[ 



Themes, Rationales, and Subthemes 



element of truth. Unfortunately, stereotyping of American Indians, 
which began at the onset of European contact with indigenous popu- 
lations, has led to many inaccurate and misleading generalizations 
that are present in contemporary American society" (Bowker 1993, 
30). The most visible stereotypes of Native Americans include noble 
savage, heathen, wild, princess or squaw, nomadic, redskin, uncivi- 
lized savage, childlike, anti-education, undisciplined children, white 
man's helper, and vanishing American. (Appendix D provides defini- 
tions and sources for each.) 

One of our most important tasks as teachers is to continually 
search for truths and to facilitate and empower our students as they 
search for truths about themselves, their own cultures, and the 
worlds outside themselves. The Chichi Hoohoo Bogeyman demonstrates 
the effect of limited truths, of stereotypes, on Native children. In the 
following excerpt, Cindy tells her Sioux cousins why she behaved so 
badly, embarrassing them at a movie they had just seen: 

". . . That was a stupid movie. Everybody in it was stupid — especially 
the Indians. Indians are always stupid and dumb in movies. That's 
why everyone thinks Indians should act that way in real life." Cindy 
got up from the cot, stuck one finger behind her head, hopped 
around in a fake war dance and rapidly patted her mouth with her 
other hand. "When I grow up I'm going to be real smart and use only 
big words when I talk. Nobody will dare call me a dumb Injun." 
(Sneve 1993, 34) 

Stereotypes are not perpetuated in movies alone; many popu- 
lar books and stories about Native Americans rely on several differ- 
ent stereotypes of Native peoples. These stereotypes often arise from 
social, political, and economic situations in which certain individuals 
or groups stand to benefit from the perpetuation of such images. For 
example, many popular stories about Indians feature a singular 
Indian hero, such as Chief Joseph, who unsuccessfully struggles 
alone against insurmountable odds. When the hero ultimately sur- 
renders or dies, the European American belief in the superiority of a 
particular kind of civilization and Manifest Destiny appear to prevail. 
The stories non-Natives tell, about who Native Americans were or 
are, can reinforce the non-Natives' beliefs about themselves and the 
world around them. The stories may also represent the non-Natives' 
desire to atone for the sins of cultural destruction and genocide, by 
portraying characters who fall because they are innocent and unso- 
phisticated — in other words, primitive. 

Children and young adults within our classrooms and communi- 
ties also repeat such stereotypes. Whooping and hollering three-year- 
olds beg grandfathers to make them bows and arrows. Older children 
taunt each other with names like "savage" and "squaw," and teens and 
adults tell "Indian" jokes. Others who have developed compassion for 



] 



32 



Roots and Branches 



minorities believe Native Americans and their cultures "were" far supe- 
rior to the "money-hungry murdering Americans." Michael Dorris 
summarizes the situation: "On occasion [Indians] are presented as 
marauding, blood-thirsty savages, bogeys from the nightmares of 'pio- 
neers' who invaded their lands and feared for the consequences. At 
other times they seem preconcupiscent angels, pure of heart, mindlessly 
ecological, brave and true. And worst of all, they are often merely cute, 
the special property of small children" (Dorris 1982, vii). Ardy Bowker 
(Eastern Cherokee), in her book Sisters in the Blood, provides one of the 
best discussions of "Racism and Stereotyping in Native America," and 
the impact of stereotypes on Native American women in particular. 
Bowker also discusses the way stereotypes are used to describe situa- 
tions, such as "They all drop out of school," "They all get a monthly 
check from the federal government," or "They are all drunks" (Bowker 
1993, 30). Yet most of the children and young adults who use and accept 
these stereotypes as truth probably don't know one Indian person well 
enough to be invited into his home. Moreover, as long as the stereotypes 
are so prevalent and available, they have no need to search beyond 
what they already know and believe. 

By contrasting popular books and stories by Native and non- 
Native writers, teachers can help students appreciate the way individ- 
ual voices address and counter racial and cultural stereotypes that have 
objectified Native American peoples. One such voice is the speaker in 
the following poem by Diane Bums (Anishinabe/Chemehuevi) in 
which the speaker responds to ignorant non-Indians who want to fit her 
into a stereotypical racial and cultural category. Native adults who have 
traveled outside their home communities into multi-ethnic cities have 
heard, and know by heart, the stereotype-invested questions that lie 
underneath each of the lines. The last two lines reveal the speaker's 
frustration and her assertion of her personal identity. 

Sure You Can Ask Me A Personal Question 

How do you do? 

No, I am not Chinese. 

No, not Spanish. 

No, I am American Indi — uh, Native American. 

No, not from India. 

No, not Apache. 

No, not Navajo. 

No, not Sioux. 

No, we are not extinct. 

Yes, Indin. 

Oh? 

So that's where you got those high cheekbones. 

Your great grandmother, huh? 

An Indian Princess, huh? 




49 



[ 



] 



Themes, Rationales, and Subthemes 



33 



Hair down to there? 

Let me guess. Cherokee? 

Oh, so you've had an Indian friend? 

That close? 

Oh, so you've had an Indian servant? 

That much? 

Yeah, it was awful what you guys did to us. 

It's real decent of you to apologize. 

No, I don't know where you can get peyote. 

No, I don't know where you can get Navajo rugs real cheap. 

No, I didn't make this. I bought it at Bloomingdale's. 

Thank you. I like your hair too. 

I don't know if anyone knows whether or not Cher is really Indian. 

No, I didn't make it rain tonight. 

Yeah. Uh-huh. Spirituality. 

Uh-huh. Yeah. Spirituality. Uh-huh. Mother Earth. 

Yeah. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Spirituality. 

No, I didn't major in archery. 

Yeah, a lot of us drink too much. 

Some of us can't drink enough. 

This ain't no stoic look. 

This is my face. 

— Diane Bums 

When teachers understand the origins of stereotypes, they can 
better help young people of all ages to grow in their ability and will- 
ingness to regard themselves and others as unique individuals, and 
to distinguish between lifeways and stereotypes. 



Works Cited 



Allen, Paula Gunn. 1982. "Answering the Deer." American Indian Culture and 
Research Journal 6.3: 39. 

Banks, Lynne Reid. 1988. The Indian in the Cupboard. Santa Barbara, CA: 

ABC -Clio. 

Bowker, Ardy. 1993. Sisters in the Blood: The Education of Women in Native 
America. Bozeman: Center for Bilingual/Multicultural Education, 
Montana State University. 

Bruchac, Joseph, ed. 1983. Songs From this Earth on Turtle's Back. Greenfield 
Center, NY: The Greenfield Review Press. 

Bruchac, Joseph. 1991. Native American Stories. Golden, CO: Fulcrum Pub- 
lishing. 

Burns, Diane. 1983. "Sure You Can Ask Me a Personal Question." In Songs 
from this Earth on Turtle's Back , ed. Joseph Bruchac. Greenfield Center, 
NY: The Greenfield Review Press. 

Carter, Forrest. 1991. The Education of Little Tree. Albuquerque: University of 
New Mexico Press. 

Champagne, Duane. 1994. Chronology of Native North American History. 
Detroit, MI: Gale Research Inc. 



ERIC 



50 



] 



34 



[ 

Roots and Branches 



Contrary Warriors: A Story of the Crow Tribe. 1985. Rattlesnake Productions. 
Videocassette. 

Cook-Lynn, Elizabeth. 1987. "You May Consider Speaking about Your Art." 
In I Tell You Now: Autobiographical Essays by Native American Writers, 
eds. Brian Swann and Arnold Krupat. Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press. 

Dorris, Michael. 1982. Foreword to American Indian Stereotypes in the World of 
Children: A Reader and Bibliography, ed. Arlene B. Hirschfelder. 
Metuchen, NJ: The Scarecrow Press, Inc. 

Dorris, Michael. 1992. Morning Girl New York: Hyperion Books for Chil- 
dren. 

Endrezze, Anita. 1992. at the helm of twilight. Seattle, WA: Broken Moon 
Press. 

Farley, Ronnie, ed. 1993. Women of the Native Struggle: Portraits and Testimony 
of Native American Women. New York: Orion Books. 

Harjo, Joy. 1997. She Had Some Horses. New York: Thunder's Mouth Press. 

Henson, Lance. 1992. A Cheyenne Sketchbook: Selected Poems 1970-1991. 
Greenfield Center, NY: The Greenfield Review Press. 

Hirschfelder, Arlene B., and Beverly R. Singer, eds. 1992. Rising Voices — 
Writings of Young Native Americans. New York: Charles Scribner's 
Sons. 

Hogan, Linda. 1990. Mean Spirit. New York: Ivy Books. 

Littlebird, Harold. 1983. "A Circle Begins." In Songs From this Earth on Tur- 
tle's Back, ed. Joseph Bruchac. Greenfield Center, NY: The Greenfield 
Review Press. 

McNickle, D'Arcy. 1973. Native American Tribalism. New York: Oxford Uni- 
versity Press. 

Momaday, N. Scott. 1990. Foreword to Native American Stories, ed. Joseph 
Bruchac. Golden, CO: Fulcrum Publishing. 

Nabokov, Peter ed. 1978. Native American Testimony. New York: Harper & 
Row. 

"New Age Fable from an Old School Bigot?" 1991. Newsweek, Oct. 14, p. 62. 

Plenty, Len. 1992. "The Bighorn River." In Rising Voices — Writings of Young 
Native Americans, eds. Arlene B. Hirschfelder and Beverly R. Singer. 
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. 

The Random House Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged Edition. 

1967. 

Rapada, Kimberly Kai. "My Role as a Native American" In Rising Voices — 
Writings of Young Native Americans, eds. Arlene B. Hirschfelder and 
Beverly R. Singer. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. 

The Reservations. 1995. The American Indians Series. Alexandria, VA: Time- 
Life Books. 




51 



[ 



Themes, Rationales, and Subthemes 



] 




Riley, Patricia, ed. 1993. Growing Up Native American: An Anthology. New 
York: Wm. Morrow. 

Sneve, Virginia Driving Hawk. 1993. The Chichi Hoohoo Bogeyman. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press. 

Spotted Bear, Delia. 1992. "My Family." In Rising Voices — Writings of Young 
Native Americans , eds. Arlene B. Hirschfelder and Beverly R. Singer. 
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. 

Stonechild, Murray. "To Be an Indian." In Rising Voices — Writings of Young 
Native Americans, eds. Arlene B. Hirschfelder and Beverly R. Singer. 
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. 

Thomasma, Ken. 1984. Soun Tetoken: Nez Perce Boy. Jackson, WY: Grandview. 

Wallerstein, Judith, and Sandra Blakeslee. 1990. Second Chances: Men, 

Women, Children a Decade After Divorce. New York: Ticknor & Fields. 

Weiten, Wayne, and Margaret A. Lloyd. 1994. Psychology Applied to Modern 
- Life: Adjustment in the '90s. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole. 

Welch, James, with Paul Stekler. 1994. Killing Custer: The Battle of the Little 
Bighorn and the Fate of the Plains Indians. New York: W.W. Norton. 

West, Elliot. 1995. The Way to the West: Essays on the Central Plains. Albu- 
querque: University of New Mexico Press. 

Willis, Brian. "A World Within a World." In Rising Voices — Writings of Young 
Native Americans, eds. Arlene B. Hirschfelder and Beverly R. Singer. 
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. 

Yellow Robe, Rosebud. 1992. Tomveya and the Eagles and Other Lakota Tales. 
New York: Penguin. 

Zitkala-Sa. [1900] 1985. American Indian Stories. Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press. 



36 




2 

Historical 
and Cultural 
Literary Contexts 



What is Native American literature? Although some have tried — 
major publishing houses included — the definition of Native Ameri- 
can literature cannot be reduced to myth, mysticism, or historical 
artifact, evidence of "the way Indians used to live." In truth, tradi- 
tional oral and contemporary written Indian literatures, in the plural, 
reflect the diversity of over five hundred tribal cultures, with a vari- 
ety of literary traditions within each of those cultures. These litera- 
tures also demonstrate the influences and consequences of intertribal 
contact and European American culture contact, expressing the indi- 
vidual lives that stem from these various cultural and historical expe- 
riences. According to Gerald Vizenor, "Native American literatures 
embrace the memories of creation stories, the tragic wisdom of native 
ceremonies, trickster narratives, and the outcome of chance and other 
occurrences in the most diverse cultures in the world" (Vizenor 1995). 

Despite the diverse experiences and traditions, both older and 
more contemporary Indian literatures do display similar characteris- 
tics and visions. "Intelligent analysis becomes a matter of identifying 
smaller assumptions that underlie our own culture and its literature 
and art," writes noted poet and literary critic Paula Gunn Allen in her 
essay "The Sacred Hoop: A Contemporary Perspective." Especially 
important are those assumptions that are "peculiar to the locale, 
idiom, and psyche of the writer" (Allen 1983, 3). Allen compares and 
contrasts some Western European traditions with what she regards as 
the more predominant Native literary traditions (Allen 1992). Allen's 
critical work has provided a cultural and literary context for litera- 
tures, especially those rooted in Plains Indian cultures. Still, the fol- 
lowing list and discussion of elements can represent no more than my 
own experience with the literatures mentioned, the work of Paula 
Gunn Allen, and the works of contemporary literary critics I have 
read. 




53 



Historical and Cultural Literary Contexts 



37 



Cultural and 
Literary 
Elements in 
Native and 
Western 
European 
Literatures 



Underlying 
Assumptions about 
the Universe 



1. Underlying assumptions about the universe 

2. Definition and practice of power 

3. Meaning and function of symbol 

4. Literary purposes 

5. Classification of genres 

6. Definition of "hero" 

7. Organizational patterns 

8. Recurring motifs in Native American literatures 

9. Themes of loss and survival 

Keeping in mind my need to generalize because of the limita- 
tions of time, space, and experience, I hope the following will facili- 
tate teachers' and students' understanding as they read and explore 
the Native American literatures listed in this resource. 

Western and tribal traditions may hold different underlying assump- 
tions about the universe. Very generally speaking, the Western Euro- 
pean universe, primarily based on the Judeo-Christian world view, 
consists of polarized categories — good or bad, masculine or feminine, 
civilized or savage, superior or inferior, with a definite line drawn 
between spiritual and material realities. The Western European 
world view is also based on the medieval "Great Chain of Being" 
concept, with God at the top and animals at the bottom. Furthermore, 
the Western European universe, like those of the Hopi and certain 
other Indian cultures, embraces a linear view of history, in which cul- 
tures and peoples can progress toward the establishment of "new 
worlds." In contrast, Dakota educator Dr. Debbie LaCroix, in work- 
shops given at NCTE conferences and conventions, uses a circle to 
describe the universe of her people. Within this circle, "all have an 
equal place on the Sacred Hoop, the circle of life, and all have spirit." 
Individuals are responsible for working toward a sense of harmony 
and balance with all creation. In this universe, individuals "compete 
to be stronger, to become wise, to become more centered than on the 
previous day." 

In Linda Hogan's novel Mean Spirit , Michael Horse, "the last 
person in Indian Territory [Oklahoma] to live in a tepee," reads aloud 
from his written "gospel according to Horse" (written because today, 
"they won't believe it unless they see it in writing"): 

Live gently with the land. We are one with the land. We are part of 
everything in our world, part of the roundness and cycles of life. And 
all life is sacred. . . . Restore your self and voice. Remake your spirit, 
so that it is in harmony with the rest of nature and the universe. Keep 
peace with all your sisters and brothers. Humans whose minds are 
healthy desire such peace and justice. (Hogan 1990, 362) 



38 



Definition and 
Practice of Power 



i 

Roots and Branches 



In his book Other Destinies, Choctaw /Cherokee /Irish writer 
Louis Owens describes a way of looking at the world that Native 
American writers offer — a way that is "new to Western culture": 

It is a holistic, ecological perspective, one that places essential value 
upon the totality of existence, making humanity equal to all elements 
but superior to none and giving humankind crucial responsibility for 
the care of the world we inhabit. (Owens 1992, 29) 

In these Indian worlds, the significance and consequences of 
the past circle into the present, and voices of ancestors speak through 
poets today who continue to search for harmony with all Creation. 
Since the European colonization of the western hemisphere. Native 
American cultures and peoples have experienced dramatic changes 
over the years as they have both resisted and adapted to the Euro- 
pean American culture. Nevertheless, many American Indian writers 
today stand firm in the faith that their Native cultural heritages can 
never be destroyed. 

Reading works by writers such as James Welch and Linda 
Hogan, non-Native students frequently are confused when ravens 
speak, the dead walk, and dreamers wake with magical stones in 
hand. However, when these students examine their assumptions 
about the universe, they can begin to understand and accept the real- 
ities of worlds and views different from their own. 

Western Europeans frequently define power in economic, historical, 
and political terms; it is the force by which individuals impose their 
will upon others. This power is frequently viewed negatively, espe- 
cially today when many people regard powerful institutions as cor- 
rupt and evil. By contrast, Native power may be described as a 
benevolent living force that circulates through human beings so all 
life in this world might continue. In novels by Louise Erdrich, Leslie 
Silko, and N. Scott Momaday, the characters move into community, 
frequently rejecting the Western European concept of temporal 
power and the "American Dream" of individual freedom and mater- 
ial success. This is also true in the novels of James Welch and D'Arcy 
McNickle. Writing about McNickle's work, William Bevis observes: 

[T]he free individual without context is utterly lost. . . . No "free indi- 
vidual" who achieves white success in these six books is really 
admired, and certainly the free "mode of life" they have "chosen" is 
not preferred to tribal context. (Bevis 1990, 102) 

Because this Native power is viewed as being connected to 
word and thought, traditional and contemporary Indian peoples 
have placed great value in their choice and use of words. The impor- 
tant value of noninterference is also related to this Native idea of 
power, especially with respect to education. Rather than directly using 



Historical and Cultural Literary Contexts 



39 



power to impose their will or opinions regarding desirable and unde- 
sirable behaviors upon others, many Native people have traditionally 
used story to educate their children and to communicate indirectly 
their beliefs to those outside their cultures. For example, when Frank 
B. Linderman asks Pretty-shield (Crow) her people's opinion of Sit- 
ting Bull, she says: 

I was about twenty-eight or thirty years old when I saw Sitting-bull 
here at this very place. I will tell you what happened on that day, and 
then you may write down your own answers to your own questions. 
(Linderman 1972, 196) 

Trusting that individuals will make decisions most appropriate 
for themselves, Indian people such as Pretty-shield also allow others 
to suffer and learn from the consequences of inappropriate decisions. 



Meaning and 
Function of 
Symbol 



In the Western European tradition, a symbol suggests other meanings 
in addition to its literal meaning. Generally, a symbol stands for 
something greater than itself; a cross stands for Christ or the Crucifix- 
ion, a flag stands for a country or state. By contrast, in Lame Deer's 
Cheyenne universe, the physical aspect of the symbol is as valid and 
important as the reality it represents (Lame Deer 1972). Bevis dis- 
cusses this issue in the novels of Welch and McNickle. Whereas non- 
Native peoples are "accustomed to using nature, abstracting it, 
confining it to [their] purposes," in these novels, "Nature is not a 
symbol, subordinate to the human need for understanding. Animals 
have their own rights in life and art. . . . Native American nature is 
urban ... at the center of action and power, in complex and unpre- 
dictable and various relationships" (Bevis 1990, 112-13). 

Two examples from Linda Hogan's Mean Spirit also serve to 
illustrate what looks like symbol but is, in fact, spiritual power. Joe 
Billy (Osage) holds a medicine bundle with dry parchment-like cov- 
ering, and closes his eyes: 

He heard what he thought were warnings stirring beneath the surface 
of his skin, beneath the floors of his house. 

In the morning, his wife opened the door to the study to find her 
husband asleep in the chair. . . . 

[I]nside [the leather pouch] Martha could see that something was 
moving. The sight of it bumping and turning in Joe Billy's hands star- 
tled her and she drew in such a frightened breath that Joe Billy woke 
and looked from her blue eyes to the moving bundle that he held. 

"What's in there?" Martha asked. 

He blinked at her and all he could really say was, "It's the older 
world, wanting out." (Hogan 1990, 138) 

For Joe Billy's people, as well as for the Blackfeet in James 
Welch's novels, the sacred medicine bundle itself carries the power to 
structure and maintain their universe. In Mean Spirit , following the 



40 



Literary Purposes 



o 

ERIC 



i 

Roots and Branches 



persistent visits of death and fire, the narrator observes a gathering of 
Indians and whites at a Fourth of July celebration: 

They were in a trap, a circle of fear, and they could not leave. Money 
held them. It became a living force. One way or another, if they had it 
or if they didn't, it held them like the caged parrots a vendor was sell- 
ing. . . . They were crowded in their cages. They all faced south 
toward the deep, wet jungle, their homeland. (Hogan 1990, 293) 

In this instance, the Native narrator views money as a spiritual 
power, a very real living force. 

From a formalist critical perspective, the written work may be regarded 
as an entity unto itself; in the mimetic view expressed in Hamlet, "the 
purpose of playing ... is to hold . . . the mirror up to Nature." This 
purpose is also true of Native literatures. In his Foreword to Keepers of 
the Earth, N. Scott Momaday says, "stories are true to human experi- 
ence. Indeed, the truth of human experience is their principal informa- 
tion" (Momaday 1988). 

In general, both Native and non-Native written literatures are 
more private than public, engaging individuals, not communities; 
other Western European and Native traditions also value the role and 
scope of self-expression. However, traditional Native stories usually 
are regarded within the tribal community as being "told by," not 
"invented or created by," their storytellers. Also, Native stories have 
many roles: some teach, some are ceremonial, some carry history, and 
some are told purely for entertainment. Through the act of traditional 
Indian storytelling, listeners can learn values and behaviors impor- 
tant to the community while they are also entertained, with story- 
teller and listeners participating together in the storytelling. Thus, 
stories themselves act as unifying factors. Ceremonial stories, as well 
as popular stories, bring listeners into harmony and balance with the 
entire community, as the children learn to practice the social and spir- 
itual ways of their elders. In this way, stories actually define a com- 
munity, a people as a whole; this is the sacred nature of story. It is for 
this reason that tribal people might own their stories, and believe that 
"something is lost when the stories leave our community." As teach- 
ers familiar with America's public literature, including television, 
movies, radio, and videotape in which little attention is paid to who 
"owns" the stories, we need to be sensitized to the different role that 
story plays in Native cultures. Culture committee members in one 
Montana community asked me to make sure that readers of Roots and 
Branches understood the following: 

Be careful about using stories out of time, because many tribes have 
particular seasons when some stories must not be told; respect the 
integrity or value of the story for the community; leam about why we 



57 



Historical and Cultural Literary Contexts 



=i 

41 



have stories — because someone cared enough to share and to carry on; 
remember that stories belong to people — they are the personal collective 
history and memory of a people; tell the history of Native people accu- 
rately , and always remember that these stories represent a diversity of 
people. 

Whenever teachers use traditional Native stories, they should explain 
their vital role in maintaining a particular tribe's integrity, and they 
should emphasize the difference between reading a stranger's story 
and hearing it from an elder. 

Although this integrative purpose of literature may be more 
obvious in the oral tradition, many Indian poets today express a 
respect and responsibility for their communities. Also, many contem- 
porary Indian literary works feature characters who move into com- 
munal balance and harmony as they search for identity. After reading 
Sherman Alexie's The Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in Heaven , one of 
my seniors remarked, "I really liked the book, but sometimes I felt 
like an outsider. I didn't know enough about his world to understand 
the 'inside' jokes and stories." According to Louis Owens in Other 
Destinies , without this knowledge, non-Native readers find them- 
selves "outside the text," whereas the Indian reader is the "privi- 
leged" or integrated audience (Owens 1992, 29). Owens suggests that 
Indian writers today are pulling both Indian and non-Indian readers 
into community, demanding that they know something about the 
mythology and literary history of Native Americans. 



Classification 
of Genres 



Directly linked to the purposes of literature is the classification of 
genres. For traditional Native literatures especially, the Western Euro- 
pean terms "fiction" and "non-fiction" are somewhat meaningless, 
because traditional stories are regarded as true. Traditional Native lit- 
eratures may be classified according to function and cultural context 
instead of by form and style. Also, each traditional category may 
include what Western Europeans might call "poetry" and "prose." 
Having been influenced by both Native and Western European liter- 
ary traditions, contemporary writers such as Leslie Marmon Silko 
and N. Scott Momaday blend poetry and prose into one narrative, 
even as they write novels, short stories, poetry, or drama. 

One traditional Native American cycle features the popular 
and intensely complex trickster/ transformer or culture hero. Known 
by different names, genders, and behaviors, this hero and antihero (in 
Western European terms) can take on the forms of animals and 
humans, depending on the particular tribal tradition. To the Sioux, he 
is Iktomi, the spider; to the Southwest Plateau Indians and the Salish, 
he is Coyote; to the Crow, he is Old Man Coyote; to Indians in the 
Northwest, he is Raven; to the Blackfeet, he is Old Man and Napi; to 
the Abenaki, he is Gluscabi; to the Cree in Montana and Canada, he is 



O 

ERIC 



58 



] 



42 



C 

Roots and Branches 



Wisahkecahk; to the Cheyenne, he is VeHo; and to the Gros Ventres, 
he is Nee Ot. Representing a wide range of possible human actions, 
the trickster is capable of much good, but he or she also may exhibit 
the most undesirable human behaviors. With mischief in mind, the 
hero may overreach, deceive, and manipulate others to get what he 
wants. Sometimes, he earns his just reward and brings ridicule on 
himself in the end. Through the stories, listeners learn how to imitate 
positive and creative behaviors, to understand the power or good 
that they may access, while they also learn to recognize their own 
deceitful and fraudulent behaviors. Listeners may also learn to avoid 
stupidity — and even death — by being watchful and wary of those 
who might deceive them. 

Early twentieth-century and v contemporary Indian writers, 
such as N. Scott Momaday, Zitkala-Sa, Gerald Vizenor, James Welch, 
Joseph Bruchac, D'Arcy McNickle, Louise Erdrich, and Debra Ear- 
ling, frequently incorporate the trickster and his wide range of behav- 
iors in poetry, stories, and novels. Brigit Hans, in her introduction to 
The Hawk is Hungry and Other Stories by twentieth-century writer 
D'Arcy McNickle, includes McNickle's explanation of the continuing 
importance of Coyote to the Salish people: 

Indian story telling presents a contrasting view of man's role in the 
historical process: the coyote tales are especially good for this. Coyote 
is rarely a hero, or if he starts out to be a hero invariably he ends up a 
scoundrel or he finds himself outsmarted. There are no mounting 
crises and no gratifying denouements. Life is an arrangement of reci- 
procal expectations and obligations, and no one is allowed to set him- 
self up as a power unto himself. (Hans 1992) 

In his critical analysis of N. Scott Momaday's House Made of 
Dawn and the character of Tosamah, the Priest of the Sun, Louis 
Owens writes: 

Tosamah mocks, ridicules, and challenges every fixed meaning or sta- 
tic definition. . . . Like the traditional trickster, [he] is in dialogue with 
himself, embodies contradictions, challenges authority, mocks and 
tricks us into self-knowledge. (Owens 1992) 

Quoting Momaday, Owens also writes that "Tosamah serves at times 
as the author's 'mouthpiece'." The same is true with Gerald 
Vizenor 's fiction, where "the author /trickster [attacks] terminal 
creeds and [loosens] the shrouds of identities" (Owens 1992, 254). 

Definition The traditional Western European hero is self-reliant and male, 
of ^Hero 77 resolving conflicts in order to achieve communal and individual 
goals. Stories written by non-Indians about Indians frequently fea- 
ture a singular hero, such as Chief Joseph, Chief Seattle, Crazy Horse, 
or Sitting Bull. These heroes unsuccessfully struggle alone against 




59 



Historical and Cultural Literary Contexts 



43 



insurmountable odds. When they ultimately surrender or die, the 
European American values of a particular civilization's superiority 
and Manifest Destiny appear to prevail. Rather than communicating 
the Indian peoples' image of who they were or are, these stories sim- 
ply reinforce the value system of the non-Indian writers. 

On the other hand, the protagonists in Indian literatures fre- 
quently exhibit values necessary for the survival of the community. 
Indian writers such as Charles Eastman, Wooden Leg, and Pretty- 
shield tell stories about Chief Joseph, Crazy Horse, and Sitting Bull 
that differ significantly from those told by Susan Jeffers or published 
by Troll Publications. The protagonists or heroes in Welch's Winter in 
the Blood, Silko's Ceremony, McNickle's Runner in the Sun, Ella Delo- 
ria's Waterlily, and Momaday's House Made of Dawn, learn the nega- 
tive effects of individualism and instead move into community and 
into the common tribal understanding of a ritual tradition. Bevis calls 
this process "homing in," or becoming connected to place; "'knowl- 
edge' is formed and validated tribally," and "the protagonist ends 
where he began" (Bevis 1990, 103-107). At the end of Fools Crow by 
James Welch, the hero finds himself surrounded by and completed 
with images from his community: "Red Paint's hand, the rhythm of 
the drum, his vision of the other world. Feather Woman, and drops of 
water on the bare earth that countless feet had trampled smooth over 
the winter." As an adult. Fools Crow is now responsible, "burdened 
with the knowledge of his people, their lives and the lives of their 
children" (Welch 1986, 390). In Hogan's Mean Spirit, Belle thinks to 
herself, "bees [are] like Indians, with a circular dance, working 
together for the survival of the next generations" (Hogan 1990, 312). 
Ella Deloria, an early twentieth-century Dakota linguist and ethnolo- 
gist and the author of Dakota Texts, suggests that growing up, to the 
traditional Dakota people, means assuming one's individual respon- 
sibilities within the home and community (Deloria 1992). In contrast, 
many non-Natives may describe themselves as grown up when they 
have disconnected, have become independent, have left home to 
"seek a fortune." 



Organizational 

Patterns 



The organizational pattern of Indian oral and written literatures dif- 
fers from the Western European tradition of unity in linear time, 
place, and action. Instead of a plot characterized by rising action, cli- 
max, and falling action, Indian stories are frequently cyclical and 
episodic, with varying times, settings, and points of view. Language 
and image may suggest multiple directions and interpretations. Love 
Medicine by Louise Erdrich reads like a collection of gossip with 
words and stories from several narrative voices. In Leslie Silko's 
Ceremony, scenes move from the time of World War II, to before the 
war and after the war, then into the realm of the extraordinary with 



44 






Roots and Branches 



Recurring Motifs 
in Native American 
Literatures 



o 

ERIC 



ancient stories of Tayo's Laguna Pueblo. In each chapter of N. Scott 
Momaday's The Way to Rainy Mountain, the elements of legend, his- 
tory, and the personal are brought together to create a whole in which 
"The imaginative experience and the historical express equally the 
traditions of man's reality" (Momaday 1969, 4). These lead readers or 
listeners into holistic experiences that bring together all of their char- 
acters' related experiences to create new meaning or understanding. 

Though all cultures and literatures may communicate similar arche- 
typal patterns, it is valuable to look at several recurring motifs that 
pervade both traditional and contemporary Indian literatures. 

Everyone and Everything Is Related 

In the collection Growing up Native American, Louis Owens writes 
about the Yahoo River and the Great Horned Owl: 

[F]rom the Yahoo we must have learned to feel water as a presence, a 
constant, a secret source of both dream and nightmare . . . the Great 
Homed owls called in drumming voices, vague warnings of death 
somewhere. (Riley 1993, 275) 

In Other Destinies, Owens writes about the Blackfeet world of James 
Welch's Fools Crow: 

[T]here is no disjunction between the real and the magical, no sense 
that the magical is metaphorical. In the world Welch recovers. Raven 
talks to men and women, the sacred and the profane interpenetrate 
irresistibly, and this is reality. (Owens 1992, 165) 

The Reality and Power of Dreams 

The dream motif appears throughout Native literatures, such as in 
Joseph Bruchac's contemporary stories, in children's literature, and in 
the as-told-to autobiography Plenty Coups, Chief of the Crows by Frank 
B. Linderman. In this book Chief Plenty Coups describes a dream he 
once had in which he saw the future disappearance of the buffalo and 
their replacement with domestic cattle. Trusting his dream and its 
foreshadowing of the inevitable non-Indian presence in Crow terri- 
tory, Plenty Coups fought with the white man, providing scouts, war- 
riors, and supplies to the military in order to safeguard the land and 
culture of his people (Linderman 1962). Today the Crow people are 
one of the few tribes still living in the lands of their ancestors. Pretty- 
shield (Crow) also tells a story about a woman she once knew who 
had a dream that saved her people. In the dream, a woman-mouse 
tells the woman that a Lakota war party will attack soon if the people 
don't return to the place they have come from (Linderman 1972). The 
story not only demonstrates the Crow trust in dreams and the voices 



61 



[ 



Historical and Cultural Literary Contexts 



] 



45 



of animal-people, but it also reveals the importance of women in 
Crow society. 

The Real Presence of Ancestors 
and the Importance of Memory 

In the introduction to her collection of prose and poetry Elizabeth 
Woody (Yakama/Warm Springs/Wasco/Navajo) explains what her 
ancestors mean to her: 

It was United States government policy until just a few years ago, to 
eradicate all Indian languages. It was illegal to teach them in schools. 
I am part of the generation in which this language massacre reached 
its final stage: I learned only English. But those older languages are 
active in my brain. Waking to the aroma of coffee, I listened as a child 
to the Indian words of my grandmother and great-aunt in the morn- 
ing. I also heard the softness of their walk and the song accompany- 
ing them from the birds in the junipers. Such simple pleasures elude 
me to this day, but the memory returns stronger as I grow older. Even 
though Eve had to become proficient in a language and speaking 
style entirely different from that of my Sahaptin-Wasco-Dine ances- 
tors, I believe the language I use in my poetry comes from the deep 
well of these ancient American languages. Listening to the older 
aspects of myself in my relatives, I was initiated into a life's work 
with words. (Woody 1994, 14-15) 

The Sacred Nature of Children 
and the Importance of Elders 

Pretty-shield (Crow) tells Linderman, "my grandchildren are like the 
dry earth when rain falls upon it" (Linderman 1972, 133). Lame Deer 
(Lakota) says: "In their own homes Indian children are surrounded 
with relatives as with a warm blanket" (Lame Deer 1972). And as the 
sacred cornmeal is sprinkled "by the door of your classroom," the 
speaker in the poem, "For Misty Starting School," by Luci Tapahonso 
(Navajo), asks the child to "remember now, where this cornmeal is 
from / remember now, you are no different . . . / remember now, you 
are no different / blessing us / leaving us" (Tapahonso 1987). In his 
introduction to The Way to Rainy Mountain , N. Scott Momaday 
(Kiowa) describes his return to his grandmother's grave. 

Her name was Aho, and she belonged to the last culture to evolve in 
North America. . . . Now that I can have her only in memory, I see my 
grandmother in the several postures that were peculiar to her: stand- 
ing at the wood stove on a winter morning and turning meat in a great 
iron skillet; sitting at the south window, bent above her beadwork, 
and afterwards, when her vision failed, looking down for a long time 
into the fold of her hands; going out upon a cane, very slowly as she 
did when the weight of age came upon her; praying. I remember her 



) 



Roots and Branches 



46 



most often at prayer. She made long, rambling prayers out of suffering 
and hope, having seen many things. (Momaday 1969, 10) 

The Importance of Play and Humor 

Humor is prominent in stories and poetry by storytellers and poets 
such as Joseph Bruchac, Sherman Alexie, D'Arcy McNickle, Diane 
Burns, Luci Tapahonso, and Pretty-shield. Taking a satirical view of 
the colonized Native world, the novel Dead Voices , or "published sto- 
ries," by Gerald Vizenor, portrays trickster "exterminators" who 
practice chemical warfare against fleas, trickster hunters who pretend 
to be like the animals and then move in for the kill, and trickster fur 
traders. Writing with dark irony in The Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight 
in Heaven , Sherman Alexie describes a vision and contrasting ways of 
measuring time: 

The buffalo come to join us and their hooves shake the earth, knock all 
the white people from their beds, send their plates crashing to the 
floor. We dance in circles growing larger and larger until we are stand- 
ing on the shore, watching all the ships returning to Europe. All the 
white hands are waving good-bye and we continue to dance, dance 
until the ships fall off the horizon, dance until we are so tall and strong 
that the sun is nearly jealous. We dance that way. (Alexie 1994, 17) 

At the Tribal Council meeting last night, Judas WildShoe gave a 
watch he found to the tribal chairman. 

"A white man artifact, a sin," the chairman said, put the watch in 
his pouch. 

I remember watches. They measured time in seconds, minutes, 
hours. They measured time exactly, coldly. I measure time with my 
breath, the sound of my hands across my own skin. 

I make mistakes. (Alexie 1994, 109) 

Themes of Loss 
and Survival 



There is a very important characteristic of written Indian literature 
that resembles the protest literature of other marginalized peoples 
and yet differs from that of American Indian oral traditions. Appear- 
ing in even the earliest written works, it is the theme of dispossession 
and displacement, of loss, and of cultural and personal decay mani- 
fested in high rates of unemployment, abuse, alcoholism, and suicide. 
Frequently characters experience breakdowns in communication 
while they search for significance and identity to defy the stereotypes 
that relegate Indian to artifact. To recover losses their ancestors expe- 
rienced, writers today may romanticize a cultural past they person- 
ally have never known. Nevertheless, they express an indomitable 
struggle to survive as individuals and as nations. According to James 
Welch, these writers "proudly describe their own cultures, with an 
underlying realization and sadness that they are being swallowed up 
by the dominant culture, rather than being accepted by it." Still, they 



O 

ERIC 



63 



Historical and Cultural Literary Contexts 



47 



insist on "their unalienable right to bang at the gates" (Welch 1994, 7). 
The power to recreate community exists within this writing as it 
works to renew and protect a living tradition. 



What is Native American literature? The above discussion may 
function as one approach to this question, especially with respect to 
Plains tribal cultures. In defining any literature, we must answer the 
question "What does it do?" With Native American literatures, we 
can say that they express the storytellers' and writers' own historical 
and cultural heritages. 

Three contemporary writers, Kenneth Lincoln, professor of 
American literature and Native American studies at UCLA, Wendy 
Rose (Hopi/Miwok), and Sherman Alexie (Spokane /Coeur d'Alene), 
have voiced their definitions: 

There is no genre of "Indian Literature," because we are all different. 
There is only literature written by people who are Indian and who, 
therefore, infuse their work with their own lives the same way you 
do. (Rose 1981, 402) 

Grounded Indian literature is tribal; its fulcrum is a sense of related- 
ness. To Indians tribe means family. . . . Tribe means an earth sense of 
self. . . . Tribe means ancestral history, the remembered presence of 
grandmothers and grandfathers gone before. . . . Tribe means spiri- 
tual balance through inherited rituals. . . . Tribe means the basics of 
human community shared, lean to fat. . . . And given four hundred 
sad years of Indian dispossession, tribe often means nonwhite inver- 
sions of the American mainstream, a contrary ethnicity and dark 
pride, even to a people's disadvantage. (Lincoln 1983, 8) 

In the following poem from Sherman Alexie's Old Shirts and 
New Skins (1993), the speaker tells his listeners what Native American 
literature will and will not do. Insisting that no one can ever truly tell 
or completely understand another's story, Alexie provides his defini- 
tion of the genre, which bears the scars of what Kenneth Lincoln calls, 
"four hundred sad years of Indian dispossession." 

Introduction to Native American Literature 

Somewhere in America a television explodes 

& here you are again (again) 
asking me to explain broken glass. 

You scour the reservation landfill 
through the debris of so many lives: 
old guitar, basketball on fire, pair of shoes. 

All you bring me is an empty bottle. 

Am I the garbageman of your dreams? 



48 



Roots and Branches 



Listen: 

it will not save you 

or talk you down from the ledge 

of a personal building. 

It will not kill you 

or throw you facedown to the floor 

& pull the trigger twice. 

It believes a roomful of monkeys 
in a roomful of typewriters 
would eventually produce a roomful 
of poetry about missing the jungle. 

You will forget 

more than you remember: 

that is why we all dream slowly. 

Often, you need change of scenery. 

It will give you one black & white photograph. 

Sometimes, it whispers 
into anonymous corner bars 
& talks too much about the color 
of its eyes & skin & hair. 

It believes a piece of coal 
shoved up its own ass 
will emerge years later 
as a perfectly imperfect diamond. 

Sometimes, it screams 
the English language near freeways 
until trucks jackknife & stop all traffic 
while the city runs over itself. 

Often, you ask forgiveness. 

It will give you a 10% discount. 

* 

Because you have seen the color of my bare skin 

does not mean you have memorized the shape of my ribcage. 

Because you have seen the spine of the mountain 
does not mean you made the climb. 

Because you stood waist-deep in the changing river 
does not mean you were equal to me 2 . 

Because you gave something a name 
does not mean your name is important. 




65 



[ 



] 



Historical and Cultural Literary Contexts 



49 



Because you sleep 

does not mean you see into my dreams. 

* 

Send it a letter: the address will keep changing. 

Give it a phone call: busy signal 
Knock on its door: you'll hear voices. 

Look in its windows: shadows dance through the blinds. 

In the end, it will pick you up from the pavement 
& take you to the tribal cafe for breakfast. 

It will read you the menu. 

It will not pay your half of the bill. 

— Sherman Alexie 



Works Cited Alexie, Sherman. 1993. Old Shirts and Nezv Skins. Los Angeles: University of 

California. 

Alexie, Sherman. 1994. The Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in Heaven. New 
York: HarperCollins Publishers, Inc. 

Allen, Paula Gunn. 1982. "Answering the Deer." American Indian Culture and 
Research Journal , 6.3: 39. 

Allen, Paul Gunn. 1992. "The Sacred Hoop: A Contemporary Perspective." 
In Studies in American Literature. New York: Modern Language Asso- 
ciation of America. 

America's Fascinating Indian Heritage. 1978. Pleasantville, NY: The Reader's 
Digest Association, Inc. 

Bevis, William. 1990. "McNickle: Homing In." In Ten Tough Trips: Montana 
Writers and the West. Seattle: University of Washington Press. 

Bowker, Ardy. 1993. Sisters in the Blood: The Education of Women in Native 
America. Bozeman: Center for Bilingual/Multicultural Education, 
Montana State University. 

Bruchac, Joseph. 1994. "A Living Tree with Many Roots: An Introduction to 
Native North American Literature." In Native North American Litera- 
ture, ed. Janet Witalec. Detroit, MI: Gale Research, Inc. 

Bruchac, Joseph, ed. 1983. Songs from this Earth on Turtle's Back. Greenfield 
Center, NY: Greenfield Review Press. 

Byler, Mary Gloyne. 1987. "Taking Another Look." In Through Indian Eyes: 
The Native Experience in Books for Children, eds. Beverly Slapin and 
Doris Seale. Philadelphia, PA: New Society Publishers. 

Caduto, Michael, and Joseph Bruchac, eds. 1988. Keepers of the Earth: Native 
American Stories and Environmental Activities for Children. Golden, CO: 
Fulcrum Publishing. 

Champagne, Duane. 1994. Chronology of Native North American History. 
Detroit, MI: Gale Research, Inc. 



] 



50 



Roots and Branches 



Contrary Warriors: A Story of the Crow Tribe , 1985. Rattlesnake Productions. 
Videocassette. 

Cook-Lynn, Elizabeth. 1987. "You May Consider Speaking about Your Art." 
In I Tell You Now: Autobiographical Essays by Native American Writers, 
eds. Brian Swann and Arnold Krupat. Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press. 

Deloria, Ella Cara. 1992. Dakota Texts. Vermillion, SD: Dakota Press. 

Dorris, Michael A. 1982. Foreword to American Indian Stereotypes in the 
World of Children: A Reader and Bibliography, ed. Arlene B. 
Hirschfelder. Metuchen, NJ: The Scarecrow Press, Inc. 

Endrezze, Anita. 1992. at the helm of twilight. Seattle, WA: Broken Moon 
Press. 

Hans, Brigit. 1992. Introduction to The Hawk Is Hungry and Other Stories, by 
D'Arcy McNickle. Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 

Henson, Lance. 1992. A Cheyenne Sketchbook: Selected Poems 1970-1991. 
Greenfield Center, NY: The Greenfield Review Press. 

Hirschfelder, Arlene, and Beverly R. Singer, eds. 1982. Rising Voices — 

Writings of Young Native Americans. New York: Charles Scribner's 
Sons. 

Hogan, Linda. 1990. Mean Spirit. New York: Ivy Books. 

Jennings, Francis. 1976. The Invasion of America — Indians, Colonialism, and the 
Cant of Conquest. New York: W.W. Norton and Company. 

Lame Deer, John (Fire), and Richard Erdoes. 1972. Lame Deer, Seeker of 
Visions. New York: Washington Square Press. 

Lincoln, Kenneth. 1983. "Sending a Voice." In Native American Renaissance. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Linderman, Frank B. 1962. Plenty Coups: Chief of the Crows. Lincoln: Univer- 
sity of Nebraska Press. 

Linderman, Frank B. 1972. Pretty-shield: Medicine Woman of the Crows. Lin- 
coln: University of Nebraska Press. 

McNickle, D'Arcy. 1973. Native American Tribalism. New York: Oxford Uni- 
versity Press. 

Momaday, N. Scott. 1969. The Way to Rainy Mountain. Albuquerque: Univer- 
sity of New Mexico Press. 

Momaday, N. Scott. 1988. Foreword to Keepers of the Earth: Native American 
Stories and Environmental Activities for Children, eds. Michael Caduto 
and Joseph Bruchac. Golden, CO: Fulcrum Publishing. 

Nabokov, Peter, ed. 1991. Native American Testimony. New York: Penguin. 

Owens, Louis. 1992. Other Destinies: Understanding the American Indian 
Novel. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 

The Random House Dictionary of the English Language, The Unabridged Edition, 
1967. 



O 

ERIC 



67 



Historical and Cultural Literary Contexts 



51 



Reyhner, Jon, and Jeannie Eder. 1992. "A History of Indian Education." In 
Teaching American Indian Students , edited by Jon Reyhner. Norman: 
University of Oklahoma Press. 

Riley Patricia, ed. 1993. Growing Up Native American: An Anthology. New 
York: Wm. Morrow & Co. 

Rose, Wendy. 1981. "American Indian Poets and Publishing." Book Forum 
5(3): 402. 

Sheehan, Bernard. 1973. Seeds of Extinction — Jeffersonian Philanthropy and the 
American Indian. New York: W.W. Norton and Company. 

Tapahonso, Luci. 1987. A Breeze Swept Through. Albuquerque, NM: West End 
Press. 

The Reservations. 1995. The American Indians Series. Alexandria, Virginia: 
Time-Life Books. 

Vizenor, Gerald. 1992. Dead Voices: Natural Agonies in the New World. 
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Vizenor, Gerald, ed. 1995. Native American Literature: A Brief Introduction and 
Anthology. HarperCollins Literary Mosaic Series. Berkeley, CA: 
HarperCollins College Publishers. 

Welch, James. 1986. Fools Crow. New York: Viking Penguin. 

Welch, James. 1994. "Introduction." Ploughshares , 20.1 (Spring): 7. 

Woody, Elizabeth. 1994. Seven Hands , Seven Hearts. Portland, OR: The Eighth 
Mountain Press. 



ERIC 




52 




3 

Secondary Level 
Units, Lessons, 
and Activities 



Representing a variety of structures and approaches, most of the fol- 
lowing units, lessons, and activities have been used with high school 
students and in teacher development workshops. More developed 
descriptions of specific selections may be found in Chapters 4, 5, and 
6, but each plan includes goals, suggested resources, a variety of 
activities, and references to related themes. The plans also offer 
diverse biographical, geographical, and historical background mate- 
rials to show some of the possibilities for teaching the works in con- 
text. I hope teachers might find the suggestions useful as they 
develop similar units featuring literatures from other landscapes and 
cultures. 



I. 9- Week Unit: Commitment to Relatives and to Community 53 

II. 2- Week Unit: World View, Myth, and Bias 

in America's Ethnic and Cultural Roots 60 

HI. 5-Day Lesson: Oratory of Resistance and Revolution 

in American Literature 67 

IV. 4- Week Unit: Introduction to Native American Literature 69 

V. 6-Day Unit: Bias and Stereotype in Literature 

about Native Americans 72 

VI. 5-Day Lesson: The Way to Rainy Mountain 

by N. Scott Momaday: A Journey into Human Reality 

through Imagination and History 78 

VII. 4- Week Unit: James Welch's Fools Crow 81 

VIII. 13-Day Unit: Zitkala-Sa's American Indian Stories 89 

IX. 4-Week Unit: Linda Hogan's Mean Spirit 97 




69 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



Goals 



Resources 



o 

ERIC 



i 

53 



(Qgp(o] 0® 



Developed by Donna Miller and Dorothea Susag 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Between Two Worlds; Change and Growth 
Grade Level: S 

This unit uses Indian literature to model the importance of family 
members and cultural values in the determination of personal iden- 
tity Students discover answers to "who am I" or "who are we" ques- 
tions through a study of and response to family relationships and 
cultural influences. 



■ To understand the concept of culture and to examine students' cul- 
tural systems 

■ To become aware of the ways values motivate behavior and shape 
culture 

■ To realize the values and consequences of a personal commitment 
to community and to affirm individual and family values 

■ To recognize the way cultural rituals and ceremonies create and 
perpetuate community 

■ To become aware of and to challenge stereotypes of American 
Indians, European Americans, and elderly people 

■ To experience contemporary Native American literature in three 
genres: novel, short story, and poetry 

■ To practice oral storytelling, oral reading, and writing in response 
to Native American literature 



Byler, Mary Gloyne. 1992. "American Indian Authors for Young Readers: 

An Annotated Bibliography." In Through Indian Eyes: The Native 
Experience in Books for Children , eds. Beverly Slapin and Doris Seale. 
Philadelphia, PA: New Society Publishers. 

Ruoff, A. LaVonne Brown. 1990. Preface to American Indian Literatures: An 
Introduction , Bibliographic Review , and Selected Bibliography. New York: 
Modem Language Association of America. 

Surviving Columbus: The Story of the Pueblo People. 1992. Albuquerque, NM: 
KNME-TV, PBS. Videocassette. 

Hidden Places: Ancient Places. 1980. Montana Committee for the Humanities. 
Videocassette. 

McNickle, D'Arcy. 1987. Runner in the Sun. Albuquerque: University of New 
Mexico Press. 



70 



54 



Roots and Branches 



The Lakota: One Nation on the Plains. 1976-1978. University of Mid America. 
Videocassette. 

Deloria, Ella. 1988. Waterlily. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 

Transitions: The Death of the Mother Tongue. 1991. Native Voices Public Televi- 
sion Workshop. Bozeman: Montana State University. Videocassette. 

Ear ling, Debra. 1990. "Perma Red." In The Last Best Place: An Anthology of 

Montana Literature, eds. William Kittredge and Annick Smith. Helena: 
Montana Historical Society Press. 

Selected poetry from Bruchac, Joseph, ed. 1983. Songs from this Earth on 
Turtle's Back. New York: Greenfield Review Press. 

Allen, Paula Gunn. "Grandmother" 

BigEagle, Duane. "My Grandfather Was a Quantum Physicist" 

Brant, Beth. "For All My Grandmothers" 

Burns, Diane. "Sure You Can Ask Me A Personal Question" 

Goose, Mary. "Just an Old Man" 

Hale, Janet Campbell. "Where Have All the Indians Gone?" 

and "Walls of Ice" 

Harjo, Joy. "Remember" 

Kenny, Maurice. "Corn-Planter" 

Young Bear, Ray A. "Grandmother" 



Prereading 

Activities 



1. Discuss ways we might distinguish between people from a vari- 
ety of ethnic backgrounds, including African American, Norwe- 
gian, Italian, and Native American. Students write their 
definitions of an Indian, and the teacher will compile them (with- 
out names) for the purpose of discussion at the beginning and at 
the end of the unit. For assistance, teachers can rely on Mary 
Gloyne Byler's definition in Slapin and Seale's Through Indian 
Eyes: "There is more to being an American Indian — Apache, 
Seneca, Hopi, or whatever tribe — than can be acquired through an 
act of will, a course of study, or discovering an Indian ancestor 
somewhere in the family tree. It is not an intellectual choice. In 
short, being Indian is growing up Indian: it is a way of life, a way 
of thinking and being" (Byler 1992, 289). A. LaVonne Brown 
Ruoff, in American Indian Literatures, provides a complex defini- 
tion from the Bylaws of the National Indian Education Associa- 
tion (Ruoff 1990, vi). 

2. Watch the video Surviving Columbus or the video Hidden Places: 
Ancient Places, produced by Montana Committee for the Humani- 
ties, 1980. Hidden Places is a thirty-minute film that describes the 
dry canyon lands of the American Southwest, where Indian cul- 
tures flourished thousands of years before Columbus's voyages. 
The host visits the Great Gallery of Barrier Canyon in Utah, the 
Hueco Tanks in Texas, and the Catholic mission church in Zuni 
Pueblo, New Mexico. 




71 



[ 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



] 



55 



Selection 1: Runner 
in the Sun by 
D'Arcy McNickle 



Postreading Activity 

In the role of Quail, write journal entries spanning one week, report- 
ing all that you have learned about the beliefs and values shaping 
this culture. Include in your entries your observations regarding how 
these values dictate or motivate community behaviors. 

Questions for Further Consideration 

1. Research the etymology or the connotations and denotations of 
the word salt. Based on this research, how effective is the author's 
naming of his protagonist? 

2. How has Salt learned to balance his individual desires with the 
welfare of his people? 

3. Because Flute Man and Dark Dealer desire personal power and 
advantage, they are feared. Think of someone you know with sim- 
ilar desires. Write an entry in your diary exploring reasons you 
might fear that person. 

4. To what extent does this book contradict negative stereotypes of 
Native Americans? List five common stereotypes and then use 
specific events or personal characteristics that demonstrate the 
contradiction. 



Journal Activities (for each day's reading, 
approximately 20 pages per night) 

1. Each chapter has a title; explain how this title suits the chapter's 
subject, or sketch an event, character, landscape, or symbol from 
the chapter. 

2. Note any incidents in which a character behaves responsibly or irre- 
sponsibly toward his or her community and define that behavior. 
How would you respond to that character and his or her actions? 

3. Keep a page in your journal on which to record a list of all vocab- 
ulary words and their definitions; add any words to the list that 
are unfamiliar to you as you read. 

4. Look for aspects of the precontact environment of the Pueblo 
Indians that resemble behaviors, beliefs, or traditions of your own 
culture. 



Transition Activity Watch the video The Lakota: One Nation on the Plains, produced by the 

University of Mid America, 1976-1978 and available through the 
Montana Committee for the Humanities. With N. Scott Momaday 
narrating, this video describes the movement of the Plains Indians 
across the Great Plains. It focuses on a case study of the Lakota, their 
migration into the region in the eighteenth century, and their adapta- 
tion to the new environment. 



56 



[ 



Roots and Branches 



Selection 2: 
Waterlily by 
Ella Deloria 



Reading Activities 

1. Keep a log of each day's reading and give each chapter a title. 

Note incidents in which characters behave responsibly toward 
community and describe that behavior. 

2. After each reading, ask an "I wonder why?" question that may be 
answered through class discussion or library research, and keep 
one journal page for definitions of vocabulary words that are new 
to you. 

Chapter 2: Choose a custom or ritual and compare it with a 

behavior or custom in your world. 

Chapter 5: Choose an example of good manners and com- 
pare it with similar behavior in your family. 

Chapter 6: Work with the teacher to create two typed pages 

of "Cliffs Notes" for this chapter, and then work in groups of two or 
three to create your own "Cliffs Notes" for subsequent chapters. They 
will be compiled in a booklet for each student. Denise Juneau, an 
English teacher in Browning, Montana, has used this strategy with 
more lengthy books in her high school classes to facilitate students' 
independent learning. "Cliffs Notes" should include main characters; 
setting (time and place); chapter summary of lessons, incidents, cere- 
monies, and researched definitions for terms not defined in text; and 
identification of the crisis and resolution within chapters. 

Chapter 7: Define gender roles in this culture and compare 

them with those of your culture. 

Chapter 8: You are the natural child of Rainbow and you 

have never experienced the Hunka ceremony that is held for 
Waterlily. How would you feel and how would you act toward your 
parents and Waterlily? Do you believe the adults' explanations to nat- 
ural children are adequate or fair? Write a letter to Rainbow and tell 
him how you feel. 

Chapter 9-15: Work in seven groups for three days to create 

"Cliffs Notes" for these chapters. 

Questions for Discussion with Groups 

Chapter 9: Is self-mutilation justified in this situation? Why 

might a people discontinue this practice? 

Chapter 10: How are white men defined? 

Chapter 11: Why is the Sun Dance so important to the Dakota 

people? 

Chapter 12: What is the value of the Grandmother in Dakota 

culture? 

Chapter 13: Was Waterlily's decision to marry Sacred Horse a 

wise decision? How would you evaluate this decision? 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



Transition Activity 



Selection 3: 
"Perma Red" by 
Debra Earling 



ERIC 



1 

57 



Chapter 14: Under what circumstances have you felt as 

lonely as Waterlily? How did you cope with that loneliness? 

Chapter 15: What was the impact of diseases such as small- 
pox on tribal people in North America? 

Chapters 16 and 17: Take one external conflict and examine 
how it causes an internal conflict for Waterlily How is each major 
conflict in the novel resolved at the end? 

Postreading Activity 

In cooperative groups, create Venn diagrams that compare the char- 
acters Salt and Waterlily, the personal sacrifices of Salt and Waterlily, 
the roles the elderly play in each novel, one important ceremony or 
ritual from each culture, the gender role definitions from each cul- 
ture, important values from each culture, and the ways kinship oblig- 
ations control the lives of Salt and Waterlily 

Watch the 30-minute videotape Transitions, produced by Native 
Voices Public Television Workshop and available through the Mon- 
tana Committee for the Humanities. This film, by Blackfeet produc- 
ers, explores the relationship among language, thought, and culture, 
and examines the impact of language loss in Native American com- 
munities. 

Prereading Activity 

Respond in groups or in writing to the following questions: How do 
we know who we are? Is who we are determined by what others 
think of us? Why do some people prefer being alone to being with 
others? Why is it hard to ignore what others think of us? Can we con- 
trol what others think about us? 

Assignment 1 

Read the opening six paragraphs of "Perma Red." In groups, answer 
the following questions: How does Louise feel? What are the images, 
the words and phrases, that communicate the mood of this section? 
What is the effect of this imagery on Louise, the protagonist? 

Assignment 2 

As you complete the reading, respond in your log to the following 
questions. 

1. What do you think Louise wants? What is she afraid of? 

2. How does the author describe the community on the reserva- 
tion? How does Louise feel about herself in relation to that com- 
munity? How is this a story of living in two worlds? 




58 



c 



Roots and Branches 



Selection 4: Poetry 



3. How did the story affect you? Were you angry, sad, indifferent? 
Were you sympathetic with Louise? Explain your answer. 

4. Do Louise and her relatives remind you of anyone you know, 
anyone you have ever seen, or a similar experience? 

5. Identify a passage in the story that captures an important mes- 
sage or idea and explain why you chose that passage. 

6. Does the title fit the story? How? Explain your answer. 

7. Why does Louise leave the reservation if home is where she 
really wants to be? 

8. What is missing in the story that we must fill in as we read it? 

9. What factors contribute to Louise's confusion? To what or whom 
does she feel responsibility? 

10. What is the relationship between the nature images and an indi- 
vidual struggling with her identity in this story? 

Assignment 3 

Research the following questions in workshop groups. 

1. Who are the Salish people? 

2. What is the history of the Flathead Reservation? 

3. What was federal policy regarding Indians during the time of this 
story, the 1940s? 

4. What is the significance of sweet grass to the Salish people? 

Postreading Activities 

Writing: Write the next chapter of Louise's story or write let- 

ters of advice from Salt and Waterlily to Louise. 

Storytelling: "Perma Red" is Debra Earling's story of a facet 

of family history. Think of your own story. Locate the story in a place, 
recall vivid images, real or invented, and tell your own story that cap- 
tures a part of your life. Share your story orally with the rest of the 
class. 

Prereading Activity 

Write a journal entry recalling an experience with a grandparent or 
an elderly person. 

Reading Activity 

In cooperative groups, select poems from the list given in the 
"Resources" for this unit, and create a visual representation of theme 
or subject in the poem, such as a collage, original artwork, shadow 



[ 



] 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



59 



boxes, or dramatization. As a group, read and present the poem to 
the rest of the class. 

Postreading Activity 

Write a poem to a grandparent or elder. 

Closing Activities 1- In small groups and using the various cultures you have encoun- 

tered in this unit, as well as your own culture, as models create a 
list of at least five factors usually contributing to cultural and per- 
sonal identity. Be prepared to share these lists orally with the 
entire class. Then, as a large group, select the five or six most 
important factors. In small groups, select one of those factors and 
explore in depth how it applies to each of three selections dis- 
cussed in this unit. 

2. Select one of your social groups — school, family, friends, church, 
nation — and define your personal responsibilities within that 
group in a short essay, poem, or short story. 



O 

ERIC 



r-M f-y 

i b 



60 



Goals 



Resources 



o 

ERIC 



Roots and Branches 



DOo (iDrais Wm d G^Gttog <sMs\ B0@§ 

Bra PmsMsf® @M© «o] ©odB^^ (3©©fe 



Themes: Lifeways and Stereotypes; Remembering the Old 
Ways; Between Two Worlds. 

Early in the year we examine the concept of myth , exploring the many 
possible truths behind myths to discover who we were as peoples 
and who we are today Although not many young people realize it, 
this is an important activity because their values and beliefs have 
been shaped by the stories they have grown up knowing, by the edu- 
cation they have received, and by the landscape within which they 
have lived. All of these contexts have contributed to their world 
views as individuals, as members of families, and as members of 
communities. Teachers may adapt the assignments to similar selec- 
tions from other texts. 

■ To develop an understanding of the concept of personal and cul- 
tural world views 

■ To develop strategies for critically examining the origin and char- 
acteristics of myth 

■ To develop an awareness of the diversities, similarities, and values 
in various Native American cultural and story traditions 

■ To develop an awareness of racist and biased language and its 
impact on readers over centuries 

■ To develop strategies for examining messages for racial and cul- 
tural bias 

Slapin, Beverly, and Doris Seale. 1992. "The Bloody Trail of Columbus Day." 
In Through Indian Eyes: The Native Experience in Books for Children , 7-8. 
Philadelphia: New Society Publishers. 

Bruchac, Joseph (Abenaki). 1991. "Gluscabi and the Game Animals." In 
Native American Stories, 109-113. Golden, CO: Fulcrum Publishing. 

Mourning Dove (Okanagan). 1990. "Coyote and the Wood-Tick." In Coyote 
Stories, 163-170. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 

Rides at the Door, Darnell Davis (Blackfeet). 1979. "The Magic Leggings." In 
Napi Stories, 15-16. Browning, MT: Blackfeet Heritage Program. 

Deloria, Ella C. (Dakota). 1992. "Iktomi Tricks the Pheasants." In Dakota 
Texts, 9-11. Vermillion, SD: Dakota Press. 

Smith, John. 1984. "General History of Virginia." In American Literature, 
Yellow Level, 14-19. Evanston, IL: McDougal, Littell. 

Bradford, William. 1984. "Of Plymouth Plantation." In American Literature, 
Yellow Level, 21-24. Evanston, IL: McDougal, Littell. 



77 



[ 



] 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 61 





Brant, Beth. 1992. "Grandmothers of a New World/' In Through Indian Eyes: 
The Native Experience in Books for Children , eds. Beverly Slapin and 
Doris Seale, 102-110. Philadelphia: New Society Publishers. 

Pocahontas. 1996. Burbank, CA: Walt Disney Home Video. Distributed by 
Buena Vista Home Video. Videocassette. 

Surviving Columbus: The Story of the Pueblo People. 1992. Albuquerque, NM: 
KNME-TV, PBS. Videocassette. 

"The Nations of the Northeast." 1994. The Native Americans Series. Atlanta, 
GA: TBS Productions. Videocassette. 

Green, Rayna. 1975. "The Pocahontas Perplex: The Image of Indian Women 
in American Culture." The Massachusetts Review, 16(4): 698-714. 

Washburn, Wilcomb E. 1964. The Indian and the White Man. Garden City, NY: 
Anchor. 

Jennings, Francis. 1976. The Invasion of America: Indians, Colonialism, and the 
Cant of Conquest. New York: W.W. Norton. 

Steinbeck, John. 1966. America and Americans. New York: Viking. 


Prereading 

Activities 


1. Define world view using material from the "lifeways and stereo- 
types" theme. After discussing various cultural world views, 
write your own world view. 

2. List facts about Columbus Day that you believe are true. 


Selection 1 


Read "The Bloody Trail of Columbus Day" by Beverly Slapin and 
Doris Seale. Written from a Native perspective, this selection reveals 
some seldom-heard facts about Spanish genocidal policies and the 
Taino and Arawak peoples' powerful resistance. 

Reading Activity 

1. List facts from this reading that are consistent with what you 
know is true. 

2. List facts from this reading that differ from what you previously 
knew. 

3. Explain the differences between the two and the way world view 
might influence the presentation of facts. 


Selection 2 


Use trickster/ transformer stories in Native literatures from Chapter 
2, especially those from the Abenaki, Blackfeet, Dakota, and Salish. 


Selection 3 


Tell traditional stories such as "Gluscabi and the Game Animals," 
"Coyote and Wood-Tick," "The Magic Leggings," and "Iktomi Tricks 
the Pheasants," providing geographical and cultural background. 



ERIC 



78 



62 



c 



Roots and Branches 



Selections 4 and 5 



O 

ERIC 



Questions for Further Consideration 

1. How would you define oral tradition as represented in this literature? 

2. What are the characteristics and values of tribal cultures repre- 
sented by this literature? 

3. Where have you seen these characters in people or situations 
around you or within you? 

Read "The General History of Virginia" by John Smith and "Of Ply- 
mouth Plantation" by William Bradford. 

Reading Activities 

1. Write two questions of your own for the class to consider: one ques- 
tion that is answered in the text and an "I wonder why" question. 

2. Examine the textbook for editor's bias, which may be communi- 
cated in several ways: the choice of materials to include in the 
text, the background information provided, the kinds of questions 
asked at the end of each selection, and the introductory material 
before each selection. For example, in the introduction to "The 
General History of Virginia," the editors call this "John Smith's 
most important work." It is important to discuss the implications 
of the words most important, especially after examining John 
Smith's perception of Indian people as communicated in this text. 
Bias is also strong in selections by Custer and Catlin in the text- 
book's Original Land unit and in the textbook writers' choice of a 
few poems from the Native tradition. 

3. Examine more carefully the section in the text in which Smith 
describes an Indian leader as "a great grim fellow . . . with a hell- 
ish voice, and a rattle in his hand . . . with strange gestures . . . 

[and then] three more such like devils came rushing in with the 
like antique tricks." 

4. In workshop groups, consider the implications of words such as 
grim, hellish, rattle, strange, devils, rushing, antique, and tricks in 
responding to the following questions: 

a. What might readers conclude about Indians or about John 
Smith, the writer? 

b. What are the implications for a Christian audience, for an audience 
that had never met Indian people, and for an Indian audience? 

Postreading Activities 

1. You are a member of John Smith's company and you have heard 
about Bradford's settlement in Plymouth. Write a letter to Brad- 
ford informing him about the hazards and benefits of settlement 
in the New World. 

2. Compare Bradford and Smith according to subject matter, tone, 
style of writing, and bias. 



79 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



Selection 6 



Selections 7 and 8 



Selection 9 



Selection 10 



o 

ERIC 



In "Grandmothers of a New World," Beth Brant discusses the legend 
about John Smith and Pocahontas as related in accounts based on 
John Smith's story. Then she counters Smith's account with another 
Pocahontas story that is based on Brant's understanding of 
Pamunkey practices and on her belief in the traditional strength and 
influence of Native women. Brant suggests, "John Smith's so-called 
rescue was, in fact, a mock execution — a traditional ritual often held 
after capture of enemies." 

Postreading Activities 

1. Watch the same scene from Disney's Pocahontas and be prepared 
to discuss how the messages in the film might influence the beliefs 
and behaviors of both Native and non-Native people today. 

2. In six workshop groups, build cases to defend or prosecute Brant, 
Disney, or Smith for deceiving audiences for personal gain. 

View 30 minutes each from Surviving Columbus and "The Nations 
of the Northeast," in which Native Americans from the Southwest 
and Northeast tell stories of their ancestors and the coming of the 
Europeans. 

Viewing Activity 

While watching the films, keep a list of observable details (what peo- 
ple say and do, the music, and the setting) and a list of your interpre- 
tations of what those details might communicate about Pueblo 
culture or Northeastern tribal cultures. 

Read "Pocahontas Perplex: The Image of Indian Women in American 
Culture" by Rayna Green. 

Reading Activity 

Write answers to the following questions and be prepared to discuss 
them in workshop groups. 

1. What are Green's subject, opinion, and thesis? 

2. How does this fit in with the discussion of myth and world view? 

"Document 5 of Personal Relations: Captain John Smith" was pub- 
lished in The Indian and the White Man by Wilcomb E. Washburn as 
part of a series on Documents in American History. Two of John 
Smith's men, Walter Russell and Anas Todkill, wrote the following 
passage, which includes remarks of Wahunsonacoch (Powhatan) 
regarding John Smith. Russell and Todkill noted what the Indian 
leader had said regarding Smith and his company. 



30 



64 



: 



Roots and Branches 



Selection 11 



Selection 12: 
"America and 
Americans" by 
John Steinbeck 



I krtowe the difference of peace and warre better then any in my 
Countrie. But now I am old, and ere long must die . . . my two sisters, 
and their two daughters, are distinctly each others successours. I 
wish their experiences no lesse then mine, and your love to them, no 
lesse then MINE TO YOU . . . you are come to destroy my Countrie, 
so much affrighteth all my people, as they dare not visit you. What 
will it availe you to take that perforce, you may quietly have with 
love, or to destroy them that provide you food. . . . Think you I am so 
simple not to knowe it is better to eate good meate, lie well, and 
sleepe quietly with my women and children, laugh, and be merrie 
with you, have copper, hatchets, or what I want being your friend; 
then bee forced to flie from al, to lie cold in the woods, feed upon 
acorns roots and such trash, and be so hunted by you that I can nei- 
ther rest eat nor sleepe . . . and if a twig but breake, everie one crie, 
there comes Captaine Smith. (14-18) 

Postreading Activity 

Characterize Powhatan based on this speech. What do you learn 
about what he values, how he feels about John Smith's company? 
How does this compare with your previous views or the films you 
have seen? 

Read from The Invasion of America by Francis Jennings regarding the 
word savage and Smith's use of the word after the 1622 "massacre" of 
Jamestown. Jennings suggests Smith used such strongly racist language 
for two reasons: the language justified further attacks on the Indians, 
which would then facilitate the colony's physical and economic expan- 
sion in the "New World," and Smith may have been looking for a scape- 
goat for the deaths of at least 6,000 settlers due to starvation during the 
period 1607-1622, when only 347 had died at the hands of Indians. 

Reading Activity 

In pairs, write summaries of each paragraph in the reading and be 
prepared to share your summaries with the rest of the class. 

Originally appearing as text in a photo essay, this essay has since 
been published in the February 1998 Literary Cavalcade magazine pro- 
duced by Scholastic. In it, Steinbeck lists over fifty myths Americans 
believe about themselves and then he provides evidence that contra- 
dicts each myth. For example, we view ourselves as a nation of "do- 
it-yourselfers" but we don't know enough to look in the gas tank 
when our car quits running. "We say we value home, but the average 
American moves every five years." The essay demonstrates the com- 
plex nature of popular belief. Students can apply the following three- 
part strategy for understanding myths as preparation for the next 
research activity and closing activities. 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



65 



Closing Activities 



1. What is a truth in this myth? 

2. What are other truths behind this myth that might contradict the 
myth? 

3. What does this myth reveal about those who believe it? 

Research Activity 

Students are given a variety of resources in which they might 
uncover more truths about nine common myths of Indian peoples 
and settlers that Jennings discusses and refutes in The Invasion of 
America. Students should also have access to some of the historical 
and cultural resources listed in Chapter 4 of Roots and Branches , as 
well as information from the "Brief Summary of Federal Indian Pol- 
icy" and the descriptions and explanations of popular stereotypes in 
Appendices B and C. 

■ Myth: Indians were a savage and barbaric menace. 

■ Myth: The New World was uninhabited. 

■ Myth: Europe discovered this land. 

■ Myth: Europe came to settle (rather than exploit). 

■ Myth: Indians were inferior and uncivilized. 

■ Myth: Indians were nomadic. 

■ Myth: European colonists fought only defensive wars. 

■ Myth: The land was 'Tree" because the Indians did not own the 
land. 

■ Myth: Traits of the two cultures were incompatible. 

A. This assignment provides opportunities for students to practice 
research and documentation skills, higher-level thinking skills, and 
dramatic skills. Each of nine groups is given one myth from the pre- 
ceding list. 

1. You have been given a myth, which you will research and explain 
using the three-part strategy for explaining myths. 

Example: Myth: The New World was uninhabited. 

a. What is a truth in this myth? 

America was uninhabited by Europeans. 

b. What is another truth behind this myth that might contradict 
the myth? 

America was inhabited by an estimated 15 to 30 million 
indigenous people. 

c. What does this myth reveal about those who believe it? 

Belief indicates ethnocentricity, which denies the humanity of 
others from different cultures and races. 



[ 



I 

Roots and Branches 



2. As a group, you may use any of the materials we have read in this 
class to help you understand and explain this myth. 

3. You must use material from Jennings and at least two other 
resources. 

4. Write the correct MLA citation for each of your resources. 

5. Objective: In 5 minutes, present to the class your understanding of 
the myth, using creative drama, visual aids such as posters, music, 
illustrations, or an oral presentation. 

B. This assignment makes use of students' spatial abilities and 
appeals to visual learners. The assignment provides opportunities for 
cooperation between art and English classes and for the inclusion of 
art specialists. 

1. Select a myth and explore it to find all possible truths. Be sure to 
look for contradictory truths. 

2. Using newspapers, magazines, headlines, pictures, photographs, 
and drawings, create a group collage that communicates various 
aspects of your myth. 

3. Find a published poem that addresses the issues in your collage. 

4. Be prepared to present your collage, explaining what you have 
accomplished, and to read the poem. You may use music to 
accompany your presentation. 

In both of the above assignments, on tests, in journals, in class- 
room discussions, and in other activities, the students exhibited a 
markedly increased respect for Indian peoples and their history of 
suffering and survival despite European American encroachment. 
They demonstrated a growing awareness of the way bias affects 
meaning and an understanding of the importance of examining pri- 
mary sources to discover hidden or different truths. They learned to 
question information in even the most "sacred" classroom materials: 
history and literature textbooks. 



I 

Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



] 




OOOo ©°[5 Xgjp <§tf teMfetn)©© 

®oco] to ^juD©oftgcoifD 



Themes: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival; Between 
Two Worlds 

This lesson extends the study of Patrick Henry's speech to demon- 
strate the ways Native Americans also resisted oppression through 
rhetoric and action. Through reading and hearing the speeches of 
Tecumseh and Pushmataha, students develop a new respect for the 
Native Americans' politically effective and poetic use of language. 



Goals 



■ To develop an awareness of both Native and non-Native move- 
ments to resist oppression and domination by external forces 
between 1776 and 1820 

■ To develop an understanding of the similarities and differences 
between individuals and their rhetoric of resistance in America 
during the later eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries 

■ To develop an understanding of the impact of popular stereotypes 
on our perception of history 

■ To develop an appreciation for the way the speeches of these 
Native orators contradict the stereotypes of early Indian people as 
savage and uncivilized 

■ To practice applying a formal strategy for analyzing and evaluat- 
ing oral communication using occasion, audience, purpose, 
response, and a variety of rhetorical or literary devices 



Patrick Henry's "Speech to the Virginia Convention," 1776, in support of 

the revolution against Britain. Henry's speech appears in most Amer- 
ican Literature anthologies. 

Vanderwerth, W. C. 1989. Indian Oratory : Famous Speeches by Noted Indian 
Chieftains , Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Tecumseh's "Speech to Choctaws and Chickasaws," Spring 1811 
(61-68), a plea for the Choctaws and Chickasaws to join in a common 
effort with the British against the Americans. 

Pushmataha's "Speech to Choctaws and Chickasaws," Spring 1811 
(70-76), a response to Tecumseh's plea and for continued allegiance 
to America. (Although he supported Andrew Jackson, his people fell 
victim to Jackson's removal policy in the 1830s.) 

It is important to make a comment about translations and the 
possible influence on the texts of the transcribers and translators, 
even with Patrick Henry's speech, because none of these speeches are 
recorded today, word for word. 



] 



68 



Postreading 

Activity 



Closing Activities 



[ 

Roots and Branches 



After hearing and discussing each speech, create a grid and then 
compare the speeches. 





Patrick Henry 


Tecumseh 


Pushmataha 


Occasion 








Audience 








Purpose 








Response 








Rhetorical devices 









After this lesson, students admit their surprise at the language 
and persuasive skills of the Indian orators, finding strong similarities 
between the three speeches. 

1. Write a persuasive paper or deliver a speech that makes use of the 
elements of style and purpose you have observed in the three 
speeches. 

2. Imagine yourself in the audience of Henry or Tecumseh and Push- 
mataha. Tell your story and give your impression of the speech to 
your children and grandchildren who have survived the removal 
to Indian territory west of the Mississippi. 

3. Draw a map and time line, including population figures before 
and after, to trace the removal and relocation of one of the tribes. 



I — 

Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



69 



OM, (Ms 0(raGo®^Xy]cMift^ 



Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; 
Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 

This unit gives students the opportunity to read and study the cul- 
ture and history of a particular tribe, its literary traditions, and the 
contemporary writers who are rooted in that tradition. Students also 
learn that storytelling is fun and educational, and they appreciate the 
values and cultural characteristics the stories reveal. 



Goals 



■ To learn from the history and traditions of surrounding cultures 

■ To develop an awareness of the diversities and similarities in 
Native American cultures 

■ To explore the literary, historical, and geographical connections 
between past and present storytellers 

■ To experience listening and telling stories in situations that might 
resemble Native American traditions 



Prereading Activity 



Listen to a storyteller from a local tribal community. When a Blackfeet 
oral historian and storyteller visited our school, he spoke to several 
smaller groups throughout the school, and then he spoke to an adult 
class in the evening. Before he came, we discussed the respectful way 
the students should receive his oral presentation: Make no recordings 
or videos, take no notes, carry no books or pencils (which might dis- 
tract while listening), and do not interrupt with questions until he is 
finished speaking and asks for questions. The students who were pre- 
pared in this way demonstrated respect, whereas others who had not 
participated in the preparatory discussions turned to visiting with 
their peers during the presentation. 



Selections Listen to "The Coming of Stories" (Seneca), "Tunka-Shila, Grandfather 
Rock" (Lakota), and "Gluscabi and the Game Animals" (Abenaki), told 
by Joseph Bruchac in Keepers of the Earth: Native American Stories (audio 
cassettes. Fulcrum Pubhshing, 1992), after briefly examining the geo- 
graphical and historical background of the Seneca, Lakota, and Abenaki 
people. 

Discuss the tradition and purpose of storytelling in traditional 
Native communities such as these, the ways stories hold Native com- 
munities together, and the ways these same stories can apply to our 
lives today. 

Selections From available materials, each student selects at least three writers 
and texts from a particular culture. The following lists represent the 
students' selections from one class. 



70 



Roots and Branches 



Salish/Kootenai/Coeur d'Alene 

Hale, Janet Campbell. 1985. The Jailing of Cecelia Capture. Albuquerque: Uni- 
versity of New Mexico Press. 

. 1991. The Owl's Song. New York: Bantam Books. 

Selected poetry of Janet Campbell Hale. 

Lesley, Craig. 1989. River Song. New York: Dell. 

Walker, Deward E., Jr. 1980. Myths of Idaho Indians. Moscow: University of 
Idaho Press. 



Salish 

Earling, Debra. Selected stories and poems from Ploughshares , Talking Leaves , 
Dancing on the Rim of the World , and The Last Best Place. 

McNickle, D'Arcy. 1991. Runner in the Sun. Albuquerque: University of New 
Mexico Press. 

. 1992. The Hawk Is Hungry. Tucson: University of Arizona. 

Mourning Dove. 1990. Coyote Stories. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 

Blackfeet 

Bullchild, Percy. 1985. The Sun Came Down. San Francisco: Harper and Row. 

Welch, James. 1974. Winter in the Blood. Caledonia, VA: RR Donnelley. 

.1979. The Death of Jim Loney. New York: Penguin. 

Blackfeet /Blood 

Fraser, Frances. [1959] 1990. The Bear Who Stole the Chinook. Vancouver, BC: 
Douglas and McIntyre. 

Hungry Wolf, Beverly. 1982. The Ways of My Grandmothers. New York: Quill. 

Welch, James. 1986. Fools Crow. New York: Viking Penguin. 

Crow 

Lowie, Robert H. 1993. Myths and Traditions of the Crow Indians. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press. 

Feather Earring, Monica, Fred Tumsback, Philamine Old Coyote, and Lela 
M. Puffening. 1978. Prairie Legends. Billings: Montana Council for 
Indian Education. 

Medicine Crow, Joseph. 1992. From the Heart of the Crow Country: The Crow 
Indians' Own Stories. New York: Orion. 

Dakota 

Allen, Paula Gunn, ed. 1989. Spider Woman's Granddaughters. New York: 
Fawcett Columbine. 




87 



I 

Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



] 



71 



Deloria, Ella Cara. 1988. Waterlily. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 

Standing Bear, Luther. 1934. Stories of the Sioux. Lincoln: University of 

Nebraska Press. 

Zitkala-Sa. [1900] 1985. American Indian Stories. Lincoln: University of 

Nebraska Press. 

. [1901] 1985. Old Indian Legends. Lincoln: University of Nebraska 

Press. 

Reading Activities 

1. Keep a daily journal of reading, pages, dates, and titles of stories 
or chapters. 

2. Come to class with a question about the reading for class discus- 
sion. 

3. Keep a log of your own memories that the reading evokes. 

Postreading Activities 

1. Without notes, tell a traditional story you have read. 

2. Write a definition of the trickster/ transformer figure for the par- 
ticular culture you are reading, and use examples from the stories 
to support your definition. 

3. Read at least one novel or memoir that is based in the same cul- 
ture as the stories. 

4. Tell a 15-minute story from your own heritage, a story from your 
own experience, or an original story related to the readings. You 
may use music or props to help you tell the story. 

5. Illustrate your presentation with video, original drawing, pho- 
tographs, paintings, or posters. 

6. Prepare a 20- to 30-minute presentation to the class that communi- 
cates what you have learned about the storytellers you have read, 
the stories and central characters, the ways contemporary writers 
use old stories in the new stories, and the history and geographi- 
cal locations of the tribes or reservations. 




88 



72 



: 



— i 

Roots and Branches 



qddqRJs 03@@ oddcsJ §teo©®0^)© to 

OtsXoXiflO [Mco]0&^ ^DuQ©09©CoI70© 



Theme: Lifeways and Stereotypes 

The following unit has been used in workshops for teachers, both on 
and off reservations, but students in a critical thinking elective have 
also participated in the unit. Even the students who consider them- 
selves most conscious of the effects of prejudice and stereotyping are 
surprised by the pervasive generalizing that exists in literatures they 
commonly read or use in classrooms. 



Goals 



■ To increase awareness of the ways our own world views influence 
our understanding of others 

■ To increase awareness of the presence and effects of bias and 
stereotypes 

■ To respect the integrity of tribal cultures and peoples and to affirm 
the right of all people to define themselves in their own voices 

■ To respect the diversity of all tribal cultures and to promote cross- 
cultural understanding 



Possible Resources Caldwell- Wood, N., and L. Mitten. 1992. "I Is Not for Indian: The Portrayal 

of Native Americans in Books for Young People." Multicultural 
Review , 1.2 (April): 26-33. 

Hirschfelder, A. 1982. American Indian Stereotypes in the World of Children: A 
Reader and Bibliography. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press. 

McCann, D. 1993."Native Americans in Books for the Young." In Teaching 
Multicultural Literature in Grades K-8, ed. V. Harris. Norwood, MA: 
Christopher Gordon Publishers. 

McCluskey, Murton L. (Blackfeet). 1993. Evaluating American Indian Text- 
books and Other Materials for the Classroom. Helena: Montana Office of 
Public Instruction. 

Slapin, Beverly. 1990. Basic Skills Caucasian Americans Workbook. Berkeley, 
CA: Oyate. 

Slapin, Beverly, and Doris Seale (Santee /Cree). [1987] 1992. "How to Tell 

the Difference." In Through Indian Eyes: The Native Experience in Books 
for Children. Philadelphia, PA: New Society Publishers. 

Stedman, R. 1982. Shadows of the Indian: Stereotypes in American Culture. Nor- 
man: University of Oklahoma Press 

Stutzman, E. 1993. American Indian Stereotypes: The Truth Behind the Hype , An 
Indian Education Curriculum Unit. ERIC Document ED364396. 



1. What difference does it make who writes the stories as long as 
they tell the "truth"? 



Prereading 

Questions 



[ 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



73 



2. If you were assigned to write an autobiography (not a biography) 
about 1 month in the life of the person on your right, what kind of 
problems would you encounter? 

3. What might get in the way of your telling his or her story as your 
own, of your writing an accurate or truthful account of your 
neighbor's life? 

Introduce the unit by explaining that students will be examin- 
ing selections from literatures that were written by people trying to 
describe the lives of others. 

Selection 1 Read aloud from Basic Skills Caucasian Americans Workbook, "Note 
from Publisher" and "Caucasian American Clothing and Fashion." 
More may be read if time permits. 

Slapin's book is satire, based on an actual workbook about 
Native Americans. What if this text were the only way white children 
could learn about their ancestors and the only way people of color 
were to learn about white people? 

Question for Discussion 

What is a world view? Each of us has a way of viewing and interpret- 
ing the meaning of the world around us. Culturally and racially 
determined, our world view defines our relationship to the universe, 
and it defines — for us — the values of all things. Some possible world 
views are as follows: 

■ A view of humans as dependent on the harmonious and benevo- 
lent forces in the universe. 

■ A view of humans as the center of the universe, surrounded by a 
vast space in which we carry out our desires, build what we wish, 
control nature as we can, and tear it all down and start again. 

■ A view of humans as having a balanced relationship with every- 
thing in the universe. 

■ A belief that a loving God controls all that happens and that every- 
thing that happens works for good. 

■ A belief that no one can be trusted because all people generally 
have their own selfish interests in mind and cannot be trusted to 
care about others. 

■ A belief that there is nothing after this life, and so we need to get 
whatever we can out of each day because that is all there is. 

Activities 

1. Students write their own world views and then discuss the possi- 
ble impact of this world view on their lives as well as on the lives 
of those around them. 









] 



74 



Roots and Branches 



2. Native educators Debra Earling (Salish) and Tyler Medicine Horse 
(Crow/Sioux) have asked students to draw or write a definition 
of an Indian and keep the definition for later use. This is a useful 
activity because it forces people to confront their own biases and 
recognize the ways they participate in stereotyping others on the 
basis of race. 

Question for Discussion 

What is ethnocentrism? The perspective of viewing one's own cul- 
ture as central and superior to other cultures. Although this may 
positively manifest itself in a personal and communal pride, ethno- 
centrism often results in evaluation, judgment, and rejection of differ- 
ent cultures and races. 



Selection 2 Read from a tribal cultural world view such as the Pikurd way, 
included in Appendix D of Roots and Branches. Students learn about a 
world view that appears very different from those exhibited in the 
texts students will examine later. 

1. What is bias? Where I stand in relation to the rest of you, and what I 
see, hear, and smell represents my bias, point of view, an image fil- 
tered through a particular cultural experience, one side of a choice. 

2. Is it possible to be unbiased? Students begin to realize how diffi- 
cult it is for us to escape our own biases. They also admit that 
even history texts are biased. 

3. What is a stereotype? An exaggerated and negative generaliza- 
tion, another group's story about me, our own bias or world view, 
generally placed on another person or group or culture, a way of 
permanently locking people into a position. 

4. Can a stereotype be positive? 

5. Can a positive stereotype produce negative consequences? 

6. How does stereotyping limit individuals? Possible responses: We 
internalize it and believe it. We assume the stereotype represents 
the whole group. Indian children who believe the stereotype 
begin to doubt their own abilities. It limits our understanding of 
the diversity of other peoples. It victimizes those who are stereo- 
typed by limiting the possibility of their individual growth or 
experience. In the presence of pervasive stereotyping, Indian chil- 
dren begin to believe they have no voice, and educators in Native 
communities comment that in the presence of non-Indians, they 
remain silent or they demonstrate their anger by doing violence 
against themselves, each other, or the non-Indian community. 



Transitional 

Activity 



Students examine the sources of specific stereotypes about Indian 
peoples, using those explained in Appendix C of Roots and Branches, 
and discuss the books they have read that might exhibit some of 
these stereotypes. Examples: 



O 

tKJC 



91 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



Selection 3 
Selections 



ERIC 



] 



75 



Brother Eagle , Sister Sky by Susan Jeffers 

Peter Pan ("What Makes the Red Man Red?") by J. M. Barrie 

Little House on the Prairie series by Laura Ingalls Wilder 

The Indian in the Cupboard series by Lynne Reid Banks 

John Smith and Pocahontas by John Smith 

Double Life of Pocahontas by Jean Fritz 

The Education of Little Tree by Forrest Carter 

Annie and the Old One by Miska Miles 

Knots on a Counting Rope by Bill Martin, Jr. and John Archambault 

The Sign of the Beaver by Elizabeth George Speare 

When the Legends Die by Hal Borland 

The Light in the Forest by Conrad Richter 

Only Earth and Sky Last Forever by Nathaniel Benchley 

George Catlin readings from The Last Best Place 

Names of sports teams 

All Indians represented as Plains Indians 

1995 Disney film Pocahontas 

Complete publication information for most of these examples 
appears in Chapter 7 of this book. 

Slapin and Seale's "How to Tell the Difference" in Through Indian 
Eyes: The Native Experience in Books for Children includes examples and 
25 criteria for evaluating books for racial bias and stereotype. 

On an overhead, show excerpts from popular literatures, using 
Slapin and Seale's criteria for locating possible stereotypes. 

Brother Eagle , Sister Sky by Susan Jeffers (New York: Dial, 1991), cover and 
last page. 

"Journals of Exploration" by George Catlin in Last Best Place, eds. William 

Kittredge and Annick Smith (Helena: The Montana Historical Society 
Press), pp. 181-82. 

Return of the Indian in the Cupboard by Lynne Reid Banks (New York: Dou- 
bleday, 1986), pp. 34-35 and 158-59. 

The Education of Little Tree by Forrest Carter (Albuquerque: University of 
New Mexico Press, 1991), pp. 2-3. 

Assignment 

To pairs of students, distribute a marking pen and two overheads 
with printed pages from the following books. It is important to use 
primary-level materials because the need to generalize for younger 



92 



76 



Closing Activities 



o 

ERIC 



I , > J 

Roots and Branches 



children often creates very strong stereotypes that are easier to recog- 
nize. Using the overhead, students identify and share the evidence of 
stereotypes and non-Native biases with the rest of the class. 

The Light in the Forest by Conrad Richter (New York: Knopf, 1953), Acknowl- 
edgments. 

Little Flouse on the Prairie by Laura Ingalls Wilder (New York: Harper & 

Row, 1971), pp. 136-137. 

The Double Life of Pocahontas by Jean Fritz (New York: Putnam, 1983), 
pp. 12-13. 

Soun Tetoken: Nez Perce Boy by Ken Thomasma (Jackson, WY: Grandview, 
1984), pp. 26-27 and 106-107. 

Sitting Bull by Jane Fleischer (Mahwah, NJ: Troll Associates), pp. 30-31. 

Anpao: An American Odyssey by Jamake High water (Philadelphia: Lippin- 
cott, 1977), p. 20. 

When the Legends Die by Hal Borland (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1963), p. 25. 

Only Earth and Sky Last Forever by Ken Benchley (New York: Harper Trophy, 
1972), pp. 108-109. 

}ulie of the Wolves by Jean Craighead George (New York: Harper & Row, 
1972), pp. 8-9. 

The Indian in the Cupboard by Lynne Reid Banks (New York: Avon, 1980), pp. 
20 - 21 . 

Alligators All Around by Maurice Sendak (New York: Harper & Row, 1962), 
letter "L" 

Little Chief by Syd Hoff (New York: Harper & Bros., 1961), pp. 60-62. 

Sanapia, Comanche Medicine Woman by David E. Jones (Prospect Heights, IL: 
Waveland Press, 1972), pp. 18-19. 

Closure 

Read aloud from the following poems and definitions from the end of 
Chapter 2 of Roots and Branches , which address the issues of cultural 
and personal identity, bias and stereotype, and their effect on both 
Indian and non-Indian individuals and communities. 

"Introduction to Native American Literature" by Sherman Alexie 

Definition of Tribal Literature from "Sending a Voice" by Kenneth 
Lincoln 

"Sure You Can Ask Me a Personal Question" by Diane Bums 

1. Compare your present attitudes about Native American peoples, 
or about being Native American, with those of your peers or with 
the attitudes you had before beginning this unit. 

2. Tell your own story about the pain of prejudice and stereotyping. 



03 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



] 



77 



Other Activities 



1. Examine possible reasons for the perpetuation of stereotype and 
bias (we think it is true if it is in print, we need to generalize 
because of limited information, we need to simplify for younger 
learners, we fear losing our central or "superior" position, we 
need to control our environment, or we need to make someone 
else responsible for our problems). 

2. Look at truths behind bias, stereotype, and myth: the historical 
source of the stereotype, the different truths that contradict the 
stereotype, what the stereotype tells us about those who believe it 
and what they think is important, and the power individuals 
achieve when they stereotype. 

3. Ask students to identify times they have been stereotyped or have 
been the object of name-calling because of their membership in a 
targeted group. How did it feel? What happens to people when 
they are stereotyped? 

4. Talk about the importance of respecting the right of all people to 
tell their own stories about who they are. 

5. Learn about tribal cultures and the way they influenced individ- 
ual behaviors such as gift-giving and hospitality toward others, 
especially strangers. 

6. Examine evidence of frontier settlers' attitudes toward Indians 
and discuss the Indians' attitudes toward settlers and the U.S. 
government, which broke the treaties. 

7. For older students: Create a scenario in which students experience 
discrimination and judgment based on external characteristics 
alone (style of shoes, color of eyes, hair length). 



78 



Goals 



Resources 



Roots and Branches 



ML §©@00 [M§)0i^^ A ftnfl® OOcyiJiM 

00aj@Q^ Otro^ gpttgl OOOgtew 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles 

This lesson has been used in an adult Native American literature class, 
in a Western literature class for seniors, and in workshops for teach- 
ers, where they begin to recognize the presence of multiple meanings 
in a literary text. The lesson also uses several aspects of intelligence: 
linguistic, spatial, interpersonal, intrapersonal, and kinesthetic. 

■ To develop a respect for the integrity of the present and historical 
lives of Native American peoples represented by this literature 

■ To become acquainted with the Kiowa literary and cultural tradi- 
tion through video, prose writing, poetry, and personal artistic 
expression 

■ To explore the multiple and very individual meanings in selected 
chapters of Rainy Mountain 

■ To experience the way N. Scott Momaday's writing demonstrates 
the integration of the past, present, and future, the landscape, and 
history and imagination to create a concrete human reality 

■ To develop the skills of listening, critical thinking, and oral and 
graphic expression 

■ To demonstrate positive attitudes toward oneself, people of other 
cultures, and environment 

Lee, Francis, and James Bruchac, eds. 1996. Reclaiming the Vision, Past, Pre- 
sent, and Future: Native Voices for the Eighth Generation. Greenfield 
Center, NY: Greenfield Review Press. 

McNickle, D'Arcy (Salish). 1973. Native American Tribalism: Indian Survivals 
and Renewals. London: Oxford University Press. 

Momaday, N. Scott. [1969] 1996. The Way to Rainy Mountain. Tucson: Univer- 
sity of Arizona Press. 

Momaday, N. Scott. 1983. "The Delight Song of Tsoai-talee." In Songs from 
this Earth on Turtle's Back, ed. Joseph Bruchac, 157-162. New York: 
Greenfield Review Press. 

N. Scott Momaday, Storyteller. 1989. Native American Audio Library. 

Santa Fe, NM: Sunset Productions. 

"N. Scott Momaday." 1994. In Native North American Literature, ed. Janet 
Witalec, 432^148. Detroit, MI: Gale Research. 

"The People of the Great Plains (Part One)." 1994. The Native Americans 
Series. Atlanta, GA: TBS Productions. Videocassette. 



[ 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



Winner of the Pulitzer prize for his novel House Made of Dawn, 
published in 1968, N. Scott Momaday is an essayist, poet, storyteller, 
lecturer, and novelist with a strong interest in the graphic arts. In the 
1960s, he retraced the ancient Kiowa migration from the Rockies in 
Montana through the Black Hills and across the Plains. After the 
death of his grandmother in 1965, he made the journey to her home 
and to Rainy Mountain. This is the story that introduces The Way to 
Rainy Mountain, a novel that spans 300 years of Kiowa history and 
features Kiowa tradition and myth as the focus, the central place 
from which all other stories grow. 

In each of the 24 two-page chapters, the storyteller shares three 
stories — a traditional story, a historical story, and a contemporary 
experience — that are connected to each other as well as to the preced- 
ing and following chapters. But unlike the more predictable, abstract 
thematic connections European Americans may make, within the 
chapters in Rainy Mountain, the stories merge and diverge on con- 
crete images such as fire, antelope, buffalo, arrows, horses, and 
words. 

The following lesson places readers in communities of nine 
people. Each is responsible for keeping a part of the story; at the same 
time he or she must share it orally with the group in order to solve a 
problem. 



Prereading 

Activities 



1. Show selected excerpts from "The People of the Great Plains (Part 
One)/' in which contemporary Native voices define the Plains 
Indian people and their relationship to the land, using pho- 
tographs of tribal heroes from a variety of Plains tribes. 

2. Establish the personal and communal landscape of The Way to 
Rainy Mountain: 

a. First paragraph from "Introduction" 

b. Biographical sketch of N. Scott Momaday 

c. The estimated placement of Kiowas at the time of contact 
using D'Arcy McNickle's maps from Native American Tribalism: 
Indian Survivals and Renewals . 



Reading Activity 



Divide students into groups of nine and arrange them in circles. Dis- 
tribute the nine paragraphs to each group, a different one to each stu- 
dent, with all groups having the same nine paragraphs from the first 
three chapters of Rainy Mountain. Each group is to establish a logical 
order for the readings by arranging paragraphs into three chapters, 
with three paragraphs in each chapter, and establish a rationale for 
its choices. Each student owns the paragraph he or she has received 
and may not pass it to another to read. While reading paragraphs 
aloud, students may want to rearrange the way the group is sitting 
or standing. 



80 



Roots and Branches 



This problem-solving exercise provides the opportunity for 
participants to read aloud and to listen to each other, to explore the 
different possibilities for experiencing and understanding Moma- 
day's story, and to demonstrate the ways our own particular views 
make other possibilities difficult to conceive. Taking about an hour, 
groups respond to this activity in a variety of ways. Because they are 
not used to listening carefully and would rather read, they grow frus- 
trated when they must depend on hearing the story read aloud sev- 
eral times. Sometimes a strong leader will emerge and convince the 
other eight members to relinquish their stories, taking the separate 
paragraphs to his or her desk to arrange them. It also takes awhile for 
students to decide to get up and move to another spot in the circle. 
The most successful groups are those with Native people who are not 
looking for sequential order and who understand the circular struc- 
ture that moves from myth into history into the personal and present, 
and then returns to myth, which begins each chapter. Also, the most 
successful groups stand up and read over and over, around the circle 
each time, so the entire story becomes a part of each participant. 

1. Students from each group share, with the entire class, the order 
and rationales for their stories, and the entire class may react to 
the experience. 

2. Show "The People of the Great Plains (Part One)," about the "era 
of history called Dog Days," and about the way "everything was 
possessed of personality in differing forms." 

3. Look at one chapter and answer the following questions: 

a. What is a significant image in each of the three readings? 

b. What genre of literature might each of the three sections repre- 
sent? 

c. In what ways are the three readings connected in each chapter? 

d. What conclusions might be drawn about Momaday's writing 
style, the world view portrayed in this writing, the relationship 
between the spiritual and material, and the relationship 
between the historical and the imaginary? 

1. While listening to a recording of N. Scott Momaday reading his 
poem "The Delight Song of Tsoai-talee," one student may draw 
on butcher paper or on the white board with colored markers 
while others watch, or all students may draw at their desks and 
then share with the group what they drew. 

2. Each student selects a concrete object from his or her own land- 
scape and writes a poem, telling the story and describing his or 
her personal connections with that object. 



Postreading 

Activities 



Closing Activities 



o 

tKJC 



97 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



Goals 



Resources 



81 






Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; 
Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 

This unit has been used in an elective Western literature course and in 
an evening Native American literature class. The students had previ- 
ously experienced traditional Blackfeet stories from the collections of 
Percy Bullchild and Francis Fraser, and some had listened to a tradi- 
tional Blackfeet storyteller. Although this novel is being used in 
American literature classes across the country. Fools Crow is an impor- 
tant text for Montana students. For example, our school is situated 
near the place where Fools Crow traveled towards his vision, near 
Fort Shaw where the soldiers who attacked Heavy Runner's camp 
were stationed, and about one hundred miles south of the sight of the 
Massacre on the Marias, the climax of the novel and a significant and 
tragic event in the history of Montana's Blackfeet people. 

■ To become aware, through the reading of Fools Crow, of the impact 
of Western settlement on the Blackfeet people and of the ways the 
Blackfeet survived culturally and personally 

a To become acquainted with the Blackfeet literary, cultural, and his- 
torical tradition and experience by listening to the author discuss 
his work and through research and personal interviews 

■ To experience the genre of historical fiction and Welch's style of 
writing 

■ To experience the way James Welch's writing demonstrates the 
integration of dream and concrete reality, the incorporation of tra- 
ditional story, traditional vocabulary, and the trickster/ transformer 
figure in a contemporary text 

Authentic Music of the American Indian. Compact Disc Digital Audio. CD 312. 
Legacy International, Box 6999, Beverly Hills, CA 90212. 

Bennett, Ben. 1982. Death, Too, for The-Heavy-Runner. Missoula, MT: Moun- 
tain Press. Currently out of print, but available in libraries. 

Ewers, John C. 1958. The Blackfeet: Raiders on the Northwestern Plains. Nor- 
man: University of Oklahoma Press 

"Fools Crow by James Welch." 1994. Week Six, Audio Cassette. Big Sky Radio, 
hosted by Lowell Jaeger and Paul Zalis. 247 First Avenue East, 
Kalispell, MT 59901 (406-758-5713). 

"James Welch." 1994. In Native North American Literature, edited by Janet 

Witalec, 659-68. Detroit, MI: Gale Research. Pages 664-65 are from a 
telephone interview with Welch conducted by Kenn Robbins and 
students in a creative writing class at the University of South Dakota, 
1989. The interview was first printed in 1990 in The South Dakota 
Review, 28.1 (Spring): 103-10. 



[ 



82 



I 

Roots and Branches 



Long Standing Bear Chief, a.k.a. Harold Gray (Blackfoot). 1992. Ni-Kso-Ko- 
Wa: Blackfoot Spirituality , Traditions , Values and Beliefs. Browning, MT: 
Spirit Talk Press. 

Montana Indians: Their History and Location. 1995. Helena: Montana Office of 
Public Instruction. 

Schultz, James Willard. 1962. Blackfeet and Buffalo: Memories of Life Among the 
Indians. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Welch, James. 1986. Fools Crow. New York: Viking Penguin. 

Welch, James, with Paul Stekler. 1994. Killing Custer: The Battle of the Little 
Bighorn and the Fate of the Indians , 25-47. New York: W.W. Norton. 



Background: Name 

The Blackfeet The name Blackfeet is controversial. Harold Gray, in Ni-Kso-Ko-Wa: 
Reservation Blackfoot Spirituality , Traditions , Values and Beliefs , says the proper 
name is Siksika ( Blackfoot in English), but they are actually the Pikuni. 
The Blackfoot are the people who are located in Alberta, as are the 
Bloods. Blackfeet refers to the color of moccasins, darkened by prairie- 
fire ashes. Actually, the federal government insisted that the tribe 
should be called Blackfeet in 1935 because non-Indian people were 
commonly referring to them as Blackfeet and because "there are more 
than one of you." 

Location 

North: bound by United States-Canada border 
South: 52 miles south to Birch Creek 

East: an imaginary line starting near the junction of Cut Bank Creek 
and the Marias River and extending north 

West: foothills of the Rockies 

Browning, Montana, has been the headquarters of Blackfeet Indian 
Agency since 1894 

Land Status 

716,865 individually allotted acres 
272,464 tribally owned lands 
536,247 fee title or state lands 
136 acres of government land 

1,525,712 total acres (35 percent owned by non-Indians) 

Population 

7,179 Indians living on or near Blackfeet Reservation 
6,094 Indians living off reservation 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



13,273 enrolled tribal members 

2,500 non-Indians on reservation 

Historical Background 

■ Ancestors of Algonquian linguistic orientation: Blackfeet (Siksika), 
Kainah or Bloods, and Piegans. 

■ Located until 1730 in the present Saskatchewan. 

b Moved southward to follow the buffalo and other game, traveling 
in bands of 20-30 people, with a chief who decided the band's 
movement and settled disputes. 

a Occupied lands from the Continental Divide, to the 

Montana-Dakota borders, to the Yellowstone River, and to 
Edmonton, Alberta Canada. 

■ Before 1800, they had little contact with other tribes or European 
Americans. 

■ Traded for tools, utensils, and weapons with Cree and Assiniboine 
and the Hudson's Bay Company. 

■ Probably obtained horses from the Shoshone. 

■ Dominated the area until 1800 with horses and guns, establishing 
a reputation as warriors and demanding the respect of other tribes 
and settlers. 

a 1851: The Fort Laramie Treaty established an area for Blackfeet 
without their representation. 

■ 1855: Designed to stop warfare, the government treaty with the 
Blackfeet, called "Lame Bull's Treaty," provided for use of the orig- 
inal reservation as a common hunting territory. 

■ 1865, 1868: Although treaties negotiated for lands south of Mis- 
souri were not ratified by Congress, non-Indian homesteaders 
came anyway. 

■ January 23, 1870: Baker Massacre resulted in the deaths of 173 
Piegans, primarily women and children of Heavy Runner's band, 
who were ill with smallpox. 

■ 1873, 1874: By presidential order and congressional act, the south- 
ern boundary was moved 200 miles north, taking away the land 
between the Marias River and the Sun River. Land to the south 
was opened to settlement. Remaining Blackfeet were forced to 
accept reservation living and a dependence on rationing for sur- 
vival. 

■ Winter 1883-84: 600 Blackfeet starved to death because of the 
scarcity of buffalo and insufficient U.S. government provisions; 
other sources indicate the date was winter of 1882. 




100 



84 



Roots and Branches 



■ 1888: White Calf and Three Sons ceded additional lands to the U.S. 
government for survival needs. In return, the Blackfeet got tools, 
equipment and cattle for farming and ranching. 

■ 1888: Sweetgrass Hills Treaty established separate boundaries for 
the Blackfeet, Fort Belknap, and Fort Peck Reservations. 

■ 1895: A treaty was initiated by the U.S. government to secure min- 
erals and land from the area that is now Glacier National Park. 
George Bird Grinnell, considered a friend of the Blackfeet, was 
part of this commission. In 1910, when minerals were not found, 
the area became part of Glacier National Park from the Continental 
Divide to the reservation. 

■ 1895: Dawes Act: tribal people were selling allotted lands just to 
survive until 1907, when Woodrow Wilson returned all surplus 
lands to the tribe. 

■ By the 1920s, two-thirds of Blackfeet people were directly depen- 
dent on the federal government. 

■ 1935: Blackfeet Indian Tribe organization under the Indian Reorga- 
nization Act: 

Established the tribe as a political entity. 

Established the tribe as a business corporation in which all tribal 
members share. 

Established the nine-member tribal council. 

Membership consists of people "of Indian blood whose names 
appear on the official census rolls of the tribe as of January 1, 

1935 . . . and all children bom to any blood members." The consti- 
tution requires one-fourth or more Blackfeet blood quantum for 
membership in tribe. 

■ 1921: Discovery of oil provided some economic hope. 

■ 1964: A flood ripped down Two Medicine River, killing 30 Black- 
feet and leaving hundreds homeless. 



Prereading Activity 



Because contemporary Indian writers often incorporate the trickster 
and his or her wide range of behaviors in poetry, stories, and novels, 
it is important to preface the reading of a novel such as Fools Crow 
with a discussion of the trickster/ transformer figure, using the mate- 
rial from Chapter 2 in Roots and Branches. 



Reading Activities 
and Assignments 



1. Come to class every day with a question regarding an idea, a liter- 
ary motif, symbol, or character that you think the other students 
should think about. 

2. Keep a reading log that includes your responses to each of the 
questions or activities listed under each day's reading assignment. 



0 

ERIC 



101 



[ 



] 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



85 



Chapters 1-4 

Begin a list of Blackfeet values communicated through this literature. 
What are the setting, situation, point of view of the narrator? Know 
the Blackfeet names for animals and their English equivalents. Using 
physical characteristics of three animals that are not part of Welch's 
landscape, create new names. Research the names for animals in the 
Blackfeet language. Look for evidences of the trickster/ transformer 
figure in the narration, characters, and events. 

Chapters 5-6 

Be able to explain a vow and its value to the Blackfeet. Begin a list of 
White Man's Dog's characteristics. 

Chapters 7-8 

Identify and be able to explain an external conflict. 

Chapter 9 

Find a line that sounds wise to you. Write it down and describe what 
it means to you. 

Chapter 10 

How might the Blackfeet define a man? How might they define a 
woman? Research the ceremony of the Sun Dance or interview a per- 
son from a tribal community. 

Chapter 11 

Why did the Blackfeet war against the Crows? Using the history of 
federal Indian policy in Appendix B of Roots and Branches, select an 
event or time period to research. 

Chapters 12-14 

Research the historical Owl Child and Malcolm Clark. What was the 
relationship between the two men? What is the significance of the 
conversation between Raven and Fools Crow? Compare Raven's per- 
suasive arguments with the arguments of Shakespeare's Macbeth, in 
his speech to the murderers. 

Chapters 15 and 16 

Find two descriptive passages that are examples of poetic prose, not- 
ing similes, metaphors, or other examples of imagery. Explain a sen- 
tence or short passage that demonstrates strong patterns of sound. 




102 



] 



86 



Roots and Branches 



Explain the literary devices used and be prepared to discuss their 
effect on the meaning of the passage. 

Chapters 17 and 18 

What is the attitude of the Blackfeet attitude toward the Napikwans 
now? How and why has it changed from the beginning of the novel? 

Chapters 19 and 20 

Describe one character's internal conflict and resolution. 

Chapters 21-24 

What statement is the novel making about justice? What does Kipp 
mean when he thinks, "these people have not changed, but the world 
they live in has" (252)? List the names of the different chiefs and their 
philosophical positions on the conflict with the Napikwans. Write a 
"You are there" dialogue in which you take an active role in the coun- 
cil meeting. What will you advise? Justify your arguments in your 
dialogue. 

Chapters 25-32 

Where does Fools Crow journey? What is the symbolism of the 
turnips? What is honor to the Blackfeet? Where is the hope in this 
chapter? 

Chapters 33-36 

Listen to the Big Sky Radio tape of James Welch discussing Fools 
Crow. Research historical names and places from Fools Crow, such as 
Joe Kipp, General Alfred Sully, Marshal Wheeler, Heavy Runner, 
Colonel Eugene M. Baker, and White Man's Dog, and present results 
to the class. 



Closing Activities 



1. Write a case study of Fast Horse. 

2. Write a description of the landscape where the Massacre on the 
Marias occurred. 

3. Discussion questions: List events within the major conflict in the 
novel. Where was the turning point in that conflict? What was the 
resolution in the novel? Is this romantic fiction or realism? Is it 
romantic primitivism? How would you describe Welch's style? 
Identify a theme from this novel and describe how that theme is 
revealed. 

4. Draw a scene, character, or collage of symbols from the novel and 
be prepared to explain your drawing to the class. 




103 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



87 



5. Students write questions from three levels of thinking (recall, 
interpretive, evaluative), which their classmates will answer. Once 
the questions are written, the class can discuss the questions, help- 
ing to revise so the questions represent the three levels of think- 
ing. Then each student draws three questions, one from each 
level. The students who have written the questions read and eval- 
uate the responses for those questions. The following questions 
are examples from one class of eight students. As students read 
the responses to their questions, they discover the possibilities for 
different interpretations of both the novel and their questions. 
They also realize that some questions either rely on stereotypes or 
generate questions about stereotypes, and sometimes these ques- 
tions elicit responses that also rely on stereotypes. 

Recall 

a. Describe the role of Medicine Woman. What does she do? 

b. Name three important animals from Fools Crow. For each ani- 
mal, describe a situation from the novel that involves the 
animal. 

c. How did White Man's Dog become a man? 

d. How did White Man's Dog receive the name Fools Crow? 

e. Describe the situation in which Yellow Kidney lost his fingers. 

f. What does Fools Crow learn from Feather Woman? 

g. Describe the course of Fools Crow's journey following his 
dream. 

h. Describe in detail what happened at the Baker Massacre 
toward the end of the book. 

Interpretive 

a. Several characters in Fools Crow undergo physical and spiritual 
changes that transform how they see themselves and interpret 
their surroundings. Select one character and cite two situations 
from the text to explain these changes. 

b. Why did Yellow Kidney have to die after he had finally found 
peace with himself and had left the Lone Eaters? 

c. What was the function and value of Mik-api to the Lone Eaters? 

d. Why do you think Fast Horse decided to leave the Lone Eaters 
for good? 

e. Using Running Fisher's reaction to the eclipse, what does the 
novel reveal about the belief system of the Blackfeet? 

f. In Fools Crow, why do men and women receive different pre- 
sents at their wedding? Cite examples from the wedding of 
Fools Crow and Red Paint. 

g. Explain the effect of James Welch's use of limited third person 
in Fools Crow. 




f , 



104 



[ 



88 



Roots and Branches 



h. What was the reason for Rides-at-the Door's opinion regarding 
the whites before the conference of chiefs? Was he alone in his 
position? Why or why not? 

Evaluative 

a. Select a novel from another culture. Compare four cultural val- 
ues Welch communicates in Fools Crow with values in the other 
novel. Are the Blackfeet values exhibited in this novel relevant 
for today? Explain. 

b. What was the significance of Fools Crow's visions in the yel- 
low skin of Feather Woman? 

c. How do the Pikunis handle situations presented by the seizers 
in regard to the destruction of their land and culture? Cite one 
situation and explain. How do you think your father would 
react if someone more powerful than he were threatening his 
family's way of life? Which method of handling the situation is 
more appropriate? 

d. Compare the Indian woman's role in Fools Crow to that of a 
stereotypical white woman today. Who has more power? 

Why? 

e. Identify two different Indian leaders and their approaches to 
the invasion of the white man. Which approach was better? 
Give reasons for your answer based on the novel and your 
understanding of human nature. 

f. Compare the influence of dreams in the Blackfeet society at the 
time of the novel and in your world today. 

g. Did Fast Horse actually dream about Cold Maker, or did he 
invent it for attention? Explain your answer. 

6. Conduct a trial of Lieutenant Colonel Eugene Baker for the mas- 
sacre on the Marias River, January 23, 1870. 

7. Write a ballad telling the story of Fools Crow. 

8. Draw a map and plot the places and events that occur in the 
novel. 

9. Tell a story that one of your grandparents has told about a critical 
moment in your family's history. 

10. Draw a map showing the reduction in Blackfeet territory from 
1850 to the present. 

11. Research a personal story of a settler in Blackfeet territory during 
the time period of Fools Crow. 



ER AC 




Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



89 



^DOOo (Ms MM(£>^ D 8 ife) 



Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 

Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 

Scholars believe that Zitkala-Sa (Gertrude Simmons Bonnin) was one 
of the first Native writers to publish without the gloss of non-Native 
editors. The developed background that this unit requires demon- 
strates the complexity of culture, history, language, and biography 
that informs most contemporary Native American literatures today, 
especially those in which the authors are bilingual, speaking their 
Native language and English. Members of an adult Native American 
literature course, as well as twelfth-grade students enrolled in a West- 
ern literature elective, have participated in this unit. 



Goals 



Resources 



■ To understand the influence of the author's cultural and personal 
background on the rhetoric in Zitkala-Sa's three autobiographical 
essays 

■ To develop an appreciation for the importance of landscape in 
Native American lives 

■ To become aware of the impact of Indian boarding schools and 
Western settlement on Native American people and the ways one 
person survived 

■ To become familiar with the Dakota literary, cultural, and histori- 
cal tradition and experience 

■ To experience the genre of autobiographical essay and Zitkala-Sa's 
style 

■ To reinforce previous knowledge about irony, tone, and the differ- 
ent narrative and editorial voices that may exist in 
autobiographical essays 

Fisher, Dexter. 1985. "Zitkala-Sa: The Evolution of a Writer." In American 
Indian Stories, by Zitkala-Sa. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 

"Gertrude Bonnin (Zitkala-Sa)." 1994. In Native North American Literature, 
ed. Janet Witalec, 169-176. New York: Gale Publishing. 

Hoover, Herbert T. 1988. Indians of North America: The Yankton Sioux. New 
York: Chelsea House. 

"The People of the Great Plains (Parts One and Two)" and "The People of 
the Northwest." 1994. The Native Americans Series. Atlanta, GA: TBS 
Productions. Videocassette. 

Picotte, Agnes. 1985. Foreword to Old Indian Legends, by Zitkala-Sa. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press. 

The Reservations. 1995. The American Indian Series. New York: Time-Life 
Books. 




108 



90 



Roots and Branches 



Susag, Dorothea. 1993. "Zitkala-Sa (Gertrude Simmons Bonnin): A Power(full) 

Literary Voice." Studies in American Indian Literatures, Winter: 3-24. 

Walker, James R. 1983. Lakota Myth. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 

Zitkala-Sa. [1900] 1985. American Indian Stories. Lincoln: University of 

Nebraska Press. 

Zitkala-Sa. [1901] 1985. Old Indian Legends. Lincoln: University of Nebraska 

Press. 

Background The Lakota System of Bands and Alliances: 

Zitkala-Sa's Linguistic and Cultural Heritage 

Gertrude Simmons was bom in 1876 on the Yankton Indian Reserva- 
tion in what was then Dakota Territory. Throughout her life, she 
claimed to be "a Dakota woman" and refused definition as a "mixed- 
blood" (Welch 1985, p. 61). Although biographers and critics of Zitkala- 
Sa indicate this specific tribal connection, the question remains: Just 
what is a Dakota or a Lakota or a Sioux? For practical purposes, the 
entire nation has been and still is called Sioux by many writers, histori- 
ans, and ethnologists. Although Elizabeth Grobsmith does not offer a 
date, the Chippewas called the whole people Lesser Adders (snake) or 
Nadoweisiw-eg in order to distinguish them from a more feared enemy, 
the Iroquois, the True Adders. Unable to pronounce the Chippewa 
word, the French shortened it to Sioux, the name by which this Plains 
people has been known for over two centuries (Grobsmith 1981, p. 11). 
Yet the name Lakota has also represented the larger nation as a whole, 
as well as a particular alliance and dialect. This double meaning of 
Lakota contributes to the confusion over the appropriate name for these 
people. 

Within this greater Sioux or Lakota nation are three related 
dialects: Lakota, "a dialect of the 'Dakota Sioux' language within the 
Siouan linguistic family"; Nakota, spoken by the northern or Yankton 
Sioux; and Dakota, "the language of eastern or Santee Sioux." These 
dialects of the Sioux represent three major alliances as well, but "all 
the Sioux tribes constituted a political unit called the Oceti Sakowin or 
'Seven Council Fires'" (Grobsmith 1981, pp. 5-6), which traditionally 
met every summer for the Sun Dance Ceremony. 

The largest division, the Tetons or Tetonwan (Prairie Dwellers), 
was located west from the Missouri River. Seven bands within this 
Teton division all spoke the Lakota dialect: Oglala (now living on the 
Pine Ridge Reservation), Sicangu or Brule (living on the Rosebud, 
Lower Brule, and Crow Creek Reservations), Hunkpapa, Mnikowoju, 
Sihasapa, Oohnunpa, and Itazipco. (These last four are living on the 
Rosebud, Lower Brule, and Crow Creek, Cheyenne River, and Stand- 
ing Rock Reservations.) Four divisions of the Seven Council Fires, 
speaking the Dakota dialect, were included in the Dakota Alliance: the 



O 

ERIC 



107 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



=i 

91 



Wahpeton, Mdewakanton, Wahpekute, and Sisseton. The two other 
divisions of the Seven Council Fires, the Yankton (End Dwellers 
because of their location at the end of the camp circle) and Yanktonais 
(Little End Dwellers), both formed the Nakota Alliance and spoke the 
Nakota dialect (Powers 1990, p. 23). Although several sources agree 
that the Yankton people spoke the Nakota dialect, Raymond 
DeMaille, in his introduction to Sioux Indian Religion, questions it for 
two important reasons: There is "no historical evidence that these peo- 
ple ever used an initial n in their name" and "throughout recorded 
history, they have called themselves Dakotah" (DeMallie and Parks 
1987, p. 7). Other evidence also supports DeMaille's conclusion. They 
are called Dakotas in the Yankton Reservation Agency reports, and 
Zitkala-Sa called herself Dakota. Speakers of each dialect could under- 
stand speakers from other dialects, yet the complex traditional organi- 
zation of these tribes demonstrates their heterogeneous nature. 

The Yankton Band/Dakota dialect represents a part of the his- 
torical, cultural, and linguistic heritage of Zitkala-Sa. Perhaps she 
was familiar with more than one dialect. Both Dakota and Nakota 
words appear in her essays and stories ( Iktomi , a Dakota word, and 
Wiyaka-Napbina, a Nakota word). Despite government efforts to 
eradicate the languages of indigenous people across the continent, 
Zitkala-Sa helped to maintain the cultural integrity of her Native 
heritage. 

The Yankton Reservation: 1858-1902 

Another aspect of Zitkala-Sa's heritage that informs her writing of 
American Indian Stories was the movement west and the resulting ter- 
ritorial and physical losses for her Yankton people. Before 1800, her 
ancestors had traveled across half the continent, following the migra- 
tion of buffalo from the upper Mississippi River valley to the Black 
Hills. In the early 1800s, because of their location near the Missouri 
River, many forts and trading posts were established on their land. 
According to Edwin Thompson Denig, this contact resulted in the 
loss of "a great many, by diseases caught along" this California route 
(Denig 1961, p. 38). 

The Treaty of Prairie du Chien, 1830, ceded 2.2 million acres to 
the U.S. government. In 1850 the Yankton band still claimed 13.5 mil- 
lion acres from the upper Des Moines to the upper Missouri River 
valleys. But when more traders and settlers migrated to this area and 
"squatted," pressuring the U.S. government to move the Yanktons to 
a reservation, the Yanktons were forced, on April 19, 1858, to cede all 
remaining land to the government except 431,000 acres lying 30 miles 
along the Missouri River. The tribe was to receive $1,600,000 — about 
ten cents an acre — in decreasing annuity payments until 1908. 





103 



] 



92 



Roots and Branches 



Within the Yankton Reservation boundaries, and with the 
annuity funds, federal agents worked toward dismantling the tribal 
structure and building European American civilization on a farming 
base. Every year, agents, school superintendents, and physicians filed 
their reports with the Department of the Interior. However, despite 
the agents' efforts to demonstrate the success of these programs, the 
reports proved the devastating effects of farming policies, housing 
policies, and boarding schools on the lives of all Yankton men, 
women, and children. 

In 1874, an agent recommended that the Yanktons be moved to 
Indian Territory because the country on the Missouri lacked sufficient 
resources for farming, and another in 1877 called it a "woodless and 
desolate prairie." Three out of every four years, fields yielded as little 
as one bushel to the acre due to hailstorms, grasshoppers, "hot blast- 
ing wind," and drought so severe that shade trees died. In 1896, 
when they did raise a good crop, the Indians were forced to take a 
"seriously low price" because they had no place to store it and "white 
neighbors would never pay a fair price." By 1902, no more seed 
wheat was provided because it cost as much to produce as it would 
bring in a sale. No doubt agents were reluctant to admit their own 
failures to build successful farming operations, so they blamed the 
land, the neighboring whites, and the Indians. 

In 1876, the year Gertrude Simmons was born, the agent said 
that if the rations were removed, there would be "utter destitution 
and great suffering, and a general breakup of the tribe." Yet eight 
years later. Agent J. F. Kinney, with paternalistic tone, strongly recom- 
mended issuing less flour because "less rations, more farming, more 
self-reliance, less dependence, more manhood." 

In 1874, St. Paul's Episcopal boarding school for girls and boys, 
three day schools, and two Presbyterian schools served 200 Yankton 
Reservation children. In contrast with the government schools, St. 
Paul's was still educating in the Dakota language in 1890. In 1900, 
Agent John W. Harding recommended ceasing of funding to St. 
Paul's because "it [was] more sympathetic with Indians in conflict 
with Government policies." An agent in 1880 offered the most praise 
for Carlisle, an off-reservation school in Pennsylvania where Zitkala- 
Sa would teach and write her essays. However, by 1887 and continu- 
ing into the next century, agents rejected this same school in favor of 
the reservation's Industrial Boarding School. Not only did schools 
like Carlisle take their "brightest" students, but one agent disap- 
proved of the children's extended separation from parents. Children 
would "lose their health in Eastern schools." Some school officials 
objected to Eastern schools because they would then have to fill reser- 
vation school quotas with "children earlier rejected for ill health." 



109 



t 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



] 



93 



On May 21, 1895, the government proclaimed, "Lands ceded 
by Yankton tribe of Sioux Indians are open to settlement. These lands 
shall be offered for sale to actual and bonafide settlers." In essence, 
the Allotment Act contributed to the further loss of Indian territorial 
integrity when much of the "surplus" land was purchased and leased 
by non-Indians. 

By 1902, numerous new lights dotted the reservation landscape, 
many sod houses had replaced tepees, and parents resisted sending 
children to reservation schools because they feared they would die. 
Physician reports prove that the parents' fears were justified. From a 
population of 2,600 in 1857, the numbers of Yanktons and mixed- 
bloods on the Yankton Reservation dropped to 1,678 by 1902. Epi- 
demics of sore eyes, sore throats, influenza, consumption, scrofula 
(tuberculosis), measles, chicken pox, and whooping cough raged 
through these Yankton people, especially in the schools, where such 
highly contagious diseases found captive victims. Although one angry 
agent in 1884 suggested that the prevalence of disease was caused by 
"stupid indifference to laws of health," a more sympathetic physician 
in 1901 blamed "poverty and one-room houses devoid of ventilation." 
In 1894, a physician indicated that few were disease-free; in 1899 21 
children died before the end of the school year, and in 1901 95 people 
died of "consumption and old age." The agency report in 1902 
showed a comparison between the death rate among the white pop- 
ulation surrounding the reservation of 8 in 1,000 and among the 
Indians, 24 in 1000. The Yankton people were dying; the Indians them- 
selves knew it, and so did the agents. Mothers kept children home to 
prevent their contracting a deadly disease, and agents suspected that 
the deaths of children were kept secret so the families could continue 
to receive maximum rations ( Annual Rqports 1874—1902). This was the 
situation for Zitkala-Sa's people, and for the writer herself, at the time 
she first published her autobiographical essays in the Atlantic Monthly, 
in January, February, and March of 1900. 



Classification of Lakota Cosmology 




Spirit 


Other Lakota 


English Gloss 


ANOG ITE 


Forms 


Double Face, Double Woman 


ANP (contraction 
of ANPETU) 




Day 


CAN OTI 


CAN OTILA 


Tree Dwellers 


ETU 




Time 


EYA (Wiyohpeyata 
Wicasa) 




The West Wind 


GNAS 


GNASKI 


Demon, Crazy Buffalo 




1.1 n 



94 



c 



Roots and Branches 



English Gloss 

Darkness 



Spirit 

HAN 

HAN-WI (also 
HANWI) 

HU NONP (also 
HUNOMP) 

IBOM 



Other Lakota 
Forms 



WI-WIN 

MATO 

Another name 



for IYA 



IKTOMI 


IKTO, 

UNKTOMI 

(Dakota) 


INYAN 

ITE 

IYA 


IYO 


KSA 

MAKA 


MAKA-AKAN 


OKAGA 


from ITOKAGA 


PTE-OYATE 


OYATE-PTE 


SKAN 


TAKU 

SKANSKAN 


TATANKA 


TATANKAKAN 


TATE 


TATEKAN 


TOKA 


TOKAHE 


UNK 


UNKTE 


UNKCEGILA 


UNCEGILA 


UNKTEHI 


UNTEHI 


WAKANKA 

WAKINYAN 


KA 


WAZIYA 


WA 


WI 

WI-CAN 

WOHPE 


WI-AKAN 


YANPA 

YATA 

YUMNI 





Moon 

Bear, Two Legged 
Cyclone 

Trickster, Spider 

Rock 

Face 

Eating Monster 

Wisdom 

Earth 

The South Wind 
Buffalo People 

The Sky, Something In 
Movement, Changes Things, 
That-Which-Moves 

The Buffalo 
The Wind 

The First One, First Man, 

First Woman 

Passion 
Land Monster 

One Who Kills, Water Monster 
The Witch 

The Thunderbird, The Winged 
One 

The Wizard 
The Sun 
Stars 

The Beautiful Woman, 

The Feminine, The Mediator 

The East Wind 
The North Wind 

The Whirlwind, The God of Love 
— (Jahner 1983, 30-33) 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



Prereading Activity 



Selection 1: 
"Impressions 
of an Indian 
Childhood" 
(pp. 7-45) 



Selection 2: 
"School Days" 
(pp. 47-80) 



i 



Introduce Zitkala-Sa and American Indian Stories with a brief biogra- 
phy of Gertrude Bonnin from the Forewords by Dexter Fisher and 
Agnes Picotte and locate the Yankton Reservation on a map. 

After their individual reading, each group is assigned two of the fol- 
lowing questions, which they will share with the entire class. 

1. Looking at the significant figures and names from Lakota cosmol- 
ogy, what evidence of any of these symbols do you see in the text? 
Pay attention to the name of Gertrude Simmons's mother as given 
in Agnes Picotte's Foreword to Old Indian Legends. 

2. What are the characteristics of the child's mother? What is the 
relationship between child and mother? What are the values and 
lessons the mother teaches her child? 

3. Identify rhetoric that suggests a non-Indian, possibly Puritan 
writer, and identify rhetoric that suggests Indian or a particular 
tribal writer. This includes metaphors and vocabulary. 

4. What images suggest a reservation landscape? 

5. What is the place of traditional story, and Iktomi stories in partic- 
ular, in this essay and in the child's experience? 

6. In this landscape and experience, where does power lie? 

7. List evidences of loss (territorial, communal, and personal) in this 
text. 

8. Identify any ironies in the text. 

Introduce the second essay, ''School Days," with some background 
information on the history of the Yankton Reservation and on Indian 
boarding schools. 

1. Identify specific European American acculturation practices in 
this essay. 

2. Identify specific evidence (comments and actions) of resistance to 
European American acculturation. 

3. Identify the essay's tone and cite lines from the text that demon- 
strate tone. 

4. Where is the evidence of an ironic voice in the text? 

5. List specific aspects of the Eastern experience that might differ 
from the writer's childhood experiences on the Dakota prairie. 

6. How can this essay be read as an Iktomi story or a story featuring 
the trickster/transformer figure? 

7. Look for evidence of the adult voice and the child's voice in the 
text. 

8. How have the child and the child's home changed in the three 
years since she first left? 



] 



96 



Roots and Branches 



Selection 3: 
"An Indian Teacher 
among Indians" 
(pp. 81-99) 



Closing Activities 



9. Explain the conflict the young girl experiences during the speech 
contest. Does she prevail over the discrimination? If so, how? 

10. Does the writer or the child have a consistent support group or 
system? If so, what is it? 

1. Identify evidence in the rhetoric that indicates the writer or child 
refuses to remain the victim. 

2. How does she describe her employer? What inferences might we 
draw that underlie the surface descriptions? 

3. How are the white people in this essay described? 

4. Cite evidences of further European American encroachment and 
personal, communal, or territorial disintegration of the home or 
Dakota landscape. 

5. How are the mother and daughter reconciled? 

6. How might we read this essay as an indictment against European 
Americans? 

7. Define . the stereotype of European Americans that this essay por- 
trays. 

8. Cite evidence in the text that indicates the writer is familiar with 
Iktomi stories and has used such stories to interpret her experi- 
ence with European Americans. 

9. What do you think was the writer's "new way of solving the 
problem"? 

10. What aspects of this child's life are missing from this story? Some- 
times what is missing tells us more about a writer or a story than 
what is included. 

1. Write your own autobiographical essay or tell a story from your 
life. What will you include and exclude? Who will be your signifi- 
cant others, both positive and negative? 

2. Teachers may supplement Zitkala-Sa's essays with readings that 
portray similar themes. 




113 



1 ~ 

Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



97 



D& Mg LSMo] 



Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; 
Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 

When this unit follows American Indian Stories , students can see the 
further impact on individuals and families as well as the death and 
territorial loss that resulted from the encroachment of non-Native 
people in their rush for mineral-rich lands. Some scholars compare 
Linda Hogan's writing with the magical realist fiction of Gabriel Gar- 
cia Marquez, so the novel works well in units with his stories and 
other similar literatures. Mean Spirit may also be combined with nov- 
els and stories about the Osage people and the Oklahoma oil boom. 
Students in an adult Native American Literature class and a high 
school Western literature elective have studied Mean Spirit using the 
following materials and assignments. 

Goals ■ T° become aware of the impact of boarding schools, allotment, 

guardianship, and citizenship issues on Native Americans and the 
ways they survived 

■ To understand the concept of cultural exchange 

■ To develop an appreciation for the importance of landscape in 
Native American lives 

■ To become aware of the exploitation of natural resources on Indian 
lands and the genocide that accompanied such exploitation 

■ To experience the genre of historical fiction with strong female 
characters 

■ To become familiar with the narrative style of magical realism and 
to examine the meaning and effect of symbols in the novel 

Resources Gibson, Arrell Morgan. 1980. The American Indian , Prehistoric to the Present. 

Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Hogan, Linda. 1990. Mean Spirit. New York: Ivy Books. 

"Linda Hogan." 1994. In Native North American Literature , ed. Janet Witalec, 
333-343. New York: Gale Research. 

Mathews, John Joseph (Osage). 1961. The Osage: Children of the Middle 
Waters. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Miller, Arthur. [1952] 1981. The Crucible. New York: Penguin. 

Mooney, James. 1991. The Ghost-Dance Religion and the Sioux Outbreak of 

1890. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. Originally published in 
1896 by the U.S. Bureau of Ethnology. 

The Reservations, Tribes of the Southern Plains, and The Spirit World. 1995. The 
American Indians Series. New York: Time-Life Books. 

Wilson, Terry. 1985. The Underground Reservation: Osage Oil. Lincoln: Univer- 
sity of Nebraska Press. 




114 



98 






Roots and Branches 



Background: 
Osage History, 
1500-1970 



Language System: Siouian 

■ 1500: The Osage were located in woodland areas of southern Mis- 
souri and eastern Kansas: the Mississippi Valley. They had 
encountered and traded with Spanish and were raiding villages in 
Arkansas and Canadian settlements to protect their territory. 

■ 1600s: The French enlisted the Osages to capture Pawnees for slave 
trade. 

■ 1700: They moved to their "permanent residence" on grasslands of 
the Plains. 

■ 1762: The Spanish felt threatened by the Osages in Louisiana, who 
were resisting the Spanish invasion. 

■ 1808: In an attempt to create a pan-Indian confederacy to stand 
with the British against U.S. expansion, Tecumseh tried to enlist 
Osages to join the Shawnees. 

■ 1812: The territories of Arkansas, Missouri, and Iowa were called 
Indian Country. The federal government planned to make land 
into reservations for Eastern tribes, but the Osage, Quapaw, Oto, 
Missouri, and Kansa people lived there. 

■ 1803-1825: Treaties were enacted to move Osage and other tribes 
west. 

■ 1836: Osages were finally moved to the treaty lands, north of 37° in 
the northern half of Indian Territory. 

■ Before 1854: Kansas comprised the northern half, and some of the 
best land, in Indian Territory. 

■ 1857: The Osages and a federation of Indian nations, the Cherokee, 
Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, and Seminole (also known as the Five 
Civilized Tribes) were demonstrating assimilationist economic, 
political, and social lifestyles. 

■ 1860: Fighting in marginal roles as scouts for other Indian tribes 
who fought for the Confederacy, the Osages promised 500 war- 
riors to the Confederacy. 

■ 1865: With the apparent purpose of punishing the Five Civilized 
Tribes and the Osages for fighting with the Confederacy, "enemies 
of the United States," these tribes were told they must surrender 
part of lands to the United States for other tribes and that all tribes 
must combine to form one government. 

■ 1870: Precipitating further conflicts between the Osage and white 
settlers, and the Osage and the Cherokee, Congress passed a law 
acquiring land for squatters on Osage land and for relocated 
Cherokees. The Osage were told to move further west, but many 
full-bloods chose not to move. Other Osage remained behind 
because they were "assimilated mixed-bloods," and the U.S. gov- 
ernment told them they could receive citizenship and allotments, 
etc. However, the white settlers in Kansas rejected them. 




115 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



99 



b 1851-1872: 1,500 Osages returned to Indian territory, a rough 
upland meadow and hill country fit only for grazing, not farming. 
It was a less desirable reservation than others. They adopted a 
written constitution. 

a By 1880, 67 different tribes occupied Indian Territory. For many it 
was the fourth relocation in 50 years. 

m 1886: The surface land was divided among 2,229 enrollees, but the 
Osage retained the tribal ownership of minerals. 

o 1887: The General Allotment Act, the Dawes Act, resulted in divi- 
sions of reservations into small acreages per family head. Those 
who "cooperated" were promised the possibility of U.S. citizen- 
ship. Surplus lands went for as little as three cents an acre. Along 
with some other tribes, the Osages were exempted because they 
objected to the allotment, fearing it would result in the destruction 
of the tribe. 

h 1893: Congress decided that the Osages were subject to allotment, 
but in 1906, after oil was discovered on the reservation, they "won 
permission from Congress ... to partition the 1.5-million-acre 
reservation so that each of the tribe's 2,229 members received four 
plots totaling just over 650 acres. The Osage reserved all subsur- 
face mineral rights for the tribe as a whole, with the proceeds from 
oil leases and royalties to be divided evenly among tribal mem- 
bers" ( The Reservations 1995, 154). 

■ 1906: Burke's Law ended the conferring of citizenship rights, until 
25 years of trusteeship had passed, providing the individuals were 
deemed "competent." 

a 1908: To meet their needs for survival, 90 percent of allottees in the 
entire country had disposed of their lands to non-Indians. 

a 1912-1928: Over $157 million in oil-rich lands belonging to the 
Osage tribe were auctioned off to non-Indian oil men, who paid as 
much as $1 million for 160 acres. The Osage oil wealth resulted in 
many attempts to defraud them. 

a From 1921-1925 there were 24 unsolved murders, shootings, poi- 
sonings, and the burning of a house. 

a 1920s: "During the early 1920s, what came to be known as the 
reign of terror befell the tribe. Unscrupulous whites stopped at 
nothing, not even murder, in order to gain control of oil-rich Osage 
land. A wave of murders brought in agents from the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation (FBI), who discovered that the motives for 
the killings were elementary. Almost all of the murders involved 
Osages whose white guardians or white husbands would benefit 
by taking over the headright. It was common knowledge that a 
killer could be hired for $500 and a used roadster. The favorite 
modus operandi was to get the Osage drunk, find a doctor who 
would attest to this condition, and then later give the victim a 
lethal injection by morphine. Invariably the cause of death was 



ERIC 




100 



[ 



=1 

Roots and Branches 



said to be alcohol poisoning. By some estimates, up to 60 Osages 
were murdered, nearly three percent of the tribe, before the pres- 
ence of the FBI and congressional legislation bringing guardians 
under control of the Indian Bureau helped stop the killing" ( The 
Reservations 1995, 155). 

■ 1934: The Osages were exempt from state descent and distribution 
of property laws. State law did not determine descent and distrib- 
ution of individually owned Indian property or as restricted 
allotments. However, federal officials were designated trustees of 
tribal funds; the Indians wanted protection but not supervision. 

■ 1948: Assimilation Crimes Act dictated that specific crimes not 
covered under state or federal law or statute were to be tried in 
federal courts. 

■ By 1952, the total yearly income had decreased to $4,571,644.66 for 
the entire tribe. 

■ September 30, 1970: The Justice Department declared a $13.2- 
million settlement with the Osage Indian Nation of Oklahoma for 
28 million acres of lands purchased by the federal government in 
Arkansas, Kansas, Missouri, and Oklahoma between 1803 and 
1819. 



Reading Activity 



After each reading, students come to class with questions for discus- 
sion. 



Postreading 

Activities 



1. Supporting answers with references from the text, four workshop 
groups respond to the following: 

a. Using textual references, define the meaning and significance 
for each of the following symbols: group 1, corn and redshirt; 
group 2, bats and oil fires; group 3, parrot and bees; group 4, 
wind and mean spirit. 

b. Look at each of the following major characters. How do they 
cope, resist, and survive tragedy, despair, exploitation, and 
possible extermination? Group 1, Michael Horse, Stace Red 
Hawk, and John Stink; group 2, Nola, Ruth, Dune-Hog Priest, 
Joe Billy, and Martha; group 3, Ona Neck, Lettie, Sara, and 
Belle; group 4, Moses, Benoit, Jess Gold, and Red Shirt. 

c. Explain each of the following conflicts in Mean Spirit. How are 
they manifest? How are they resolved — if they are resolved? 
Group 1, between those who have the power and those who 
want the power; group 2, between genders; group 3, between 
parents and their children; group 4, internal conflicts. 

2. Keep a journal and sketchbook with responses to reading. 

3. Investigate and report about natural resource issues on local 
Indian reservations. 

4. Write your own Gospel. 



c 



Secondary Level Units, Lessons, and Activities 



101 



5. Compare the subversion and manipulation by wealthy whites in 
Oklahoma with the 1690 situation in Salem, Massachusetts, as told 
in Arthur Miller's Crucible. 



Works Cited 



Annual Reports of the Department of the Interior and Indian Affairs , Report of the 
Commissioner and Appendixes. 1874-1902. Washington, DC: Govern- 
ment Printing Office. 

DeMallie, Raymond, and Douglas R. Parks. 1987. Sioux Indian Religion: 
Tradition and Innovation. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Denig, Edwin Thompson. 1961. Five Indian Tribes of the Upper Missouri. 
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Grobsmith, Elizabeth. 1981. Lakota of the Rosebud. New York: Holt, 

Rinehart & Winston. 

Jahner, Elaine A. 1983. Introduction to Lakota Myth , by James R. Walker. 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 

Powers, Marilyn Marla Nancy. 1990. Oglala Women in Myth, Ritual, and 

Reality. Dissertation. New Brunswick: Rutgers University — The State 
University of New Jersey. 

The Reservations. 1995. The American Indians Series. New York: Time-Life 
Books. 

Welch, Deborah. 1985. American Leader: The Story of Gertrude Bonnin. Disser- 
tation. Laramie: University of Wyoming. 



102 




4 

Bibliography 
of Resources 
for Teachers 



Most of the resources listed below provide general information. 
However, they are especially good for identifying more specific 
sources for further research. Some of the selections grouped under 
"Educational Resources" are geared for the primary (designated "P," 
K-3) and intermediate ("I," 4-6) levels, but the lessons and sugges- 
tions can work with students in grades 7-12 ("S") as well. 



Historical 
and Cultural 
Resources 



The American Indians. 1992-1996. Henry Woodhead, series ed. Alexan- 
dria, VA: Time-Life Books. 

This series is a lengthy and comprehensive historical and cul- 
tural resource. Relying on regional consultants for each subject 
area, as well as historians and anthropologists with extensive 
backgrounds in tribal history, each book demonstrates the 
diversity of Indian peoples while it also recognizes and affirms 
what they have in common. Several of the selections, authors, 
and resources listed in Roots and Branches are referred to in the 
narratives in this series. Averaging 175 pages each, the books 
include historical narration, photographs and drawings, bibli- 
ography, and index. Some of the consultants are connected 
with the D'Arcy McNickle Center for the History of the Ameri- 
can Indian at the Newberry Library in Chicago. 



Champagne, Duane, ed. The Chronology of Native North American His- 
tory. Detroit, MI: Gale Research, 1994. 574 pp. 

This is an excellent resource for a comprehensive listing of his- 
torical and cultural events about the Native peoples of North 
America and Canada, and it includes black and white paint- 
ings and photos. The Chronology includes: Tribal Chronologies; 
an introductory narrative of Indian history; a Historical Time 
Line; and Native North American History, separated into three 




119 



[ 



] 



Bibliography of Resources for Teachers 



103 



time blocks, with short biographies of many North American 
Indians, specific dates and descriptions of federal Indian poli- 
cies and related acts, individual episodes of strong Indian resis- 
tance, and contributions by Indians to education, literature, 
and the general economy; American Indian Orators; Docu- 
ments of History; Excerpts from Significant Legal Cases; and a 
General Bibliography. 

Fixico, Donald L. Termination and Relocation: Federal Indian Policy, 
1945-1960. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 
1990. 268 pp. 

Operating on the assumption that both Indians and bureau- 
crats favored a modernized society, with the Indian integrating 
into the mainstream of modern America, the federal govern- 
ment pursued a policy of "terminating the government's trust 
relationship over Indian lands and relocating the native resi- 
dents to new homes in urban areas" (ix). Detailing postwar 
Indian policies and their devastating effects on Indian peoples, 
Fixico concludes that the policy failed: "Ironically, the federal 
government did not learn from its history of relations with 
Native American peoples that no single policy can be devised 
that will successfully serve all Indians, who represent many 
different tribes, languages, and cultures" (197). Termination and 
Relocation includes a Preface that briefly covers federal policy 
from early 1800s to World War II; nine chapters that conclude 
with an evaluation of the policies; maps and extensive notes; 
and an epilogue that looks at policies of the 1960s and 1970s. 
This is an excellent resource for understanding the devastating 
social, political, economic, and cultural influences on many of 
our contemporary writers. 

Foreman, Grant. Indian Removal: The Emigration of the Five Civilized 
Tribes of Indians. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1989. 
423 pp. 

Based on diaries and letters, as well as other primary resources, 
this book examines in detail the tragic consequences for the 
Choctaw, Creek, Chickasaw, Cherokee, and Seminole tribes 
due to their removal from Native lands to the Indian Territory 
west of the Mississippi, beginning in 1830. All teachers work- 
ing with nineteenth-century history should read this book. Stu- 
dents can use specific sections for research into the historical 
experiences of these tribes. At the close of his Preface, Foreman 
says that "this tragic phase of American history is best under- 
stood if one will remember that for the most part the southern 



ERIC 



1 2 0 



[ 



] 



104 



Roots and Branches 



Indians were people of fixed habits and tastes. They were not 
nomads . . . they were rooted in the soil as the Choctaw chief 
Pushmataha said, 'where we have grown up as the herbs of the 
woods.' ... It is doubtful if white people . . . can understand the 
sense of grief and desolation that overwhelmed the Indians 
when they were compelled to leave all these behind forever 
and begin the long sad journey toward the setting sun which 
they called the Trail of Tears" (Preface), the death march that 
took the lives of thousands. 

Hoxie, Frederick E. A Final Promise: The Campaign to Assimilate the 
Indians, 1880-1920. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University 
Press, 1989. 350 pp. 

Frederick Hoxie is director of the D'Arcy McNickle Center for 
the History of the American Indian at the Newberry Library in 
Chicago, and he has served as a major consultant to the Time- 
Life series. The American Indians. In Ids Preface to Final Promise, 
Hoxie makes clear his focus: "My study is a work of history: I 
discuss individual events, particular ideas, certain pieces of 
legislation, and important actors. But the point of the discus- 
sion is to place the assimilation campaign in the context of a 
national experience. . . . With this work, we should be able to 
move away from the accusations of guilt and professions of 
innocence and begin to understand better both the actions of 
the inscrutable white man and the responses of Native Ameri- 
cans" (xvi-xvii). 

Indians of North America Series. New York: Chelsea House. 

Hoover, Herbert T. The Yankton Sioux. 1988. 94—144 pp. 

Hoxie, Frederick E. The Crow. 1989. 94—144 pp. 

Porter, Frank W. The Coast Salish Peoples. 1989. 94—144 pp. 

Chelsea's English catalog includes curriculum programs with 
literatures traditionally taught in America's English class- 
rooms, as well as works by Black and Hispanic writers and 
modem men and women writers. As of this publication, it 
doesn't offer any Native American literatures, but this histori- 
cal series is one of the best available. Other historical titles from 
Chelsea House include The Apache; The American Indians; 
Archaelogy of North America; The Aztecs; The Cherokee; The 
Cheyenne; The Chickasaw; The Chumash; The Comanche; The Iro- 
quois; The Lenapes; Literatures of the American Indian; The Maya; 
The Mohawk; The Navajos; The Nez Perce; The Ojibwa ; The Pueblo; 
The Seminole; The Wampanoag; and Women in American Indian 

Society. 




121 



Bibliography of Resources for Teachers 



I 

105 



Jennings, Francis. The Invasion of America: Indians, Colonialism, and the 
Cant of Conquest. New York: Norton, 1976. 369 pp. 

This is an essential resource for teachers of American literature 
because it provides primary source material on William Brad- 
ford, John Smith, and other early American figures who have 
become part of the American myth system. Although students 
may be shocked by the "new" information they get from this 
book, they will learn to appreciate the way history textbooks 
have been reduced to simple conclusions and resultant stereo- 
types. They can learn to further question whatever they read and 
hear; they can learn how to conduct research themselves; and 
they can appreciate the power of language to change the course 
of history. For example, Jennings suggests that John Smith began 
to use the word "savage" with respect to Indian peoples when 
the Indians were of no more use to him and when he desired 
both military and monetary assistance to remove them. 

At the conclusion of his Preface, Jennings says that "The 
issue is not whether something had to happen, but whether it 
has to happen again. I have made the assumption that human 
persons do have some power of choice over their own conduct 
and that their adherence to moral standards, whatever those 
standards may be, is a matter of historical concern" (viii). 

McNickle, D'Arcy (Salish). Native American Tribalism: Indian Survivals 
and Renewals. London: Oxford University Press, 1973. 190 pp. 

Although the events at Wounded Knee, South Dakota, in Janu- 
ary of 1973 weren't recorded in this work, McNickle prefaces 
this publication with references to that anger and violence and 
the right of Native American people to remain a separate and 
identifiable people. One way to ensure that right is to use the 
"word" with all its power to carefully explore the history of 
tribal relations on this continent since the colonists first arrived. 
The book begins with a "Generalized View," moves through 
the last four centuries, and then identifies the surviving peo- 
ples and cultures who won't be "lost in anonymity" but will 
continue to survive as an "integrating tribal people" (170). This 
is a most important resource for teachers and students who 
want to know the unromantic Indian experience with Amer- 
ica's "manifest destiny." 

The Native Americans Series. 1994. Atlanta, GA: TBS Productions. Video- 
cassettes. 48 min. each. 

These excellent videos, featuring Native American educators, 
leaders, poets, and video producers, tell the history and culture 




122 



] 



106 



[ 

Roots and Branches 



of their peoples from precontact up to the present, with Joy 
Harjo (Creek) providing much of the narration. 

Part I. The Tribal People of the Northwest: Living in Harmony 
with the Land — Lummi, Salish, Chumash, Colville, Yakima. 

Part II. The Nations of the Northeast: The Strength and Wis- 
dom of the Confederacies — Iroquois, Mohawk, Seneca, Penob- 
scot, Oneida, Wampanoag. 

Part III. The People of the Great Plains (Part One): Buffalo Peo- 
ple and Dog Days — Crow, Comanche, Sioux, Kiowa, Arapaho. 

Part IV. The People of the Great Plains (Part Two): The Coming 
of the Horses, the White Man and the Rifle — Crow, Comanche, 
Sioux, Kiowa, Arapaho. 

Part V. The Natives of the Southwest: Artists, Innovators and 
Rebels — Pueblo Peoples, Hopi, Navajo, Pima, Isleta, Apache. 

Part VI. The Tribes of the Southeast: Persistent Cultures of 
Resilient People — Choctaw, Seminole, Chickasaw, Creek, 
Cherokee. 

Sheehan, Bernard W. Seeds of Extinction: Jeffersonian Philanthropy and 
the American Indian. New York: Norton, 1974. 301 pp. 

This is an important book for readers who want a detailed 
description of the ways in which personal world view and 
bias both affect and effect events. Seeds of Extinction is a study of 
the "white man's ideas about himself and the Indian" (x). In 
three sections (Metaphysics; Program; and Illusions), Sheehan 
explores the roots of Thomas Jefferson's philosophical ideas 
and surrounding patterns of "humanitarian" thinking. Shee- 
han does not pass judgment, but he does provide thorough 
research into the terrible violence and disintegration of Indian 
peoples that occurred as a result of Jeffersonian policies: "The 
Indian became a victim of the white man's proclivity for 
conceptualization and idealization. . . . Typically, Jeffersonian 
thinking stressed the improving aspects of the human situa- 
tion" (8). But Sheehan also believes that the major "crime" of 
philanthropy was its treatment of "the native more like a pre- 
cious abstraction than a living human being," wanting the best 
for the Indian and believing that would be "the elimination of 
the tribal order" (12). Seeds of Extinction is an important histor- 
ical work, but Sheehan's own non-Native bias directs his 
rhetoric and argument — it appears that he assumes the Indian 
was not civilized. 




123 



[ 



] 



Bibliography of Resources for Teachers 



107 



Where the Spirit Lives. Anthony-Borgese Communications Presenta- 
tion. Off Hollywood Video. New York: Studio Entertainment, 
1989. 120 min. 

An excellent "work of fiction," this two-hour PG-rated film, 
written by Keith Ross Leckie, directed by Bruce Pittman, and 
starring Michelle St. John, presents the dark side of North 
American assimilationist practices. Using school extras from 
the Blood Tribe and Six Nations Reserves, as well as songs 
sung by traditional drummers and music written by Buffy 
Sainte-Marie, Where the Spirit Lives makes a remarkable contri- 
bution to the list of important resources. 

Set in the 1930s in an Alberta Indian Residential School, 
Where the Spirit Lives rings true for tens of thousands of Native 
peoples and their ancestors. The film opens on a Native village 
in Northern Alberta where children play and participate in tra- 
ditional rituals, until an Indian agent arrives and offers them 
candy and a "ride" in his plane. With this kidnapping they 
enter an environment where they experience emotional and, 
sometimes, sexual abuse. Separated from parents and home, 
the children are taken to an Indian Residential School where 
the Anglican leaders and teachers will discipline them until 
their Native language, dress, religion, and all other manners of 
their "Indianness" have disappeared. The story centers on the 
oldest girl taken, who resists her name change, resists their 
forced assimilationist practices, and continues to speak her lan- 
guage and practice her Native traditions. An idealistic young 
teacher sympathizes with the children and succeeds in teach- 
ing "Amelia" how to read and write English. But her apparent 
collaboration with administrators who lie to Amelia, telling her 
that her parents have died in a smallpox epidemic, brings 
about Amelia and her brother's final flight back to her home- 
land "Where the Spirit Lives." 

Where the Spirit Lives can be used in history as well as litera- 
ture classes to introduce works by a number of authors such as 
Louise Erdrich, Linda Hogan, Zitkala-Sa, Sherman Alexie, and 
a number of Canadian Native writers who also portray young 
people and the emotional, social, and physical consequences of 
their attending boarding schools distant from their homelands. 

Winds of Change: A Matter of Choice. American Indian Collection. PBS 
Home Video, 1991. 1-800-776-8300. 60 min. 

Winds of Change is an excellent video about the Native experience 
with "living between two worlds." Originally produced by Wis- 
consin Public Television, this video portrays the contemporary 



ERIC 



124 



[ 



] 



108 



Roots and Branches 



experience of several: those who have remained on the reserva- 
tion, those who have left, and those who have returned. Hattie 
Kaufman (Nez Perce /German) narrates, exploring the lives of 
Hopi women and men as examples of the new opportunities 
reservation communities can offer while maintaining tradi- 
tional values and lifeways: "the importance of place, extended 
family, spirituality, and the connection between homeland, 
tribal identity, and world view." Speakers share their personal 
conflicts and the ways they struggle for balance between the 
old ways and the contemporary world; the ways they work to 
overcome the consequences of boarding school deculturation, 
which separated children from parents for many years; and the 
ways they succeed in the contemporary business world, bring- 
ing it into the Hopi community; and finally, the ways they suc- 
ceed in the economic and social world off the reservation. As 
they share the possibilities for individual and communal reso- 
lutions, they affirm the family as most important to all Indian 
peoples. 



For Further 
Reading 



Adams, David Wallace. Education for Extinction: American Indians and 
the Boarding School Experience, 1875-1928. Lawrence: University 
of Kansas Press, 1995. 



American Indian: A Multimedia Encyclopedia. Version 1.0. Facts on File, 
1993. [ISBN: 0-8160-2835-4], 

A resource for treaties, land grants, and other rare documents 
from the National Archives, as well as complete texts of books, 
audio excerpts from authentic Indian songs, more than 100 leg- 
ends, maps, time lines, and more 900 photographs which cover 
150 tribes from across the continent. 



Barreiro, Jose (Guajiro), ed. Indian Roots of American Democracy. 
Akwe:kon Press, 1992. 209 pp. 

The story of the Haudenosaunee, Native people of the North- 
east, who introduced colonists to the "Great Law of Peace," 
which was later incorporated into the U.S. Constitution. 

Beck, Peggy V., Anna Lee Walters (Pawnee /Otoe), and Nia Francisco 
(Navajo). The Sacred: Ways of Knowledge, Sources of Life. Tsaile, 
AZ: Navajo Community College Press, 1988. 368 pp. 

A comprehensive examination of the multicultural tradition of 
Native America, written originally as a textbook for college 
Native American studies. 



[ 



Bibliography of Resources for Teachers 



109 



Bowker, Ardy (Eastern Cherokee). Sisters in the Blood: The Education of 
Women in Native America. Newton, MA: WEEA Publishing Cen- 
ter, 1993. 354 pp. 

A comprehensively researched study of Native Americans in 
education, and of Native American women in particular, which 
also draws significant conclusions about the critical position 
teachers held in the lives of these women. 

Bruchac, Joseph (Abenaki). Roots of Survival: Native American Story- 
telling and the Sacred. Golden, CO: Fulcrum, 1996. 206 pp. 

A collection of essays detailing the living nature of stories and 
their purpose and place in Native American lives. 

The Civilization of the American Indian Series. Norman: University of 
Oklahoma Press. 

Comprising the most extensive list of resources available, this 
is a series of 139 separate publications by noted historians and 
Native American writers. Roots and Branches includes several of 
these publications, listed separately by author. 

Clark, William P. Indian Sign Language. Lincoln: University of Nebraska 
Press, 1982. 443 pp. 

Cohoe, William. A Cheyenne Sketchbook. Norman: University of Okla- 
homa Press, 1964. 

A collection of ledger drawings from a Plains Indian's past and 
also from his imprisonment in Florida in 1875. 

Costo, Rupert. Indian Treaties: Two Centuries of Dishonor. San Francisco: 
Indian Historian Press, 1978. 283 pp. 

Danky, James P, ed. Native American Periodicals and Newspapers, 1828- 
1982. New York: Greenwood Press, 1984. 532 pp. 

Deloria, Vine (Sioux). Custer Died for Your Sins: An Indian Manifesto. 
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1988. 279 pp. 

An Indian point of view of U.S. race relations, federal bureau- 
cracies, Christian churches, and social scientists. 

Dixon, Joseph Kossuth. The Vanishing Race: The Last Great Indian 
Council. New York: Popular Library, 1972. 

A record in picture and story of the "Last Great Indian Coun- 
cil," with Indian chiefs from nearly every reservation in the 
United States in attendance — first published in 1913. 



[ 



] 



110 



Roots and Branches 



Eagle Walking Turtle [Gary McClain] (Choctaw). Indian America: A 
Traveler's Companion. Santa Fe, NM: John Muir Publications, 1995. 

An updated guide that tells the traveler how to find over 300 
Indian tribes, where and when visitors are welcome, what cere- 
monies are performed, what arts and crafts are produced, and 
where historical sites may be found. 

Fedullo, Mick. Light of the Feather. New York: Wm. Morrow, 1992. 
256 pp. 

A narrative in which Fedullo, an adopted Crow, relates his 
experiences with the various tribal groups and the way those 
experiences caused him to drop his own stereotypes for more 
realistic images of Indian peoples today. 

Fowler, Loretta. Arapahoe Politics, 1851-1978: Symbols in Crises of 
Authority. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1986. 373 pp. 

A demonstration of the way one group of Native American 
people resisted and accommodated to acculturation pressures. 

The Great Law of Peace and the Constitution of the United States of Amer- 
ica. Rooseveltown, NY: Akwesasne Notes. 15 pp. 

Hertzberg, Hazel W. The Search for an American Indian Identity: Modern 
Pan-Indian Movements. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 
1981.362 pp. 

A history of Indian affairs on a national basis covering the 
years 1889 through 1934. 

Hirschfelder, Arlene B. American Indian and Eskimo Authors. New 
York: Association on American Indian Affairs, 1973. 99 pp. 

Howard, Joseph Kinsey. Strange Empire: A Narrative of the Northwest. 
New York: Wm. Morrow, 1952. 601 pp. 

A historical narrative that integrates the life and death of Louis 
Riel with the history of contemporary Canadian and United 
States military and economic policies and actions, as well as 
with the history of other related Indian peoples. 

Josephy, Alvin M. Jr. The Nez Perce Indians and the Opening of the North- 
west. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1997. 705 pp. 

Katz, William Loren. Black Indians: A Hidden Heritage. New York: 
Atheneum, 1986. 196 pp. 

The history of relations between Blacks and American Indians 
through pioneer days, with black-and-white photographs. 





127 



Bibliography of Resources for Teachers 



Mihesuah, Devon A. (Choctaw). American Indians: Stereotypes and 
Realities. Atlanta, GA: Clarity Press, 1997. 152 pp. 

Morey, Sylvester M., and Olivia Gilliam. Respect for Life: The Tradi- 
tional Upbringing of American Indian Children. New York: Myrin 
Institute, 1974. 202 pp. 

A report of discussions at Harper's Ferry, West Virginia, 
between Navajo, Mohawk, Crow, Kiowa, Pueblo, and Arapaho 
people regarding a most critical issue: the lives of their children 
in today's world. 

Native Peoples Magazine. Phoenix, AZ: Media Concepts Group, Inc. 

A quarterly publication of culture, history, and art. 

Oliver, Eileen Iscoff. Crossing the Mainstream: Multicultural Perspectives 
in Teaching Literature. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers 
of English, 1994. 235 pp. 

Resource Reading List. Toronto: CASNIP. 

An annotated bibliography of books by and about Native peo- 
ples, assembled by the Canadian Alliance in Solidarity with 
Native People, with topics including: Books for Elementary 
Schools; Teaching Resources; Books for Youth and Adults; and 
Back of the Books. 

Rutledge, Don (Cree). Center of the World: Native American Spirituality. 
North Hollywood, CA: Newcastle, 1992. 128 pp. 

An explanation of the world view of early Native Americans, 
the basic beliefs and ways of the Native American Tradition, 
from the perspective of a Plains Cree Pipe Keeper. 

Scott, Patricia. Chippewa and Cree. Rocky Boy, MT: Rocky Boy School, 
1976.277 pp. 

A bibliography of books, newspaper articles, government doc- 
uments, and other printed and written materials in various 
libraries of the United States and Canada. 

Sneve, Virginia Driving Hawk (Lakota). Native History Series. New 
York: Holiday House. 

Books for intermediate level readers about the culture and his- 
tory of individual tribes, including The Apaches (1997), The 
Cheyennes (1996), The Cherokees (1996), The Hopis (1995), The Iro- 
quois (1995), The Navajos (1993), The Nez Perce (1994), The Semi- 
noles (1994), and The Sioux (1995). 





123 



112 



: 



Roots and Branches 



Educational 

Resources 



Stedman, Raymond W. Shadows of the Indian: Stereotypes in American 
Culture. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1982. 282 pp. 

Usner, Daniel H., Jr. Indians, Settlers, and Slaves in a Frontier Exchange 
Economy: The Lower Mississippi Valley before 1783. Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina Press, 1990. 294 pp. 

An examination of the economic and cultural interactions 
among the Indians, Europeans, and African slaves of colonial 
Lousiana, including the province of West Florida. 



Allen, Paula Gunn, ed. Studies in American Indian Literature: Critical 
Essays and Course Designs. New York: Modern Language Asso- 
ciation of America, 1983. 384 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

This collection begins with Paula Gunn Allen's own essay, 
"The Sacred Hoop: A Contemporary Perspective," which expli- 
cates the oral tradition of non-Western literature for Western 
readers. The book also includes the following sections: 

Section One: Three possible course designs for teaching Oral 
Literature: an Introduction to American Indian Oral Tra- 
ditions; Lakota Oral Literature; and Creation and Trickster 
Narratives. 

Section Two: Personal Narratives and Autobiography, with 
essays about these narratives, and three possible course 
designs for teaching Indian Personal Narratives. 

Section Three: Five essays about American Indian Women's 
Literature together with three possible course designs. 

Section Four: Essays by Ruoff, Jahner, Hogan and others, 
together with six possible course designs about Contemporary 
American Indian Literature. 

Section Five: The Indian in American Literature and the preva- 
lence of stereotypes throughout that literature. 

Studies in American Indian Literature also includes biblio- 
graphies of anthologies, texts, research, and periodicals, by 
A. LaVonne Brown Ruoff, as well as other bibliographies of 
periodicals, special issues, and presses. This is an invaluable 
critical resource for all secondary and college-level teachers of 
American Indian literatures. 



Bibliography of Resources for Teachers 



U3 



Caduto, Michael ]., and Joseph Bruchac (Abenaki), eds. Keepers of the 
Earth: Native American Stories and Environmental Activities for 
Children. Golden, CO: Fulcrum, 1988. 208 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

Keepers of the Earth is the flagship book in a series that also 
includes Keepers of the Animals, Keepers of Life, and Keepers of the 
Night. Keepers of the Earth provides stories from various tribal 
orientations, together with a Teacher's Guide and a list of other 
resources. The stories are organized under the following sub- 
jects: Creation; Fire; Earth; Wind and Weather; Water; Sky; Sea- 
sons; Plants and Animals; Life-Death-Spirit; and Unity of 
Earth. Many of the classroom activities inspire environmental 
awareness. Although the series aims at the primary through 
intermediate levels, any of the books works well in secondary 
classes because individuals of any age can identify with the 
characters in the stories. The stories in Keepers of the Earth are 
also featured in Bruchac's anthology. Native American Stories. 
Because the present volume cannot provide a complete discus- 
sion of all texts, and because of the availability of the Keepers 
series, this review includes a more detailed description of indi- 
vidual stories that I hope will serve as examples for ways in 
which other texts might be used. 

The Abenaki story "Gluscabi and the Game Animals" is a 
favorite of intermediate and secondary students. Featuring 
Gluscabi, the Abenaki trickster /transformer figure, this story 
teaches many lessons, but the most obvious is the individual's 
responsibility to respect nature now and for future generations. 
Gluscabi goes hunting with a magic bag in which he traps all 
the animals of the world. After his grandmother expresses her 
disappointment over his insensitivity to the importance of 
maintaining a balance and harmony between all things, Glus- 
cabi returns the animals to the forest. Bruchac says that when 
telling the story, he has had participants share over a dozen dif- 
ferent and valid interpretations of the tale. 

The Lakota creation story "Tunka-shila, Grandfather Rock" 
tells about the journey of "all things" to Earth, where "out of the 
waters, a great burning rock rose up," making dry land appear 
so life on Earth could begin. The rock is called "Grandfather" 
because it is the oldest. In Chapter 8, Caduto makes the connec- 
tion between this story and the action of volcanoes erupting to 
form "molten rock . . . steam, heat, ash and fire" (57). In essence, 
science and the Lakota people are telling the same story. 

In the traditional Inuit story "Sedna, the Woman Under the 
Sea," Sedna falls in love with a seabird in the form of a man. 



0 



130 



[ 



] 



114 



Roots and Branches 



who lures her to his impoverished home far away. There she 
realizes her mistake and sings a song to her father: "The birds 
do not look kindly / on me, for I am a stranger. / Cold winds 
blow about my bed / and I have little food" (96). Her father 
finally comes to rescue her, and in their escape across the sea, 
her father cuts off the ends of her fingers, which fall and become 
whales and seals. According to Caduto, the story teaches the 
"importance of the whales and seals as food, and how the 
angakok or shaman can influence Sedna to assure successful 
hunting of these animals" (97). Demonstrating the value of com- 
munal survival and the foolishness of an individual's pursuit of 
singular happiness, this story may help students to discover 
how its values contrast with the predominant individualism of 
the novel Julie of the Wolves by Jeanne Craighead George. 

"White Buffalo Calf Woman and the Sacred Pipe" is a 
Lakota story in which the White Buffalo Calf Woman gives the 
people the Sacred Pipe, which represents animals, plants, and 
breath. She also gives them the lessons and rituals that will 
help them continue to live with respect and in harmony with 
all things. 

"How Coyote Was the Moon" is the Kalispel story of how 
Coyote became the moon and used his position to spy on the 
people of the Earth below. Consequently, the people who 
"wished to do things in secret" took Coyote out of the sky. The 
story shows how individuals can improve their situations 
through action. 

The Siksika (Blackfeet) story "The Origin of Death" teaches 
the importance of living with the consequences of our deci- 
sions. In the beginning, when the "world was new," Old Man 
and Old Woman decided how humans should look and how 
long they should live. 

"How Turtle Flew South for the Winter," a Dakota story, 
tells of why only birds fly south for the winter and also why 
turtles sleep all winter. The story also communicates the 
importance of "keeping your mouth shut." 

Teachers who are looking for available and authentic mater- 
ials will find the books in the Keepers series invaluable. 

Fedullo, Mick. It's Like My Heart Pounding: Imaginative Writing for 
American Indian Students. Ogden, UT: Weber State College, 
Mountain West Educational Equity Center, 1990. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

Mick Fedullo now lives on the Crow Reservation in Pryor, 
Montana. He has taught writing to Indian students throughout 
the United States, and this excellent publication presents his 




131 



Bibliography of Resources for Teachers 



115 



educational philosophy, his approaches for the teaching of 
imaginative writing, and eighteen specific assignments. 

Fedullo's first chapter, "Copyright; Plagiarism; Words Not 
to Use; Titles; Stanzas; When and How to End a Poem; 
Rhythm; The Matter of Rhythm; Revision," provides a curricu- 
lum he recommends for grades four through nine, but any of 
the lessons may be adapted for either lower or higher grades. 
Even teachers who have little experience with writing poetry 
will find this resource easy to use. 

Fedullo's second chapter is entitled "Setting the Mood; 
Technical Terms; Focusing; Writing Time; Creative Silence; Pos- 
itive Criticism." The eighteen lessons in Chapter Two "follow a 
sequence which advances from an emphasis on learning new 
expressive language techniques to exploring both personal and 
tribal values, while always involving the students in writing 
their own experiences" (vii). But Fedullo has found that older 
students are more interested in the values, and so he suggests 
teachers might want to "work backwards, or mix up the value- 
oriented lessons with the technique-oriented lessons" (vii). 

Fedullo suggests that his "Formula for Success" is the fol- 
lowing "four-step" pattern: 

1 . Model poems 

2. Discussions 

3. Writing time 

4. Oral reading of work 

Fedullo doesn't intend to create a multitude of "Indian 
poets"; instead he wants to "take the fear out of writing" and 
"build the self-confidence so necessary in completing an edu- 
cation and facing the future" (vii). Evidence of his program's 
success exists in the enthusiastic communities of poets he 
leaves behind, and in the increasing number of publications 
which feature his students' poetry. 

No other "imaginative writing" resource for teaching 
Indian children, or for teaching non-Indian children who are 
living in a community with Indian peoples, can equal this one. 

Francis, Lee (Laguna Pueblo), and James Bruchac (Abenaki), eds. 
Reclaiming the Vision , Past, Present, and Future: Native Voices for 
the Eighth Generation. Greenfield Center, NY: Greenfield Review 
Press, 1996. 153 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

This volume is the result of the work of many of the Native 
writers who had been a part of "Returning the Gift" (the July 




133 



116 



c 



Roots and Branches 



1992 conference of more than 200 North American Native writ- 
ers) and the Native mentoring organization Wordcraft Circle 
(an outgrowth of the 1992 festival). It includes transcripts from 
the plenary sessions of "Returning the Gift," including Leslie 
Silko's comments about Native writing and Native identity; 
Eleanor Sioui's comments about poetry writing; and Carter 
Revard's comments about the way he developed a Native 
American literature course: "I didn't think of the literature as 
just 'here are these words on the page that I'm teaching in 
class.' I thought of it as coming from the People all over the 
country who are trying to say 'we're here'" (25) Reclaiming the 
Vision also includes an anthology of poetry and prose by 
"Emerging Native Voices," sections on storytelling, the writing 
of poetry, fiction and autobiography, and lessons and exercises 
in "Writer's Workshops" that use Native American writing to 
generate work from student writers. This section is especially 
useful for teachers because the workshops were written by 
published Native writers. Each one focuses on one or two short 
poems or memoirs, with background discussion about the poet 
and culture, followed by discussion questions and writing exer- 
cises. Joseph Bruchac believes that "Reclaiming the Vision is a 
book to be treasured by anyone interested in Native American 
literature or the teaching of Native American students." I agree. 

Indian Reading Series. Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational 
Laboratories, 1977-82. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Intended as a supplemental reading program to help children 
improve reading comprehension and enhance verbal and writ- 
ten communication, this series also aims to develop and rein- 
force students' positive self-image and pride. All of the story 
content has been researched, written, and illustrated by Ameri- 
can Indians. The National Institute of Education, participating 
tribes, and the Pacific Northwest Indian Program of the North- 
west Regional Educational Laboratory, a group of more than 
250 "reservation-based planners, writers, and artists" cooper- 
ated to produce this series, which was tested for more than five 
years and has been used in the following programs: Language 
Arts; Indian Language and Culture; Special Education; Multi- 
cultural Awareness; Gifted and Talented; Head Start; Adult 
Basic Education; and Libraries. 

According to the Northwest Report, Northwest Regional 
Educational Laboratory: "The pages are alive with the animals 
and birds that shared the Indian's domain — coyotes and buf- 
falo, eagles and ravens, bears, whales, and wild horses. Told 



133 



Bibliography of Resources for Teachers 



117 



with grace, wit, and wisdom, the stories have been handed 
down over many generations from a time when storytelling 
was the vehicle for transmitting culture, for teaching values 
and survival skills, and for explaining natural phenomena." 

Although each of the four teacher's manuals suggest activi- 
ties to accompany the stories, almost sixty pages in the Levels I, 
II, and III Teacher's Manual explain and illustrate the following 
teaching activities: Dramatization; Talking About; Retelling the 
Story; Writing Down; In Other Words (Making Books): and 
Word Study. The Level IV Teacher's Manual provides historical 
information about the participating reservation communities, 
including Flathead, Blackfeet, Fort Belknap, Fort Peck, and 
Northern Cheyenne. "Teacher Guided Activities" accompany 
each story for this level. The Level V Teacher's Manual provides 
vocabulary studies and science and social studies activities. 
The series also includes a Parent/Teacher Guide. Elementary as 
well as secondary schools will find this an invaluable resource 
for the teaching of Native American literatures. 

The series includes ninety-nine student booklets, one book, 
four teacher's manuals and a parent/ teacher guide. The series 
is currently out of print, but it is available online through the 
Educational Resources Information Center's ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service at www.edrs.com, under ERIC Docu- 
ment Numbers ED258757-258766. 

Plains Native American Literature. Multicultural Literature Collection. 
Virginia Seeley, series ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Globe, 1993. 
151 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Compiled for the middle school level, this anthology is orga- 
nized according to the following Western European and Native 
genres: Oral Tradition; Nonfiction; Fiction; Poetry; and Drama, 
although most are excerpts from larger works. Taken from 
widely published and more popular works, the selections rep- 
resent a balance in gender and tribes from the area east of the 
Rocky Mountains to just west of the Mississippi River, from 
Southern Alberta and Saskatchewan to Southern Texas. Also, 
introductions to selections provide tribal, geographical, and 
historical information about each culture. The compilers hope 
to inspire students to appreciate the values and beliefs of these 
cultures. Questions and activities for thinking, writing, and 
speaking follow each selection, and the Teacher's Resource Man- 
ual provides more background, vocabulary exercises, questions 
for class discussion, suggestions for further reading, and 
assessment worksheets. This is a useful resource for teachers 




134 



118 



Roots and Branches 



who want to introduce students to a variety of Native cultures 
and literatures and who want accessible tools for teaching. To 
"fill in the gaps about Indian boarding schools" in American 
history studies, middle school teachers have used readings 
such as Zitkala-Sa's "School Days of an Indian Girl." 

Reyhner, Jon, ed. Teaching American Indian Students. Norman: Univer- 
sity of Oklahoma Press, 1992. 328 pp. 

Grade Level: All levels 

Teaching American Indian Students, together with Ardy Bow- 
ker's Sisters in the Blood, should be required reading for all 
teachers of Native students. Originating at the Indian Bilingual 
Teacher Training Program at Eastern Montana College in 
Billings, Montana, it includes work done at many Indian 
schools, colleges, and universities. Essays, formal and informal 
studies, and personal experiences of educators who know 
Indian children, are organized into five sections: Multicultural 
Education; Instruction, Curriculum, and Community; Lan- 
guage Development; Reading and Literature; and Teaching in 
the Content Areas. Although the text reflects the work of 
twenty contributers, they all operate on the following assump- 
tions: that new teachers on reservations know very little about 
the students they teach; that "American Indians can learn to 
participate successfully in white society while, at the same 
time, retaining their language and traditional Indian values" 
(77); that Indian students deserve to learn through strategies 
that meet their individual needs; and that Indian students will 
respond best when the classrooms are stimulating and when 
educators involve parents and communities in the process. 

Slapin, Beverly, and Doris Seale (Santee /Cree), eds. Through Indian 
Eyes: The Native Experience in Books for Children. Philadelphia: 
New Society, 1992. 312 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

The purpose of Through Indian Eyes is to enlighten teachers of 
all children so that they might nurture their students "to grow 
up to create a more equitable, bias-free society" (2). For teach- 
ers at all levels, this is an invaluable resource for essays, poems, 
reviews, and bibliographies of literature by and about Indian 
peoples. Beverly Slapin's Introduction provides a background 
to American Indians' historical and cultural experiences that 
justifies such a publication. From Indian perspectives, six 
essays view Columbus Day, Thanksgiving, and popular litera- 
ture taught in many K-12 schools. Thirty-three poems by 
Native writers provide a good way "to know the heart of a 




c 



Bibliography of Resources for Teachers 



1 

119 



People." Essays by Joseph Bruchac, Mary Gloyne Byler, Ceni 
Myles, Beth Brant, and Lenore Keeshig-Tobias express their 
Native insights into experiences with traditional Indian educa- 
tion and with education in America's schools. Slapin and 
Seale's eighty-four reviews of books currently used in the pri- 
mary and intermediate grades are an important resource for 
teachers who are truly concerned about the ways literature can 
communicate both positive and dangerously negative stereo- 
types to young children. Examples and twenty-five criteria for 
evaluating books for racial bias and stereotypes follow the 
reviews. The book closes with an annotated list of resources, 
publication centers, and "A Selected Bibliography" of recom- 
mended works and authors. Teachers may use Through Indian 
Eyes as a resource, but many of the selections can be told or 
read aloud to students of all ages. 



For Further 
Reading 



Antell, Lee. Indian Education: Guidelines for Evaluating Textbooks from 
an American Indian Perspective. Denver, CO: Education Commis- 
sion of the States, 1981. 19 pp. 

Grade Level: P 



Brewer, Linda Skinner (Choctaw). 'O Wakaga': Activities for Learning 
about the Plains Indians. Seattle: Daybreak Star, 1984. 40 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Caduto, Michael J. All One Earth — Songs for the Generations. Cedar 
House Sound and Mastering, 1994. 

Grade Level: I, S 

A musical companion to the Keepers of the Earth books on cas- 
sette and CD. 



Caduto, Michael J., and Joseph Bruchac (Abenaki), eds. The Keepers 
Series. Golden, CO: Fulcrum. 

Keepers of the Animals: Native American Stories and Wildlife Activ- 
ities for Children. 1991. 286 pp. 

Keepers of the Earth: Native American Stories and Environmental 
Activities for Children. 1988. 208 pp. 

Keepers of Life: Discovering Plants through Native American Stories 
and Earth Activities for Children. 1994. 265 pp. 

Keepers of the Night: Native American Stories and Nocturnal Activi- 
ties for Children. 1994. 160 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

This series of books presents an excellent interdisciplinary 
approach to Indian culture and stories, with detailed explana- 
tions of storytelling methods, numerous activities regarding 



O 



13G 



120 



Roots and Branches 



the specific cultures, as well as related areas of science and 
social studies, and explicit procedures for creative projects and 
activities. 

Daybreak Star Indian Reader. Seattle, WA: Daybreak Star Press. 24 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

A monthly publication with cultural information, geographical 
locations, legends, word games and puzzles, and a nature sci- 
ence section. 

"Finding Your Roots." No. 2364. Carson, CA 90746: Educational 
Insights, 1978. 

Grade Level: I, S 

An approach to research into heritage, using old newspapers, 
marriage and death certificates, inscriptions on books, family 
Bibles, etc. 

Kovacs, Edna. Writing across Cultures: A Handbook on Writing Poetry 
and Lyrical Prose. Hillsboro, OR: Blue Heron, 1994. 165 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Patacsil, Sharon (Blackfeet) and Colleen Neal (Squamish). Daybreak Star 
Preschool Activities Book. Seattle, WA: Daybreak Star Press, 1979. 

Grade Level: P 

Project Learning Tree. Olympia, WA: Western Regional Environmen- 
tal Education Council, 1988. 

Grade Level: P, I 

A collection of written science and social studies activities in 
Native American cultural contexts. 

Stott, Jon C. Native Americans in Children's Literature. Phoenix, AZ: 
Oryx Press, 1995. 238 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Szumski, Bonnie. Christopher Columbus: Recognizing Stereotypes. Oppos- 
ing Viewpoints Juniors. San Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press, 1992. 
36 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Verall, Catherine, and Lenore Keeship-Tobias, comp. All My Relations: 
Sharing Native Values through the Arts. Toronto: Canadian 
Alliance in Solidarity with Native Peoples, 1988. 120 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 



□ 



I — 

Bibliography of Resources for Teachers 



121 



Lessons featuring ways to express the values learned through 
creative drama, words, songs, art, and action. 

Windy Boy, Sam, and Ruth Weasle (Chippewa /Cree). Sign Language. 
Rocky Boy, MT. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

A video portraying the differences between Indian sign lan- 
guage and sign language as used by deaf people today. The 
video may be obtained by contacting the library at Stonechild 
College, Rocky Boy Reservation, Box Elder, MT. 



Literary 

Criticism 

Resources 



Owens, Louis (Choctaw /Cherokee). Other Destinies: Understanding 
the American Indian Novel Norman: University of Oklahoma 
Press, 1992. 285 pp. 

A professor of literature in the University of California-Santa 
Cruz, Louis Owens admits that "to begin to write about some- 
thing called 'the American Indian novel' is to enter a slippery 
and uncertain terrain. Take one step into this region and we are 
confronted with difficult questions of authority and ethnicity" 
(3). But Owens uses Bakhtin's critical approach (and others) 
and places the texts within their cultural, historical, and geo- 
graphical contexts, thereby establishing the studied texts as 
important literary representatives of literature in general as 
well as what he calls "the Native American Indian novel." The 
book is "for mixedbloods, the next generation," and the texts 
he has selected serve well to represent the multidimensional 
mixed-blood experience in the postcontact era. His Introduc- 
tion (3-31) provides a valuable analysis of genre in the Native 
American novel: 



1. Identity is the central issue and theme. 

2. World views of "Indian" ways are almost always in direct con- 
flict with the dominant ideologemes of Euramerica. 

3. Authors are challenged to make themselves understood in a 
prose form, and a language, quite foreign to traditional Native 
American discourse. 

4. Trickster tales, the crucial role of play and humor, are integral to 
many contemporary Indian novels and stories. 

5. Many works do not reinforce traditional cultural values embod- 
ied in [European American] canonical texts. 

6. Protagonists frequently resemble the typically displaced, mod- 
ernist figure. 

7. The authors seek to transcend fragmentation, placing humanity 
within a carefully, cyclically ordered cosmos, giving humankind 




133 



122 



: 



Roots and Branches 



irreducible responsibility for the maintenance of that delicate 
equilibrium. 

8. Many include an intense didacticism and insistence upon certain 
immutable values. 

9. The word has very real power. 

10. Indian writers today have come to expect, even demand, that 
readers learn something about the mythology and literary (oral) 
history of Native Americans, and about crucial moments in 
Native American history of the past two centuries. 

In this collection of criticism, Owens examines the works of 
John Rollin Ridge, Mourning Dove, John Joseph Mathews, 
D'Arcy McNickle, N. Scott Momaday, James Welch, Leslie 
Silko, Louise Erdrich, Michael Dorris, and Gerald Vizenor. Sec- 
ondary school teachers will find this an important resource. 

Ruoff, A. LaVonne Brown, ed. Literatures of the American Indian. Indi- 
ans of North America Series. New York: Chelsea House, 1991. 
109 pp. 

Probably the best and most thorough narrative resource for 
teachers and students of American Indian literatures, Litera- 
tures of the American Indian briefly looks at American tribal his- 
tory, defines "literature" and its relevance to American Indian 
peoples, explains the meaning of ceremony and song to Ameri- 
can Indians, and shares their traditions in story and in paint- 
ing. Ruoff also examines the time of contact and "As-Told-To" 
oratory and autobiography first written in English. She sum- 
marizes Native writing in English from 1772-1967, and then 
describes the Native American "Literary Renaissance," begin- 
ning with N. Scott Momaday's book House Made of Dawn, 
which won the Pulitzer Prize in 1969. Illustrated with pho- 
tographs and samples of Indian art, the text weaves biblio- 
graphic information and excerpts from many works into a very 
readable narrative. In absolute denial of the the notion that 
"Indian is Artifact," the book closes with a poem by Simon 
Ortiz: "It Doesn't End, Of Course ... in all soothing / the aches 
of all years, / it doesn't end" (101). 

Witalec, Janet, ed. Native North American Literature: Biographical and 
Critical Information on Native Writers and Orators from the United 
States and Canada from Historical Times to the Present. Detroit, MI: 
Gale Research, 1994. 706 pp. 

For teachers who want a single resource about American 
Indian literature and authors. Native North American Literature 
is invaluable. Like the yearly publication Contemporary Literary 



O 

ERfC 



139 



Bibliography of Resources for Teachers 



123 



Criticism, also by Gale, Native North American Literature pro- 
vides a comprehensive collection of biography and published 
criticism about seventy-eight Native North American writers, 
storytellers, and orators. Lists of "Major Native Nations" 
according to regions, and maps of reservations and culture 
groups follow the Preface. Three separate indexes help readers 
locate specific authors and texts — Tribal Index; Genre Index; 
and Title Index. Students who want to know more about 
Native authors they are reading will find NNAL interesting 
and helpful. Native North American Literature is a resource for 
all school and public libraries, but it should also be available in 
classrooms where students are regularly reading Native litera- 
tures. 



For Further 
Reading 



Bataille, Gretchen M., and Kathleen Mullen Sands, American Indian 
Women: Telling Their Lives. Lincoln: University of Nebraska 
Press, 1984. 209 pp. 



Bevis, William W. Ten Tough Trips: Montana Writers and the West. Seattle: 
University of Washington Press, 1990. 233 pp. 

Lincoln, Kenneth. "Introduction: Sending a Voice." In Native Ameri- 
can Renaissance. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983, 
pp. 1-14. 



Ruoff, A. LaVonne Brown. American Indian Literatures: An Introduc- 
tion, Bibliographic Review, and Selected Bibliography. New York: 
Modem Language Association of America, 1990. 200 pp. 

Studies in American Indian Literatures. A Journal of the Association for 
the Study of American Indian Literatures. University of Rich- 
mond VA 23173 

The only scholarly journal that focuses exclusively on Ameri- 
can Indian literatures (published quarterly). 

Swann, Brian, and Arnold Krupat, eds. Recovering the Word: Essays on 
Native American Literature. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1987. 644 pp. 




140 



124 



5 

Bibliography 
of Anthologies 



Some of the following collections represent Native voices from across 
the continent, while others are more specific to the North Central and 
North Western regions. For some collections, themes and genres are 
not designated because they are specific to individual selections in 
the text. Although this list is in no way exhaustive, most of these col- 
lections are available, and they represent works that can create a high 
level of student interest. 

Achimoona. Introduction by Maria Campbell (Metis). Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan: Fifth House, 1992. 98 pp. 

Genre: Traditional /Contemporary Story 
Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home Within Circles; 
Change and Growth; Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: I, S 

With an available teacher's guide, this is an excellent collection 
of Cree stories by Native writers who met at Gabriel's Cross- 
ing, Batoche, Saskatchewan, in March 1985. In her Introduc- 
tion, Maria Campbell explains the meaning of achimoona , or 
stories, and the sacred craft of storytelling: "Storytelling was 
only done during the winter months and it had to stop when 
the frogs started to sing in the spring. . . . Achimoona are for 
everyone. Each person, young or old, finds the things in the 
story that are meant for him or her. That is one of the special 
gifts of the oral storyteller — to be able to weave all the lessons, 
messages or jokes into a story and not leave anyone out." The 
book includes eleven stories, biographical information on each 
storyteller, and full-color reproductions of artwork by Native 
artists such as Ruth Cuthand, Gerald McMaster, Raymond 
McCallum, and Lome Fineday, which are accompanied by the 
artists' commentaries about their world views and their work. 
The Native protagonists interact with the voices from their sur- 
rounding natural and supernatural worlds, experience con- 
flicts and resolutions with the neighboring white people and 



0 





141 



Bibliography of Anthologies 



125 



cultures, travel through traditional stories arising out of their 
contemporary situations, and learn the important value, "you 
must respect everything." 

Allen, Paula Gunn (Laguna Sioux), ed. Voice of the Turtle: American 
Indian Literature 1900-1970. New York: Ballantine, 1994. 321 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

In the Introduction, Paula Gunn Allen provides a rationale and 
background for each writer and selection, beginning with E. 
Pauline Johnson and ending with Simon J. Ortiz: "The stories 
are an aggregate of U.S. history, national and international 
Native American history, spirituality, and personal narrative. 
Their structures, especially as the formative period of Native 
fiction drew to a close in 1970, came to resemble traditional 
Native narrative more and more while the voice, tone, and 
style ever more closely replicated a communal voice: multiple, 
integral, and accretive" (6). She goes on to say that "Native 
American fiction in the twentieth century has two sides: the 
Oral Tradition of the Native Nations, and Western fiction and 
its antecedents . . . [ceremonial texts and Western traditions] 
interact, as wings of a bird in flight interact" (7). 

Voice of the Turtle offers readers moving and enlightening 
short stories and excerpts from longer works of the following 
writers, most of whom are rooted — and tom — in the Plains land- 
scape and traditions: E. Pauline Johnson, Charles A. Eastman, 
Arthur C. Parker, Mourning Dove, Pretty-shield, Luther Stand- 
ing Bear, Estelle Armstrong, John Oskison, Black Elk and John G. 
Neihardt, Zitkala-Sa, John Joseph Mathews, D'Arcy McNickle, 
Don C. Talayesva, N. Scott Momaday, Ronald Rogers, Grey 
Cohoe, and Simon Ortiz. 

This is excellent reading for secondary students, especially, 
and teachers can use these essays to teach the themes sug- 
gested in Roots and Branches, especially "Between Two Worlds," 
and "Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival." 

Bruchac, Joseph (Abenaki), ed. Songs from this Earth on Turtle's Back. 
New York: Greenfield Review Press, 1983. 294 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Fifty-two contemporary poets, with brief biographies and pic- 
tures, are presented in this excellent and very readable anthol- 
ogy. In his Introduction, Bruchac says, "[These writers] share 
traditions of respect for the Earth and the natural world . . . 
they share strong folk cultures which have either been trans- 
mitted to them by family or learned through a continuing 



O 

ERIC 



3 



142 



126 



c 



Roots and Branches 



personal seeking. They share respect for the awesome power of 
the Word — power which can make or destroy, break or heal . . . 
they share English as a different language for them . . . the lan- 
guage brought by those who dispossessed them . . . they share 
the experience of being viewed as outsiders in their own 
land . . . and they share a high level of accomplishment, for 
they are among the best American poets ..." (xi). 

The poems described below reinforce the values of the Old 
Ways for Native peoples: the values of grandparents, land, and 
eternal relationships within the universe. 

Duane Big Eagle (Osage). "My Grandfather was a Quantum 
Physicist." The speaker's grandfather always knew what scien- 
tists are just discovering today: "that the intimate details / of 
our lives / are influenced by things / beyond the stars / and 
beyond time." The poem teaches the value of Respect for 
Elders and Respect for Nature (22). 

N. Scott Momaday (Kiowa). "The Delight Song of Tsoai-Talee" 
is Momaday's "Name" poem — his celebration of himself who 
stands in "good relation to the earth ... to the gods ... to all 
that is beautiful ... to the daughter of Tsen-tainte / You see, I 
am alive, I am alive" (158). And the poem ends without a 
period. This poem is recorded in N. Scott Momaday, Storyteller. 
Narrated and read by the author, music and ambient effects by 
Rusty Crutcher. Native American Audio Library, Lotus Press. 
Sante Fe, NM: Sunset Productions Inc. 

Ted D. Palmanteer (Colville). "Granma's Words." The poet 
offers his grandmother's remembrance of the Old Ways, her 
words of wisdom — a solution — for the bad times: "Be strong / 
in the heart, / nothing lasts / forever" (196). 

Intermediate- and secondary-level students respond very 
positively to oral reading, and they especially enjoy drawing 
freely while they listen because the poems carry such strong 
concrete images and because the students say they "don't have 
to work." With any novels, stories, or essays involving family 
or environmental themes, these poems work to further the stu- 
dents' experience with literature. 

Hirschfelder, Arlene B., and Beverly R. Singer, eds. Rising Voices : Writ- 
ings of Young Native Americans. New York: Scribner, 1992. 107 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

These poems and short essays have been previously published 
in school publications and creative writing journals. Organized 
in six sections — Identity; Family; Homelands; Ritual and Cere- 



I 

Bibliography of Anthologies 



127 



mony; Education; and Harsh Realities — the poems represent 
the writing of children and young adults nationwide. In the 
Foreword, Hirschfelder says, "Young people speak to these 
issues with intelligence, dignity, wit, and remarkable insight. 
Their words bear vivid, often eloquent witness to the realities 
of their lives over the past hundred years" (1). 

Kittredge, William, and Annick Smith, eds. The Last Best Place: A Mon- 
tana Anthology. Helena: The Montana Historical Society Press, 
1990. 1,158 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

Many selections throughout this anthology represent Native 
voices from Montana. An essay by James Welch prefaces the 
first section, "Native American Stories and Myths," and the 
twenty-eight selections represent eight Montana tribes. 
Although the section "Journals of Exploration" represents the 
non-Indian voice, it is useful to study for its early European 
American bias toward Montana Indian peoples. 

The section "Stories of Early Pioneers and Indians" 
includes memoirs of tragic conflict and loss during the nine- 
teenth century. For example, "Iron Teeth, a Cheyenne Old 
Woman," told to Thomas B. Marquis, begins with Iron Teeth's 
memories of her childhood in the Black Hills, the food they 
planted, and vegetable foods that grew wild. She tells about 
the traditional ways of Cheyenne women and the effect on her, 
and on her people, of the encroachment of whites into their 
lands. One of the Northern Cheyennes who were taken to 
Oklahoma, where they "all got sick with chills and fever," Iron 
Teeth was also one of those who followed Little Wolf in his 
escape to the Dakota country. After surrendering, they were 
taken to Fort Robinson, where they continued to experience 
persecution, freezing temperatures, and terrible hunger. Still, 
she and her party refused to return to Oklahoma. This memoir 
portrays the strength and bravery of just one woman who 
never failed to fight for her people and their right to live by 
the old ways. Speaking through an interpreter, she said, "I 
think the government ought to do better in keeping its 
promise to take care of the old Indians" (248). Teachers may 
use parts of this memoir (233-49), depending on the age of 
students and intended theme. 

Contemporary Indian writers represented in this anthology 
include Minerva Allen (Assiniboine), Linda Weasel Head (Sal- 
ish), James Welch (Blackfeet), D'Arcy McNickle (Salish), Debra 
Earling (Salish), John Tatsey (Blackfeet), and Roberta Hill 
Whiteman (Oneida). 




144 



128 



Roots and Branches 



One story that addresses the problems of being a young 
adult and living "Between Two Worlds" is Debra Earling's 
"Perma Red." With "faded" hair and "last night's liquor a 
cotton-dry whisper on her thick tongue," Louise hitchhikes 
back to Dixon, where her mother lies dying from what "Aunt 
Suzy says is bad medicine." There Louise finds her grand- 
mother burning sweetgrass and listening for the night owl to 
signal Annie's death. Even though Louise has been running 
away, "wishing she had made it to Missoula, or Wallace, any- 
where, off this reservation," her "heart [becomes] her drumbeat 
home." Sitting in the pickup and watching her mother's burial, 
Louise sees in the truck mirror that "the red color of her hair 
[doesn't] match her dark skin." And so she looks for "some- 
thing to cover her [peroxided] head" as she slowly approaches 
the grave. Beside the grave. Grandma lifts "her palms to the 
sky" and chants a "slow, meandering song [in Salish] that 
[makes] Louise very sad." Although "Perma Red" is a story of 
loss and disconnection, a story about being caught between two 
worlds, the conclusion affirms the Native tradition that will 
always hold Louise: her grandmother "sang to a part of Louise 
that was lonesome" (1025). Set in the 1940s, "Perma Red" sensi- 
tively portrays the conflicts and resolutions many young people 
experience even today (1019 -1025). This story may be com- 
bined with James Welch's contemporary novels Winter in the 
Blood and The Death of Jim honey, or with D'Arcy McNickle's 
novel The Surrounded and Louis Owens's Wolfsong. 

Lerner, Andrea, ed. Dancing on the Rim of the World: Anthology of 
Northwest Native American Writing. Tucson: University of Ari- 
zona Press, 1990. 266 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

This excellent anthology, alphabetically organized according to 
author, includes contemporary Northern Plains and Northwest 
area writers, including the following: 

Janet Campbell Hale (Coeur D'Alene). "Ancestress." With 
images of continuity, circles, and drums, and flying eagles, the 
speaker affirms her relationship to her grandmother, who tells 
her she "lived here once" and who will "endure" through her 
granddaughter (87). 

Victor Charlo (Bitterroot Salish). "Flathead River Creation," 
"Dixon Direction," "Frog Creek Circle," and "The Milltown." 
Victor Charlo 's poetry affirms life with the possibility and power 
in personal (re)creation repeated again and again: "You are the 
creation of the universe one more time"; "We are remembered 




145 



c 



Bibliography of Anthologies 



1 

129 



today in circles / of family, of red pine, of old time chiefs, / of 
forgotten horses that thunder dark stars"; "We are the stories 
now / . . . And now / we bum yes, we sing yes to world we 
find / in us" (27-30). Identifying himself as a "Bitterroot Salish 
parent, poet, philosopher, theologian and teacher," and working 
as a counselor at the Kicking Horse Job Corps, Charlo knows the 
needs of young people. His poetry speaks to all levels. 

Jo Whitehorse Cochran (Lakota). "Halfbreed Girl in the City 
School." This poem demonstrates the social and personal con- 
flicts for contemporary Indian young people who attend mul- 
tiracial schools. It specifically addresses the issues of cultural 
and racial stereotypes and their influence on the Indian's per- 
sonal identity and voice (41-42). 

Debra Earling (Salish). "Winter Keeps," "Summer Humming 
1946," "Montana Burial Wind," and "Summer of Bees." In Ear- 
ling's poetry, we hear voices alive in dust and wind and bees; 
we share in the living presence of those who have gone before, 
and we hear and live "the stories of other times." In her poetry, 
voices are "always calling, / The creak of a summer screen 
door, / A car turns off the highway lighting / A pale dust road 
going / Home. Your mother waving, / The drowned girl 
laughing, / The high buzzing wires, / The dry-dust soil, / 
Then wind." Just as in Momaday's The Way to Rainy Mountain, 
Earling's poetry expresses the powerful way memory and 
imagination re-create sounds and images into each new experi- 
ence. Working well to demonstrate a cyclical and communal 
world view, the poem "Summer of Bees" can easily be included 
in a unit on contemporary American poetry (54—62). 

Several of the introductory biographical sketches represent 
the voices of the writers themselves. Andrea Lerner compiled 
this collection to dispel the stereotype of the Vanishing Indian 
and to celebrate "the creativity, enthusiasm, and craft that 
marks [contemporary and alive] literary efforts" (xvii) in the 
Northwest Region. The voices in this collection, which sec- 
ondary students can appreciate, are tribal voices addressing 
disturbing issues such as suppression, disease, political repres- 
sion, and dispossession. 

Lesley, Craig, ed. Talking Leaves: Contemporary Native American Short 
Stories. New York: Dell, 1991. 385 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

An exceptional collection of contemporary Native American 
short fiction. Talking Leaves includes the works of thirty-five 
established writers, lesser-known writers, and new writers. 



0 

ERIC 



14G 



130 



Roots and Branches 



including Paula Gunn Allen, Joseph Bruchac, Elizabeth Cook- 
Lynn, Anita Endrezze, Rayna Green, Joy Harjo, Linda Hogan, 
N. Scott Momaday, Gerald Vizenor, James Welch, and Elizabeth 
Woody. In the Introduction, Craig Lesley says: “The stories here 
in no way reflect a 'romantic' view of nature or contemporary 
Native American life. Change is the rule rather than the excep- 
tion, and enormous stresses operate on the culture and the indi- 
vidual. Frequently, the characters are torn between two worlds. 
Families are wrenched by displacement, alcoholism, spouse or 
child abuse. Remarkably, the characters manage to survive in 
spite of overwhelming odds. And as these voices attest, they 
survive with courage, and dignity, and humor" (xviii). 

Most of the protagonists in Talking Leaves are Native Ameri- 
can young adults, making this an excellent anthology of Native 
American literature for a secondary classroom. One of the best 
stories is also the most controversial, but a high school student 
commented that it was his "favorite story because it tells it like 
it is — these are the truths of puberty!" In Debra Earling's "The 
Old Marriage," Louise recalls her experience with Clarence Yel- 
low Knife, who "used to follow her around, a beaver-dark boy 
with a stinking mouth full of rotting teeth." The son of the "rat- 
tlesnake woman," Clarence carries the power of the rat- 
tlesnake, but Louise's grandmother helps her bury the rattles 
under "three red-colored rocks" so she can avoid their power. 
Still Clarence Yellow Knife pursues Louise and asks her to 
marry him. She runs away to the security of her grandmother's 
house, where she remembers "her grandma talking about the 
choices of men, of bad medicine and the power of the old mar- 
riage." The story "The Old Marriage" is grounded in a tradi- 
tional Salish belief system as well as in Earling's understanding 
and honest communication regarding the sexual conflicts 
young teens experience. Because of the sexual imagery, this 
story is best saved for the more mature readers (61-69). 

A non-Indian, eleventh-grade reader responded by writing 
about the number of stories featuring the "respect for elders, 
the importance of the past, the whole family as captained by 
the Grandmother, and the family's reliance on the Grand- 
mother's wisdom." Another twelfth-grade reader concluded 
her reading of Talking Leaves by writing: "When storytellers tell 
about their experiences and hardships, they accept them as 
reality and, perhaps, will have a greater chance for change." 

Nabokov, Peter, ed. Native American Testimony: A Chronology of Indian- 
White Relations from Prophecy to Present. New York: Harper & 
Row, 1978. 232 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 




147 



Bibliography of Anthologies 



Organized according to theme and subject matter — Premoni- 
tions and Prophecies; Face to Face; Exchange Between Worlds; 
Bearers of the Cross; Living Beside Each Other; The Long 
Resistance; The Treaty Trail; Exiles in Their Own Land; and The 
Nation's Hoop Is Broken and Scattered — this collection repre- 
sents over fifty first-person accounts of Native experiences 
with the white man. In his Foreword, Vine Deloria, Jr. suggests 
this volume provides the other side of American history, the 
"informality of human experience, which colors all our deci- 
sions and plays an intimate and influential role in the historical 
experiences of our species." He concludes with the recommen- 
dation that readers "discard presumptions and preconceptions 
and immerse the soul in the richness of the human condition" 
(xvii-xix). This collection is especially useful as a contrast to 
many contemporary non-Indian works that carry romantic or 
negative stereotypes of Indian peoples. 

Niatum, Duane (Klallam). Harper's Anthology of 20th Century Native 
American Poetry. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1988. 395 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Niatum has brought together thirty-six contemporary poets 
who "attest to the health of both the Native American spirit 
and American literature," and he has provided biographical 
sketches of all included authors (ix). In his Preface he suggests 
these writers generate a sense of "coming from the land and 
not to it," and Niatum recognizes commonalities in style, 
theme, and subject matter (xi). Brian Swann, in his excellent 
and comprehensive Introduction, surveys the history of Native 
American literature, looks at what distinguishes Native Ameri- 
can Poetry while trying to avoid calling "Indian literature" a 
"genre" (xviii). He looks at the changes in Native American 
poetry, the themes, the ways ancient voices present themselves 
in these contemporary voices, their reverence for tradition, and 
he applauds their "courage to continue" in spite of "loss, in 
spite of living divided in two worlds, and in spite of alien- 
ation" (xxxi). This collection is an excellent resource for inter- 
mediate and secondary libraries 

Riley, Patricia (Cherokee), ed. Growing Up Native American: An Anthol- 
ogy. New York: Wm. Morrow, 1993. 333 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

Growing Up Native American would be an excellent classroom 
text for high school students, especially those of Native Ameri- 
can heritage. Excerpts from larger works, essays and short sto- 



O 

EKLC 



143 



132 



Roots and Branches 



ries are included in four sections: Going Forward, Looking Back; 
The Nineteenth Century; Schooldays; and Twentieth Century 

In the Introduction, Patricia Riley recalls her own growing 
up, suggests that she never read authentic American Indian lit- 
erature because "it was shelved in the anthropology section of 
the downtown library," and regrets the books she did read 
with characters who "bore no resemblance to the lives of [her] 
neighbors or friends." Riley says she has put together this 
anthology "as a chance to rectify, in some small way, the situa- 
tion of my childhood, not only for myself and my own chil- 
dren, but for anyone, Indian or non-Indian, interested in the 
real-life experiences of Native American people" (23). She has 
included many of these particular authors and stories because 
they have strongly influenced the way she views herself and 
the world around her, and because many of the stories "res- 
onate" for her on a "deeply personal level": 

The truth is, we have not vanished, though we have often "disap- 
peared" from the minds and hearts of America, even as we continue 
to be romanticized and exploited by various "New Age" philoso- 
phers who appropriate and distort Native American spiritual tradi- 
tions, but never look for nourishment in their own ancient European 
tribal traditions. (23) 

An introduction prefaces each section, briefly suggesting 
the historical, geographic, and cultural context for the readings, 
and a short biographical introduction prefaces each reading. 
This collection is neither escape literature nor adventure or fan- 
tasy literature, and none of the readings may be labeled as 
romantic. This is literature that disturbs, that confronts the 
reader with realities only participants in the experience are 
qualified to share. Although adults may appreciate all the 
selections in this anthology, the protagonists, for the most part, 
are young adults, in the middle of their growing, who confront 
and survive even the most devastating circumstances. Riley 
hopes her audience will not only be non-Indians who wish to 
learn the truths about being Native American, but also "many 
Native American readers who will see the text as a respectful 
opening into the multilayered and intricate worlds from which 
they (we) come" (8). Each reading may be completed in one sit- 
ting. Students will find this anthology a beginning to their 
reading of contemporary Indian literatures, and they will want 
to read the entire works of authors such as Black Elk, Joseph 
Bruchac, Ella Deloria, Michael Dorris, Louise Erdrich, Linda 
Hogan, Sara Winnemucca Hopkins, N. Scott Momaday, Leslie 
Marmon Silko, Anna Lee Walters, and others. 



0 



149 



Bibliography of Anthologies 



133 



Rosen, Kenneth, ed. The Man to Send Rain Clouds: Contemporary Stories 
by American Indians. New York: Penguin, 1992. 178 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

Understanding this collection was first published in 1974 helps 
to explain Rosen's opening comments that these stories repre- 
sent "a small but important and growing body of literature that 
has until now been virtually ignored" (ix). The numbers of 
anthologies listed in the bibliography here written definitely 
contradict Rosen's statement. Most of the stories feature male 
protagonists; several demonstrate the important connections 
between the old and the young, between humans and their 
environment; and several depict the fragmented lives so many 
contemporary Native and non-Native young people live today. 

The title story is "The Man to Send Rain Clouds," by Leslie 
Marmon Silko (Laguna Pueblo), one of the most widely anthol- 
ogized Native short stories today. When an old Indian grandfa- 
ther dies, two boys put his body in the back of a pickup so the 
old man's daughter might perform a traditional burial ritual. 
The daughter finally asks the local priest to come, not to per- 
form a Christian burial but to sprinkle holy water over the 
body so the people might receive rain. They succeed in pulling 
him into participation in their Native ritual. Still, the priest 
remains an outsider, but he has achieved more insight into the 
values of the traditional Indian ways. The story demonstrates 
the cyclical nature of all life and experience, and it shows the 
ways Indian people can make use of the dominant culture 
while still holding to the "Old Ways." This story may be com- 
pared and contrasted with Margaret Craven's novel, I Heard the 
Owl Call My Name, in which a Catholic priest experiences the 
strengths of the Kwakiutl Indian culture and ritual. 

In "Humaweepi, the Warrior Priest," also by Silko, nineteen- 
year-old Humaweepi travels into the hills with an old man. 
There Humaweepi learns to trust his survival to nature in the 
ways of animals; he sees a bear, "magic creature of the moun- 
tains, powerful ally to men" (166), and Humaweepi sings the 
song of the "warrior priest." 

"Saves a Leader," by Larry Littlebird and the members of 
Circle Film, tells a story that can be used for all levels. It is a 
communal story about an old woman (Grandmother), and 
"Lazy Coyote. He slept by the river" (155). Grandmother tells 
the children a story about "Saves a Leader," who had "gained 
the respect of all" because he was brave. When she finishes her 
story, the best swimmer among the children tries to swim 
across the river and is caught in the fast water. Lazy Coyote 
wakes and saves him, earning the new name, "He Too Saves a 



erJc 



150 



134 



Roots and Branches 



Leader." This story communicates the importance of each per- 
son's responsibility to work for the welfare of each other: 
"Together, the power of the people was strong. / The people 
were very happy together" (160). 

At the end of his Introduction, Rosen writes about contem- 
porary American Indian writers: "Poetry and traditional tales 
still seem to be the dominant genres . . . but fiction is attracting 
the efforts of more and more young people . . . who are faced 
with the monumental task of somehow reconciling an inherent 
concept of tradition with a contemporary non-Indian world in 
which the exploitation of the individual talent is forever being 
encouraged" (xiv). 

Vanderwerth, W. C., comp. Indian Oratory: Famous Speeches by Noted 
Indian Chieftains. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1989. 
291 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Using transcriptions of early white men who had heard Indian 
tribal council meetings and speeches, and using the Indian oral 
tradition, Vanderwerth suggests in his Preface that "every 
effort was made to trace the speeches as far back as possible, so 
that little would be added or subtracted in the telling and 
retelling" (ix). In the Foreword, William R. Carmack recognizes 
the way the "wit and sarcasm" in these speeches "destroys the 
stereotype of the stoic, silent, humorless red man" (viii). A 
picture, a short biographical sketch, and a description of the 
situation and date preface each of the twenty-six speeches, and 
students will recognize the names of familiar chieftains from 
across the continent. 

Although probably recorded and translated by non-Native 
people, the speeches by Tecumseh and Pushmataha, both 
delivered to the Chickasaws just five years before their removal 
to the Indian Territory west of the Mississippi, are fine exam- 
ples of oratory which may be compared with Patrick Henry's 
speech to the Virginia House before the Revolutionary War. 
Also, in light of the bias of many history textbooks toward 
Andrew Jackson and his "removal policy," these speeches pre- 
sent an opportunity for students to question the implications of 
serious political decisions for all involved people, not just for 
the winners. 

Also included in this book of oratory are the last words 
attributed to Crazy Horse (Sioux): "At ten o'clock [September 
5, 1877], he called Indian Agent Jesse M. Lee to his side and 
spoke to him, shortly after which he died" (215). Although we 
have no other record of these words by Crazy Horse, they may 






151 



1 = 

Bibliography of Anthologies 



~1 

135 



serve as a primary source (214-217). Teachers can use this 
"speech" in conjunction with Benchley's story. Only Earth and 
Sky Last Forever. 

Vizenor, Gerald (Chippewa), ed. Native American Literature: A Brief 
Introduction and Anthology. HarperCollins Literary Mosaic 
Series. Berkeley: HarperCollins, 1995. 372 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

Native American Literature is part of a series for college-level 
classes, which includes Hispanic American Literature, African 
American Literature, and Asian American Literature, but secondary- 
level students appreciate reading this independently. With a 
Foreword and Introduction by the general editor, Ishmael 
Reed, the book is organized according to genre — Autobiogra- 
phy; Fiction; Poetry; and Drama — and each is prefaced with 
a short biography, a list of the writer's complete works, and a 
paragraph that establishes a focus for the reader. There is 
also an "Alternate Table of Contents by Theme": Identity; 
Place; Family; Struggle; Tricksters and Transformations; and 
Language. 

In Reed's description of Gerald Vizenor, he says: "Vizenor 
insists that the story of Native Americans in the United States 
should be told by Native Americans and not by intermediaries 
or translators" (ix). Native American Literature does just that. 
There are no as-told-to stories here, no separate and isolated 
traditional tribal stories which Vizenor would probably say 
are meant to be spoken, not printed in "Dead Voices," and 
none by storytellers whose voices may have been twisted in 
translation or editing. Although the collection includes works 
by nineteenth-century writers William Apes, Luther Standing 
Bear, and John Rogers, most of the writers are mixed-bloods 
born after World War II. 

Ishmael Reed also refers to N. Scott Momaday's comment 
about Gerald Vizenor: "He has the richest sense of humor of 
anyone I know, and in addition he's the most articulate per- 
son — he's a man to be reckoned with" (ix). Vizenor 's own con- 
tributions demonstrate his sense of humor. His stories have the 
power to convince readers that Indians are survivors who 
understand trickery, who will themselves play tricks, and who 
will not be victimized again. One of the two plays included is 
Vizenor 's Ishi and the Wood Ducks: Postindian Trickster Comedies. 
Since many young people have read Alfred Kroeber's Ishi, the 
Last of His Tribe , they will be interested in Vizenor 's approach, 
which portrays Ishi as a character in the story of his life after 
his death. Native American Literature selections prove the truth 







1 52 



] 



136 



Roots and Branches 



in Momaday's observation. They tell some terrible stories, but 
they lack the overtly negative tone that appears in other con- 
temporary collections — as well as works by some of the 
included writers. Vizenor's own wordplay, his use of complex 
symbols, his vivid imagination, and his profound sense of the 
ironies and paradoxes in the lives of Native Americans have 
definitely influenced his choice of the works included in this 
anthology. It is an excellent collection of contemporary Native 
American literatures. 

Walker, Deward E., Jr. Myths of Idaho Indians. Moscow: University of 
Idaho Press, 1980. 197 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

In his Introduction, Walker, an anthropologist, defines myths: 
They "impart the basic values and beliefs of a society and give 
moral instruction to its members . . . they serve as mechanisms 
for educating children, stimulating social interaction, and 
amusement" (7). He also includes an explanation of the Trick- 
ster (Coyote), who he says "acts out man's socially disruptive 
drives, thereby revealing the disastrous results of violating 
conventional mores" (8-9). The Introduction concludes with 
suggestions about the most reliable and least biased ethnologi- 
cal works. Six tribes are represented in this collection: Kutenai, 
Kalispel, Coeur d'Alene, Nez Perce, Shoshone, and Northern 
Paiute. 



For Further 
Reading 



Ahenakew, Freda (Cree), and H. C. Wolfart. Our Grandmothers' Lives 
as Told in Their Own Words. Saskatoon, Saskatchewan: Fifth 
House, 1992. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Reminiscences and personal stories telling about the daily lives 
of Cree women. 



Allen, Paula Gunn (Laguna Sioux). Grandmothers of the Light: A Medi- 
cine Woman's Sourcebook. Boston: Beacon, 1991. 245 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

A collection of twenty-one "goddess" stories from a wide vari- 
ety of nations across the entire continent. 

, ed. Spider Woman's Granddaughters: Traditional Tales and Con- 
temporary Writing by Native American Women. New York: Faw- 
cett Columbine, 1989. 277 pp. 

Grade Level: S 



Bibliography of Anthologies 



137 



Twenty-four stories by Native women writers from various 
tribal traditions, beginning with an Introduction that includes a 
brief historical outline of the literary tradition of American 
Indian women. 

Anderson, Gary Clayton, and Alan R. Woolworth, eds. Through Dakota 
Eyes: Narrative Accounts of the Minnesota Indian War of 1862. St. 
Paul: Minnesota Historical Press. 316 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Eyewitness accounts of the war and its aftermath. 

Brafford, C. J. (Oglala Sioux), and Laine Thom (Shoshone /Goshiute/ 
Paiute). Dancing Colors: Paths of Native American Women. San 
Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1992. 120 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Glossy color and black-and-white photographs of Indian 
women, their landscapes and the clothing, tipis, jewelry, and 
household implements, interwoven with stories, all demon- 
strating the power and respect which Native women have tra- 
ditionally been afforded. 

Braided Lives: An Anthology of Multicultural American Writing. St. Paul: 
Minnesota Humanities Commission, 1991. 287 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

A multicultural collection, including selections from the fol- 
lowing Native American writers: Paula Gunn Allen, Diane 
Bums, Louise Erdrich, Diane Glancy, Linda Hogan, Maurice 
Kenny, Barry Milliken, N. Scott Momaday, Leslie Marmon 
Silko, Mary TallMountain, Laura Tohe, and Roberta Hill White- 
man. 

Brant, Beth (Mohawk), ed. A Gathering of Spirit: A Collection by North 
American Indian Women. Ithaca, NY: Firebrand Books, 1988. 
239 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

Bruchac, Joseph (Abenaki). Flying with the Eagle, Racing the Great Bear. 
Mahwah, NJ: BridgeWater Books, 1993. 128 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Sixteen transition or "rites of passage" stories with male pro- 
tagonists, where young people benefit from the wisdom of 
elders. 



O 



154 



138 



Roots and Branches 



, ed. Returning the Gift: Poetry and Prose from the First North 

American Native Writer's Festival. Tucson: University of Arizona 
Press, 1994. 369 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

A collection of emerging Native writers. 

Bruchac, Joseph (Abenaki), and Gayle Ross (Cherokee). The Girl Who 
Married the Moon: Tales from Native North America. Troll Medal- 
lion, 1994. 127 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Stories with female protagonists that demonstrate the impor- 
tant balance that existed between the sexes in Native American 
cultures. 

Clark, Ella E. Indian Legends from the Northern Rockies. Norman: Uni- 
versity of Oklahoma Press, 1966. 350 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

A collection of myths, legends, and historical traditions from 
the tribes of Montana, Wyoming, and Idaho, with brief histori- 
cal backgrounds of the tribes. 

Erdoes, Richard, and Alfonso Ortiz (San Juan Pueblo). American Indian 
Myths and Legends. New York: Pantheon Books, 1984. 526 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

Over 150 stories plus a brief history and geographical location 
of the tribes represented. All the stories are essentially authors' 
"retellings" and so may differ from the same stories told by 
local tribal people. Since the collection has not been compiled 
for children, teachers of intermediate students should be selec- 
tive about which stories they use. 

Erdoes, Richard, ed. The Sound of Flutes. Pantheon, 1976. 129 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

A collection of twenty-nine traditional tales told by Lame Deer, 
Jenny Leading Cloud, Leonard Crow Dog, and others from Pine 
Ridge and Rosebud, South Dakota, illustrated by Paul Goble. 

Farley, Ronnie, ed. Women of the Native Struggle: Portraits and Testi- 
mony of Native American Women. New York: Orion, 1993. 158 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

One of the most powerful books published today, which 
strongly contradicts the negative stereotypes of Indian women. 





155 



Bibliography of Anthologies 



139 



providing evidence of the positive ways in which Native 
American women have confronted and survived change. 

Gattuso, John, ed. A Circle of Nations: Voices and Visions of American 
Indians: North American Native Writers and Photographers. Port- 
land, OR: Beyond Words. 128 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Hamilton, Charles. Cry of the Thunderbird: The American Indian's Own 
Story. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1972. 284 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Over fifty Native Americans who describe events in their own 
words. 

Legends of Our Nations. North American Indian Traveling College. 
Cornwall Island, Ontario: NAITC Press, 1984. 

Grade Level: I 

Swann, Brian, and Arnold Krupat, eds. I Tell You Now: Autobiographi- 
cal Essays by Native American Writers. Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press, 1987. 283 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

A good resource for teachers as well as students, offering 
insight into the philosophies and experiences of published 
writers. 

Velie, Alan R., ed. American Indian Literature: An Anthology. Norman: 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1991. 373 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

A collection of "literature by Indians on Indian subjects" that is 
organized according to genre and collected on the basis of "lit- 
erary quality" and for gender balance, rather than according to 
region or tribal orientation. 

Vizenor, Gerald (Chippewa), ed. Touchwood: A Collection of Ojibway 
Prose. Minneapolis: New Rivers Press, 1987. 177 pp. 

Grade Level: S 




~.v 



15G 



140 




6 

Bibliography 
of Native Literatures 



Although the following annotations and reviews cannot include an 
extensive list of recommended uses for the selections, most include 
suggestions for use with other literatures and with themes normally 
covered in language arts programs. Each annotation includes the 
genre, themes, and grade level for each work, as well as the tribal 
affiliation of the author(s). For additional biographical notes and 
excerpts of critical reviews, teachers and students may consult the 
1994 Gale Research publication. Native North American Literature, 
edited by Janet Witalec. Within the following annotations, NNAL des- 
ignates the authors who are included in the Gale resource. 

Regrettably, by the time Roots and Branches is published, some 
of the books listed here, especially those from smaller publishing 
houses, may no longer be in print. However, they may be obtained 
through public, college, and tribal libraries, and I hope that an 
increasing demand may encourage publishers to reprint. 

Ahenakew, Freda, trans. and ed. How the Birch Tree Got Its Stripes. 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan: Fifth House, 1988. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: I 

Illustrated by George Littlechild, this traditional Cree story was 
written by Cree-speaking students. It is the story of the Cree 
trickster/transformer Wisahkecahk, who wants to test his 
endurance beyond common sense. Among other lessons, the 
story communicates the dangers of too much pride. However, 
third-grade Sioux and Assiniboine children were saddened 
and disturbed by the violent ending, asking their teacher what 
"whipping" meant. This situation demonstrates the difficulties 
of using traditional stories in other cultural contexts without 
adequate preparation for the listeners. 




1 57 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 






141 



Alexie, Sherman (Spokane/Coeur d'Alene). The Lone Ranger and Tonto 
Fistfight in Heaven. New York: The Atlantic Monthly Press, 
1993. 223 pp. 

Genre: Short Story 

Themes: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival; Between 

Two Worlds; Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: S NNAL (119-124) Alexie 

Sherman Alexie was born in 1966 on the Spokane Reservation 
in Wellpinit, Washington, where he still lives. His poetry, nov- 
els, and short stories depict the Spokane Reservation landscape 
and some of the harshest realities of Native American lives 
today. In particular, the stories in The Lone Ranger and Tonto Fist- 
fight in Heaven reveal the vast distance between illusion and 
reality and the resulting loss. The narrator of many of these sto- 
ries is Victor, a Spokane Indian who suffers from poverty, 
despair, and alcoholism. Still, the stories construct and connect 
figures like Victor, Jimmie, and Thomas with each other, with 
their past heroes, and with those they have fought and loved. 
Beginning with fierce "hurricanes" raging in fistfights, in bro- 
ken promises and treaties, and in mud-puddle drownings 
across the reservation, the stories multiply into metaphor. 
Here, past heroes sing and dance again in a Crazy Horse bas- 
ketball warrior and through a storyteller who may never 
"answer a question straight" (39). 

In The Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in Heaven, Alexie the 
storyteller provides answers through a creative landscape of 
ironies and juxtapositions. The parents of two "warriors" shine 
with pride for their "very brave" car-stealing sons. Traditional 
tribal ties split and splice into community surrounding "a bot- 
tle and broken dreams." Anorexic and bulimic teens throw up 
their lunch while "back on the reservation [mothers stand] in 
line" for commodities. And the aunt holds "her baby close to 
her chest" while the doctor ties her tubes, "with the permission 
slip [she] signed because the hospital administrator lied and 
said it proved her Indian status for the BIA" (81). After reading 
this section aloud to a group of educators on one of our reser- 
vations, a middle-aged woman told about a doctor who 
drowned two newborns in a bucket of water. 

Within the stories, Alexie's characters, like Coyote, are 
transformed from horses to warriors to contemporary story- 
tellers: "His eyes are looking past the people who are looking 
past us for the coyote of our soul and the wolverine of our 
heart and the crazy man that touches every Indian who spends 
too much time alone" (116). And Samuel tells the story of Coy- 
ote himself, the creator of all, whose toenail clippings acciden- 



O 

ERIC 



153 



142 



Roots and Branches 



tally drop and fall to the earth, burrow into the ground, and 
grow "up to be the white man" (135). 

More than anything, though, this collection of stories is about 
the power of stories, and laughter, and imagination to ensure 
survival. "Survival = Anger x Imagination. Imagination is the 
only weapon on the reservation" (150). In "This is What it Means 
to Say, Phoenix, Arizona," Thomas Builds-the-Fire has a dream, 
telling him to go to Spokane and "stand by the Falls." When Vic- 
tor's father appears and asks what Thomas is doing, he says, 
"Waiting for a vision." Later, after Victor's father drives Thomas 
back to the reservation, Thomas says to Victor: "Your dad was 
my vision. Take care of each other is what my dreams were saying. 
Take care of each other " (69). In "A Good Story," the narrator's 
mother tells him to "write a story about something good" (140). 
And so he tells a story of the friendship between "the best bas- 
ketball player in the reservation grade school" and Uncle Moses, 
an old teller of a "good story," who knows "we are all given 
something to compensate for what we have lost" (143). 

No one who reads these stories can escape the heartbreak or 
the laughter — or the possibility of hope through imagination 
and community: "Imagine an escape. Imagine that your own 
shadow on the wall is a perfect door. Imagine a song stronger 
than penicillin. Imagine a spring with water that mends broken 
homes. Imagine a drum which wraps itself around your heart. 
Imagine a story that puts wood in the fireplace" (152). 

The publishers appropriately suggest that Sherman Alexie 
"evokes the complex density of life in and around the Spokane 
Indian Reservation, an existence filled with pain, anger, and 
bitterness but also, more importantly, with forgiveness and 
resilient hope. What is explored here is the distance between 
people: between Indians and whites, reservation Indians and 
urban Indians, men and women, and, most poetically, between 
modem Indians and the traditional figures from their past" 
(back cover). 

The Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in Heaven pulls readers in 
and demands understanding and empathy, making it very pop- 
ular with adult as well as secondary readers. Reservation stu- 
dents know this world well, and teachers will find that they can 
easily use it as a class novel. Several story selections may be used 
with intermediate-level students. This book can work to break 
down racial and cultural barriers between Indian and non- 
Indian students in surrounding communities, especially when 
they first explore the oral tradition of the Coeur d'Alene and the 
history of federal Indian policy. Alexie is an artist, and teachers 
can use his work well to achieve current NCTE/IRA language 
arts standards for literature, writing, and oral communication. 



159 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



Teachers and students who enjoy Alexie's work might also 
appreciate Smoke Signals, a motion picture released in 1998 that 
is based on stories in The Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in 
Heaven. The film, which Alexie wrote and coproduced, won the 
Audience Award and the Filmmaker's Trophy at the 1998 Sun- 
dance Film Festival. 

Big Crow, Moses Nelson (Lakota). A Legend from Crazy Horse Clan. 
Chamberlain, SD: Tipi Press, 1987. 28 pp. 

Genre: Traditional, Historical Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: I 

Legendary Tashia Gnupa (Meadowlark) and her baby raccoon 
are left behind after a buffalo stampede scatters their camp. 
Befriended by a buffalo calf, Tashia becomes a member of the 
Buffalo Nation. Years later, warriors find and take her with 
them. After marrying one of the warriors, she bears sons, one of 
whom was Crazy Horse, the "pride of all Lakota." Although 
Paul Goble has published a story that resembles this legend. Big 
Crow's story is more believable because the characters display 
human weaknesses as well as strengths. When the girl finds 
herself alone, she cries and wanders, is unable to build a fire 
because the "stones won't work," and speaks Lakota like a five- 
year-old when she is finally found years later. Lakota phrases, 
names, and some dialogue are integral to the story, as are the 
traditional Lakota behavior patterns of men and women, and 
Big Crow has included a "Lakota Word Glossary" at the end. 
Children today who enjoy intimate relationships with their 
horses or dogs, or with deer, like the boy in Rawling's The Year- 
ling, can identify with the girl who travels with a buffalo herd 
because she made friends with a buffalo calf who wanted to 
play. Illustrated by Daniel Long Soldier, A Legend from Crazy 
Horse Clan is an excellent resource for teachers who want to 
read or tell the story to primary level children, or for children 
from third grade up who will read it themselves. The story com- 
municates the Lakota tradition of accepting strangers into a clan 
or community, the problems for individuals who must live 
between two cultures or life ways, and it shows how even the 
youngest children are taught to respect and express gratitude to 
Wakan-Tanka, the "Great Mystery," who brings every new day. 

Young Sioux children, hearing this story read, ask if it is all 
true. In response, one teacher focused on the true interdepen- 
dent relationship between humans and animals and the way 
history becomes legend when distanced by time. 






160 



144 



Roots and Branches 



Black Hawk (Sauk). Black Hawk: An Autobiography. Donald Jackson, 
ed. Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 1990. 164 pp. 
Genre: As-Told-To Autobiography 

Themes: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival; Between 
Two Worlds 

Grade Level: S NNAL (59-67) Black Hawk 

First dictated to a U.S. interpreter, Antoine LeClair, and pub- 
lished in 1833, this autobiography represents the story of a man 
who fought Andrew Jackson's "removal policy" to preserve his 
village, surrounding corn fields, and a way of life. Deceived by 
chiefs and medicine men, and pressured by fearful squatters 
and a relentless U.S. military, he was unable to prevent the star- 
vation and final slaughter of his band, even as they intended to 
surrender. Prefaced by an Introduction based on information 
from the military's historic records, this edition poses interest- 
ing contrasts in points of view. No doubt, Meridel Le Sueur 
used Black Hawk: An Autobiography as a source for her young- 
adult novel Sparrow Hawk, and so students of American and 
Indian history can benefit from reading both accounts. 

Brass, Eleanor (Cree). Medicine Boy and Other Cree Tales. Illustrated by 
Henry Nanooch. Saskatoon, Saskatchewan: Fifth House, 1979. 
Genre: Traditional and Contemporary Story 
Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 
Grade Level: I 

In this collection of twenty-six stories, Eleanor Brass explains 
the legendary trickster/transformer figure, Wesuketchuk: "He 
originated every act, both good and bad, that humanity has ever 
done since the beginning of creation. He was also a friend to 
animals and nature. He spoke to them and addressed them all 
as his little brothers. He played many tricks on them and so they 
were wary when he approached but he nearly always outwitted 
them." This excellent collection includes creation stories, stories 
which reflect the influence of the French language and culture, a 
few contemporary stories, and stories featuring Wesuketchuk. 
In the story "Abandoned," a contemporary young Cree woman 
learns she was the abandoned child of a "frightened white girl." 
Having been raised in a Cree family, she regards such abandon- 
ment as "unpardonable according to tribal laws." Maintaining 
her commitment and relationship to the family that raised her, 
she says, "you are my real mother and my family will never be 
abandoned by me." This story teaches the solidarity of families 
and the commitment required by all members to maintain that 
solidarity, but it also teaches that relatives are defined by behav- 




.1 



O 



1GI 



] 



I 

Bibliography of Native Literatures 



145 



ior rather than blood. Although all the stories communicate tra- 
ditional values, some close with the essential teaching of the 
story: to always listen to warnings, to remember to think of oth- 
ers, to never be greedy and neglect responsibilities, and to be 
grateful for all gifts on earth. Students from all grade levels can 
appreciate these stories. 

Bruchac, Joseph (Abenaki). Children of the Longhouse. New York: Dial, 
1996. 150 pp. 

Genre: Young Adult Novel 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Change and Growth; At 
Home within Circles 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (184—198) Bruchac 

This is a story of the Mohawk, The Flint Nation, one of the Six 
Iroquois Nations that were organized under The Great Law of 
Peace, the forerunner of the United States Constitution. Ohkwa'ri 
and Otsi:stia are eleven-year-old twins, at home in a Flint 
Nation village in the late 1400s. The children learn the ways of 
their people through historical and sacred stories, while they 
work and play beside their elders. But they also come into con- 
flict with an older group of boys after Ohkwa'ri overhears their 
plans of war against a people who had once made slaves of the 
Mohawk. The elders commend Ohkwa'ri for telling them of the 
plan and publicly chastise the group and refuse to sanction the 
attack because the consequences could be devastating for the 
entire community. But the leader of the group wishes revenge, 
and this provides motivation for succeeding events that climax 
when the boys fight during Tekwaarathon, a sport that cen- 
turies later would be known as lacrosse. As Ohkwa'ri and 
Otsi:stia change and grow, they learn about the importance of 
peace and the obligation of all people to give thanks for all gifts. 
They learn to respect the elders and the powerful role women 
and men hold in maintaining peace, and they learn about the 
ways to avoid conflicts. 

Like Michael Dorris' Morning Girl, the voices and story of a 
brother and sister in Children of the Longhouse are carried 
throughout the novel in alternating chapters. Joseph Bruchac 
demonstrates a sensitivity to the feminine experience that cre- 
ates a believable balance throughout the novel, while he tells 
the archetypal story of males battling for power. Students will 
want to discuss and possibly argue about the way the elders 
intervene to avoid hazardous conflicts between young people. 
Since so many students today would never "tell on" their 
peers, even when they are in great danger, they might disap- 
prove of Ohkwa'ri's actions after he overhears the plan of war. 



O 

ERIC 



162 



146 



Roots and Branches 



[ 



Kanatsiohareke, the village which provides the setting for 
this novel, has been restored after the people raised funds to 
purchase a five-hundred-acre piece of land at auction. Today it 
is a place where "Mohawk children climb Ohkwa'ri's hill, and 
the sound of the water drum Otsi:stia loved so well is heard on 
moonlit summer nights as the old social dance songs are sung" 
(150). Children of the Longhouse is an excellent novel, and teach- 
ers can easily combine it with science, history, geography, and 
storytelling activities. 

— . Turtle Meat and Other Stories. Duluth, MN: Holy Cow! Press, 
1992. 115 pp. 

Genre: Short Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 

Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (184-198) Bruchac 

Rendering laughter, insight, tears, and the absolute certainty 
that dreams are real, all of the stories in Turtle Meat are short 
enough to be read aloud — or told — and teachers may easily use 
them in combination with science, social studies, and other lit- 
erature and writing activities. Some of the seventeen stories are 
traditional, and a few occur in historical settings and situations 
such as eighteenth century New England and World War II. 

One story, "Code Talkers," is patterned after the historical 
World War II story of a group of Navajos that the United States 
Army recruited to create a code using the Navajo language as a 
base. In "Code Talkers," Bruchac tells his own World War II 
trickster story where two Indians from different cultures con- 
fuse German intelligence: "Wayne was an Apache and I wasn't. 
I didn't know his language for beans and aside from that year I 
spent in the mountains with my grandfather when he kid- 
naped me from the Indian school, my native Indian language 
had been English." They conspire to frustrate "German intelli- 
gence officers who listened in on [their] conversations" by 
speaking "basic German so badly that no one else could under- 
stand a word [they] were saying." This story humorously 
demonstrates the way the "powerless" can outwit those "in 
power" (33-38). 

Other stories portray the way foxes, bears, fish, and 
wolves can prevail over entrapment and exploitation with the 
assistance of their human brothers. "The Fox Den" demon- 
strates the interdependent relationship between animals and 
humans and the importance of respect for all living things, 
even for the foxes who kill chickens. When Grandfather and 
his collie catch and kill a fox, they rescue her only living cub 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



] 



147 



and bring it back to Grandmother, who will care for it even 
though she knows it will grow up to kill her chickens. Many 
years later, although years before that fox had been “shot as 
he was chasing chickens," the narrator meets another fox in 
the field who “for that one moment and forever after" was as 
close to him as the one his mother and "grandparents kept as 
a pet . . . two decades" before he was born (27-32). 

The trickster appears throughout these stories, but clever 
people outwit him and foil his plans. Through Bruchac's story- 
teller's voice, we can hear the wisdom of Abenaki "old 
people," especially in the story, "Jed's Grandfather." When Jed 
visits his grandfather, who is dying of cancer, old Joseph Sabael 
teaches the boy that "cancer smells" and that "it's as natural as 
anything else" (21-26). As Jed learns to overcome his fear of his 
grandfather's pending death, the old man and Jed tear apart 
the bread Jed's mother has sent for the grandfather, and they 
toss it to the gulls flying over the "waveless lake," demonstrat- 
ing the cyclical, and natural, patterns of life and death. The 
story "How Mink Stole Time," about cultural differences with 
respect to time, offers lessons to all people: "Because Mink stole 
Time, it now owned him and the People. It has been that way 
ever since then. Time owns us the way we used to own the 
Sun" (69-70). 

Bullchild, Percy (Blackfeet). The Sun Came Down: The History of the 
World as My Blackfeet Elders Told It. New York: Harper & Row, 
1985. 390 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Change and Growth; At 
Home within Circles 
Grade Level: I, S 

Divided into four parts — creation stories; Napi tales; "Kut-Toe- 
Yis, Bloodclot Tales"; and "Honoring Creator Sun" — this book 
is an excellent resource of traditional Blackfeet literature and 
could be used in part or whole for teaching units. In the section 
"Earth's Beginnings," Bullchild tells the story of the Blackfeet 
world from its inception to the preservation of the future, and 
he tells how Creator Sun created the earth, the universe, 
humans, and all that is necessary for human survival. Percy 
Bullchild indicates these stories have been handed down from 
generation to generation, but they also represent cultural 
change as they reflect the influence of Christianity on the 
Blackfeet culture. In the story "Earth's Beginning," Bullchild 
tells about Creator Sun who took space dust and spit on it to 
make a ball out of the clay. Then he created snakes, which 



0 



164 



[ 



] 



148 



Roots and Branches 



increased so many times that he tried to destroy them. Still one 
survived to continue to populate the earth. Then Creator Sun 
made grass to grow so the earth would be more beautiful. At 
the end of the story. Creator Sun wishes for something that 
"will look like [his] image." "Moon and Big Dipper Come into 
Being" is about the way Creator Sun made the Moon for his 
mate and how their seven children became the Big Dipper, but 
still the snakes are reproducing to make trouble for Creator 
Sun. These stories communicate the dependent relationship 
between the creatures on earth and the Sim and Moon. 

The Napi tales are humorous and enlightening, teaching 
traditional lessons and values that the Blackfeet needed to sur- 
vive in their society. "A Disciple of Creator Sun" tells of the cre- 
ation of Napi, Creator Sun's idea to "send a small part of 
himself to watch over his children and to teach them to come 
out of the bad ways they had been doing." But Napi, Old Man, 
takes the power given him by Creator Sun and does mischief, 
coming to "admire himself for his doings, even if they were 
crazy doings." Not all people followed him; many knew of his 
foolishness. 

The third section includes stories about Kut-Toe-Yis, who 
was created by Creator Sim and Mother Earth to undo the 
wickedness that Napi had brought to the earth. The fourth part 
tells about the Native religion, rituals, and ceremonies. 

Campbell, Maria (Metis). Halfbreed. Lincoln: University of Nebraska 
Press, 1973. 154 pp. 

Genre: Memoir 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Change and Growth; At 
Home within Circles; Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival; 
Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (199-209) Campbell 

A best-seller in Canada, Halfbreed is a very popular book with 
female readers. Growing up as one of the thousands of land- 
less "Road Allowance" Metis in Northern Saskatchewan and 
Alberta, Maria Campbell struggled to prevent starvation, 
poverty, and the disintegration of the bonds between herself 
and her six brothers and sisters after her mother's death. This 
memoir provides insight into the lives of Indian mixed-bloods 
who grew up with strong grandmothers, their Cheechum, who 
constantly reinforced family and community pride. However, 
this quickly turns to shame and self-abasement once the Chee- 
chum leaves. At the age of fifteen, Maria marries a "wealthy" 
white man she doesn't love, believing he will provide a com- 
fortable life for her brothers and sisters. And so begins her 



165 



[ 



] 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



149 



lonely battle with alcohol and drugs. Yet the strength of the 
grandmother's voice prevails even at the end of the memoir 
when Maria recalls Cheechum's promise: "You'll find yourself, 
and you'll find brothers and sisters." She finally conquers her 
addictions and begins to work with the Native movement in 
Canada for the thousands of other women and men like herself 
who must set aside their differences in order to survive as indi- 
viduals and as a community. Halfbreed is the story of loss and 
survival, of cultural integrity and of hopelessness conquered. 
Students who read Halfbreed recognize the value of the ways 
the family struggled for years to keep together. Although the 
strong language may prove to be a sensitive issue for some stu- 
dents, the insight into the life of one survivor makes this a 
valuable book for older high school students, both Indian and 
non-Indian alike. Teachers may also use excerpts to demon- 
strate the powerful, negative impact of racial stereotypes on 
the self-esteem and spirit of Indian people. 

Charbonneau, Eileen (Cherokee). In the Time of the Wolves. New York: 
Tom Doherty, 1994. 180 pp. 

Genre: Young Adult Historical Novel 

Themes: Change and Growth; Between Two Worlds; Remem- 
bering the Old Ways 
Grade Level: I, S 

Beginning her writing career in print journalism, Charbonneau 
has relied on her mixed heritage to write mysteries featuring 
Cherokee themes and historical novels that address multicul- 
tural and mixed-blood issues for American young people. In a 
presentation to teachers at an NCTE convention in Chicago, 
she said that she writes in the mystery genre because it 
"appeals to young people's sense of justice — when young 
adults solve the problems through reading, they can experi- 
ence a sense of empowerment." Also interested in film and the 
media, she was co-writer of an award-winning educational 
film narrated by Christopher Reeve, Endowment for the Planet. 
In the Time of the Wolves, nominated as a 1995 Library Associa- 
tion "Best Book for Young Adults," is the second in a trilogy 
which Kirkus calls "Good, appealing historical fiction." 

Set in the Catskill Mountains of the northeastern United 
States, In the Time of the Wolves begins with the narrator's vio- 
lent reaction to verbal assaults, "Heathen!" and "Ugly savage," 
directed at his sister. Living between the worlds of "heathen" 
and Catholic, Native, French, and Dutch ancestry, fourteen- 
year-old Joshua and his family face discrimination and con- 
flicts throughout the summer of 1824, when they trust the 



0 



16G 



150 



: 



Roots and Branches 



prediction of Quinn Delaney: "It will be a year without sum- 
mer . . . there will be frosts in every month, little sun and too 
much rain. You must plant carefully, you must protect your 
animals, for the wild creatures of the mountains will become 
crazed with hunger. It will be a year ... [of the wolves]" 
(29-30). "Struggling with his heritage," and with the commu- 
nity's rejection of his father's belief, Joshua follows an older 
woman, whom he has befriended, into a trap where he is 
expected to betray his family for the sake of his desired Har- 
vard education. Joshua changes and grows when he recognizes 
and asserts the values of both his parents: "My father is not 
evil. He does not even recognize evil, his heart is so good. It is 
my mother's wisdom that surrounds us. . . . We are of the 
mountains, and of wilder stock than yours, but we are created 
equal Americans . . . we are like the balsam trees: we know how 
to live and we will not be uprooted" (145). 

Although the story is fiction, Charbonneau explains in the 
"Author's Notes" that in 1816 a killing frost occurred in every 
month of the year, with snowstorms in July and August. Scien- 
tists believe it was caused by the eruption of Mount Tambora 
on the Indonesian island of Sumbawa, when "dust circled the 
earth, reducing the amount reaching the ground. The event led 
to strange weather, massive crop failures, soaring prices, and 
perhaps even a pandemic of cholera" (181). The narrator's 
voice at times appears too sophisticated for his age and experi- 
ence, especially when he refers to his father as "Daddy." But 
having grown up in a "house without books," Charbonneau 
demonstrates her skills in dialogue and intrigue, as well as her 
sensitivity to the desires and conflicts young adults experience. 
In the Time of the Wolves would work well with Arthur Miller's 
The Crucible, which also features the theme of an individual's 
responsibility to think for himself or herself no matter what the 
emotional cost. 

Cook-Lynn, Elizabeth (Crow Creek Sioux). From the River's Edge. New 
York: Arcade, 1991. 147 pp. 

Genre: Historical Novel 

Themes: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival; Between 
Two Worlds 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (216-221) Cook-Lynn 

This book is based on the true story of John Tatekeya, "a Dako- 
tah and a cattleman," who lost his land to flood and his cattle 
to thieves, and who suffers under the "justice" of the "white 
man's court of law." Although he lives traditionally, John has 
bought into the white man's concept of ownership, and so his 



167 



c 



] 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



151 



loss is all the greater. In the end, his identification with the 
"antiquities of the universe" is affirmed, "his eyes, wide open 
in the total darkness," and he adjusts "by degrees, to his own 
triviality" (147). In the final image of the novel, young Philip 
puts sage into the hands of "his venerable grandfather, Harvey 
Big Pipe." One eleventh-grade student responded with this 
realistic insight: "Even though he won his case, his battle was 
not nearly won." Students from farming and ranching back- 
grounds especially appreciate John Tatekeya's conflicts and 
frustration with a system he can't control. 

Crow Dog, Mary (Lakota), and Richard Erdoes. Lakota Woman. New 
York: Harper, 1990. 263 pp. 

Genre: As-Told-To Autobiography 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Personal and Cultural Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: S NNAL (180-183) Crow Dog 

With Richard Erdoes, Mary Crow Dog tells her story, which 
won the American Book Award in 1991. The memoir opens 
with "I am Mary Brave Bird. After I had my baby during the 
siege of Wounded Knee they gave me a special name — Ohitika 
Win, Brave Woman, and fastened an eagle plume in my hair, 
singing brave-heart songs for me. I am a woman of the Red 
Nation, a Sioux woman. That is not easy" (3). Much of her story 
concerns Leonard Crow Dog, her husband. But it is her voice 
we hear, telling her story of personal and cultural conflict and 
survival: "My Voice you shall hear: I will live!" A high-school 
freshman girl called Lakota Woman "tragically sad and shock- 
ingly real ... a book about growing up," and valuable for ages 
fifteen and older. There is a video by the same title that is based 
on this story. 

Culleton, Beatrice (Metis). In Search of April Raintree. Winnipeg: 
Peguis Publishers, 1995. 228 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Personal and Cultural Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: S NNAL (232-239) Culleton 

In response to questions about her reasons for writing April 
Raintree, Culleton said, "[There] had been two suicides in my 
family, the rest of my family members were alcoholics, and we 
had to be raised in foster homes. I wanted to know why: Was it 
because we were natives?" A novel of two sisters, victimized 
by an uncaring social service system as they search for lost 







1G3 



[ 



] 



152 



Roots and Branches 



identities, April Raintree represents what critics call "Native 
counterdiscourse"; like Armstrong's Slash, discourse that sub- 
verts the dominant European-American discourse to fight 
against injustice of any kind. When the book was reissued in 
1984 as April Raintree, the graphic rape scene had been cut for 
high-school use. In an interview with Hartmut Lutz, in Contem- 
porary Challenges: Conversations with Canadian Native Authors, 
Culleton said: "But I'm not angry at white people. If it were, 
say, the Indians and they were oppressing the white people, I 
would be angry with the Indians, of course. It's the injustice 
that people do to each other! There's just no reason for it!" 

Deloria, Ella Cara (Yankton Sioux). Dakota Texts. Vermillion, SD: 
Dakota Press, 1992. 142 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles 
Grade Level: I, S NNAL (240-245) Deloria 

First published in 1932, this is the most extensive collection of 
Dakota oral literature available. Ella Deloria, as a native 
speaker herself, recorded and translated sixty-four traditional 
stories. Born in White Swan, South Dakota, in 1889, Ampetu 
Waste wi (Beautiful Day) lived most of her young life on the 
Standing Rock Reservation, where her father was an Episco- 
palian minister. Later she attended All Saints' School in Sioux 
Falls, Oberlin College in Ohio, and Columbia University in 
New York. She taught at Haskell Indian School, as well as 
schools she had herself attended, but she spent much of her life 
collecting ethnological and linguistic materials for the anthro- 
pologist Franz Boas. Dakota Texts represents her work with tra- 
ditional Dakota storytellers. The current collection includes her 
Introduction, her synopses of tales, her free translations, and 
her notes to the English version. The first eight stories feature 
Iktomi, the Dakota trickster, and thirty-one stories feature char- 
acters such as Double-Face, Iya, Stone-Boy, the Rolling Skull, 
and the European characters, Orpheus and Eurydice. The next 
fourteen stories include "tales of bewitchment and magical 
transformations" such as "the story of the girl who changes 
into a rock, giving the name to Standing Rock Agency." Most of 
the other stories take place in the Pine Ridge Area, dealing 
"with the clash between the Dakota and the Crow during the 
not-too-distant past" (vii). Students enjoy comparing this liter- 
ature with other collections of Dakota stories, but they also find 
value in examining the stories within twentieth-century con- 
texts. In a unit featuring works from a single tribal culture, this 



169 



c 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



153 



collection can preface the reading of Deloria's Waterlily and 
Zitkala-Sa's American Indian Stories. 

. Waterlily. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1988. 244 pp. 

Genre: Historical Novel 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles, 
Change and Growth; Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: I, S NNAL (240-245) Deloria 

First written in 1944, this mid-nineteenth-century novel pro- 
vides insight into the traditional Dakota customs, rituals, and 
values of the Old Ways while it tells the story of Waterlily, a 
Dakota girl. In the "Afterword," Raymond DeMallie suggests 
Waterlily uniquely portrays "nineteenth-century Sioux Indian 
life, unequaled for its interpretation of Plains Indian culture 
from the perspectives of women" (233). For Ella Deloria and 
other traditional Lakota people, responsibility to relatives and 
community was a most important value. Not only does Water- 
lily demonstrate that value, but so does Deloria's lifelong work 
with the Sioux people. Waterlily, with a female protagonist, 
may be taught in conjunction with James Welch's Fools Crow, 
with a male protagonist, especially since both represent the cul- 
tural and personal loss and survival of mid-to-late nineteenth- 
century Plains Indians. 

Dorris, Michael (Modoc). Morning Girl. New York: Hyperion, 1994. 
74 PP- 

Genre: Historical Novel 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Change and Growth; At 
Home within Circles 

Grade Level: I NNAL (258-268) Dorris 

In alternating chapters — and in separate voices — Michael Dor- 
ris creates the lives of two Taino children on a Bahamian island 
in 1492. Twelve-year-old Morning Girl is "always doing things 
in her dreams, swimming or searching on the beach for unbro- 
ken shells or figuring out a good place to fish." Star Boy, her 
brother, sees "everything so upside down from [her]." At the 
end, they welcome "the strangers [Columbus and his men] . . . 
who had decorated their faces with fur and wore shiny rocks 
on their heads" (69). With dramatic irony, Dorris closes his 
story of Morning Girl and Star Boy with an excerpt from one of 
Christopher Columbus's letters to the King and Queen of 
Spain, dated October 11, 1492: "They should be good and intel- 
ligent servants, for I see that they say very quickly everything 





170 



154 



c 



Roots and Branches 



that is said to them ... at the time of my departure I will take 
six of them from here to Your Highnesses in order that they 
may learn to speak" (74). Although lacking the action that 
many young readers demand, the strong sensory images, flow- 
ing language, and realistic characterizations make Morning Girl 
appealing to all ages. 

. A Yellow Raft in Blue Water. New York: Henry Holt, 1987. 342 

pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival; At Home within Circles 

Grade Level: S NNAL (258-268) Dorris 

Set on a Montana reservation, somewhere east of Havre on 
Highway 2, A Yellow Raft in Blue Water is a three-generational 
account of Rayona, the estranged fifteen-year-old daughter, 
Christine, her strong-willed mother who is dying, and Ida, the 
matriarch of their clan. Each tells her story as the novel moves 
from contemporary reservation life to the past. The novel 
addresses the cultural aspects of the women's lives, but it has 
universal themes and is especially useful for teaching structure 
and point of view. Episodic in time and sequence, A Yellow Raft 
in Blue Water also shifts points of view and comes full circle 
where whole pictures are connected. The painful realism in the 
novel might be objectionable to some, and female readers have 
questioned the author's ability to accurately write about the 
feminine experience, although some critics suggest that Louise 
Erdrich edited the text. 

Eastman, Charles A. (Santee Sioux). Indian Boyhood (190 pp.) and Old 
Indian Days (279 pp.). Greenwich, CT: Fawcett, 1972 (originally 
published in 1902 and 1907, respectively). 

Genre: Memoir 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Between Two Worlds; Personal and Cultural Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: I,S NNAL (269-275) Eastman 

Born a Santee Sioux in Minnesota, in 1858, Ohiyesa was later 
named Charles Eastman because his father, who had been 
imprisoned at Davenport, Iowa, in 1862, with those who took 
part in the uprising or in the battles following, was converted 
in prison by the pioneer missionaries ( Indian Boyhood, 189). 
After Lincoln pardoned Many Lightnings for lack of evidence, 
he searched for his son, Ohiyesa, until he found his camp in 
Canada. The boy, baptized Charles A. Eastman, was educated 



O 

ERIC 



171 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



] 



155 



in eastern boarding schools, attended Dartmouth, and became 
a government physician at the Pine Ridge Agency in South 
Dakota. 

Indian Boyhood is a text that illustrates the conflict for East- 
man of living "Between Two Worlds." The language usage in 
this book indicates Eastman wrote it for a non-Indian audience, 
which had defined Indian belief systems as "superstitious" and 
Indian stories as "legends or fairy stories." Eastman also pro- 
vides explanations for names and cultural practices unfamiliar 
to a non-Indian audience, and he defines the Indian as "sav- 
age" and the white culture as "civilized." Nevertheless, the 
entire work demonstrates his affection for his Native culture. 
Whenever he introduces an "alien" practice to his audience, he 
appears to apologize for it by using non-Indian terminology, 
but each episode concludes with an affirmation of its truth and 
value to the people (including Eastman). 

Written in both the first and third persons, this memoir 
includes Ohiyesa's recollections of his grandmother, his play- 
mates and their games, his pet grizzly and other animals, 
family and tribal traditions, storytellers and their legends, 
encounters with Cree, Chippewa, and Blackfeet, harvests of 
rice, sugar, and hunting buffalo, and his early impressions of 
the white man and his technology. In one of the last chapters, 
Eastman contradicts the "stern-faced" stereotype of Indian 
peoples when he tells about "The Laughing Philosopher" who 
could keep "the community in a convulsive state (179)." 

Teachers may use individual chapters with units regarding 
various aspects of the Native experience as lived in the North 
central Plains west of the Mississippi and north of the Missouri 
into Canada. But the entire text may be paired with Ella Delo- 
ria's Waterlily, with collections by Luther Standing Bear and 
Zitkala-Sa, or it may be contrasted with Conrad Richter's Light 
in the Forest or with the romantic and counterfeit voice of 
Forrest Carter in the Education of Little Tree. 

-. Indian Heroes and Great Chieftains. Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press, 1991. 241 pp. 

Genre: Biography 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival; Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (269-275) Eastman 

An important alternative to many popular biographies of 
Native American warriors and leaders, this collection from the 
Native perspective provides sensitive, and sometimes first- 
hand, stories of fifteen Plains leaders. The first ten chapters tell 




172 



156 



Roots and Branches 



the stories of famous Sioux heroes who lived and fought dur- 
ing the transition period: Red Cloud, Spotted Tail, Little Crow, 
Tamahay, Gall, Crazy Horse, Sitting Bull, Rain-in-the-Face, Two 
Strike, and American Horse. 

At the beginning of "Crazy Horse" (Sioux), Eastman 
acknowledges the stereotypes that have dominated the pub- 
lic's image of Crazy Horse: "Notwithstanding all that biased 
historians have said of him, it is only fair to judge a man by the 
estimate of his own people rather than that of his enemies. Big- 
heartedness, generosity, courage, and self-denial are the quali- 
fications of a public servant, and the average Indian was keen 
to follow this ideal" (84-85). Telling several stories of Crazy 
Horse's boyhood, Eastman closes with a contradiction of the 
"savage" stereotype: "He was never involved in any of the 
numerous massacres on the trail, but was a leader in practically 
every open fight. Such characters as those of Crazy Horse and 
Chief Joseph are not easily found among so-called civilized 
people" (83-106). This work may be compared with Only Earth 
and Sky Last Forever by non-Indian author Benchley. 

Eastman himself spoke with Chief Joseph (Nez Perce) about 
his flight and how he and his people resisted leaving his home- 
land in the Grande Ronde Valley in Oregon: "I call him great 
because he was simple and honest. Without education or spe- 
cial training he demonstrated his ability to lead and to fight 
when justice demanded. He outgeneraled the best and most 
experienced commanders in the army of the United States. . . . 
He was great finally, because he never boasted of his remark- 
able feat" (194-212). 

The biography of Dull Knife shows a Cheyenne hero who 
was "devoid of selfish aims, or love of gain ... a pattern for 
heroes of any race." Dull Knife, called the "panther of the 
Cheyennes" by whites, led his people to escape imprisonment 
in Indian Territory where they were dying. Although most died 
in the effort, Eastman suggests that at least they died together 
with their "dauntless leader," as "fighting Cheyennes." Of 
Roman Nose, a contemporary of Dull Knife, Eastman says, 
"No other chief attacked more emigrants going west on the 
Oregon Trail between 1860 and 1868." Roman Nose died in a 
battle with General Forsythe: "In order to inspire [his men] to 
desperate deeds he had led them in person, and with him that 
meant victory or death" (179-93). 

Hole-In-The-Day (Ojibway) lived when many people 
believed this continent could easily hold both the Indian peo- 
ple and the white people. The stories in this chapter reflect 
Hole-In-The-Day's belief that Indian people must accustom 



O 

ERJC 



173 



[ 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



] 



157 



themselves to the white ways. However, the chief opposed the 
removal of the Mississippi River Ojibways in 1867 to the White 
Earth reservation. Eastman says he was " one of the most bril- 
liant chiefs of the Northwest, who never defended his 
birthright by force of arms" (225-41). 

When Eastman served as a government physician sent to 
the Sioux and Northern Cheyenne, he knew Little Wolf. 
Although much is heard about Chief Joseph and his march 
toward freedom, little is told about Little Wolf's flight from 
imprisonment in "Indian Territory" to Montana. He and his fol- 
lowers went to "Montana and then to Pine Ridge, where he and 
his people remained in peace until they were removed to Lame 
Deer, and there he spent the remainder of his days" (213-24). 

Students enjoy reading these stories and comparing and 
contrasting them with their previous views of these figures. 

Endrezze, Anita (Yaqui). at the helm of twilight. Seattle: Broken Moon 
Press, 1992. 120 pp. 

Genre: Poetry 

Themes: Change and Growth; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival; At Home within Circles 
Grade Level: S 

With a sensual and lyric voice, and with insight into the ways 
we can die or survive, Anita Endrezze writes about the femi- 
nine in relationship to others, about the way human beings 
need and give to each other, and about the way these relation- 
ships weave into our individual identities. The poem "One 
Thing, Too Much" may be used with the study of Macbeth, Death 
of a Salesman, or other selections featuring themes of obsession, 
but it also provides one of the important reasons for multicul- 
tural education: "We all love one thing too much. / Chocolate. 
Coffee. Liquor. / . . . We all fear one thing too much. / Being 
alone. Dying. / The stranger at the door. / . . . But we don't 
know / what our own backs / look like / unless we're wi llin g 
to see / from a different perspective . . . We don't know that too 
much / of one thing / is like a burning woman / calling for 
more wood" (86-87). 

Erdrich, Louise (Chippewa). Love Medicine. New York: Holt, Rinehart, 
& Winston, 1984. 275 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; 

Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: S NNAL (276-289) Erdrich 




% 



174 



] 



158 



Roots and Branches 



Love Medicine is a saga of two Native American families, the 
Kashpaws and the Lamartines, and of those who left the Indian 
land and those who stayed. Set in North Dakota and Minnesota, 
the narration of Love Medicine works the way stories are told, 
retold, and reinterpreted by those who hear them and tell them 
again. The point of view changes from chapter to chapter, and 
by the end of the novel readers are enmeshed in a community 
through the stories they have shared. June Kashpaw is the Deer- 
Woman, haunting the lives of the people she knew and chang- 
ing even before her husband's eyes. The novel is a kind of 
trickster-transformer story, with stories of characters changing 
the way those characters appear to others within the story and 
to those who read the story. Not a simple tale of the healing 
power of love, Erdrich's novel is instead about June and her 
Love Medicine — a power or curse — appearing throughout the 
stories to draw in the elements of her universe, beyond their 
own will or control. Within the stories, Louise Erdrich spins 
metaphors into meaning upon meaning just as she spins the 
tales of her characters. After reading Love Medicine , an eleventh- 
grade girl wrote: "Many traditional values are presented in this 
book . . . the value of nature (an example of the transformation 
of a deer into June in the back seat of the car; also humans are 
metaphorically compared to animals), the value of remember- 
ing the dead (in every instance of a death, a person close to the 
deceased had an experience of meeting or feeling the spirit of 
the dead, reassuring them that they would always be with 
them), and the most important value of family." Another non- 
Indian senior student wrote: "After reading Love Medicine, I 
became aware of the amount of understanding we need to use 
when reading literature that comes from a different culture than 
our own. We also can feel the confusion and frustration of 
Indian children who are forced to read non-Indian literature." 
Love Medicine is an excellent novel for the more sophisticated 
readers who want to explore the contemporary world of mixed- 
bloods and Indians relocated to the cities, a world where change 
is inevitable and survival is definitely possible. 

-. Tracks. New York: Henry Holt, 1988. 226 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival; Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: S NNAL (276-289) Erdrich 

Tracks is the third in a series of related novels that also includes 
Love Medicine. Beginning with the devastating Anishinabe 
losses from smallpox or the "spotted sickness" in 1912, the 





] 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



novel tells old man Nanapush's story to his granddaughter. 
Lulu. (Nanabush is the Ojibway trickster/transformer figure.) 
The other storyteller in the novel, Pauline, causes trouble 
throughout and finally becomes an insanely fanatical nun. One 
senior reader, who "wanted to turn the pages until the very 
end," identified Pauline as the trickster, holding "loyalty to no 
one and causing mischief to Fleur and anyone else who tried to 
help her. ... It is ironic that Pauline later became a nun because 
she had caused so much harm, and people usually view the 
Catholic Church as good." It is the story of Nanapush's fight 
against "bureaucrats [who sank] their barbed pens into the 
lives of Indians" to survive with land and family and dignity. 

Fraser, Frances. The Bear Who Stole the Chinook. Vancouver, BC: Douglas 
and McIntyre, 1990. 129 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: I, S 

Growing up in Alberta, Canada, just south of the Blackfoot 
Reserve, Frances Fraser learned the Blackfoot language, listened 
to songs and stories, and developed a deep respect for the 
Blackfoot culture and people who visited her father's farm. 
Hugh Dempsey, associate director of the Glenbow Museum, 
suggests that the Blackfoot Indians supported her writing and 
publishing. Included in this collection of thirty-one stories are 
tales about Napi (Old Man), the Blackfoot trickster/transformer 
figure, who exhibits contradictory and very human characteris- 
tics such as courage and cowardice, wisdom and foolishness, 
kindness and cruelty. Heroic adventures, general legends, and 
religious tales are also represented in this collection. While 
some stories portray individuals who lived in the nineteenth 
century, others explain the origin of certain ceremonial prac- 
tices. Fraser intended the stories to be read aloud to all levels, 
but middle school and high school students will especially 
appreciate reading the entire collection. This book works well as 
an introduction to Blackfeet/Blackfoot culture before reading 
novels such as Fools Crow and Winter in the Blood. 

Geiogamah, Hanay (Kiowa). New Native American Drama: Three Plays. 
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1980. 113 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Play 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: S NNAL (290—297) Geiogamah 




i v 



17G 



160 



=ZI 

Roots and Branches 



Regarded as America's best-known Native playwright, Hanay 
Geiogamah "employs humor, realism, and idiomatic language 
to subvert negative stereotypes about Native Americans and to 
address the alienation felt by the Indian in contemporary 
American society" ( NNAL 290). The Body Indian features Bobby 
Lee, a crippled alcoholic, as the main character. Of Foghorn, 
Geiogamah says, "Almost all the characters in this play are 
stereotypes pushed to the point of absurdity." The central char- 
acter in the third play, 49, is Night Walker, a holy man who is 
the voice of the past, present, and future. Geiogamah's plays 
are about survival and resurrection, and "they are considered 
optimistic in outlook because of their focus on the importance 
of developing pride, unity, and self-respect among Native 
Americans." 

Grayson, Chief W. G. (Creek). A Creek Warrior for the Confederacy. 
W. David Baird, ed. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 
1988. 164 pp. 

Genre: Memoir 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: S 

Born in 1843 near present day Eufaulag, Oklahoma, Grayson 
served as a Confederate army officer during the Civil War and 
in various offices of the Creek Nation from 1870 until his death 
in 1920. This is an important work for two major reasons: It 
reveals the participation of Native Americans in America's mil- 
itary and war efforts, involvements which go unrecognized in 
many history textbooks; and it affirms the way Native Ameri- 
cans resisted annihilation and survived as a people. Any seri- 
ous study of the Civil War should include this book. Grayson's 
memoir is part of the "Civilization of the American Indian" 
series. 

Hale, Janet Campbell (Coeur d'Alene). Jailing of Cecelia Capture. New 
York: Random House, 1985. 198 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: S NNAL (304-307) Hale 

An urban Indian with roots to her tribe in Northern Idaho, 
Cecelia Capture experiences an identity conflict. She grows up 
in a home with a mixed-blood mother who denies her own 
Indian identity, and with an Indian father who expects Cecelia 




177 



c 



] 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



161 



to succeed but who fails to follow through with those expecta- 
tions because of his own alcoholism. At nineteen, she becomes 
an unwed mother and then later marries a white graduate stu- 
dent. Living in the midst of many conflicts, she begins to drink 
and considers suicide. While achieving success in law school, 
she is jailed for drunken driving, but Cecelia's memories sus- 
tain her. At the end, she decides to let go of what she has lost, 
"feeling more like herself than she had felt in a long time. . . . 
She was not able to return to the beginning, of course, and 
remake her life more to her liking, but now she was free to go 
on with the life she did have" (201). Some independent readers 
find the format difficult to follow because "it moves from one 
time in her life to a totally different time." But they also recog- 
nize this as a powerful book about loss and survival. Although 
some readers find the language too rough and the sexual 
imagery too explicit, it is no more so than in many contempo- 
rary films. 

-. The Owl's Song. New York: Bantam Books, 1991. 153 pp. 
Genre: Young Adult Novel 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival; Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (304-307) Hale 

As a child on the reservation in Idaho, Billy White Hawk 
would listen to the aged Waluwetsu tell stories about the times 
before the Suyappi (white men) came, and before the Jesuit 
missionaries, when "the land had been wild and free, without 
roads and houses of any kind, places where trees were 
chopped down, not torn, plowed, and cultivated fields." But 
Waluwetsu also told of the coming time when the owl, who 
brings messages of coming death, will sing "for our race." By 
the time the boy is fourteen years old, the old man and Billy's 
mother have died, his father, Joe, gets drunk many evenings, 
and Billy witnesses the suicide of his closest friend. After a 
dream where Waluwetsu calls Billy to come across a river, Billy 
decides to travel to San Francisco, where he believes he will 
find a new life. There he finds himself utterly alone, experienc- 
ing racism from both classmates and counselors. But he sur- 
vives through memories that take him "far, far away," and he 
claims his identity in those memories. The novel closes after 
Billy has returned home to be with his dying father: "It was all 
right, though. Billy knew it was good that it happened this 
way, [after Joe has vigorously chopped down a tree] with his 
last day being one spent in hard work 'like the old days.' It was 
all right" (152). In spite of the theme of alienation and loss. 




178 



3 



162 



Roots and Branches 



Janet Campbell Hale's novel affirms the values of tradition, 
ancestors, dreams, and "manhood" visions brought by the 
Manitous: "He loved these Benewah hills, this place where the 
people of his tribe first came into being when the earth was 
very young. It was, as Waluwetsu had said, that there was very 
little of what had been. It seemed there was no way of staying 
and living any more. Still, all this would remain with him 
when he went away and would not change. ... It was all right, 
now . . . Manitous, spirits of earth, wind, rain, sun. Father and 
grandfather and unknown ancestors" (153). Billy knew he 
could carry them with him wherever he went. This book works 
especially well as a preparation for reading McNickle's stories 
and novels. 

Harjo, Joy (Muskogee Creek). In Mad Love and War. Middletown, CT: 
Wesleyan University Press, 1990. 74 pp. 

Genre: Poetry 

Theme: Personal and Cultural Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (308-318) Harjo 

Joy Harjo, poet, scriptwriter, musician, and activist, narrated 
much of the TBS video series The Native Americans. In In Mad 
Love and War, through the passions of "Love and War" — 
personal, communal, and racial — Harjo's mythic poetic voice 
transforms the dead and cold into blooming, living stories. Coy- 
ote, Rabbit, and Crow, all tricksters, laugh and live again and 
again, and in tribute to Jacqueline Peters, an activist who was 
lynched in Lafayette, California, in 1986, dance "anyway from 
this killing tree." One poem, dedicated to "Anna Mae Pictou 
Aquash, Whose spirit is Present Here and in the Dappled Stars 
(for we remember the story and must tell it again so we may all 
live)," may be used in conjunction with Johanna Brand's The 
Life and Death of Anna Mae Aquash. Although critics describe 
Harjo's poetry as dark, "feminist poetry of personal /political 
resistance," her prose poems represent survival. In Mad Love and 
War is a collection of poems that all secondary students can eas- 
ily read, learn from, and appreciate. 

Hogan, Linda (Chickasaw). Mean Spirit. New York: Ivy, 1990. 377 pp. 
Genre: Historical Novel 

Themes: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival; Between 
Two Worlds; At Home Within Circles 

Grade Level: S NNAL (333-343) Hogan 

This historical novel begins with the 1922 murder of an 
Oklahoma woman after she becomes the richest Osage in the 



O 

ERiC 



179 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



] 



Oklahoma Territory. Learning to respect his people and their 
past, a Native American government official, Stace Red Hawk, 
uncovers the mystery of her murder. At issue are the federal 
Indian policies that non-Indians used to obtain treatied lands: 
the Dawes Act, which left unallotted lands open property for 
white settlers; competency rulings, which prevented the Indian 
people from privately owning and controlling their own allot- 
ted lands; the noncitizen status of all Indians at this time, 
which prevented Indians from inheriting or obtaining lands 
belonging to family members outside their immediate family; 
and federal mandates, which forced Indian children to leave 
their families to attend distant boarding schools. Mean Spirit 
retells the story of twenty-four Osage full-bloods and mixed- 
bloods who were murdered or died mysteriously, their homes 
sabotaged and burned. The characters in Mean Spirit increas- 
ingly fear and distrust non-Indian businessmen, lawyers, and 
doctors, and relatives. Although John Hale, the wealthy and 
"friendly" oilman, is eventually found guilty of murder and 
fraud, the novel closes without complete resolution. Other 
"John Hales" will appear to manipulate and circumvent laws, 
and more Indians will die as they continue to be victimized 
and as they enact their own justice whenever the federal sys- 
tem fails to adequately defend them. At the novel's end, Linda 
Hogan quotes an Osage woman, Diane Fraher: 

We know we are all only visitors in this world, and that no matter 
what has happened, we have refused to let the strength of spirit be 
taken from us. Out of love for my family, I wanted to share this love 
and spirit and let it find its way into this story. (377) 

The characters who still survive at the end watch the burning 
of their "house, the bam, the broken string of lights" — all sym- 
bols of the white man's way. Nevertheless, despite all their 
losses, they retain the Osage values of community and tradition. 

Written from a woman's perspective. Mean Spirit vividly 
demonstrates the terrible impact women experience when they, 
and their husbands and children, suffer and die. The Los Ange- 
les Times Book Review has compared Hogan's writing with the 
magical realism of Gabriel Garcia Marquez and Isabel Allende, 
as she wraps "wonder and magic around some brutal Ameri- 
can truths." The reading of this novel might be combined with 
the 1992 film Thunderheart, which examines the exploitation of 
Oglala Sioux Indians and their resources; a reading of Arthur 
Miller's The Crucible, which reveals the subversive actions of 
individuals who used Salem's fear of witchery to increase their 
wealth; a novel such as Fools Crow by James Welch, which fea- 
tures the loss and survival of the Pikuni people during the later 




130 



164 



Roots and Branches 



c 



nineteenth century; Louis Owens's Wolfsong, about a young 
man who fights to protect ancestral lands in the Cascade 
mountains from the intrusion of roads and mines; or with a his- 
torical study of federal Indian policy and its consequential 
impact on the lives and lands of all Indian peoples. After read- 
ing Fools Crow, by James Welch, and Mean Spirit, a senior girl 
wrote, "I always resented the Indians I knew who seemed to 
get money without working, spending it on cars and alcohol. 
But after reading these novels, I know I wouldn't take a million 
dollars for what they have lost. A class that teaches you not to 
hate is the most important kind of success." 

King, Thomas (Cherokee). Green Grass, Running Water. Boston: Hough- 
ton Mifflin, 1993. 469 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Cultural and Personal 
Loss and Survival; Between Two Worlds; At Home within Circles 
Grade Level: S NNAL (373-382) King 

Thomas King's novel begins and ends with Coyote, the arche- 
typal trickster, and his self-proposed mission to "fix the 
world," with a dream, with "all that water," and with a combi- 
nation of unique yet familiar characters who meet and (re)meet 
for the annual Sun Dance celebration in a Blackfoot reservation 
town called Blossom. Of central concern for each character, and 
his or her story, is the dam, which the "Government built to 
help Indians," to make them "millionaires," but which surely 
will kill the water and the lake. King's characters "talk" on 
every page. And mythologies are mixed with "floating 
imagery," cultures, histories, provoking shocking irony as well 
as laughter for the reader. Four "old Indians," Lone Ranger, 
Hawkeye, Ishmael, and Robinson Crusoe, have again disap- 
peared from a mental institution just as they have before, 
whenever significant "natural" environmental "disasters" have 
occurred: the summer "Yellowstone was in flames," the spring 
Mount Saint Helens erupted, and on several other occasions as 
long ago as 1883. There is an "attractive university professor" 
who is pregnant, with the paternity uncertain, the conception 
somehow "immaculate." There are three "stolen" cars, "A Nis- 
san, a Pinto, and a Karmann-Ghia," which the builders see 
"sailing" toward the dam. And when an earthquake, or possi- 
bly Coyote, ultimately destroys the dam, the waters recede 
after "just over a month." 

Green Grass, Running Water is a powerful novel that with 
wit, trickery, and a deep sense of tragedy similar to Gerald 
Vizenor's, offers a different view of American culture, of his- 



181 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



165 



tory, and of the most "sacred" Western and Biblical historical 
and mythological beliefs. In the end, Hawkeye urges Coyote to 
apologize, "in case we hurt anyone's feelings"; and chaos 
resolves into harmony where nature is once again in balance. 
Still, we know that as history repeats itself, the possibility for 
more trouble exists. With the very last line of the novel. Coyote 
begins again: "And here's how it happened." Nevertheless, the 
reader, who has been smart enough not to be tricked on every 
page, can honestly say that "that was a good true story" 
because it represents the universal experience of being human. 

Secondary students who know North American history, 
tribal and treaty history, literature, and Judeo-Christian litera- 
ture, and who know enough of Coyote and other trickster/ 
transformers, will especially appreciate this novel. Teachers 
might use it with D'Arcy McNickle's Wind from an Enemy Sky, 
Linda Hogan's Mean Spirit, or Louis Owens's Wolfsong in a unit 
about the tribal /federal government conflict over the use of 
lands and natural resources. 

Linderman, Frank B. Plenty Coups: Chief of the Crows. Lincoln: Univer- 
sity of Nebraska Press, 1962. 324 pp. 

Genre: As-Told-To Autobiography 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; At 
Home within Circles 

Grade Level: I, S 

Not a speaker of Native languages, Frank B. Linderman relied 
on interpreters and sign language to communicate with Plenty 
Coups for this "as-told-to" autobiography. Also, writing pri- 
marily for a non-Native or nontraditional Native audience, Lin- 
derman included definitions and explications of Native words 
and cultural practices in his narrative text. Linderman's 
rhetoric suggests a European-American or Judeo-Christian 
world view through which Plenty Coups's own story and per- 
sonal philosophy is filtered. For example, Indians are "red 
men"; those who die go to "The Father," and Linderman is 
astonished that Plenty Coups's memory of an event so closely 
resembles the "written account." Included in the text are the 
names of many dead warriors, names he obtained from others 
after his interview with Plenty Coups because Plenty Coups 
would not speak the names of the dead. Nevertheless, we can 
trust Frank B. Linderman as an honest collaborator. Included in 
the text are Plenty Coups's criticisms of the "white man" for his 
stupidity in battle, for his confusion over religion, and for his 
inability to practice what he preaches. Furthermore, in his Fore- 
word, Linderman himself qualifies his authority when he 



ERiC 




182 



166 



Roots and Branches 



admits that he doesn't know much about "the Indian," even 
after studying him "for more than forty years." But he also 
places himself and his authority above those who know much 
less, who write "all there is to learn" about Indians after spend- 
ing "a week's vacation . . . alternately fishing and talking to an 
English-speaking tribesman." 

Originally published in 1930, Plenty Coups: Chief of the 
Crows portrays the traditional life of a Crow boy and his early 
manhood, but it also provides insight into the Crow's relation- 
ship with the "white man" and with the Crow's traditional 
enemies, the Sioux, Cheyenne, Blackfeet (Pikuni), and Flat- 
heads. As a young man. Plenty Coups experienced a dream in 
which he saw the disappearance of the buffalo and their 
replacement with domestic cattle. Believing that the best way 
to safeguard the land and culture of his people. Plenty Coups 
fought with the white man, providing scouts, warriors, and 
supplies to the military. Among many other war stories. 
Plenty Coups tells the stories of the men who fought with 
Generals Crook and Custer in the Battles of the Rosebud and 
the Little Bighorn in the summer of 1876, battles they may 
have survived had they listened to the wisdom of seasoned 
Crow warriors such as Plenty Coups. Although Plenty Coups 
did not wish to talk with Linderman about the time after the 
buffalo had gone, he interjects observations and his grief over 
the ways their young men and women have changed since the 
white man took over: they lost their knowledge of medicine 
and ceremony, and they lost the strength gained from physical 
and mental challenges. 

Pretty-shield: Medicine Woman of the Crows. Lincoln: University 
of Nebraska Press, 1972. 256 pp. 

Genre: As-Told-To Autobiography 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; At 
Home within Circles; Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: I, S 

Pretty-shield, whose husband was a Crow scout for General 
Custer, tells Frank B. Linderman about her life before reserva- 
tion days and before the disappearance of the buffalo. One of 
the earliest accounts of Indian women, the text communicates 
the importance of tribal cooperation. Students appreciate the 
feminine perspective, and critical readers recognize, through 
the interactions between Linderman and Pretty-shield, some of 
the problems in communicating between cultures and genders. 
Although Linderman interprets her comments, readers can 



183 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



1 

167 



recognize the places where Linderman definitely does not 
understand Pretty-shield. On one occasion. Pretty-shield 
expresses her resentment of Linderman's stereotyping when he 
offers her a cigarette. She responds with "No . . . my mother 
did not smoke, and I have never smoked." And then she goes 
on to say, "and I do not know if whisky is sweet or sour (16)." 
During a later session. Pretty-shield asks "Sign-talker" (Linder- 
man) if any of the animal-people talk to him. But when he 
responds that he understood what "[his] horse or [his] dog 
wished [him] to know," she appears dissatisfied because her 
experience with animals is much more intimate and real. Lin- 
derman and Pretty-shield tell a good story that captures the 
attention until the end, but it also provides invaluable insight 
into the personality of a woman who lived at a time of tremen- 
dous change and who was trying her very best to be both use- 
ful and happy during a difficult time. 

Marquis, Thomas, interpreter. Wooden Leg: A Warrior Who Fought 
Custer. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1931. 384 pp. 
Genre: Interpreted Memoir 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Cultural and Personal 
Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: I, S 

Through sign language and the corroboration of Wooden Leg's 
contemporaries, Thomas Marquis has interpreted this com- 
pelling story of an individual Cheyenne's experiences. Wooden 
Leg's boyhood and the traditional Northern Cheyenne cultural 
beliefs and practices are compared and contrasted with neigh- 
boring cultures such as the Crow, Sioux, Pawnee, and Black- 
feet: "As I now think back upon those days, it seems that no 
people in the world ever were any richer than we were." 
Wooden Leg describes the rituals of war, the buffalo hunts, and 
visions, and he discusses the importance of "The Great Medi- 
cine" to his people along with the Cheyenne means of disci- 
pline and punishment for the breaking of rules. Wooden Leg 
also describes the age-old conflict between the Crow and 
Cheyenne and the way it manifested itself in the conflict 
between the Cheyenne and the U.S. military, which culminated 
in the "Battle of the Little Bighorn." Throughout the memoir, 
contemporary names and places accompany references to his- 
torical events. In careful detail. Wooden Leg remembers the 
gathering of approximately 16,000 people on the Little Big 
Horn in 1876, the surprise attack and ensuing battle from his 
particular point of view, and the experiences and events of the 




184 



168 



c 



Roots and Branches 



next year, which culminated in the Cheyenne people's removal 
to Oklahoma. After reading this independently, an eleventh- 
grade student wrote: "I learned about the government of the 
tribe, and the different warriors' classes . . . and how each per- 
son functions to work with another in the tribe." He also was 
surprised by several "facts" about the Battle of the Little Big 
Horn: "The attack surprised the Indians . . . the soldiers lasted 
longer . . . most of the soldiers were new recruits . . . and the 
total Indian casualties were 32." Students might compare this 
account with Two Moons' story in The Last Best Place, with U.S. 
military accounts, with Crow accounts of the same battle, and 
with stories of Dull Knife's flight. 

McNickle, D'Arcy (Salish). The Hawk is Hungry and Other Stories. Bir- 
git Hans, ed. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1992. 179 pp. 
Genre: Short Story 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (417-428) McNickle 

D'Arcy McNickle, Cree-born, probably Metis, was raised on 
the Flathead Reservation, the home of the Salish and Kootenai 
people. Organized under subject matters — The Reservation; 
Montana; and The City — all the stories in this book depict 
polarized outsiders and insiders: reservation superintendents 
and tribal elders, mixed-bloods and full-bloods, newcomers 
and old-time homesteaders, women and men, and the young 
and the old. Resembling the naturalistic writings of Heming- 
way and Steinbeck, McNickle incorporates the traditional 
trickster/transformer figure in the "Reservation" and "Mon- 
tana" stories. When prefacing these with a telling of a Coyote 
story, such as in Mourning Dove's Coyote Stories collection, stu- 
dents can learn to watch for Coyote at work in McNickle's sto- 
ries. They can also appreciate the writer's use of irony and the 
mental agility of those who outsmart the trickster. The follow- 
ing stories will particularly interest secondary students: "Hard 
Riding," about an Indian superintendent who is outsmarted by 
tribal elders; "En roulant ma boule, roulant ..." about a group 
of "mentally tattered and physically ragged half-bloods" who 
attempt to try an eighteen-year-old full-blood for rape; "Meat 
for God," an unusual hunting story about an old man and his 
nine-year-old grandson; "Snowfall," about an old man's death; 
"Train Time," about Major Miles and his boarding-school train; 
"The Hawk is Hungry," about the contrast between romantic 
expectations and harsh realities on the Montana prairie; and 




185 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



"Man's Work," about the gender and generationally different 
definitions of work. 

In response to a favorite story, "Meat for God," ninth-grade 
students have written: "It shows how a kid wasn't taken seri- 
ously — just like most kids today ... it shows how when people 
today do something wrong, they try to hide it so they won't get 
into trouble ... it is a story that inspires sympathy for the old 
man who no longer has control over his life — his killing the 
deer symbolizes his effort to regain that control." 

Runner in the Sun: A Story of Indian Maize. Albuquerque: Uni- 
versity of New Mexico Press, 1987. 249 pp. 

Genre: Young Adult Novel 

Themes: Change and Growth; At Home within Circles; Cul- 
tural and Personal Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (417-428) McNickle 

Salt, a young Indian boy, is sent on a long journey southward 
in search of some "unknown" that will save his people, who 
are threatened by poverty, drought, and discord from within. 
When Salt returns, his community acquires a new, higher- 
yielding breed of com and a new member. Quail. With these 
gifts. Salt brings needed change to his people in a way they can 
accept. He learns to trust the dreams of the elders, his own 
instincts about his new and different wife, his desire to act for 
the welfare of his people, and to value peace on earth. Runner 
in the Sun can be used with the poetry of Luci Tapahonso. 

-. The Surrounded. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico 
Press, 1936. 296 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Remembering the Old Ways; At 
Home within Circles; Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: S NNAL (417-428) McNickle 

In The Surrounded, McNickle's first novel, Archilde, a young 
man of Salish/Spanish descent, returns to the Flathead Reser- 
vation after attending an Indian boarding school. There on the 
reservation, in the early twentieth century, he experiences the 
intense conflicts of living "Between Two Worlds," an outsider 
to both. After reading this novel, an eleventh-grade student 
wrote: "I believe the closeness Archilde feels toward his fellow 
people is something that he could not experience in the white 
world. Despite the internal closeness to his people, Archilde is 
disrespectful of many views and actions. He wants the best of 




18G 



170 



c 



Roots and Branches 



both worlds . . . and is hopelessly caught. ... At the end, these 
conflicts remain unresolved." Too many on the reservations are 
still living Archilde's experience, and high school students can 
identify with the turmoil of a young man who is looking for a 
place to belong. 

-. Wind from an Enemy Sky. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1978. 
256 pp. 

Genre: Historical Novel 

Themes: Between Two Worlds, Personal and Cultural Loss and 
Survival; Lifeways and Stereotypes; At Home within Circles 
Grade Level: S NNAL (417-428) McNickle 

When the federal government builds a dam on an Indian 
Reservation in the sacred Northwest mountains, culture and 
personal conflicts grow within Indian families and between the 
Indians and government representatives. Wind from an Enemy 
Sky is the tragic story of a people's struggle to regain their 
sacred and communal power while well-intentioned, yet igno- 
rant, whites bring destruction on both Indians and themselves 
when they fail to understand the culture and strength of the 
Little Elk people. Woven throughout this narrative are explica- 
tions and consequences of federal Indian policies from the 
nineteenth to the mid-twentieth centuries: John Marshall's 
Supreme Court decision; the kidnaping and transfer of Indian 
children from their homes to distant boarding schools; forced 
farming practices on unrelenting lands; federal government 
fraud over land deals with Indians; and the allotment of tribal 
lands. Yet the power of their Indian values — cooperation, 
respect for the sacred, generosity, commitment to relatives and 
to justice — survives beyond the tragedy, proving this following 
truth: "Above all else, a man learned to be strong in support of 
his kinsmen. A man by himself was nothing, a shout in the 
wind. But men together, each acting for each other and as 
one — even a strong wind from an enemy sky had to respect 
their power" (197). In response to reading this book, an 
eleventh-grade student wrote: "The book will be valued as a 
story of the general injustice of white people toward Indians 
while it also illustrates the white people's inability to right 
their wrongs, leaving Indians perpetually repressed." Non- 
Indian students will require some background on Indian cul- 
tural values and tribal history before they read this book. 
Teachers who want to further explore the way the Native writ- 
ers employ the trickster. Coyote, in contemporary works will 
find Thomas King's novel Green Grass, Running Water an excel- 
lent selection to follow Wind from an Enemy Sky. Just as the very 



187 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



1 

171 



traditional Bull of the Little Elk people views the dam as a 
"killer of the water," so too do Coyote, four "old Indians," and 
Eli, from Green Grass view the government's dam as a river 
killer. 

Medicine Crow, Joseph (Crow). From the Heart of the Crow Country: 
The Crow Indians' Own Stories. New York: Orion, 1992. 138 pp. 
Genre: Memoir, History 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; At Home within Circles, Life- 
ways and Stereotypes 

Grade Level: I, S 

Born in Lodge Grass in 1913 and raised by his traditional 
grandparents, Joe Medicine Crow is "the acknowledged his- 
torian of the Crow tribe — and a teacher and lecturer with a 
M.A. in anthropology from USC in Los Angeles." As a child, 
Joseph Medicine Crow would listen to stories from elders, as 
well as to war stories from one of Custer's scouts. From the 
Heart of the Crow Country provides information about ancient 
and recent history, tribal/U.S. Government relations, culture 
and language, and a list of important events in the history of 
the Crow tribe from 1500 onward, as well as personal stories. 
From the Heart of Crow Country offers a realistic contrast to the 
mid-nineteenth-century romantic writings of George Catlin. 

Momaday, N. Scott (Kiowa). House Made of Dawn. New York: New 
American Library, 1968. 191 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: S NNAL (432-448) Momaday 

Momaday was awarded the 1969 Pulitzer Prize for this novel, 
which centers on the contemporary problems of Indian people 
who live "Between Two Worlds," both psychologically and 
physically displaced. The protagonist, Abel, becomes separated 
from the Jemez Pueblo and traditions, travels to Europe as a 
soldier during World War II, and returns to Los Angeles. House 
Made of Dawn celebrates the survival and value of oral and rit- 
ual tradition as it provides the foundation for Abel's sense of 
self, tribe, and place. In the end, Abel experiences himself at the 
center, from where he could see "the canyon and the mountains 
and the sky. He could see the rain and the river and the fields 
beyond. He could see the dark hills at dawn." And he sings the 
Jemez prayer of restoration and healing: "House made of 
pollen, house made of dawn." House Made of Dawn is the only 
Native-authored book for which Cliffs Notes are available. 







183 



] 



172 



Roots and Branches 



The Way to Rainy Mountain. Albuquerque: University of New 
Mexico Press, 1969. 89 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story, History, Contemporary Story 
Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Cultural and Personal 
Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (432-448) Momaday 

Momaday's journey to Rainy Mountain spans “many genera- 
tions and many hundreds of miles" to define the culture of the 
Kiowa people. This journey is an "evocation of three things in 
particular: a landscape that is incomparable, a time that is gone 
forever, and the human spirit which endures" (4). While the 
storyteller suggests that "the young Plains culture of the 
Kiowas withered and died like grass that is burned in the 
prairie wind," (3) the entire novel affirms his belief in cultural 
continuity and contemporary relevance. The Kiowa culture, 
defined in a "remarkably rich and living verbal tradition" lies 
"within reach of memory still" (86). In each of the twenty-four, 
two-page chapters, the storyteller shares three stories — a tradi- 
tional story, a historical story, and a contemporary experi- 
ence — which are connected to each other as well as to the 
preceding and following chapters. But unlike the more pre- 
dictable, abstract thematic connections Western Europeans 
may make, each story merges and diverges on concrete images 
such as fire, antelope, buffalo, arrows, horses, and words. For 
example. Chapter 8 tells the story of Grandmother Spider, 
whose grandsons are saved from smoke and suffocation when 
they repeat the powerful words she told them to say: thain- 
mom, "above my eyes." The second story discusses the way the 
"word has power in and of itself, [giving] origin to all things." 
And the third story features Momaday's grandmother Aho 
who, confronted with some kind of evil, would repeat the 
word zei-dl-bei, or "frightful." "It was not an exclamation so 
much, I think, as a warding off, an exertion of language upon 
ignorance and disorder" (33). 

The Way to Rainy Mountain addresses the issues of death 
through disease and starvation, loneliness, the importance of 
dogs and horses to the Kiowa people, and the loss of "sum- 
mer's freedom" — when the Comanches and Kiowas could ride 
across "the long sweep of the earth itself" (61). As readers imag- 
ine, reflect, and reread the stories, they will discover surprising 
connections and a multiplicity of possible meanings. For just as 
the traditional stories imbue the historical and contemporary 
stories with particular meaning, so do the contemporary stories 
further enrich the traditional stories. The Way to Rainy Mountain 
is an excellent introduction to Native literature. 



c 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



] 



173 



Mourning Dove (Okanagan /Colville). Cogewea, The Half-Blood. Lin- 
coln: University of Nebraska Press, [1927] 1981. 301 pp. 

Genre: Novel 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Lifeways and Stereo- 
types; Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: S NNAL (463-471) Mourning Dove 

Considered the first novel written by an Indian woman, Cogewea 
represents the collaboration of both Lucullus McWhorter (the 
editor), and Hum-ishu-ma, or "Mourning Dove." At least three 
distinct voices exist in the text: the stilted and formal narrator, 
the strong "Western" dialect of the cowhands, and the lyric 
voice of Stemteema, the grandmother. Cogewea is caught 
"Between Two Worlds," in love with an unscrupulous white 
man and loved by a mixed-blood, and pulled by both the 
Anglo culture and the traditional tribal culture of her grand- 
mother. The story is fashioned after the popular romance 
novel, but it also incorporates much of Mourning Dove's Salish 
background. In response to her reading, an eleventh-grade 
student wrote: "[Cogewea] learns to respect and follow the 
traditions of her Native culture. If we today would treat elders 
the way Mourning Dove's people did, then the elders would 
be treated as they deserve, instead of being abused and 
neglected." Teachers could use this novel in combination with 
traditional Salish stories, with other collaborative works such 
as Plenty Coups, and with contemporary poetry and stories by 
Salish writers such as Janet Campbell Hale, Debra Earling, and 
D'Arcy McNickle. With some preparation regarding the differ- 
ent voices in the text, students can enjoy reading Cogewea inde- 
pendently. 

. Coyote Stories. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, [1933] 

1990. 246 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles 
Grade Level: I, S NNAL (463-471) Mourning Dove 

Collaborators for this edition include Mourning Dove (Hum- 
ishu-ma); the original editor and illustrator, Heister Dean Guie; 
L. V. McWhorter; Jay Miller; and Chief Standing Bear, who 
wrote the Foreword. In her Preface, Mourning Dove explains 
the paradoxical nature of Coyote: "He did more than any of the 
others to make the world a good place in which to live ... he 
amused himself by getting into mischief and stirring up trou- 
ble" (7). For students reading other works by Mourning Dove 
or by other contemporary Salish writers, reading this collection 



O 

ERIC 



100 



174 



Roots and Branches 



first is beneficial since traditional cultural beliefs, plot lines, 
and characters appear throughout contemporary writers' 
works. 

Of all the short stories read and/or told in a single ninth- 
grade unit, "Coyote and Wood Tick" was the favorite. One 
Native boy wrote what he learned from the story: "If I don't 
give anyone respect. I'm going to starve." When "Coyote and 
Wood Tick" is told before McNickle's "Meat for God," students 
can look for the way the Game Warden (trickster) is at work, 
and how the old man, also like Coyote, desires more than he 
deserves. However, they can see how the old man outsmarts 
the trickster, refusing to play the fool, and maintains his pride 
when he burns the deer at the end. These stories are beneficial 
for the important ethical, environmental, and social lessons 
each one teaches. We can all learn from Coyote who, according 
to student readers, "doesn't think about the consequences of 
his actions." 

Neihardt, John G. Black Elk Speaks. Lincoln: University of Nebraska 
Press, [1932] 1988. 298 pp. 

Genre: As-Told-To Autobiography 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Cultural and Personal 
Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: S 

The is the story of an Oglala Sioux medicine man who lived 
during the later half of the nineteenth century and the begin- 
ning of the twentieth, when the Sioux were forced to live on 
reservations. Written through the voice of Neihardt, with Black 
Elk's son acting as interpreter. Black Elk tells about his visions 
and his tribe's world view, as well as his own life experiences. 
Included in the book are eyewitness accounts of major conflicts 
between the Sioux and the U.S. military, such as the Battle of 
the Little Bighorn and the Wounded Knee Massacre. According 
to Vine Deloria, Jr., in his Introduction, "The most important 
aspect of the book ... is in its effect upon the contemporary 
generation of young Indians who have been aggressively 
searching for roots of their own in the structure of universal 
reality." Because Black Elk Speaks was one of the first works of 
its kind, it has become the "criterion by which other books and 
interpretive essays are to be judged," according to Deloria. Its 
most important value for students of Indian culture and his- 
tory, though, is in the way it represents the personal and tribal 
experience of one Oglala man who believed that he must share 
the "Great Vision" given to him. 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



□ 



Owens, Louis (Choctaw /Cherokee). The Sharpest Sight. Norman: Uni- 
versity of Oklahoma Press, 1992. 264 pp. 

Genre: Novel 

Themes: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival; Remember- 
ing the Old Ways 

Grade Level: S NNAL (508—513) Owens 

Novelist, educator, nonfiction writer, and Steinbeck scholar, 
Louis Owens has received several grants and awards including 
one from the National Endowment for the Humanities and an 
Outstanding Teacher of the Year award. He currently teaches at 
the University of Califomia-Santa Cruz. A perceptive and 
articulate critic of contemporary Native American writing, he 
is praised for his own fiction. The Sharpest Sight is a mystery 
about a mixed-blood Vietnam veteran, part Native American, 
Mexican American, and Catholic, who has been murdered by 
his ex-lover's family, and whose bones are somehow missing. 
At issue is the Choctaw tradition that bones must be properly 
treated or the world will be disturbed. With a tone that ranges 
from serious to very funny. The Sharpest Sight is an engaging 
story that pulls readers into the conflict between good and evil 
and the individual's search for identity. 

. Wolfsong. Albuquerque, NM: West End Press, 1991. 249 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds, 
Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival; Lifeways and Stereo- 
types 

Grade Level: S NNAL (508-513) Owens 

Set in the Cascade mountains of Washington, Wolfsong is the 
story of Tom Joseph, who leaves a California university when 
he learns that his uncle, Jim Joseph, has died. At home in Ste- 
hemish country, thinking "a hundred years ago I would have 
known who I was," Tom Joseph searches for a meaningful iden- 
tity as he confronts serious contemporary environmental issues 
such as clear-cutting, preservation of old-growth cedars, road 
building in wilderness areas, and open-pit mining. "Between 
Two Worlds," Tom Joseph must choose to work for the mining 
or road-building company, to work for the Forest Service as a 
ranger with little power to protect the sacred wilderness, to 
work as a logger, to return to college, or to remain and fight the 
relentless intrusion of technology and waste into their ancestral 
landscape, just as his uncle had as a traditional Stehemish. In 
the end, after dynamiting the Hill Company's ten-thousand- 





176 



c 



Roots and Branches 



gallon water tank, Tom Joseph listens and follows the "rising 
howl of the wolf." Pursued by old friends and enemies, Tom 
Joseph still follows the call of the wolf, "growing louder and 
louder and spinning in everwidening circles through the thin 
air until it was deafening and seemed a part of the air he 
breathed" (249), to the feet of "Dakobed, the great mother 
mountain," and then to the glaciated rocky ridges of the Ste- 
hemish mountains. In spite of the devastating losses depicted in 
Wolfsong, the lyrical narrative voice reveals a world view where 
all things living — word, spirit, and landscape, all creation — can 
exist together in harmonious balance. Wolfsong also challenges 
many persistent stereotypes of Indians: 

An image of a plains warrior padding silently through the forest 
came to him and he smiled. Books and movies seldom showed Indi- 
ans who looked like the Salish people of these mountains. Short, dark 
people dressed in woven cedar bark weren't as exciting as Sioux war- 
riors in eagle-feather headdresses on horseback, the sun always set- 
ting behind them. (83) 

He thought of the way his uncle liked to describe Columbus's discov- 
ery of America. "That's like when you need a new radio, so you go in 
the back window of your neighbor's house when he ain't home and 
discover his radio. Then you say, 'Oh, look at this wonderful radio I 
have discovered.'" (81) 

Although for some students the language in Wolfsong might 
prove controversial, this is an excellent novel for older secondary 
students. It would work well with Mean Spirit by Linda Hogan; 
Green Grass, Running Water by Thomas King; and Wind from an 
Enemy Sky by D'Arcy McNickle, novels that also deal with con- 
flicts over the use of natural resources in sacred Indian lands. 

Power, Susan (Sioux). The Grass Dancer. New York: Berkeley Books, 
1997. 333 pages. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; 
Change and Growth; Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival; 
Lifeways and Stereotypes 
Grade Level: S 

An enrolled member of the Standing Rock Sioux tribe and a 
native Chicagoan, Susan Power's mixed heritage and personal 
landscape is reflected in her characters' lives. Set primarily on a 
North Dakota Sioux Reservation along the "sluggish Mis- 
souri," with chapters featuring a variety of narrators, protago- 
nists, and time periods. The Grass Dancer resembles the works 
of Louise Erdrich, who calls this "a wild river of a book." 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



193 



] 



I 

Bibliography of Native Literatures 



177 



Integral to the text are the Dakota words and phrases, with the 
controlling metaphors of grass and dancer that magically 
dance beyond the literal and sweep into dreams. 

This is a saga of two families and their "living" ancestors, 
who act and react within the conflicts between cultures, 
between themselves, and within themselves. Beginning with an 
annual powwow in 1981, and the death of a champion grass 
dancer from Chicago, the novel depicts the ways these ances- 
tors and relatives search out truths about their own heritage, 
and the ways they impact and direct one year in the lives of two 
teenagers, Harley Wind Soldier and Charlene Thunder. Theirs 
is the continuing story of Ghost Horse and Red Dress, who 
"died so long ago," but is "all wrapped up in her descendants 
and still looking for her lover." Grass Dancer is the story of both 
white and Indian "ghosts," of trickery and transformation, and 
of good and bad "medicine" and the women who possess and 
use it. But most important, it is a human story, encompassing 
both humor and tragedy as they exist in all of our lives. 

Although The Grass Dancer is a novel about growing up and 
finding a personal identity that is linked to heritage, it is also a 
political work. Within the various plots and story lines. Power 
addresses a variety of critical issues. The influence of the 
church is visible in the lives of all the characters, but most of 
them are capable of using it as a tool to resist or to manipulate 
those who would overpower them. The novel also addresses 
the issues of German prisoners of war and Japanese internment 
during World War II. 

According to Heidi Juel, AP English teacher at Roosevelt 
High School in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, Grass Dancer "clearly 
deals with adolescents' search for identity and place. It is diffi- 
cult sometimes to sell them on the history or even the culture of 
a particular people, but that search for identity within peer and 
familial relationships, and, in the case of the book, ancestral 
relationships, is a classic theme that all adolescents seem able 
to grasp, discuss, and respond to. That 'hook' is pretty impor- 
tant. Then they are more willing to discuss other issues the 
book presents because they can already identify a reality which 
they understand." 

Silko, Leslie Marmon (Laguna Pueblo). Ceremony. New York: Signet, 
1977. 275 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: S NNAL (575—586) Silko 




194 



[ 



] 



178 



Roots and Branches 



Silko, a writer who emerged in the 1970s Native American lit- 
erary renaissance, is one of the most widely anthologized 
Native writers today, and Ceremony is a classic American 
novel. In Ceremony, Tayo, the son of an Indian mother and a 
white man, has grown up a displaced mixed-blood, neither 
white nor traditionally Indian. His return to the Laguna 
Pueblo from World War II action in the Philippine jungle pre- 
cipitates an identity search that culminates in his shifting 
from a confused individual identity toward a healthy com- 
munal identity. According to Louis Owens in Other Destinies, 
everything in the Pueblo cosmology, "whether animate or 
inanimate — is significant and has its ordered place and is 
knowable and therefore controllable" through "formula, rit- 
ual, and ceremony" (172). By the end of the novel, Tayo 
learns his personal responsibility toward this Laguna world 
when he "tells his own story" and locates himself within a 
context of myth, history, and ceremony. The text of Ceremony 
represents what Owens calls a "web" of interrelated "story, 
ceremony, and cure while also pointing toward the male- 
female balance that is the desired state in Pueblo ritual." Tra- 
ditional story, especially the Corn Mother myth, provides the 
foundation of Tayo's story which "Silko [remakes, reforms, 
and molds] to fit new situations and times" (170). Mature 
secondary readers will find Ceremony a strong novel that 
exemplifies the contemporary Indian experience of "Living 
Between Two Worlds." 

-. Storyteller. New York: Seaver, 1981. 281 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story, Memoir, Poetry 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: S NNAL (575-586) Silko 

The stories of Silko's Laguna tradition wind through her own 
personal and family stories. Through poetry, prose, and pho- 
tographs, Leslie Marmon Silko communicates the historical 
realities of place, connections between generations and peo- 
ples, and the dark realities of "hunger, poverty, and injustice." 
There is the story of Aunt Susie, "the last generation here at 
Laguna that passed down an entire culture by word of mouth" 
(5-6), and then there is one story Aunt Susie used to tell, about 
"the little girl who ran away." There is the story of her great- 
grandmother Marie Anaya, and her great-grandfather, who 
wouldn't stay in a hotel that refused to house his Indian sons, 
and the "one thing he had to remember [at Laguna]: No matter 




193 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



] 



1179 



what is said to you by anyone, you must take care of those 
most dear to you" (256). 

This collection of stories, and their connections in pho- 
tographs and place, works well to stimulate students' own per- 
sonal storytelling or story writing, and encourages them to use 
whatever format works best for them. 

Slapin, Beverly. Basic Skills Caucasian Americans Workbook. Berkeley: 
Oyate, 1990. 32 pp. 

Genre: Culture 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Lifeways and Stereotypes 

Grade Level: I, S 

This entire book takes a satirical look at the "mysterious world 
of the Caucasian," after the manner of workbooks about Indi- 
ans. Basic Skills describes "Caucasian American Homes" and 
the "couch potato (kowch'-po-ta-to)"; "Caucasian American 
Clothing and Fashion," and her conclusion that "Men dictated 
(dik'-ta-tid) the customs, and women obeyed (o-bayd') them"; 
as well as the topics Language, Food Production, Education, 
Family Life, Government, Religion, Ceremonies, and Beliefs, 
and Leaders such as Leona Helmsley, Ivan Boesky, Lee Iaccoca, 
and George Bush. 

While they enjoy laughing at themselves, students begin to 
understand the way stereotype denies individuality. After 
reading sections aloud, students can also discuss the impact 
such stereotypes might have on young people with low self- 
esteem, and they can discuss ways young people of all cultures 
and races can separate themselves from personal definitions 
that others (from outside their group) create. Basic Skills, an 
invaluable resource for teaching about bias and stereotype and 
for counteracting racism, is a joint project of Oyate and the 
Teaching Peace with Justice Task Force. 

Sneve, Virginia Driving Hawk (Lakota). The Chichi Hoohoo Bogeyman. 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1975. 63 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Change and Growth; At 
Home within Circles; Between Two Worlds; Lifeways and 
Stereotypes 

Grade Level: I 

This is the story of adventure, of loyalty to peers, of responsi- 
bilities to parents and to grandparents, of the effects of 
stereotypes on children, and of the strength of traditional 




10 



0 



180 



Roots and Branches 



cultural values and beliefs. When three cousins meet a 
strange man in the woods, they playfully name him the 
Chichi Hoohoo Bogeyman, after hearing Uncle George tell a 
story about his car honking in the middle of the night. Just as 
many parents have used the "bogeyman" to discipline their 
children, the Crow have used the chedah, the Sioux people 
have used the chichi spirit, which represents the enemy, and 
the Hopi have used the hoohoo to inspire children to behave 
appropriately. This novel easily contrasts with literature that 
exhibits traditional stereotypes of Indians. If Virginia Driving 
Hawk Sneve were to write more novels such as this one, we 
might see a dramatic turn away from romantic — and stereo- 
typical — stories about Indians, and toward Native-written 
works that depict young people in contemporary, more real- 
istic situations. 

Standing Bear, Luther (Sioux). Stories of the Sioux. Lincoln: University 
of Nebraska Press, 1934. 79 pp. 

Genre: Historical and Traditional Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Change and Growth; At 
Home within Circles 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (598-606) Standing Bear 

Primarily for pleasure. Grandfathers and Grandmothers told 
and retold these stories of important events and historical hap- 
penings to children of the Sioux. Only a few stories in this col- 
lection provide explanations for natural and unnatural 
phenomena. Within each story are lessons for living the good 
Sioux life: to practice generosity and hospitality, especially to 
strangers; to welcome as relatives those who want and need a 
home; to trust in the power and truth of visions; to value 
highly the welfare of the entire community; to trust in the wis- 
dom of elders; to value bravery and endurance; to always face 
and respect the enemy; to value personal sacrifice, coopera- 
tion, and the practice of ritual for the welfare of all; to value 
self-reliance and resourcefulness in solving problems; to see 
the important way stories are linked to the landscape; to 
appreciate animals as relatives and for their value to humans; 
and to always value the giver as much as the gift. Students of 
all ages can enjoy these stories while they consider the ways 
the lessons may be applied to their present lives. Luther 
Standing Bear's stories suggest that, with utmost respect, the 
lives of animals must be sacrificed if the people are to live. 
They also demonstrate the ways stories are rooted in the sur- 
rounding landscape. 



O 

ERIC 



197 



[ 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



181 



Stands in Timber, John (Cheyenne), and Margot Liberty. Cheyenne 
Memories. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1972. 330 pp. 
Genre: As-Told-To Autobiography 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Between Two Worlds; Personal and Cultural Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: S 

Margot Liberty first met John Stands in Timber when she was 
teaching in a government school in eastern Montana in 1956. 
With a background in anthropology, and assistance from his- 
torians and other collaborators such as Alvin Josephy, Jr. and 
Liberty's mother, Helena Huntington Smith, Margot Liberty 
recorded and edited John Stands in Timber's memories. 
Cheyenne Memories includes stories of chiefs, tribal societies, 
medicine and ceremony, intertribal wars, the Custer fight. 
Dull Knife's flight from Oklahoma, and the reservation years 
from 1890. Belle Highwalking, John Stands in Timber's sister, 
also has a written memoir. Students who want to concentrate 
on this time period and this tribe can also read the novel 
Cheyenne Autumn by Mari Sandoz and other nineteenth- and 
early twentieth-century Cheyenne stories. 

Sterling, Shirley (Interior Salish). My Name is Seepeetza. Vancouver, 
BC: Groundwood Press, 1992. 126 pp. 

Genre: Novel 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival; At Home within Circles 
Grade Level: I, S 

Written in diary form. Sterling has created a novel based on her 
own experiences. As a ten-year-old Seepeetza attends an 
Indian residential school, she is forced to deny all that being 
Indian means to her. The novel covers one school year in which 
Seepeetza experiences conflicts with teachers, nuns, priests, 
and other students. The novel concludes with her return to the 
Joyaska Ranch, her "home," and her experiences with a loving 
father who drinks, with berry picking, and with her brothers 
and sisters. This is a story of living "Between Two Worlds," 
two cultures, two religions, and two ages. The narrative voice 
is neither an adult nor a child, as written. Instead, it is a combi- 
nation of both, which can result in the reader's distrust and 
confusion over the narrator's identity. Still, it is a valuable 
voice that articulates the experience of thousands of young 
Indians. 



O 

ERIC 



193 



] 



182 



Roots and Branches 



Tapahonso, Luci (Navajo). A Breeze Swept Through. Albuquerque: 
West End Press, 1987. 51 pp. 

Genre: Poetry 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; At 
Home within Circles; Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: P, I, S NNAL (628-634) Tapahonso 

These lyrical poems, dedicated and written for family, friends, 
and neighbors, reflect cultural and personal survival. Tapa- 
honso uses concrete images of "white silver" moons, "hair tied 
securely in the wind and dust," and sighs, cries, and prevailing 
and enduring laughter. In "Yes, It Was My Grandmother," the 
speaker celebrates her connection with her grandmother. In 
others, she celebrates her children's births, her brother's death, 
"old stories," and a ritual performed "For Misty Starting 
School," when the speaker sprinkles "cornmeal here / by the 
door of your classroom" to "[bless] us and / [strengthen] us" 
so Misty may remember [she is] no different" from the earth 
"where the cornmeal is from" (20-21). No matter what the fam- 
ily tradition, all young people can identify with this experience 
of carrying their values of home into the public school. Realis- 
tic, yet optimistic, these poems can lift the spirit and communal 
pride of even the youngest readers. 

. Saanii Dahataal: The Women Are Singing. Tucson: The Univer- 
sity of Arizona Press, 1993. 94 pp. 

Genre: Poetry, Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles 
Grade Level: P, I, S NNAL (628-634) Tapahonso 

Again, Luci Tapahonso shares her poems and stories, which 
have provided "a means for returning, for rejuvenation, and for 
restoring [her] spirits to the state of hohzo, or beauty, which is the 
basis of Navajo philosophy" (xii). In her Preface she says, "To 
know stories, remember stories, and to retell them well is to 
have been 'raised right'; the family of such an individual is also 
held in high esteem ... I was taught that the way one talks and 
conducts oneself is a direct reflection of the people who raised 
her or him. People are known then by their use of language" (xi). 

Taylor, Drew Hayden (Ojibway). Toronto at Dreamer's Rock/Education 
Is Our Right. Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 1990. 139 pp. 

Genre: Drama 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Remembering the Old Ways; 
Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: I, S 





[ 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



] 



183 



Obliquely echoing Charles Dickens' Christmas Carol, the first 
play, Toronto at Dreamer's Rock, dramatizes the story of three 
boys who hold a surprise "Toronto," a word for "where people 
gather to trade ... a place where important things happen" (37). 
When Rusty goes to an age-old dreaming place on the Birch 
Island Reserve to drink his beer and listen to his walkman, he is 
suddenly joined by Keesic, a precontact Odawa boy, and later 
by Michael from the year 2095, an intellectual, who applies his 
knowledge of history and his analytical abilities to understand 
the other two boys. Keesic challenges Rusty to learn and prac- 
tice "The Old Ways," to know the language, the rituals, the 
sacred ceremonies, and Michael shows both boys how very 
much will be lost before the people begin to recover. But when 
Michael takes out a newspaper clipping from 2023, Rusty learns 
that he will one day be the "first Grand Chief of the Aboriginal 
Government." When the play ends, Rusty is alone, and he holds 
a feather up to the Four Directions. The audience is left with the 
hope that Rusty will find a way to live up to the prophecy 
printed in the newspaper, and a way to apply "The Old Ways" 
to the problems in the future. Although Taylor is Canadian, 
Toronto at Dreamer's Rock will appeal to young adult readers 
who can identify with a young boy trying to escape reality 
while he remains separated from the traditions of his ancestors. 

Education Is Our Right also borrows from Charles Dickens, 
but in this version, the Spirits of Education Past, Present, and 
Future attempt to show the minister of Indian Affairs the error 
of his ways. The play was produced less than a year after Pierre 
Cadieux, then the Federal Minister of Indian and Northern 
Affairs in Quebec, announced a cap on post-secondary educa- 
tion for Native students. The walk to the nation's capital, a 
hunger strike in Ottawa, residential schools, and the Elders' 
storytelling in the play are all based on real incidents. 

Two Leggings (Crow). Two Leggings: The Making of a Crow Warrior. Ed. 
Peter Nabokov. New York: Crowell, 1967. 226 pp. 

Genre: Memoir 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Growth and Change; At 
Home within Circles; Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: S 

This work is the result of a collaboration between: Two Leg- 
gings (1847-1923) who communicated in Crow and sign lan- 
guage; Jasper Long and possibly Thomas H. Leforge, and Mrs. 
Taylor who would take Long's translation in shorthand; 
William Wildschut, the interviewer who wrote down Two Leg- 
gings' reminiscences between 1919-1923; and Peter Nabokov, 
who edited Wildschut's manuscript. 




200 



[ 



] 



184 



Roots and Branches 



Through the memory of an old man, Nabokov sees the ide- 
alized "coming-of-age struggle" Two Leggings experienced, 
regretting the loss of Old Ways. Both Ewers and Nabakov 
believe that Two Leggings' search for and frequent failure to 
obtain power through visions was the motivation for many of 
his actions throughout his life. After reading this book inde- 
pendently, an eleventh-grade student wrote: "this story should 
be read by young teens. It tells how to act, and it teaches that if 
a person desires something, and if he works honestly for it, 
then he will get it. This book helps students understand pre- 
whiteman history." 

Vizenor, Gerald (Chippewa). Dead Voices: Natural Agonies in the New 
World. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1992. 144 pp. 
Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; 

Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: S NNAL (635-648) Vizenor 

From the very beginning, Vizenor admits he is playing the 
trickster with this novel. Through the power of imagination, 
story, and transformation, his modern characters survive — in 
the city — to realize their "human possibilities." According to 
the publisher's cover notes. Dead Voices is a cycle of tales in 
which "Bagese, a tribal woman transformed into a bear, has 
discovered a new urban world [seen] from the perspective [of 
cross-bloods] . . . fleas, squirrels, mantis, crows, beavers, and 
finally Trickster, Vizenor's central and unifying figure" (cover). 
Dead Voices, or "published stories," takes a satirical view of the 
European-American/Native experience with tricksters such 
as "exterminators" who practice chemical warfare, "hunters" 
who pretend to be like the animals and then move in for the 
kill, and fur traders. Especially for older students who are 
familiar with traditional trickster stories, and for adult readers 
who are open to the possibilities for new visions of old stories, 
this novel is a joy to read. Individual chapters may be read 
aloud to students in combination with relevant narratives and 
poetry. For example, sections of the chapter on "Fleas" can be 
used with narratives about smallpox epidemics in books such 
as Fools Crow, by James Welch. 

In response to her independent reading of Dead Voices, an 
eleventh-grade student wrote that "Vizenor's people believed 
in Nanabozho, an all powerful trickster in the world. ... I think 
if readers do not let the trickster inside themselves escape, then 
the book will not connect." On the basis of the lesson the Dead 
Voices storyteller learns from Bagase, "not to pretend but to see 



201 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



185 



and hear the real stories behind the words, the voices of the 
animals in me, the definition of the words alone," this student 
concluded that "This book made me sit back and listen to 
nature." She didn't want to be "living in a world of dead 
voices," with one of those voices being her own. 

Welch, James (Blackfeet/Gros Ventre). The Death of Jim Loney. New 
York: Penguin, 1979. 179 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Remembering the Old Ways; 

Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: S NNAL (659-668) Welch 

James Welch was born on the Blackfeet Reservation in 1940 and 
currently lives and writes in Missoula, Montana. Asking the 
question "Where do you go when no one wants you?" The 
Death of Jim Loney explores the surface problem of alcoholism, 
but more important, the twisted reality of the alcoholic's world 
and the problems of internal separation, the loss of spirituality, 
and the hopelessness that can happen to anyone. Although the 
book's characters are not classic heroes who achieve success 
and happiness in the end, they do grow, and students can look 
at what must happen before that can occur. An eleventh-grade 
reader identified several values he found in the novel: a respect 
for women, the importance of dreams, and the importance of 
home, landscape and nature's animals; the latter values he 
found evidenced in the incident where "Loney's dog dies, 
frozen in mud, and Loney chips away the dead dog only to 
bury it where it had lived all its life." Another reader described 
the conclusion of The Death of Jim Loney thus: "He usually gets 
drunk or close to drunk every night. Both his sister and girl 
friend try to save Loney and take him away from Harlem, but 
both are unsuccessful. Throughout all of this, he keeps seeing a 
black bird (an allusion to the bird in Blackfeet mythology). At 
the end when the police go to Mission Canyon, they find Loney 
and shoot him, and the last thing he ever sees is a big black bird 
flying away. This symbol suggests that Jim Loney, like the nar- 
rator in Winter in the Blood, overcomes his hopelessness by tak- 
ing his place within an ancestral culture and community." 

. Fools Crow. New York: Viking/Penguin, 1986. 391 pp. 

Genre: Historical Fiction 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: I NNAL (659-668) Welch 




f fV 



i - 



202 



186 



c 



Roots and Branches 



Although Welch's poetry and earlier novels focus on contem- 
porary themes of estrangement, search for self, and return to 
the Indian world. Fools Crow, winner of the Los Angeles Times 
Book Prize, and the Pacific Northwest Booksellers Association 
Book Award for 1987, portrays two years in the life of a Pikuni 
(Blackfeet) leader during the 1870s. The novel describes the tra- 
ditional lifeways of the Pikuni people who lived below Chief 
Mountain in Blackfeet country and the consequent changes 
forced on the tribe during the time when whites migrated into 
Montana territory. Fools Crow (White Man's Dog) experiences 
conflicts with individuals within the tribe, with other bands 
and tribes, with Napikwans (whites), with loss of game, and 
with smallpox. Finally, 173 sick old men, women, and children 
die when "seizers" attack Heavy Runner's village, culminating 
in the Baker Massacre of January 1870. But the novel does not 
end with despair. Instead, Fools Crow remains at peace and in 
harmony with the earth and his people: "He felt in his heart, in 
the rhythm of the drum, a peculiar kind of happiness — a hap- 
piness that sleeps with sadness" (390). Students appreciate the 
way Welch adheres to a more traditional Blackfeet vocabulary, 
i.e., "wood-biter" (beaver), "ears-far-apart" (owl), and "the 
Backbone of the World" (Rocky Mountains). The novel encour- 
ages further interest and reading about tribal culture, values, 
and historical events; and students begin to ask questions of 
their own ancestry. When whole collections or individual 
Blackfeet stories, such as those by Percy Bullchild, are read or 
heard before reading the novel, students have a better under- 
standing and acceptance of distinct cultural beliefs. 

Fools Crow, the most widely studied Native American 
novel in Montana's high schools, may be paired with Ella 
Deloria's Waterlily, which features a female Dakota Sioux pro- 
tagonist from the same time period as Welch's novel. After 
reading Fools Crow in a Western literature class, a German 
exchange student wrote that "I have always felt a terrible guilt 
over what the Nazis did to the Jews during World War II, but I 
had no idea the same kind of killing had happened with the 
Indians in America. I felt such a terrible sadness as I read this 
book." 

-. Winter in the Blood. New York: Viking/Penguin, 1987. 176 pp. 
Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Remembering the Old Ways; 

Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: S NNAL (659-668) Welch 



203 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



] 



Published globally. Winter in the Blood features an unnamed 
narrator who searches for his identity, like so many young 
people today, feeling distant and alienated from both the 
Native and non-Native worlds. However, through a conversa- 
tion with his grandfather. Yellow Calf, the narrator begins to 
learn the importance of balance and a human being's interde- 
pendent place within the physical and spiritual universe. In 
Yellow Calf's world, the animals suffer and know — probably 
sooner than humans — when harmony within the cosmos is 
broken. Winter in the Blood demonstrates the way memories 
inform the present. The narrator grows when he begins to 
make sense of his father's and brother's deaths; he grows by 
regaining his personal dignity and by moving into a physical 
and spiritual balance with the earth. And in the end, there is his 
homecoming: When he saves the cow, he decides to live to free 
himself of the "winter in the blood" that has kept him from 
even his own feelings. Louis Owens, in Other Destinies, writes 
of Welch's Winter in the Blood, comparing it somewhat with T.S. 
Eliot's The Waste Land: 

Within this drought-stricken landscape, mirroring in its sterility the 
inner state of the narrator, men and women seem at war with one 
another, communication fails repeatedly, and the present balances 
precariously between voids where past disappears and future cannot 
be imagined. The narrator's story unfolds in roughly sequential 
actions, the achronological tradition of Native American storytelling 
entering the text only as Welch allows the surrealism of dreams to 
interpenetrate everyday reality and exploits the familiar technique of 
flashback to merge past and present. (128) 

-, guest ed. "Tribes." Ploughshares, 20.1 (Spring 1994). 210 pp. 
(entire issue). 

Genre: Contemporary Story 

Theme: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: S 

As editor of this volume of Ploughshares, entitled "Tribes," 
James Welch has included works from "poets and story- 
tellers . . . who strain Webster's definition of tribe," but who 
belong to "the tribe of good writing" (7). The volume begins 
with works of traditional tribal writers such as Elizabeth 
Woody, Simon Ortiz, Scott Momaday, Sherman Alexie, Anita 
Endrezze, and Diane Glancy, as well as three excerpts from Sal- 
ish writer Debra Earling's novel Perma Red: "Bad Ways," "Win- 
ter Deeds," and "Old Ghosts." "Bad Ways" begins in "a spot in 
the road [on the Flathead Reservation] where the wind smells 





204 



] 



188 



c 

Roots and Branches 



like sulfur, a dark smell, something you think you should be 
able to leave behind you, but it will be in your clothing and in 
your shoes. And there will be a darkness in the way you see 
things, a darkness you wish you could leave" (15). This is a 
dark story about Indian men who were tricked into sacrificing 
the woman White Crow "for the [whiteman's] promise of 'trea- 
sures.'" But the story doesn't end with White Crow dancing 
dead in the water: "These men, these Indians, they did back to 
the white man what the white man had done, not thinking of 
what it might do to them, not thinking what more it would 
take . . . (19)." Earling closes this story with the truth of the way 
these "Bad Ways" literally become a part of "a bad smell" in 
the landscape. Nevertheless, the narrator knows that recovery 
and survival are real; "we have to hook [the power that is leav- 
ing us], snag it like a great struggling fish and pull it back" 
(15-33). 

Welch, James (Blackfeet/Gros Ventre), with Paul Stekler. Killing 
Custer: The Battle of the Little Bighorn and the Fate of the Plains 
Indians. New York: Norton, 1994. 317 pp. 

Genre: Nonfiction, Personal Memoir, Historical Narrative 
Themes: Lifeways and Stereotypes; Personal and Cultural Loss 
and Survival; Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: S NNAL (659-668) Welch 

This is Welch's first nonfiction work, based on the research he 
and director Paul Stekler conducted for their script for the 
American Experience documentary, "Last Stand at the Little 
Bighorn." Beginning with his search for answers to the ques- 
tions how? and why? for his ancestors' deaths at the Baker Mas- 
sacre on the Marias, Welch goes on to explore the stories and 
search for answers to "The Battle of the Little Bighorn." 

Killing Custer represents Welch and Stekler 's examinations 
of personal narratives, the frequently contradictory anthropo- 
logical evidence, the cultural background of the Plains Indians, 
the economic and political situation in America at the time, and 
the stories behind typically empty textbook narratives. 

Throughout the text, the voice and point of view shifts, pro- 
viding readers with a variety of experiences and resources as 
they work toward discovering the answers to the questions 
themselves. In the storyteller's voice, through his colloquial 
expressions, his profound understatement, and with details that 
flush out the smiles, Welch resurrects a much more human and 
more vulnerable, and somewhat less respectable, Custer. This is 
a Custer who "left his column frequently to go hunting. On one 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



1 

189 



such hunting trip, he was chasing a buffalo alone and shot his 
horse in the head when the buffalo swerved" (60). Welch also 
portrays the humanity and eccentricities of the Indians as well: 
"After much folderol, which included continuing jealousy and 
rivalry between Red Cloud and Spotted Tail, a spot was picked 
for the meeting — eight miles from Red Agency (neither chief 
would go to the other's agency)" (85). In the expository voice, 
Welch (and/or Stekler) reports the research, theories, and con- 
clusions from anthropologists, military records, recorded inter- 
views with participants of the Battle of the Little Bighorn, as 
well as with descendants living today who have the oral 
records of their grandfathers' experiences. First describing the 
battle from the Indians' point of view, telling their stories about 
how and why, Welch turns to describe the battle from the point 
of view of the military and from the individual men involved. 
In graphic, violent images, Welch describes the deaths and sub- 
sequent mutilations of many of the soldiers and Indians. And 
with Welch himself, as he looks at the battlefield, "you" are 
drawn to the place where this happened, to answer the ques- 
tions of how and why for yourself. 

Killing Custer does not resurrect the "Noble Indian." Instead, 
by looking at the multiple sides of this story, Welch presents to 
readers the complex humanity of all participants, demonstrat- 
ing the terrible capabilities which may lie within us all. Killing 
Custer is one history book our young people won't be able to 
stuff under their desks, hoping for osmosis to work its tricks. 
Through the vehicle of story and the substance of myth, James 
Welch demythologizes Custer's ill-fated attack on a huge 
encampment of Plains Indians on June 25, 1876. In Killing 
Custer, Welch resurrects not only the "fleeting, a good, often 
exhilarating feeling" of victory, and not only the subsequent 
defeat which meant "death ... of a way of life," he resurrects 
this truth — that the endurance of "the Indian spirit" remains 
"hard to break" (286). 

Students can easily read this independently, but history 
classes should require it as evidence of the limits and possibili- 
ties in research. Critical Thinking classes should study Killing 
Custer for its demonstration of the way writers can verbally 
present and clarify contradictions, postulate theories, and then 
draw thoughtful conclusions on the basis of both available and 
unavailable evidence. Killing Custer is an excellent resource for 
an introduction into the culture of the Plains Indians, and 
much of the text represents an exploration of stereotype — the 
truths behind the myths and the sometimes frightening truths 
about those who believe the myths. 




> f > - 



206 



190 



Roots and Branches 



Wood, Erskine. Days with Chief Joseph. Vancouver, WA: Rosewind 
Press, 1970. 38 pp. 

Genre: Memoir from a Diary 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Lifeways and Stereotypes; 
Remembering the Old Ways 
Grade Level: I, S 

Lt. Charles Erskine Scott Wood, the special officer in charge of 
Chief Joseph at the Colville Reservation in Northeastern Wash- 
ington, was also the officer who wrote down the words of 
Chief Joseph in his often quoted remark, "I will fight no more 
forever." Wood continued to campaign for the right of the Nez 
Perce people to return to their home in the Wallowa Valley. His 
son, Erskine, wrote this diary at the age of fourteen, during his 
second lengthy visit with Chief Joseph. The text includes sev- 
eral photographs, a preface written in 1970, in which Erskine 
Wood reflects on the writing, on its accuracy, and on a few 
"boyish" exaggerations; and the text closes with Wood's "recol- 
lections of Chief Joseph." The following situation demonstrates 
the marked differences between the two cultures and world 
views, as well as serving as an example of misunderstandings 
which lead to dire consequences for many Indian people: 

My father had written me to tell Joseph that if there was anything my 
father could do for him he was, through me, to let my father know. I 
gave this message to Joseph, and he said that he would like a good 
stallion to improve the breed of his pony herd. I looked on Joseph 
as ... a noble chief driven out of his ancestral home, I revered him so, 
that I thought his request for a stallion was too puny — was beneath 
him. I thought he ought to ask if my father . . . could get him back a 
portion of his Wallowa Valley ... I shook my head and said, "No, that 
was not what my father meant." Joseph accepted this calmly . . . but I 
always regretted my utter stupidity. A fine stallion would have 
upbred Joseph's herd of ponies . . . just the kind of thing in his Indian 
life that he needed, and of course well within the ability of my father 
to get for him. But just because I exalted him so high I deprived him 
of it, and it is something I shall always regret. (38) 

The honesty in this text provides a strong contrast with 
other popular literatures about Chief Joseph. 

Woody, Elizabeth. (Yakama/Warm Springs/Wasco/Navajo). Seven 
Hands, Seven Hearts. Portland, OR: Eighth Mountain Press, 
1994. 127 pp. 

Genre: Story, Essay, Poetry 
Themes: All themes 
Grade Level: I, S 



207 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



191 



Seven Hands , Seven Hearts includes the entirety of Elizabeth 
Woody's highly acclaimed first book of poems. Hand into 
Stone — winner of the American Book Award — as well as new 
poems, stories, and essays. According to Woody's publishers, 
"The work is united by common themes: a rootedness in the 
Northwest landscape, the histories of her ancestors, and the 
ongoing struggle to define what it means to be a tribal member, 
an American, and a woman at the end of the twentieth cen- 
tury" (cover). Her ancestral connections are demonstrated in 
lines excerpted from her Introduction: "I have been learning to 
weave root bags. It requires a thought process I've been in need 
of for a long time. It claimed me, coming from women on both 
sides of my family who are weavers: my Navajo grandmother 
Annie Woody wove rugs; my Warm Springs grandmother Eliz- 
abeth Pitt wove cornhusk bags and roots bags" (15). 

Joy Harjo and Simon Ortiz comment about the value of this 
poet's work: "In these times we are being forced to recognize 
the circular web that has always connected us, all of us, and to 
reconstruct it with the gift of our word — concurrently over- 
turning the decay, uprooting denial — and Elizabeth Woody's 
work is an essential part of this transition, for she follows in the 
tradition of peoples who have understood the power of lan- 
guage, and the place of a poet/ singer/ storyteller at the center 
of the world" (Harjo). "Her gift of language, honed with com- 
passion, wisdom, and love, offers the wonderfully affirming 
mythic power of her Native heritage . . ." (Ortiz). Teachers will 
easily find many ways to make connections for their students 
with this powerful book of poetry and prose. 

Zitkala-Sa (Gertrude Simmons Bonnin, Yankton Sioux). American 
Indian Stories. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, [1900] 
1985. 195 pp. 

Genre: Autobiographical Essay, Short Story 
Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Change and Growth; Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Per- 
sonal Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (169—176) Bonnin 

Zitkala-Sa was bom on the Yankton Reservation in 1876 to a 
white father and a Yankton Dakota mother, Tate I Yohin Win 
(Reaches for the Wind), from whom she learned the ways of her 
people. Three autobiographical essays originally published in 
1900 in The Atlantic Monthly begin this collection, which also 
includes short stories of warriors, conflicts with the white man, 
and selected essay clips about "America's Indian Problem." Fre- 
quently formal, it is typical of much tum-of-the-century writing. 



203 



0 



192 



Roots and Branches 



In the first essay, "Impressions of an Indian Childhood," 
Zitkala-Sa presents the late-nineteenth-century life of a young 
girl at home on the "Dakota" prairie, with her mother, her 
extended family, and her tribal community (7-45). Zitkala-Sa 
shares the lessons in beadwork, hospitality, generosity, and the 
lessons in stories from her childhood; she recognizes that the 
suffering Indian people have endured from contact with the 
white man, and she affirms the humanity and valuable old 
ways of her Native culture. 

In the second essay, "School Days of an Indian Girl," 
Quaker missionaries take the eight-year-old from her reserva- 
tion community to a boarding school in the East where she 
remains separated from her mother for three years. Her tradi- 
tional values of respect for others and respect for elders conflict 
with her need to assert her right to remain traditionally Indian 
in values and behavior (47-80). The education toward assimila- 
tion that Gertrude Simmons received at distant boarding 
schools contributed to her mother's rejection because her 
mother viewed this choice as a turning away from her people. 
Consequently, she gave herself the name Zitkala-Sa (Red Bird) 
to affirm her Native identity. 

In the third essay, "An Indian Teacher," the narrator returns 
to teach in an Indian boarding school, remaining separated 
from her family and community. Struggling to maintain her 
traditional tribal values, she works to survive and prevail in 
the dominant European American society (81-100). 

Dexter Fisher suggests this writing "represents one of the 
first attempts by a Native American woman to write her own 
story without the aid of an editor, an interpreter, or an ethnog- 
rapher" (Foreword). Although American Indian Stories presents 
a polarized view of the Indian/white conflict, Zitkala-Sa has 
achieved a great deal of sophistication and power in her writ- 
ing by relying on her Native culture, and then uses the English 
language to assert the civilized and frequently "superior" 
humanity of her Indian people to a non-Indian audience. Men- 
tioning neither the reservation nor the specific names of 
schools, the writer also communicates much more than autobi- 
ography; she communicates the very universal experience of 
Native American children for more than half a century. Ameri- 
can Indian Stories and Old Indian Legends were her only formal 
publications, but Gertrude Simmons Bonnin continued to work 
as an advocate for Native American rights and for the Pan- 
Indian movement. 

Throughout these essays and stories, Zitkala-Sa develops 
characters who play Iktomi (the Dakota trickster/ transformer 




Bibliography of Native Literatures 



] 



For Further 
Reading 



o 

ERIC 



193 



culture hero), and so students' understanding and experience 
with the essays can be enhanced by first reading a collection of 
Dakota or Sioux traditional stories. Then they can look for 
ways the writer and characters outsmart the trickster in 
Zitkala-Sa's American Indian Stories. 

Alexie, Sherman (Spokane /Coeur d'Alene). The Business of Fancy 
Dancing. Hanging Loose Press, 1992. 

Genre: Poetry 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 

Survival 

Grade Level: S 

Calling his writing "Fancy Dancing," which provides an outlet 
for what "hurts the most," the poems in this collection feature 
the centrality of games (football and basketball) and ceremony 
to the reservation Indians. 

. Indian Killer. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1996. 432 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Theme: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 

Survival 

Grade Level: S 

. Old Shirts and New Skins. Los Angeles: University of Califor- 
nia Press, 1993. 91 pp. 

Genre: Poetry 

Theme: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 

Survival 

Grade Level: S 

. Reservation Blues. New York: Warner Books, 1996. 320 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Theme: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 

Survival 

Grade Level: S 

Armstrong, Jeannette (Okanagan). Breath Tracks. Penticton, BC: They- 
tus, 1991. 112 pp. 

Genre: Poetry 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 
Grade Level: S 



210 



NNAL (144-148) Armstrong 



[ 



: 



194 



Roots and Branches 



. Slash. Penticton, BC: Theytus, 1990. 254 pp. 

Genre: Historical Novel 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (144-148) Armstrong 

A teenage male protagonist experiences the major events in the 
Indian self-determination movement of the 1960s and 1970s 
across both Canada and the United States. 

Benton-Banai, Edward (Anishinabe). Generation to Generation. St. Paul: 
Red School House, 1991. 21 pp. 

Genre: Memoir 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: I, S 

Benton-Banai's family and tribal reminiscences, which the 
author dedicates "To all the Grandmothers and Grandfathers 
who have held on so tenaciously, lovingly and with quiet, last- 
ing hope to the meaning of Anishinabe. ..." 

. Mishomis Book: The Voice of the Ojibway. St. Paul, MN: Indian 

Country Communications, 1991. 

Genre: Memoir, Traditional Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Lifeways and Stereotypes 
Grade Level: I, S 

A spiritual odyssey and the teachings of the Ojibway people, 
contradicting the negative ways in which Native life has been 
presented. 

Big Crow, Moses Nelson (Lakota). Hoksila and the Red Buffalo. Cham- 
berlain, SD: Tipi Press, 1991. 40 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Change and Growth 
Grade Level: I, S 

"One of the oldest stories" the storyteller knows, passed down 
from generation to generation and changing with each telling. 

Bird, Gloria (Spokane). Full Moon on the Reservation. Greenfield Cen- 
ter, NY: Greenfield Review Press, 1994. 

Genre: Poetry 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: S 

The 1992 winner of the Native Authors First Book Award. 



211 



1 

Bibliography of Native Literatures 



1 

195 



Brand, Johanna (Micmac). The Life and Death of Anna Mae Aquash. 
Toronto: J. Lorimer, 1978. 203 pp. 

Genre: Biography 

Themes: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival; Between 
Two Worlds 
Grade Level: S 

The story of Anna Mae Aquash, a Micmac warrior from Nova 
Scotia and a member of the American Indian Movement, who 
was murdered and then had her hands severed and sent to 
Washington for fingerprinting. 

Broker, Ignatia (Ojibway). Night Flying Woman. Minneapolis: Min- 
nesota Historical Society, 1983. 135 pp. 

Genre: Memoir 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Change and Growth; 
Between Two Worlds; At Home within Circles; Cultural and 
Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: I, S 

Recollections from Oona, the speaker, of traditional and histor- 
ical stories for her grandchildren, demonstrating the strength 
of Ojibway people to survive. 

Brown, Emily Ivanoff (Inuit). Tales ofTicasuk: Eskimo Legends and Sto- 
ries. Juneau: University of Alaska Press. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: I, S 

Traditional stories about wise old ladies, brave orphans, heroic 
hunters, arrogant young women, people who are clever and 
magical, and evil and greed. 

Bruchac, Joseph. (Abenaki). Between Earth and Sky. New York: Har- 
court. Brace, 1996. 30 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles 
Grade Level: P, I 

A beautiful and inspiring book about some of the special places 
that are sacred to Native people, special places in the East, 
North, South, and West, as well as Above, Below, and Center. 

. Dawn Land. Golden, CO: Fulcrum, 1993. 317 pp. 

Genre: Novel 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Change and Growth 
Grade Level: S 



O 

ERIC 



212 



196 



: 



Roots and Branches 



Set in the Northeastern country of North America about ten 
thousand years ago. Dawn Land is a story based on the oral tra- 
ditions and history of the Abenaki people that centers on the 
quest of Young Hunter. 

. The First Strawberries. New York: Dial, 1993. 30 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: P, I 

The retelling of a Cherokee tale about the way strawberries 
came into the world; illustrated with watercolor paintings by 
Anna Vojtech. 

. Long River. Golden, CO: Fulcrum, 1995. 298 pp. 

Genre: Novel 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Change and Growth 
Grade Level: S 

A novel about friendship, courage, trust, and adventure, with 
the characters who first appeared in Dawn Land. 

. Native American Stories (1991) and Native American Animal Sto- 
ries (1993). Golden, CO: Fulcrum. 160 pp. each. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: I, S 

Collections of stories told by Joseph Bruchac, taken from 
Caduto and Bruchac's excellent educational resources. Keepers 
of the Earth and Keepers of the Animals. 

Bruchac, Joseph (Abenaki), and Jonathan London. Thirteen Moons on 
Turtle's Back: A Native American Year of Moons. New York: 
Philomel, 1992. 30 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: P, I 

A collection of storytelling poems, illustrated by Thomas 
Locker, which focus on Native relationships with the thirteen 
moons of each year. 

Campbell, Maria (Metis). Little Badger and the Fire Spirit. Toronto: 
McClelland and Stewart, 1977. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles 
Grade Level: P, I 



213 



[ 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



197 



The story of wisdom learned from Grey Coyote, in which Little 
Badger befriends the Mountain Goat, the Mountain Lion, the 
Grizzly Bear, the Rattlesnake, and the Fire Spirit, to bring the 
warmth of fire to his people. 

. People of the Buffalo: How the Plains Indians Lived. Vancouver: 

Douglas & McIntyre, 1976. 47 pp. 

Genre: Culture and History 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles 

Grade Level: P, I 

A book showing how Plains Indians lived, a people who felt 
the spiritual connection between all aspects of life, and for 
whom "every part of life and all forms of life made up 'the 
whole.'" The book does much to counter the romanticized 
stereotypes of Plains Indians. 

Charbonneau, Eileen (Cherokee). The Ghosts of Stony Clove. New York: 
Tom Doherty, 1988. 164 pp. 

Genre: Historical Novel 

Themes: Change and Growth; Between Two Worlds; and 
Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: I, S 

A ghost story /romance and the first in Charbonneau's histori- 
cal trilogy, featuring Asher Woods, the father of Joshua Woods, 
the protagonist of In the Time of the Wolves. Recommended for 
young adult readers. 

Conley, Robert (Cherokee). Mountain Windsong, a Novel of the Trail of 
Tears. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1994. 218 pp. 
Genre: Historical Fiction 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: S 

A love story that brings to life the suffering and endurance of 
the Cherokee people. 

Cook-Lynn, Elizabeth (Crow Creek Sioux). The Power of Horses and 
Other Stories. New York: Arcade, 1990. 131 pp. 

Genre: Short Story 

Themes: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival; Between 
Two Worlds; At Home within Circles 
Grade Level: I, S 

Stories filled with "beauty, gentleness, charm and humor," of 
people living on the reservation who suffer grief when sons 



ERIC 



214 



198 



Roots and Branches 



fight in foreign wars, when alcoholic mothers lose their chil- 
dren, and when the white man's injustice prevails. 

. Then Badger Said This. Fairfield, WA: Ye Galleon Press, 1983. 

39 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary and Traditional Story, Song, Poetry 
Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; 
Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: I, S 

"Fictional" stories, songs, and poems, "born of a very real and 
usable past which remains unforgettable." 

Culleton, Beatrice (Metis). Spirit of the White Bison. Winnipeg: Pemmi- 
can, 1985. 64 pp. 

Genre: Novel 

Theme: Personal and Cultural Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: I 

A young bison growing up on the plains in the late 1800s faces 
peril at the hands of soldiers who are destroying the great buf- 
falo herds as a way to control the Native tribes. 

Cuthand, Beth (Cree). Voices in the Waterfall. Penticton, BC: Theytus, 
1992.80 pp. 

Genre: Poetry 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Cultural and Personal 
Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: S 

Dorris, Michael (Modoc). The Broken Cord. New York: HarperCollins, 
1989.300 pp. 

Genre: Memoir 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: S 

The story of Michael Dorris's adopted son, Adam, who suf- 
fered from Fetal Alcohol Syndrome. 

Dudley, Joseph Iron Eye (Sioux). Chouteau Creek. Lincoln: University 
of Nebraska Press, 1992. 189 pp. 

Genre: Autobiography 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; 
Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: S 



215 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



] 



199 



A memoir recalling stories — including the first Wounded Knee 
tragedy — from Dudley's maternal Indian grandparents, who 
lived on the Yankton Sioux Reservation in the 1940s. 

Durham, Jimmie (Cherokee). Columbus Day: Poems, Drawings and 
Stories About American Indian Life and Death in the Nineteen- 
Seventies. Albuquerque: West End Press, 1983. 104 pp. 

Genre: Stories, Poetry 

Themes: At Home within Circles; Between Two Worlds; Life- 
ways and Stereotypes; Cultural and Personal Loss and Sur- 
vival 

Grade Level: I, S 

Frey, Rodney, ed. Stories That Make the World. Norman: University of 
Oklahoma Press, 1995. 264 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story 
Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 
Grade Level: I, S 

A collection of stories compiled with the help of Tom Yellowtail 
(Crow), Mari Watters (Nez Perce), Basil White (Kootenai), and 
the Coeur d'Alene storyteller Lawrence Aripa, which uses 
italics, ellipses, and stage directions to show the rhythm of the 
Native languages. 

Geronimo (Apache). Geronimo: His Own Story. Ed. Steven Melvil Bar- 
rett. New York: Dutton, 1970. 206 pp. 

Genre: Memoir, History 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Change and Growth; Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: I, S 

The dictated story of the culture and history of Geronimo's 
people. 

Giago, Tim (Oglala Sioux). Notes from Indian Country. Vol 1. State Pub- 
lishing, 1984. 423 pp. 

Genre: Memoir, Journalism 

Theme: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: S 

A collection of newspaper columns Giago has written on com- 
munications, culture, education and athletics, government, 
health, humor, litigation, politics, rights, religion, and the people 
he has observed. 



ERIC 



216 



[ 



: 



200 



Roots and Branches 



Goodbird, Edward (Hidatsa). Goodbird the Indian. St Paul: Minnesota 
Historical Society Press, 1985. 78 pp. 

Genre: Autobiography 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: S 

The life of Goodbird, who lived from 1869 to 1938. 

Grinnell, George Bird. Blackfeet Indian Stories. Old Saybrook, CT: 
Applewood, 1913. 214 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: I, S 

Stories compiled by a respected ethnologist who lived with the 
Blackfeet for a time and was recognized by them as a friend. 

. When Buffalo Ran. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 

1966. 114 pp. 

Genre: Story, Culture 

Themes: Change and Growth; Remembering the Old Ways; 
Lifeways and Stereotypes 

Grade Level: I, S 

An early account of a traditional Cheyenne boy's life, from 
childhood to marriage, based on Grinnell's experience of 
spending forty summers with the Cheyenne. Other books by 
Grinnell include: By Cheyenne Campfires; Alaska 1899; Blackfoot 
Lodge Tales; Cheyenne Indians, Volumes 1 and 2; Pawnee Hero Sto- 
ries and Folktales; Punishment of the Stingy; and Two Great Scouts 
and their Pawnee. 

Hale, Janet Campbell (Coeur d'Alene). Bloodlines: Odyssey of a Native 
Daughter. New York: Random House, 1993. 187 pp. 

Genre: Autobiography, Memoir 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: S 

Harcey, Dennis W., Brian R. Croone, and Joe Medicine Crow (Crow). 
White-Man-Runs-Him, Crow Scout with Custer. Evanston, IL: 
Evanston Publishing, 1993. 224 pp. 

Genre: History, Biography 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival; Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: S 



O 

ERIC 



217 



[ 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



201 



The story of a Crow warrior who adapted to the ways of the 
white man in order to maintain Crow land and the survival of 
his people. 

Heat Moon, William Least (Osage/Sioux, William L. Trogdon). Blue 
Highways: A Journey into America. Boston: Little, Brown, 1982. 
426 pp. 

Genre: Memoir, Autobiography 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival; Lifeways and Stereotypes 

Grade Level: S 

The narrator's travels throughout the country on the nation's 
secondary (Blue) highways, capturing the setting and character 
of the people he meets. 

Henson, Lance (Southern Cheyenne). A Cheyenne Sketchbook: Selected 
Poems 1970-1991. Greenfield Center, NY: Greenfield Review 
Press, 1992. 54 pp. 

Genre: Poetry 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: I, S NNAL (319—324) Henson 

Short imagistic poems of translated tribal songs combined with 
contemporary images. 

Highway, Thompson (Cree). The Rez Sisters. Saskatoon, Saskatchewan: 
Fifth House, 1988. 118 pp. 

Genre: Drama 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 

Survival 

Grade Level: S 

A funny and powerful portrayal of seven women from a 
reserve who attempt to beat the odds by playing bingo — the 
biggest bingo in the world, with a chance to win a way out of 
their tortured lives — written by an award-winning playwright. 

Hungry Wolf, Beverly (Blackfoot). The Ways of My Grandmothers. New 
York: Quill Press, 1982. 249 pp. 

Genre: Memoir, Traditional Story 

Themes: Lifeways and Stereotypes; Remembering the Old 
Ways; Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival; At Home 
within Circles 

Grade Level: I, S 



O 



213 



202 



Roots and Branches 



A thorough and honest collection of stories, myths, legends, 
and teachings presented as told to Beverly Hungry Wolf by her 
grandmothers over the years, together with recipes and cloth- 
ing patterns that could be used for class projects. 

Johnston, Basil H. (Ojibway). Indian School Days. Norman: University 
of Oklahoma Press, 1989. 250 pp. 

Genre: Memoir 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: S NNAL (353-360) Johnston 

A dark story told with wit and humor about assimilation pres- 
sures that the author survived in the Spanish Indian Residen- 
tial [boarding] School. 

. Ojibway Tales. Saint Simons Island, GA: Bison, 1993. 188 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story 
Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: S NNAL (353-360) Johnston 

A collection of twenty-two stories originally collected under 
the title Moose Meat and Wild Rice. 

Josephy, Alvin M., Jr., Trudy Thomas, and Jeanne Eder (Sioux). 
Wounded Knee, Lest We Forget. Billings, MT: Artcraft Printers, 
1990. 55 pp. 

Genre: Memoir, History, Essay 

Themes: Lifeways and Stereotypes; Cultural and Personal Loss 
and Survival; Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: S 

A powerful presentation of the "enduring nature" of the 
tragedy of Wounded Knee, presented through photographs, 
history, and memoirs from descendants of the survivors. 

King, Sandra (Ojibway). Shannon/Ojibway Dancer. Lerner, 1993. 48 pp. 
Genre: Contemporary Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: I 

A contemporary story about young girls and the pow-wow. 





Bibliography of Native Literatures 



203 



King, Thomas (Cherokee). A Coyote Columbus Story. Toronto: Ground- 
wood Publishing, 1992. 30 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: I 

Winner of the Governor General's Award. 

. Medicine River. New York: Viking, 1990. 

Genre: Novel 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Cultural and Personal 
Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: S 

A novel about the situation with mixed-bloods, especially in 
Canada, where only full-bloods have the right to live on the 
reserves, which results in drifters who are disconnected from 
home and culture. But through compassionate trickery, they 
are brought home. King wrote a screenplay for Medicine River 
for CBE-TV in 1993, and he received the PEN/Josephine Miles 
Award for this novel. 

LaFlesche, Francis (Omaha). The Middle Five: Indian Schoolboys of the 
Omaha Tribe. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1963. 
Genre: Memoir 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; 

Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (383-390) LaFlesche 

A memoir of his early childhood as a "Sacred Child" in cere- 
monial rituals, as well as his school years in the mid-1800s at 
the Presbyterian Mission, first published in 1900. 

Lame Deer (John Fire, Lakota) and Richard Erdoes. Lame Deer, Seeker 
of Visions. New York: Washington Square Press, 1972. 272 pp. 
Genre: As-Told-To Autobiography 
Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 
Grade Level: S 

LaPointe, Frank. The Sioux Today. Orinda, CA: Macmillan, 1972. 132 pp. 
Genre: Culture 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: I, S 





] 



204 



c 

Roots and Branches 



Lowie, Robert H. Myths and Traditions of the Crow Indians. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press, 1993. 308 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: I, S 

Stories told by an anthropologist who visited the Crow people, 
beginning in 1907. 

Marquis, Thomas B. Memoirs of a White Crow Indian (Thomas H. 
Leforge). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1974. 356 pp. 
Genre: As-Told-To Memoir 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Cultural and Personal 
Loss and Survival; Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: S 

A memoir, as told to Thomas B. Marquis, recounting a white 
man's experiences living with the Crows and scouting for the 
U.S. Military under Gibbon. 

Mathews, John Joseph (Osage). The Osage: Children of the Middle 
Waters. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1961. 

Genre: Memoir, History 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Cultural and Personal 
Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: S NNAL (409-416) Mathews 

The history of the Osage tribe, from before the arrival of the 
Europeans up to the present, based on oral history, and on 
Mathews's life with his people. 

. Sundown. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, [1934] 

1988. 312 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: S NNAL (409-416) Mathews 

The story of a young man who returns to the reservation after 
World War I and the discovery of oil on Osage land. 

. Wah'Kon-Tah: The Osage and the White Man's Road. Norman: 

University of Oklahoma Press, [1932] 1981. 

Genre: Historical Fiction 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: S NNAL (409-416) Mathews 

A story of the Osage people and a sympathetic Indian agent. 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



205 



McGaa, Ed (Oglala Sioux). Red Cloud: The Story of an American Indian. 
Minneapolis: Dillon Press, 1971. 54 pp. 

Genre: Biography, Culture 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; At 
Home within Circles; Change and Growth; Cultural and Per- 
sonal Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: I, S 

McLaughlin, Marie (Sioux). Myths and Legends of the Sioux. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press, 1990. 200 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Stories 
Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 
Grade Level: I,S 

A collection of thirty-seven traditional stories and legends — 
including several Inktomi (the Nakota pronunciation) stories — 
that represent McLaughlin's efforts to prevent the disap- 
pearance of her valued heritage. 

Momaday, N. Scott (Kiowa). The Names. Tucson: University of Ari- 
zona Press, 1976. 170 pp. 

Genre: Autobiography 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: S 

The story of Momaday's roots and his boyhood grounded in 
landscape, using the Native spirit of storytelling. 

Mourning Dove (Okanagan/Colville). Mourning Dove: A Salishan 
Autobiography. Ed. Jay Miller. Lincoln: University of Nebraska 
Press, 1990. 187 pp. 

Genre: Autobiography 

Themes: Lifeways and Stereotypes; At Home within Circles; 
Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: S 

An autobiography based on manuscripts found, organized, 
and edited by Jay Miller after Mourning Dove's death in 1936. 

Ortiz, Simon J. (Acoma Pueblo). The People Shall Continue. San Fran- 
cisco: Children's Book Press, 1977. 

Genre: History, Culture 

Themes: At Home within Circles; Between Two Worlds; 
Remembering the Old Ways; Change and Growth; Cultural 
and Personal Loss and Survival 



Grade Level: I 



NNAL (486^98) Ortiz 



ERIC 




206 






Roots and Branches 



A story from the point of view of American Indian peoples, 
recounting the history of European contact on the North Amer- 
ican continent from 1492 to the present. 

Otokahekagapi (First Beginnings): Sioux Creation Story. Trans, and illus. 
by Thomas E. Simms. Chamberlain, SD: Tipi Press, 1987. 30 pp. 
Genre: Traditional Story 
Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 
Grade Level: P, I, S 

A Titonwan Lakota story that is as much scripture as the Bible, 
a story given "from God." 

Owens, Amos. "Sioux/Dakota Pipe-carver." In This Song Remembers: 
Self-Portraits of Native Americans in the Arts. Ed. Jane Katz. 
Houghton Mifflin, 1980. pp. 64-70. 

Genre: Autobiography 

Themes: At Home within Circles; Remembering the Old Ways; 
Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: I, S 

St. Pierre, Mark. Madonna Swan: A Lakota Woman's Story. Norman: 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1991. 209 pp. 

Genre: As-Told-To Autobiography 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Cultural and Personal 
Loss and Survival; Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: S 

Schultz, James Willard. My Life as an Indian: The Story of a Red Woman 
and a White Man in the Lodges of the Blackfeet. New York: Double- 
day, Page, 1907. 204 pp. 

Genre: Memoir, History 

Theme: Personal and Cultural Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: S 

Schwartz, Warren E., and Wesley Whiteman (Black Bear) (Cheyenne). 
The Last Contrary: The Story of Wesley Whiteman. Sioux Falls, SD: 
Center for Western Studies, 1988. 

Genre: Traditional Story, As-Told-To Autobiography 
Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Change and Growth; 
Between Two Worlds; At Home within Circles; Cultural and 
Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: I, S 

A personal narrative of the life and beliefs of the last member of 
the Cheyenne Contrary (or "Clown") Society, who died in 1981. 




c 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



207 



Silko, Leslie Marmon (Laguna Pueblo). Delicacy and Strength of Lace. 
Ed. Anne Wright. St. Paul, MN: Graywolf Press, 1985. 105 pp. 
Genre: Contemporary and Traditional Letters and Story 
Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Cir- 
cles; Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival 

Grade Level: S NNAL (575—586) Silko 

Letters through which Leslie Silko and James Wright built a 
friendship, although they had only met twice, once at a writers' 
conference in Michigan in 1975, and again in January 1980 
when Wright lay ill with terminal cancer. 

Slipperjack, Ruby (Ojibway). Honour the Sun. Winnipeg, Manitoba: 
Pemmican, 1987. 211 pp. 

Genre: Memoir 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and 
Survival; Change and Growth 

Grade Level: S 

The seasonal diary of a ten-year-old child called "The Owl," 
who lives in a Native community in northern Ontario. 

. Silent Words. Saskatoon, Saskatchewan: Fifth House, 1992. 

250 pp. 

Genre: Young Adult Novel 
Theme: Change and Growth 
Grade Level: S 

A funny, tragic, and moving novel for both young adult and 
adult readers, about a young Native boy's journey of self- 
discovery. 

Sneve, Virginia Driving Hawk (Lakota). High Elk's Treasure. New 
York: Holiday House, 1975. 96 pp. 

Genre: Story 

Themes: At Home within Circles; Change and Growth; Between 
Two Worlds; Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: I 

The story of Joe High Elk and his sister, who find shelter from a 
raging storm in a cave where his ancestor. Steps High Like an 
Elk, had hidden his horse from white soldiers and left behind a 
sacred rawhide bundle. 




224 



208 



Roots and Branches 



. Jimmy Yellow Hawk. New York: Holiday House, 1972. 

Genre: Story 

Themes: Change and Growth; Between Two Worlds; Remem- 
bering the Old Ways 
Grade Level: I 

A contemporary story about a Lakota boy on a South Dakota 
reservation that won the 1971 Council on Interracial Books for 
Children Award. 

. They Led A Nation: The Sioux Chiefs. Sioux Falls, SD: Brevet 

Press, 1975. 46 pp. 

Genre: History 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; 
Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: I, S 

. When Thunders Spoke. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 

1993. 95 pp. 

Genre: Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Change and Growth; 
Between Two Worlds; Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: I 

A contemporary story of Norman, a young Sioux, who collects 
rough agates to trade for candy at the trading post and makes a 
treacherous climb up the west side of a butte, the "place of the 
Thunders," because his grandfather believes something good 
will happen. 

Standing Bear, Luther (Sioux). My Indian Boyhood. Lincoln: University 
of Nebraska Press, [1931] 1988. 190 pp. 

Genre: Autobiography, History 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Change and Growth; Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: I, S 

The home life and education of a young turn-of-the-century 
Sioux who learns to live the traditional life before attending 
Carlisle Boarding School in Pennsylvania. 

. My People the Sioux. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 

1975. 288 pp. 

Genre: History 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Cultural and Personal 
Loss and Survival 
Grade Level: I, S 



O 

ERIC 



22 3 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



209 



Strete, Craig Kee. When Grandfather Journeys into Winter. New York: 
Greenwillow Press, 1977. 

Genre: Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Change and Growth; At 
Home within Circles 
Grade Level: I 

A funny yet painful story about a young boy. Little Thunder, 
who must face the fact that Tayhua, his grandfather, is going to 
die. 

TallMountain, Mary (Koyukon Athabascan). Green March Moons. 
Stanford, CA: New Seed Press, 1987. 

Genre: Young Adult Novel 

Themes: Change and Growth; Remembering the Old Ways; At 

Home within Circles; Between Two Worlds 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (623-627) TallMountain 

The story of an eleven-year-old Koyukon girl who suffers a 
number of tragedies — her father dies from the "whiteman's 
flu"; her mother dies from despair; her Uncle Vaska rapes her 
one night after he has been drinking — until her Aunt arranges 
for her to live with "old Philomena." 

. A Quick Brush of Wings. San Francisco: Freedom Voices, 1991. 

59 pp. 

Genre: Poetry 

Theme: At Home within Circles 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (623-627) TallMountain 

Poetry, the means of survival for Mary TallMountain, who was 
"ripped out" of her childhood when her mother was dying of 
tuberculosis and moved into an Anglo school where she was 
mocked for her Indianness. 

Vizenor, Gerald (Chippewa). The People Named the Chippewa: Narrative 
Histories. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984. 
172 pp. 

Genre: History, Biography 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; 

Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: I, S NNAL (635-648) Vizenor 

Illustrated stories of the woodland tribal people as they meet 
missionaries, capitalists, government bureaucrats, and anthro- 
pologists. 



ERIC 



226 



210 



Roots and Branches 



. Summer in the Spring. Norman: University of Oklahoma 

Press, 1993. 166 pp. 

Genre: Poetry 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: S NNAL( 635-648) Vizenor 

Anishinabe lyric poems and stories, edited and interpreted by 
Vizenor. 

Waheenee (Buffalo Bird Woman, Hidatsa/Mandan). Buffalo Bird 
Woman's Garden. Transcribed by Gilbert Wilson. St. Paul: 
Minnesota Historical Society, [1917] 1987. 

Genre: Culture 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 
Grade Level: I, S 

Traditional Hidatsa horticultural techniques. 

. Waheenee: An Indian Girl's Story. Transcribed by Gilbert Wil- 
son. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1981. 183 pp. 
Genre: As-Told-To Stories 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; At 
Home within Circles 
Grade Level: P, I, S 

Stories of Buffalo Bird Woman, who was born in 1839, two 
years after a devastating smallpox epidemic that struck the 
Hidatsa people. 

Walker, James R. Lakota Myth. Ed. Elaine A. Jahner. Lincoln: Univer- 
sity of Nebraska Press, 1983. 426 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Theme: Remembering the Old Ways 

Grade Level: S 

Stories collected by James R. Walker, a physician to the Oglala 
Sioux at the Pine Ridge Reservation from 1896 to 1914. 

Weeks, Rupert (Shoshone). Pachee Goyo: History and Legends from the 
Shoshone. Laramie, WY: Jelm Mountain Press, 1981. 

Genre: Young Adult Novel 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Change and Growth; At 
Home within Circles 
Grade Level: I 




221 



Bibliography of Native Literatures 



] 



211 



The story of a young boy who learns to listen and to give up 
selfishness in order to grow up. 

Welch, James (Blackfeet/Gros Ventre). Indian Lawyer. New York: Pen- 
guin, 1990. 350 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Themes: Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival; Between 
Two Worlds 

Grade Level: S 

A contemporary novel, set on the Blackfeet Reservation and in 
Helena, Montana, where Sylvester Yellow Calf, an Indian 
lawyer, has served on the state parole board. 

. Riding the Earthboy 40. Lewiston, ID: Confluence Press, 1971. 

67 pp. 

Genre: Poetry 

Themes: Between Two Worlds; Remembering the Old Ways; 
Lifeways and Stereotypes; Cultural and Personal Loss and Sur- 
vival 

Grade Level: I, S 

Poems representing contemporary issues and scenes from 
around Harlem, Montana, and Welch's family farm, forty acres 
leased to Earthboy. 

Yellow Robe, Rosebud (Lakota). Tonweya and the Eagles and Other 
Lakota Indian Tales. New York: Dial, 1979. 118 pp. 

Genre: Memoir, Traditional Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds 
Grade Level: P, I, S 

An excellent collection of historical and legendary Lakota stories. 

Yellowtail, Thomas (Crow). Yellowtail : Crow Medicine Man and Sun 
Dance Chief. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1991. 
241 pp. 

Genre: As-Told-To Autobiography 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; Between Two Worlds; 
Cultural and Personal Loss and Survival 

Grade Level: S 

An illustrated autobiography as told to Michael Oren Fitz- 
gerald. 





223 



212 



c 



Roots and Branches 



Zitkala-Sa (Gertrude Simmons Bonnin) (Yankton Sioux). American 
Indian Legends. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1985. 
165 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story 

Themes: Remembering the Old Ways; At Home within Circles; 
Change and Growth 
Grade Level: I, S 

Fourteen ohunkankans (traditional stories) featuring Iktomi, 
the trickster, which Zitkala-Sa collected when she returned to 
the reservation after teaching at Carlisle School. 



213 




7 

Non-Native Authors 
and Their Stories 
about Native 
Americans 



The following reviews primarily represent my own readings of sev- 
eral popular books by non-Native authors. However, I have relied on 
the insight of Beverly Slapin and Doris Seale (Santee/Cree) who have 
conducted critical readings of books for children in Through Indian 
Eyes: The Native Experience in Books for Children. Suggestions for books 
written by Native authors with similar themes and characters appear 
at the end of several reviews. 

Banks, Lynne Reid. The Indian in the Cupboard. New York: Avon, 1980. 

181 pp. 

Genre: Fantasy Novel 
Grade Level: I 

Probably one of the most popular books for children today, this 
childhood novel may be characterized as fantasy, while it por- 
trays a character with whom most children can identify. It is 
the story of a boy who discovers he can make plastic figures in 
a cupboard come alive by turning a special key. From regard- 
ing these little figures as curiosities, as extensions of himself 
and his own imagination, Omri learns to respect their right to a 
life of their own. He demonstrates this respect and choice at the 
end of the book when he gives his mother the key. However, 
the reader may expect a "return" since Omri's mother will 
always keep the key on a chain around her neck. 

The Indian in the Cupboard represents the universal wish- 
fulfillment experience. Whereas so many children imagine 
worlds where play becomes reality, Omri's story moves one 
step beyond, into the magical world where plastic figures come 
alive, and where they require food and drink, a place to live. 




230 



[ 



] 



214 



Roots and Branches 



and meaningful and permanent relationships with others just 
like themselves. 

While the book exhibits these positive characteristics, it also 
presents some serious problems for Native children as well as 
for those who would understand Native Americans as individ- 
uals apart from popular stereotypes. 

Within the text, efforts are made to contradict stereotypes in 
Western films — for example, the explanation that the "designs" 
on tipis are unique to a tribe, so Omri can't just paint what he 
wants. However, inaccurate details about the Iroquois or the 
more general Indian experience still abound. When the narra- 
tor refers to Omri's growing ability "to see things from the 
Indian's point of view," it refers to the physical perspective of 
being small in a gigantic world, rather than "point of view" 
with respect to a world view and culture or with respect to 
relationships between people from different backgrounds. 
Also, reference is made to the influence of Western films: "It 
occurred to Omri for the first time that his idea of Indians, 
taken entirely from Western films, had been somehow false" 
(29). However, this is followed by the comment that "real Indi- 
ans" didn't go home for dinner or live in houses like his. In 
other words, the text itself would argue this very idea. Accord- 
ing to The Indian in the Cupboard, a real Indian is Little Bear, 
existing only in the past, valuing scalping and war, needing to 
be taught language, morals, and responsibility from the white 
boy, inspiring fear in white men, eating and moving like a 
predatory animal, who can't survive without the help of a 
white boy. 

The relationship between Omri and Little Bear is a micro- 
cosm of the still acceptable — and appropriate, according to this 
story — paternalistic relationship between the fatherly or care- 
giving, morality-teaching United States government and the 
American Indians. Omri must teach Little Bear to be nonvio- 
lent, and to learn to be friends with white men such as Boone, 
the cowboy. What about the document of the Iroquois confed- 
eration which Ben Franklin relied on when writing the U.S. 
Constitution? 

The text makes reference to the Algonquins fighting with 
the French and the Iroquois with the English. The following 
comment that "both sides had scalped like mad" implies the 
Indians were the perpetrators instead of both the Europeans 
and the Indians, although Omri discovers that scalping "was- 
n't at all" an Indian custom. Again, though, the text implies 
that ferocity is an Indian characteristic, since they are so "keen 
on scalping each other." 



231 



I 

Non-Native Authors and Their Stories about Native Americans 



~l 

215 



With many Indian cultures, individuals are regarded as 
"Chief" (or leader) when the others in the tribe honor them for 
their brave or generous deeds. In The Indian in the Cupboard, 
when the old chief dies, Little Bear assumes the role of Chief, 
demands (like a European king) that Omri bow to him, and 
attempts to turn Omri into a slave. And later Omri tells his 
friend, Patrick, that becoming Chief has "made him even more 
bossy and — difficult than before." This is followed by an anal- 
ogy with Omri's relationship with his mother, when he was 
"insisting on having his own way." Again, this perpetuates the 
paternalistic relationship between the Indian and the white 
man, or the stereotype of the Indian as a "child" and the white 
man as his "father." 

When the cowboy comes to life, he is stereotyped as stand- 
ing for what is right against wrong, "fantastically brave" 
against the Indian. Also, the cowboy is an alcoholic, but that 
isn't condemned — it appears natural, another stereotype. There 
is another question of historical accuracy in this cowboy/ 
Indian conflict. If the Indian is Iroquois, he wouldn't have 
known a cowboy and wouldn't have had anything to fear 
because cowboys lived on the Great Plains more than one-hun- 
dred years after the arrival of the Europeans permanently 
changed the Iroquois's world. 

Although the text indicates that Omri had given "Little 
Bear every respect as a person," teachers can encourage stu- 
dents to examine the concept of respect. Had Omri really given 
Little Bear "every respect?" 

Following are several stereotypes attributed to Little Bear: 

■ Alcoholic tendencies: The Indian knows "firewater." 

■ Stoic: standing "as if nothing [Omri] did could affect him anyway" 
( 23 ). 

■ Savage: He brags about how he can hunt, fight, and take many 
scalps. Omri doesn't want more Indians because "They'd fight," 
since that was the natural behavior of Indian peoples. Little Bear 
defines himself first in terms of violence — "[H]e's fought in wars, 
and scalped people, and grown stuff to eat like marrows and stuff 
and had a wife." The first contact between the Indian and the cow- 
boy is violent, because Little Bear assumes the cowboy will take 
his land. The cowboy wants to "have the stinkin' red hide for a 
sleepin' bag." 

■ Uncivilized: "Omri was getting used to his Indian's ungrateful 
ways and was not offended." So the white boy is the understand- 
ing victim of the Indian's uncivilized behavior. Boone says, 
"[T]hem Injuns ain't just ornery and savage. Them's dirty . . .", 
although Omri clears that up by noting how dirty Boone is. 




23 2 



216 



Roots and Branches 



■ Vanishing Indian: Although Omri asserts that "Little Bear isn't a 
toy/' he does believe he is from the past, not the present. 

■ Good white man who represents God to the Indian: Omri says to 
Patrick, "[H]e thinks I'm some kind of spirit or something." 

■ Noble savage: Chapter 9 sounds like the ideas of George Catlin, who 
would put the Indians and the cowboys in a national park where 
they could be preserved, just like exotic animals. 

From the "wild" Indian on the front cover, this book pro- 
jects what many regard as racist stereotypes of Indian people. 
If these were limited to the point of view of the boy, we might 
forgive them. But the narrator's voice also exhibits such stereo- 
types: with "another grunt, the Indian said"; "he barked": or 
"The Indian was now gazing at him with something more than 
respect — a sort of awe [of the boy]." The Indian is "His Indian," 
who is afraid of the dark; ignorant of technology when whites 
aren't; is a "toy" turned human, and will be trained like an ani- 
mal (20-21). All this on two pages. In their review of this book 
and its sequel. Return of the Indian in the Cupboard, Slapin and 
Seale indicate that the books have serious problems. "Although 
the little 'Indian' is called Iroquois, no attempt has been made, 
either in text or illustrations, to have him look or behave appro- 
priately. For example, he is dressed as a Plains Indian, and is 
given a tipi and a horse." They go on to suggest that the battle 
scenes are "among the most graphic war scenes in modem chil- 
dren's literature. As a whole, the book is brutal, and the Indians 
are horrifying" (Slapin and Seale, 122). 

In October 1994, a panel of three educators discussed the 
issue of "Censorship or a Demand for Literary Excellence." Jan 
LaBonty, children's literature expert at the University of 
Montana, Missoula, presented her research on the Iroquois cul- 
ture, on Lynne Reid Banks' position as a British writer with 
New York publishers, and on the way the text could have eas- 
ily avoided some of the above problems. Larry LaCounte 
(Chippewa), also from the University of Montana, commented 
about the effect of reading and watching films that exhibit such 
stereotypes: "I grew up identifying with the smart one, the 
good guy, the white man. And then one day I looked at myself 
and realized I was Indian. What does that do to a child's self- 
esteem?" The third panelist was Linda Pease (Crow), who read 
a note from her daughter who had just finished reading The 
Indian in the Cupboard in her fourth-grade class: "The book is 
pretty decent but some parts are not so decent . . . Now this 
statement is bad, 'bawling at him.' Now that is bad. I don't 
think Little Bear is a calf. I think he is a proud Indian and his 
tribe is part of him . . . and then there is this statement . . . 



233 



r = 

Non-Native Authors and Their Stories about Native Americans 



217 



'grunted the miniature Indian at last/ Instead of saying that, 
[Banks could have written] 'said the miniature Little Bear at 
last.'" 

When educators address the issue of stereotype and bias in 
texts such as The Indian in the Cupboard, students can learn to 
separate themselves from negative stereotypes, from the judg- 
ments and belief systems of others, while they establish posi- 
tive images of themselves and their cultures. Two books that 
provide useful contradictions of — and arguments against — 
common stereotypes are Beverly Slapin's satirical look at 
stereotypes, Basic Skills Caucasian Americans Workbook, and Vir- 
ginia Driving Hawk Sneve's contemporary story. The Chichi 
Hoohoo Bogeyman. 

To her credit, Lynne Reid Banks has publicly expressed her 
concern with "getting things right" in the future and with try- 
ing to "avoid any mistakes." Her latest book, which will be 
released in 1998, is based in "firsthand" research she con- 
ducted on three Mohawk reserves in the Montreal area. It is 
never easy to write beyond our own biases, especially the 
four-hundred-year-old paternalistic American ideology that 
suggests that Indians will learn what to value and how to 
behave from non-Indian Americans, from Europeans, and that 
even Indian adults will learn the most important values from 
their "superiors." The lack of respect for the integrity of 
Native cultures and the lack of understanding about the his- 
tory of the English devastation of eastern Native American 
cultures and peoples are integral to the American myth sys- 
tem. Consequently, neither a "sensitive" British writer, nor 
editors, nor "Anglo children" could ever see most books about 
Indians written by non-Indians as anything other than "truth" 
without Native peoples expressing their ideas and feelings 
about what is true for them. I admire Lynne Reid Banks' will- 
ingness to listen to those voices. 

Benchley, Nathaniel. Only Earth and Sky Last Forever. New York: 
Harper Trophy, 1972. 189 pp. 

Genre: Historical Young Adult Novel 
Grade Level: I, S 

Based on a traditional Lakota saying, this young adult novel 
tells the story of Dark Elk, an eighteen-year-old Cheyenne 
who had been adopted by an Oglala couple after Custer killed 
his people in 1868. The novel may be considered historical fic- 
tion, but the voice is definitely non-Indian directed at a non- 
Indian audience. Benchley has relied on the following sources 
regarding Crazy Horse and the Battle of the Little Big Horn: 



0 



234 



] 



218 



Roots and Branches 



Thomas Berger, George Bird Grirmell, Royal Hassrick, Thomas 
Marquis, David Miller, John Neihardt, Mari Sandoz, and John 
Stands in Timber (Margot Liberty and Robert M. Utley). 
Throughout the text, Benchley explains traditional references 
and ceremonial practices as though he expects his readers to 
be unfamiliar with the traditional Lakota culture. The story 
about Crazy Horse and his losing battle with the "Bluecoats" 
is subordinate to the central conflict — Dark Elk's effort to win 
the love of a Cheyenne girl, Lashuka, whose grandmother 
"unrealistically" demands forty horses of any young man who 
would marry her granddaughter. Although the narrator is a 
traditional Cheyenne, the non-Native voice demonstrates little 
respect for the spiritual aspect of ceremonies and rituals. 
Instead, the Vision Quest and the Sun Dance provide the 
means by which he might gain Lashuka's grandmother's 
acceptance. Set in the Dakota and Montana Plains, Only Earth 
and Sky Last Forever is a romantic young adult novel that car- 
ries the Vanishing Indian stereotype. 

Resources that counter the above stereotypes include Vir- 
ginia Driving Hawk Sneve's They Led a Nation: The Sioux Chiefs, 
and Charles Eastman's Indian Heroes and Great Chieftains. These 
books feature biographical essays about Crazy Horse and other 
Indian heroes, and Indian Oratory includes the last words of 
Crazy Horse. 

Borland, Hal. When the Legends Die. New York: Bantam, [1963] 1984. 

216 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 
Grade Level: S 

The story begins in 1910 when a young Ute woman, her hus- 
band, who is accused of stealing and murder, and her five- 
year-old son flee the reservation authorities in southern 
Colorado. High in the mountains, she teaches her boy the old 
ways in song, ritual, and everyday survival, and the boy makes 
friends with an orphaned grizzly bear cub, taking the cub as a 
"brother." Sometime after both his parents are dead, Thomas 
Black Bull is forced into the white man's world where teachers, 
agents, and other Indian people remind him daily that he must 
forget the old ways and his Indian name. Bear's Brother, and 
that he must live the new way. The novel represents a polar- 
ized world where the dying old ways and the inevitable new 
ways remain mutually exclusive. Thomas doesn't fit into the 
school, where his basket weaving brings ridicule and where he 
must learn to farm, to "tear up the earth." A few years later, he 
admits to an old man that "the old way is finished ... I have no 




23 



j 



c 



] 

Non-Native Authors and Their Stories about Native Americans 2 1 9 



one" (105). Following the rodeo circuit for years, "Killer" Tom 
Black becomes a legend from Texas to California to Montana to 
the East Coast. With deep and violent hatred, he punishes 
every horse he rides, punishes them in anger over his own loss, 
until the crash of one horse puts him in the hospital with more 
than a few broken bones. Determined to walk again, he heals 
and returns to his home country, where he goes to work herd- 
ing sheep. There in the mountains he confronts himself, real- 
izes that he has been trying to "kill" his past, and makes peace 
with himself, "a man who [at last] knew and was proud of his 
own inheritance, who had come to the end of his long hunt." 

There is nothing bad or racist about this book. Borland 
never pretends to be Indian. But the definition of the old ways 
is limited to the spiritual and physical interaction between a 
Ute Indian and the earth, plants, creatures, and sky. Whereas 
traditional tribal peoples regard the old ways as important and 
still relevant because they show the way human beings should 
live together as relatives. When the Legends Die is about an indi- 
vidual who finds those ways only as he separates himself from 
the rest of the world. The character development of the lone 
hero, and also the title, imply the stereotype of the good but 
Vanishing Indian. Even at the end, Thomas Black Bull has no 
other human friend. It is important that literatures about 
Indian peoples recognize their past not as artifact but as living 
and useful for their community, even as they live in the world 
of the "white man's ways." 

Students can compare one of the following Native- 
authored books with When Legends Die. The People Shall Con- 
tinue by Simon Ortiz applies more to the intermediate level 
readers, but it does contradict the Vanishing Indian stereotype 
in Borland's book. On a more adult level, James Welch's novel 
The Death of Jim Loney, and D'Arcy McNickle's Surrounded also 
address the issue of living between two worlds, and the frag- 
mentation, alienation, and tragedy mixed-bloods frequently 
experience. 

Carter, Forrest. The Education of Little Tree. Albuquerque: University of 
New Mexico Press. 216 pp. 

Genre: Novel 
Grade Level: S 

One of the most widely read books typically defined as Native 
literature, The Education of Little Tree was written as the autobi- 
ography of an orphan who learns the ways of the Cherokee 
Indians from his grandparents in Tennessee. It has sold over a 
million copies, was given an award as the title which the Amer- 



220 



Roots and Branches 



ican Booksellers Association most enjoyed selling, but it has 
also been the subject of controversy due to the social and ethnic 
heritage of the author. 

According to a review in the October 14, 1991 issue of 
Newsweek, The Education of Little Tree is not an autobiography 
because the author was a fraud: 

Book-publishing stories don't get much sweeter than that of The Edu- 
cation of Little Tree, by the late Forrest Carter. Presented as a folksy 
memoir of Carter's Cherokee upbringing, the book fairly brims with 
quaint mountain platitudes and affectionate ethnic stereotypes: the 
sage Native Americans, the thrifty Jew, the silly white folks. . . . But 
the story has a bitter side. According to some who knew him before 
he died in 1979, the author was really Asa (Ace) Carter, a former 
speech writer for Alabama Governor George Wallace and a notorious 
white-supremacist leader. . . . [George Wallace confirmed this]. . . . 
According to Dan T. Carter, an Emory University professor now 
working on a biography of Wallace, Carter formed the Original Ku 
Klux Klan of the Confederacy, a 100-member group responsible for 
the 1957 castration of a black man outside Birmingham. . . . Later, as 
Forrest Carter, Asa denied the previous identity, although he appears 
to have signed some correspondence as "Asa." ( Newsweek 1991, 62) 

Another article, in the October 14, 1991 edition of Time, sup- 
ports Newsweek's claim: "old friends point out that Asa and 
Forrest Carter looked alike, used the same address, and were 
the same age." Time cites Dan Carter as charging that the "late 
Forrest Carter was not a Cherokee at all . . . but a Ku Klux Klan 
terrorist, right-wing radio announcer, home-grown American 
fascist and anti-Semite" ( Time 1991, 33). 

Henry Louis Gates Jr., professor of humanities at Harvard 
University, has written an article entitled "'Authenticity/ or the 
Lesson of Little Tree," in the New York Times Book Review. In this 
article. Gates addresses an issue that he suggests "literary crit- 
ics would do well to ponder, for the belief that we can 'read' a 
person's racial or ethnic identity from his or her writing runs 
surprisingly deep" (Gates 1991, 1). Gates goes on to say that 
"our literary judgments, in short, remain hostage to the ideol- 
ogy of authenticity" (Gates 1991, 1). Making a case for the right 
of authors to tell stories outside their own genders, social and 
cultural situations, and racial backgrounds. Gates argues that 
Little Tree should not be dismissed as invalid literature because 
the author's background remains in question. 

However, readers should be able to trust the narrators of 
texts, to believe that the author has done his or her homework 
when the story represents another's experience. But this is not 
true with The Education of Little Tree. Instead, the novel's text 
betrays a non-Native voice expressing a polarized world of 



237 



[ 



] 

Non-Native Authors and Their Stories about Native Americans 22 1 



"Indian vs. White" and carrying such stereotypes as Noble and 
Conquered Savage, Childlike, and Vanishing Indian. In the 
fashion of New Age misappropriations of American Indian 
philosophies and lifeways. Little Tree communicates "per- 
fectly" with animals and with Mother Earth. His Cherokee 
grandparents teach him European American culture and call it 
"The Way," and we wonder, where are the rest of the Chero- 
kee? In the book, white people are universally obnoxious, ridi- 
culing Little Tree and his family while Little Tree remains 
ignorant, assuming the giggles of white people on the bus rep- 
resent "friendly" attitudes. In a teachers' workshop entitled 
"Bias and Stereotypes in Stories about Native Americans," one 
Native woman said, "no Indian child I know would misunder- 
stand the laughter of white people; we learn very early to rec- 
ognize ridicule." Other situations also contradict the realities of 
Native people that I have encountered: Little Tree is happiest 
when alone, living in his earthly paradise, and non-Native 
readers develop compassion for the young boy who never 
expresses anger toward those who discriminate against him. 

Some Native American teachers who recognize and under- 
stand the fallacies in the book are not opposed to using it, but I 
suggest that the rest of us should avoid it, as enchanting as it 
may be. It certainly can't be regarded as Native American Liter- 
ature. 

Jimmie Durham's collection of poetry, Columbus Day, and 
Grant Foreman's historical accounts of Indian Removal will pro- 
vide both contemporary and historical supplementary material 
that might facilitate a more critical reading of Little Tree. 

Craven, Margaret. I Heard the Owl Call My Name. Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday, 1973. 166 pp. 

Genre: Young Adult Novel 
Grade Level: I, S 

A young Catholic priest, with only two years to live, is sent to a 
Kwakiutl Indian parish on the seacoast of British Columbia. 
There he respects the Native people, learns their rituals and 
beliefs, and learns not to fear death when "the owl" calls. "And 
what had he learned? Surely not the truth of the Indian. There 
was no one truth. He had learned a little of the truth of one 
tribe in one village." 

I Heard the Owl Call My Name honestly demonstrates the 
conflicts Native people face as a consequence of their encoun- 
ters with the "white world": alcohol abuse, interracial mar- 
riage, the remembered importance of the Kwakwala language, 
the importance of education, the value of technology, the conse- 




233 



222 



Roots and Branches 



quences of leaving their tribal community, and the shame they 
feel when neither the white world nor their own accepts them. 
This novel may be paired with "Sedna, the Woman Under the 
Sea," a story told by Joseph Bruchac in Keepers of the Earth. It is 
the story of a girl who makes the mistake of loving a man who 
will bring her harm. Also, students can compare and contrast 
the Kwakiutl culture with other Native or non-Native cultures. 

Janet Campbell Hale's Owl’s Song, which portrays the con- 
flict a contemporary youth experiences when he leaves home, 
also includes the symbol of the owl. Native poems from Cree 
and Salish traditions feature the owl as the communicator of 
death to loved ones. 

George, Jean Craighead. Julie of the Wolves. New York: Harper & Row, 
1972. 170 pp. 

Genre: Young Adult Novel 
Grade Level: I 

George's contemporary story centers on a young girl who 
develops a relationship with a family of wolves when she is 
lost and starving in the Alaskan wilderness. Referring to the 
Native peoples as "Eskimo" rather than Inuit, this novel pre- 
sents an unrealistic and stereotypically romanticized view of 
Native life in Alaska. It is the story of a "white girl" with an 
Indian face, "a classic Eskimo beauty" (a blatant contradiction 
in terms — a "European" Eskimo?). She is a thirteen-year-old 
who leaves her husband and her evil "step-mother" to follow a 
dream of glamour and romance painted by her pen pal in San 
Francisco. Julie rejects her traditional upbringing and changes 
her name from Miyax to Julie; she is an individual, not a mem- 
ber of a community, surviving with only the help of wolves. 

Teachers may use the traditional Inuit story, "Sedna, the 
Woman Under the Sea," in Keepers of the Earth by Caduto and 
Bruchac. Sedna falls in love with a seabird in the form of a man 
who lures her to his impoverished home far away. Demonstrat- 
ing the value of communal survival and the foolishness of an 
individual's pursuit of singular happiness, students may be 
able to discover how this story contrasts with the predominant 
individualism in Julie of the Wolves. 

Goble, Paul. Brave Eagle's Account of the Fetterman Fight. Lincoln: Uni- 
versity of Nebraska Press, 1992. 47 pp. 

Genre: Historical Story, Memoir 
Grade Level: P, I, S 



ERLC 




[ 



] 



Non-Native Authors and Their Stories about Native Americans 



223 



On December 21, 1866, Red Cloud led his people to defeat Cap- 
tain Fetterman, culminating in the closure of the Bozeman 
Trail. According to Doane Robinson, "Red Cloud's War is the 
only instance in the history of the United States where the gov- 
ernment has gone to war and afterwards negotiated a peace 
conceding everything demanded by the enemy and exacting 
nothing in return" (60). Included in Brave Eagle's narrative are 
commendations for the bravery of individual warriors and sol- 
diers. Goble admits that he relied on published Indian accounts 
but also on white historians, "in order to give the reader a bet- 
ter understanding of the fight and the events which preceded 
it." The Fetterman Fight is an excellent resource for a personal 
and yet tribal perspective of the conflict between the Plains 
Indians and U.S. expansionism. 

-. Buffalo Woman. Scarsdale, NY: Bradbury Press, 1984. 32 pp. 
Genre: Traditional Story 
Grade Level: P, I 

Without designating a specific tribal source, Goble tells the 
story of a great hunter who is given a supernatural wife, but 
she leaves with their son because his relatives have been 
unkind. The hunter finds them in a herd of buffalo, and his son, 
Buffalo Calf, helps him. The Buffalo Nation then transforms the 
hunter into a "young buffalo bull." A Legend From Crazy Horse 
Clan by Moses Nelson Big Crow represents the more tradi- 
tional Lakota version of this story. 

Goble has spent a great deal of time with the people whose 
stories he uses, and his artwork is considered authentic by 
some. Although many traditional tribal people consider Paul 
Goble a respectable writer of Indian stories, others criticize him 
for taking the stories out of the specific cultures and "owning" 
them himself. By contrast, Joseph Bruchac tells stories from 
cultures other than his own, but he provides detailed back- 
ground material about the geography, history, and culture of 
the tribe within which the stories originated. Teachers who use 
Paul Goble's books should consult collections such as Ella 
Deloria's Dakota Texts and should stress the traditional values 
within the stories. 

-. Death of the Iron Horse. New York: Bradbury Press, 1987. 28 pp. 
Genre: History 
Grade Level: I 

Death of the Iron Horse is "loosely based" on an incident in 
which Cheyenne warriors successfully derailed a Union Pacific 




240 



[ 



] 



224 



Roots and Branches 



train traveling from Omaha to Ft. McPherson in North Platte, 
Nebraska, on August 7, 1867. The story begins with the terrible 
"long ago" dream of Sweet Medicine, a Cheyenne Prophet, 
who saw hairy people coming from the East to "kill all the buf- 
faloes, so there was nothing left to eat." When the Cheyenne 
saw the "Iron Horse" with the "voice of Thunder," they 
believed Sweet Medicine's dream had come true. To protect 
their people from this terrible monster, several warriors fol- 
lowed its trail, and in the dark they "dug down and chopped 
the ties in the middle, and hacked out spikes until the rails no 
longer joined together." After the train derailed, the Cheyenne 
warriors raided the boxcars, where they discovered money, 
household utensils, clothing, flags and musical instruments, 
and soldiers' uniforms and blankets; they then set the broken 
train on fire. Goble indicates that the "Cheyenne people have 
remembered [this story] with pride and amusement," ending 
his story with an image of Amtrak, the visual reminder of the 
relentless encroachment of European American technology. 
Nevertheless, the story proves that the Cheyenne people con- 
tinued to fight to protect their territory, culture, and people, 
even when the odds seemed insurmountable. 

Highwater, Jamake. Anpao: An American Odyssey. Philadelphia: Lip- 
pincott, 1977. 256 pp. 

Genre: Young Adult Novel 
Grade Level: I 

A Newbery Honor book, Anpao is the mythological story about 
a young man who travels across America's ancient world 
through dangers and trials for the sake of a beautiful girl. 
Highwater tells a good story, the kind we like to read, the kind 
that follows what we expect in fantasy. Moreover, the rhythm, 
sound, and imagery of Anpao appear to represent an "Indian 
sensibility," as the publishers suggest: "[H]e pointed down into 
the moon-filled water where shimmering images of liquid-peo- 
ple in the drowned village at the bottom of the lake rose like 
smoke on a clear night" (235). 

On the other hand, the bibliographic summary in the 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data suggests 
the most important reason why teachers should question the 
authenticity and usefulness of this book for any age group — it 
disregards the diversity of Indian peoples and consequently 
betrays their integrity as individuals: "Traditional tales from 
North American Indian tribes woven into one story that relates 
the adventures of one boy as he grows to manhood" (iv). 
Although many Indian people today can trace their ancestries 



0 

ERIC 



241 



c 



] 



Non-Native Authors and Their Stories about Native Americans 



225 



to more than one tribal culture and history, many Native Amer- 
ican authors are still writing from what Kenneth Lincoln calls a 
"sense of relatedness . . . [to] ancestral history, the remembered 
presence of grandmothers and grandfathers gone before" (Lin- 
coln 1983, 8). In no way can Highwater's story be called 
"tribal," and in no way can it pretend to tell an "Indian" story 
because it betrays the very integrity of the "tribal experience." 
Traditional storytellers would draw on active and real memo- 
ries of their ancestors' experiences, providing listeners with 
this shared wisdom for living in a world where present and 
past, vision and reality intertwine to draw the individual into a 
community. By contrast, Highwater's conglomeration of 
"woven" tales from so many very different tribes (Northern 
Plains patriarchal cultures, such as Crow, Blackfeet, Salish, 
Apache, and Southwest matriarchal cultures, among others); 
his varied bibliography, which reflects few "primary" sources; 
and his failure to call Anpao anything but "Indian" create not a 
work of art (such as the Newbery Honor suggests) but a mock- 
ery of the function of the traditional Indian storyteller and a 
denial of the "individual" humanity and historical experience 
of all descendants of tribal peoples. 

Also, the publishers deny the authenticity when they regard 
this book as representing the "classic tradition of the story- 
teller." "Classic" is Greek, European, and in that sense the pub- 
lishers are correct. Anpao is a "classic" quest, where the singular 
"hero" comes from some unknown origin, journeys through 
many trials to achieve some kind of education or self-aware- 
ness, performs sacrificial acts for the benefit of others, and 
finally earns the reward of nobility and the love of a beautiful 
woman. Unlike so much traditional literature in which Native 
values of generosity, respect for relatives, and the importance of 
community prevail, this novel portrays a very Western concept 
of possessions, success, individualism, and the weak position 
of women in society. Anpao and his brother "come as 
strangers" and are not accepted; the tribal people ridicule them 
because they are poor, and Ko-ko-mik-e-is, powerless by her- 
self, is afraid of the Sun. 

Although Highwater claims to be Blackfeet, no one on the 
Blackfeet Reservation in northern Montana seems to know him, 
and neither do the people on the Blood Reserve north of Mon- 
tana. In the Summer 1984 issue of Akwesasne Notes, a widely 
distributed Native newspaper. Hank Adams (Assiniboine/ 
Sioux) contends that Highwater is not Blackfeet but instead is 
Gregory J. Markopoulos, the son of Greek immigrants (Adams 
1984, 10-11). A subsequent issue of Notes published letters from 



O 

ERIC 



242 



[ 



] 



226 



Roots and Branches 



Markopoulos and Highwater 's attorneys denying the alleged 
connection, but as of the Early Winter 1985 issue, "NOTES still 
stands by Hank Adams' research linking Gregory Markopoulos 
to J. Marks, and thereby Jamake Highwater" ( Akwesasne Notes 
1985, 5). This issue and discussion may be important for those 
who are concerned about possible misappropriation of govern- 
ment funds intended for Native people. However, for teachers 
who may use the book, the possibility of Highwater not being 
Native may provide an explanation for the failure of Highwa- 
ter's books to respect the diversity of Native peoples. 

In his "Storyteller's Farewell," Highwater insinuates that he 
has performed the sacred storyteller role himself: "Among 
American Indians the teller of stories is a weaver. His designs 
are the threads of his personal saga as well as the history of his 
people" (239). Highwater has certainly "woven" a story — his 
own story. Teachers of non-Indian and Indian children must 
not mistake this for a tribal storyteller's voice, and neither 
should they assign the identities revealed in Anpao to the 
ancestors of any Indian children which may be sitting in their 
classrooms. Just as Highwater says, this is the storyteller's 
"personal saga," and no more. He closes his "Farewell" with a 
challenge to his readers: "Many of us are prepared to sail to 
strange places in time and in space; perhaps Anpao will address 
itself to that audience and become a personal journey for read- 
ers who wish to sail from one world to another" (246). The 
world of Anpao is a "classic" fantasy world, and no more. 

Another book by Highwater, Ceremony of Innocence, may be 
compared and contrasted with Maria Campbell's autobiogra- 
phy, Halfbreed. 

Hudson, Jan. Sweetgrass. New York: Philomel, 1989. 157 pp. 

Genre: Young Adult Novel 
Grade Level: I 

Sweetgrass is a sixteen-year-old Blackfeet girl, growing up in 
Canada in the mid-nineteenth century, whose strongest desire 
is to marry her sweetheart, Eagle-Sun. However, smallpox 
strikes during the cold of winter, and Sweetgrass must care for 
her stricken family members. Although the suffering of the 
Blackfeet due to the "white man's illness" is clear, the numer- 
ous deaths are too quickly forgotten and de-emphasized, and 
there is little evidence of the tribal experience. Although Slapin 
and Seale admit Sweetgrass "lacks overt racism," they regard 
the portrayal of the women as "appalling" and consider much 



243 



Non-Native Authors and Their Stories about Native Americans 



227 



of the text contains stereotypes which are "demeaning and 
inaccurate" (Slapin and Seale 1992, 174). 

An accurate and valuable resource for the feminine Black- 
feet experience is Beverly Hungry Wolf's The Ways of My 
Grandmothers, a book secondary students enjoy reading inde- 
pendently. 

Jassem, Kate. Chief Joseph: Leader of Destiny. Mahwah, NJ: Troll, 1979. 
47 PP- 

Genre: Biography 
Grade Level: I 

This book covers the life of Chief Joseph (Nez Perce), his flight, 
and his "I will fight no more forever" speech. Doris Seale and 
Beverly Slapin have called the Troll series "formula non-fic- 
tion." Criticizing its "white-washing" of Indian history, they 
suggest that the stories reinforce stereotypical myths of the 
"infallibility and superiority of white American institutions" 
(Slapin and Seale 1992, 230). Although the story approximates 
Chief Joseph's flight, the dialogue is contrived, and the illustra- 
tions of Chief Joseph bear little resemblance to any available 
photographs. Other Troll books communicate the same roman- 
tic image of vanished Indians who lived as kings, princes, and 
princesses. The Troll biography of Sitting Bull closes with "Old 
Ways are gone," and it further suggests that Wounded Knee 
marked the end of Indian resistance and that the practice of the 
Ghost Dance disappeared after Wounded Knee — none of 
which is true. This Troll series can best be used as an example 
of stereotype and bias that ignores the serious realities of the 
Indian experience. When Native teachers read this book, they 
quickly recognize the problems indicated above, and they 
resent the implication of "disappearance." 

Other resources about Chief Joseph include Charles East- 
man's Indian Heroes and Great Chieftains, Erskine Wood's Days 
with Chief Joseph, and the Montana Council for Indian Educa- 
tion's Chief Joseph's Own Story. 

Jeffers, Susan. Brother Eagle, Sister Sky: A Message from Chief Seattle. New 
York: Dial, 1991. 45 pp. 

Genre: Oratory 
Grade Level: P, I 

Illustrated and written by Jeffers, the text of Brother Eagle, Sister 
Sky is based on the speech attributed to Chief Seattle, who 
spoke in response to an address by Governor Stevens in the 



0 

ERIC 



244 



[ 



] 



228 



Roots and Branches 



Washington Territory, sometime in 1853, after the land was des- 
ignated for the town of Seattle. 

In his 1991 review in WEB (Wonderfully Exciting Books), Ron 
Hirschi objects to: 

1. The stereotype presented of Indian people. 

2. The simplification of and mistaken interpretation of environmen- 
tal problems facing the Suquamish people. 

3. The assumption that our government was coming to "buy" land 
from Chief Seattle and his people at the time of his famous 
speech. 

4. The representation of Indian people as a group who can only be 
referred to in the past tense. 

5. The choice of non-Indian people as the apparent good guys who 
will solve the problems illustrated in the book. 

Hirschi concludes: "I do know that a lot of kids, especially 
Indian kids, would have been greatly uplifted if Susan Jeffers 
could have found it in her painting skill to paint one image of a 
contemporary Indian child planting that single tree. Then, she 
might have given us a book worth reading . . (Hirschi 1991, 
31-34). 

The front cover portrays two stereotypes: the Plains Indian 
as universal Indian — not at all representative of Seattle or his 
people, and the Environmental Indian, represented by the but- 
terfly that easily lights on the finger of a non-Indian child. The 
last page reinforces the same Plains Indian stereotype, but the 
Vanishing Indian and the Women as Subservient stereotypes 
are also portrayed. Ghost-like in the background, certainly not 
physically part of the contemporary landscape where only 
non-Indians plant trees, the woman walks and carries her child 
while her husband follows on horseback. 

Indian children who read this book must regard it as pure 
fantasy, or they will experience further confusion and shame at 
the difference between this "Perfect but Vanishing Indian" and 
the realities the children experience in their own homes. The 
consequences of non-Indian children reading this book are 
very serious, since Jeffers' book can only exacerbate the dis- 
crimination non-Indian children may already practice toward a 
group that has "apparently" fallen from such a state of grace as 
portrayed in Brother Eagle, Sister Sky. 

Teachers who insist on using this book should at least 
read the complete text of the speech in Vanderwerth's Indian 
Oratory: Famous Speeches by Noted Indian Chieftains. The intro- 
ductory comments suggest Seattle spoke in his native lan- 
guage, and the recorder wrote what the interpreter said. Still, 



2 45 



[ 



Non-Native Authors and Their Stories about Native Americans 



229 



some interesting comments by Chief Seattle as recorded in 
Vanderwerth would contradict the perfect harmony depicted 
in Jeffers book. 

Our good father at Washington . . . will he be our father and we his 
children. But can that ever be? Your God is not our God! Your God 
loves your people and hates mine . . . we are two distinct races with 
separate origins and separate destinies. There is little in common 
between us. (Vanderwerth 1989, 119) 

The text recorded in Vanderwerth concludes with the image 
that probably is pictured at the end of the book, but the impli- 
cation is not peaceful harmony, or quiet resignation. Instead 
the following lines carry the possibility of threat to the white 
man who will also experience "the time of decay": 

[W]hen the last Red Man shall have perished, and the memory of 
my tribe shall have become a myth among the White Men, these 
shores will swarm with the invisible dead of my tribe, and when 
your children's children think themselves alone in the field, the 
store, the shop, upon the highway, or in the silence of the pathless 
woods, they will not be alone. In all the earth there is no place dedi- 
cated to solitude . . . [the streets] will throng with the returning 
hosts that once filled them and still love this beautiful land. The 
White Man will never be alone . . . Let him be just and deal kindly 
with my people, for the dead are not powerless. . . . (Vanderwerth 
1989, 121-122) 

For literature that includes traditional tribal stories from the 
Northwest, teachers should refer to The Indian Reading Series. 

Johnson, Dorothy M. Buffalo Woman. New York: Dodd, Mead, 1977. 
247 pp. 

Genre: Historical Fiction 
Grade Level: I, S 

A fictional account of an Oglala Sioux woman's life before, dur- 
ing, and after the Battle of the Little Bighorn, Buffalo Woman is a 
good account of Plains Indian life at the time of European 
American encroachment. Although non-Indian, Johnson was 
an adopted member of the Blackfeet. 

Ella Deloria's Waterlily is a Native-authored novel that por- 
trays a Dakota woman's experience in the middle 1800's, the 
time of European American contact on the Plains. Also, 
Zitkala-Sa's first essay in American Indian Stories communicates 
her experience as a child at the time when Yankton were 
moved onto the reservation. Readers can compare and contrast 
the different accounts. 




46 



[ 



] 



230 



Roots and Branches 



LaFarge, Oliver. Laughing Boy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1957. 302 pp. 
Genre: Historical Fiction 
Grade Level: S 

In Laughing Boy, a Navajo man falls in love with a woman who 
has shady dealings with the white world. They fight Navajo 
resentment of her "white" connections and return to the "Old 
Ways." With respect for LaFarge and his commitment to Indian 
people, D'Arcy McNickle (Salish) wrote a biography called 
Indian Man. 

Lesley, Craig. River Song. New York: Dell, 1989. 307 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Grade Level: S 

River Song, a sequel to the novel Winterkill, is the culmination of 
a fiction fellowship granted by the National Endowment for 
the Arts in 1986. Lesley credits the numbers of Native people 
and especially the "River People [Yakima /Nez Perce], those 
contemporary Indians who live and fish along the Columbia 
River upstream from Bonneville Dam," the Oregon Historical 
Society, and the Yakima, Nez Perce, and the Dalles Cultural 
Centers. Indian students in Montana have assumed Lesley is 
Native American because they recognize his understanding of 
the cultural and personal conflicts contemporary Indians expe- 
rience. River Song is a novel about the historical and ensuing 
personal conflicts that have occurred as a result of non-Indian 
encroachment on Yakima lands and on mining and fishing 
rights, but River Song is also about the reconciliation between 
father and son, between past and present, and between tradi- 
tional and nontraditional Indian peoples. While Danny 
Kachiah tries to establish a relationship with a son from whom 
he has been separated for fifteen years, he searches for the 
meaning to a vision and meets his ancestor. Left Hand, the Nez 
Perce warrior. The novel closes with a salmon feast, ceremony, 
and giveaway. Danny wanders away from the crowd to listen 
to the voices that rise from the dark water of the river. 

Many thousands of voices, old tongue and new, blended with the 
longhouse singing and echoed off the basalt hills until the valley 
seemed filled with their cries. They joined a deeper song borne down- 
river by the night wind, then fell to whispers. Stepping off the trem- 
bling platform, Danny started climbing toward the longhouse. 
Beneath the singing waters, Chinook glided among rocks, and camp- 
fires blazed. (305) 

River Song demonstrates the distinctive nature of a particu- 
lar Indian people who have depended not on the buffalo for 




24 7 



I 

Non-Native Authors and Their Stories about Native Americans 



□ 

231 



survival, but on the salmon. The novel also reveals the impor- 
tance of continuing to respect the salmon for providing life for 
the people. This is an excellent novel for Native young people, 
especially those whose ancestors and relatives have survived 
because of the salmon in the Columbia River. 

LeSueur, Meridel. Sparrow Hawk. Stevens Point, WI: Holy Cow! Press, 
[1950] 1987. 176 pp. 

Genre: Historical Fiction 
Grade Level: I, S 

Although LeSueur is non-Indian, she grew up in the Midwest 
of Wisconsin, Illinois, and Iowa, the settings for this novel. She 
called her work a "remembering not dismembering journey 
into the deepest heart of the valley of earth and man and 
woman." In his Foreword, Vine Deloria, Jr. praises her for risk- 
ing to communicate an "Indian slant . . . with both good and 
bad whites and Indians." This is a growing-up story of the 
friendship between two teenage boys: Huck, the son of settlers 
who are being squeezed out by squatters, and Sparrow Hawk, 
from Black Hawk's tribe of Mesquakie. While the novel pre- 
sents the conflicts which precipitated the final tragedy of Black 
Hawk's war with the U.S. military in 1832, it also carries a 
strong sense of the everyday Sauk culture. The as-told-to auto- 
biography of Black Hawk can provide teachers with further 
background information. 

Marriott, Alice, and Carol K. Rachlin, eds. Plains Indian Mythology. 
New York: Penguin, 1975. 175 pp. 

Genre: Traditional Story, Short Story 
Grade Level: I, S 

This collection of thirty-one Plains Indian stories is divided 
into four parts: myths, stories, eighteenth- and nineteenth-cen- 
tury stories, and contemporary stories. In her Foreword, Mar- 
riott defines "Mythology" as "the backbone of religion; the 
accounts of the supernatural, superhuman beings who have 
become embodied in the universe: Sun, Moon, Stars, Winds, 
and the Earth herself." "Legendary" is defined as "explanatory 
stories" that provide answers to children's questions, and this 
includes "the accounts of men and women who actually have 
lived but since their lifetimes have become larger than life," 
while "Folklore" comprises the "lore and wisdom of the folk" 
(xi). A short introductory essay explaining the tribal origin and 
the background of the story prefaces each selection. Because 
Marriott is non-Indian, some individuals or culture groups 




•j 



48 



[ 



] 



232 



Roots and Branches 



might not approve of her "retelling" the stories. Although the 
editor makes distinctions between tribes and cultures, books 
such as these that don't represent direct Native voices should 
only be used in conjunction with more primary resources of 
Native stories. 

McLuhan, T. C. Touch the Earth: A Self-Portrait of Indian Existence. New 
York: Promontory Press, 1971. 185 pp. 

Genre: Memoir, Oratory, Essay 

Grade Level: I, S 

In this collection of short sayings (excerpts from speeches and 
other writings), photographs, and short background essays, 
"the Indians speak for themselves, of the quality of their life." 
Touch the Earth includes representations from the following 
nations: Lakota, Dakota, Sioux, Blackfoot, Nez Perce, Chippewa, 
Blackfeet, Cheyenne, Cree, Crow, and Flathead, among oth- 
ers. In the Introduction, the editor presents a stereotypical 
view of Indian peoples, saying that they "speak with courtesy 
and respect of the land, of animals, of the objects which made 
up the territory in which they lived. They saw no virtue in 
imposing their will over their environment. . . Although 
McLuhan may be speaking only from her understanding of 
the Indians she has quoted in this collection, students need to 
be aware that Indians did "impose their will on the land." 
Plains Indians burned prairies to move buffalo; the Hidatsa 
farmed, as did other peoples from across the continent. 
McLuhan's effort to rely on the voices of the peoples them- 
selves is commendable, and so this is a valuable collection for 
that reason especially. 

Nardo, Don. The Indian Wars. San Diego, CA: Lucent, 1991. 127 pp. 
Genre: History 
Grade Level: I, S 

Part of the America's War series, and identified as "Juvenile lit- 
erature," The Indian Wars offers an appealing format with pho- 
tographs, maps, or drawings on every page, but the text would 
work well for secondary students. Sensitive to the influence of 
ethnic and social bias on historical sources, Nardo avoids 
adopting such bias himself: "Whites often looked upon Indians 
as savages who had to be reeducated to adopt civilized ways" 
(12), and "In their eyes, a land of Christian believers seemed 
ultimately more progressive and more pleasing to God than 
the thousands of heathen hordes that populated North Amer- 



[ 



Non-Native Authors and Their Stories about Native Americans 



— i 

233 



ica" (13). Indian Wars strongly attempts to contradict many 
stereotypes, emphasizing the strength of Indians to continue to 
resist encroachment, although Nardo does regard the capture 
of Geronimo as "The End of Apache Resistance." But Nardo 
stereotypes "whites," suggesting all people of that color were 
of the same position: "After the Indians ceased to be a threat to 
whites, however, some of these policies began to change" (118). 
While this book might portray wars between European Ameri- 
cans and Native Americans in more historical detail than any 
other American History textbook thus far, teachers should be 
aware of the non-Native bias of the writer, which at times tries 
too hard to be sympathetic to the Indian and at times avoids 
harsh realities. 

O'Dell, Scott. Island of the Blue Dolphins. New York: Dell, 1960. 189 pp. 
Genre: Historical Fiction 
Grade Level: I, S 

Scott O'Dell considers himself a writer of historical fiction, and 
Island of the Blue Dolphins may fall into that category, although 
Beverly Slapin strongly criticizes its use as "history" rather 
than fiction. It is based on the true story of an Indian woman 
who lived alone on San Nicolas Island off the coast of Califor- 
nia from 1835 to 1853. For years previous to that time, her peo- 
ple had tolerated Russian and Aleut seal hunters who gave the 
island's inhabitants little return for their large catch of seals. 
Then one day white men came to take the entire tribe away 
from the isolated island. The girl jumped ship to join her 
brother who had remained on shore, and there she stayed for 
eighteen years, even after he was killed by wild dogs. Island of 
the Blue Dolphins is a Robinson Crusoe adventure and survival 
story. O'Dell has created a perfect hero, a rather flat character, 
who, in the romantic fashion of American heroes, is not only 
resourceful enough to survive alone but can find happiness in 
the effort and the experience. She befriends wild animals, 
makes weapons for fishing and hunting, weaves clothes, and 
builds a home. Even though she has lost her entire family and 
tribe, she is at peace. Although the book makes enjoyable read- 
ing, it provides little insight into any realistic Native personal- 
ity or experience. When her brother plays "Chief," he assumes 
a dominant rather than a cooperative leadership position: "I 
am his son and since he is dead I have taken his place. I am 
now Chief of Ghalas-at. All my wishes must be obeyed" (51). 
Island of the Blue Dolphins also perpetuates the Vanishing Indian 
stereotype because the writer implies that all of these people 




250 



234 



Roots and Branches 



have either disappeared or died. It is unrealistic historical fic- 
tion and should never be taught as Indian literature. 

Richter, Conrad. The Light in the Forest. New York: Fawcett Juniper, 
[1953] 1995.117 pp. 

Genre: Historical Novel 
Grade Level: S 

For at least twenty years, Richter's young adult novel has been 
widely used in intermediate and secondary literature classes. 
Set in Ohio and Pennsylvania, the story begins as a fifteen- 
year-old Lenni Lenape boy, after an eleven-year separation, 
reluctantly returns to his white biological parents in compli- 
ance with recent treaty stipulations. Throughout the text, 
Richter demonstrates a sensitivity to the internal and external 
conflicts for both the Indians and the whites during the nine- 
teenth century. He also depicts — with the historical accuracy of 
colonists such as Benjamin Franklin — the unwillingness of 
white children who had been adopted by Indians to return to 
their original families. 

However, the text communicates some confusion over the 
historical time period of the novel, as well as over tribal beliefs 
and practices. For example, since the Carlisle School for Indi- 
ans in Pennsylvania is mentioned, the novel must be set after 
1879, and yet the relatively free existence of an Indian camp 
just west of the Mississippi would indicate a preremoval 
(1820-1830s) time period. Also, the novel implies an Indian 
belief in land "ownership," when they most likely practiced 
land "usage," not ownership. It appears violent revenge is the 
behavior of the entire tribe of warriors once they learn a white 
man has killed Little Crane. More likely, a few would have 
sought revenge, while the elders would have regarded Half 
Arrow and True Son's action toward the killer as satisfactory 
retribution. 

Richter was a product of his time, but current recognition of 
the impact of stereotypical images on both Native and non- 
Native children warrants careful attention by teachers who 
would use this book. White characters realistically use the word 
"savage." However, with no obvious harm intended, the narra- 
tor's "objective" voice and the Introduction also use it: "As a 
small boy [Richter] himself had tried to run off to Indian country 
without the benefit of ever having lived among the savages." 

Teachers who use this book should use Francis Jennings's 
The Invasion of America: Indians, Colonialism, and the Cant of Con- 
quest as a reliable historical resource that will help address the 
issues of historical inaccuracy and stereotype. 




251 



c 



] 

Non-Native Authors and Their Stories about Native Americans 235 



Sandoz, Mari. Cheyenne Autumn. Lincoln: University of Nebraska 
Press, 1992. 281 pp. 

Genre: Historical Narrative 
Grade Level: S 

In her Preface, Mari Sandoz strongly suggests that the United 
States government's Indian policy was a policy of "extermina- 
tion," even during the days of Abraham Lincoln. From this 
point of view, she has written Cheyenne Autumn, a sensitive and 
studied portrayal of the Cheyenne's flight from the Oklahoma 
Indian Territory, from disease and starvation, back to the Yel- 
lowstone country (1878-1879). Across more than 1,500 miles. 
Chief Dull Knife led the Northern Cheyennes "through settled 
regions netted with telegraph, across three railroads, and 
straight through the United States Army." Accompanying her 
narrative, Sandoz provides maps, descriptions of the political 
situation, of historical settings and of Indian warriors, military 
men, and the Indian agent. She has relied on interviews with 
Sioux and Cheyenne people and on historical records located 
in Nebraska, Washington, DC, Wyoming, Colorado, Kansas, 
Oklahoma, and New York, and provided by the Northern 
Cheyenne. Still, she occasionally refers to this proud people as 
stereotypical children, possibly to communicate her belief in 
their absolute victimization. For insight into the ways the 
Cheyenne continued to survive and maintain their pride in 
spite of the pressures to destroy them, students can also read 
the as-told-to autobiographies of John Stands in Timber, 
Wooden Leg, and "Iron Teeth, a Cheyenne Old Woman" as told 
to Thomas B. Marquis and excerpted in The Last Best Place. 

Speare, Elizabeth George. The Sign of the Beaver. New York: Dell, 1983. 
135 pp. 

Genre: Young Adult Novel 
Grade Level: I 

Twelve-year-old Matt is left to survive alone at his parents' 
cabin in the Maine wilderness. Following the stereotypical 
Indian-helps-the-white-man theme, an Indian boy and his 
grandfather rescue Matt from a bee attack and show him how 
to survive. He can choose to live with the Indians or to wait for 
his parents' return. Slapin and Seale criticize the "pidgin 
English" of the Indian speakers, the "uneven" relationship 
between the boys, the "white" attitudes toward women, and 
the missing tribal connection. Sign of the Beaver cannot be 
regarded as Indian literature. By contrast, some of the stories 
from Joseph Bruchac's Turtle Meat and Other Stories represent 



236 



c 



Roots and Branches 



Northeastern cultures and feature Native characters who are 
wise and witty, and who successfully outsmart those who 
would regard them as inferior. 

Thomasma, Ken. Soun Tetoken: Nez Perce Boy. Jackson, WY: Grand- 
view, 1984. 190 pp. 

Genre: Historical Fiction 
Grade Level: I 

Mute but not deaf, six-year-old Soun Tetoken is adopted by 
Chief Joseph's brother just a few years before the famous 1,600- 
mile flight to freedom. The story centers on Soun and his 
adventures. To save himself and/or others, he proves his 
courage and bravery in the face of bears, wolves, and rushing 
waters. Thomasma uses documented historical dates and situa- 
tions as background, but the book communicates little that is 
realistic to Native lifeways. This is a romanticized view of a ter- 
rible tragedy, with emphasis not on suffering but on Soun, the 
singular hero, who accomplishes extraordinary feats at an 
unusually young age. The text represents a polarized world of 
"Indian vs. White." Soun has no conflicts with other human 
beings, unless they are white; and after an internal struggle, he 
consents to giving his horse. Sunburst, to Chief Joseph so 
Joseph's grandson may ride to safety in Canada. After all, 
Soun's "purpose in life was to help those in need." The text 
switches point of view, even within paragraphs, and Chief 
Joseph unrealistically talks about the "importance of love." 
Thomasma's books may not be regarded as Indian literature, 
although one group of Indian teachers from Browning, Mon- 
tana, commented that they had no problem using them, since 
they "know the difference between truth and fiction" and 
laugh — with their students — at the errors. Non-Indian teachers 
who are unfamiliar with the history and culture should avoid 
these books. 

Ude, Wayne. Becoming Coyote. Amherst, MA: Lynx House Press, 1981. 
165 pp. 

Genre: Contemporary Novel 

Grade Level: S 

Ude grew up in Harlem, Montana, on the edge of the Fort Belk- 
nap Reservation (Assiniboine/Gros Ventre). A mix between 
traditional mythology and contemporary fiction. Becoming Coy- 
ote reveals the ways in which individuals can experience trans- 
formation. After breaking into a local museum and stealing 
saddles and bows and arrows, two Indians "hunt" one stolen 



253 



[ 



Non-Native Authors and Their Stories about Native Americans 



237 



buffalo into the Missouri Breaks and to the home of Charlie 
Coyote, an old man who personally carries the myth in his 
name. The main character, Snook, a tribal cop, is caught 
between the rational, day-to-day, explainable reality of his job 
and the mythical, intuitive, mystical power of his experiences 
surrounding a stolen buffalo. Snook, a local boy who has been 
hardened by his job and experiences on the reservation, is 
affected by this experience and develops a renewed apprecia- 
tion for the spiritual power of his cultural heritage, and he 
grows to appreciate gifts and the importance of making offer- 
ings to the giver. 



Works Cited 



Adams, Hank. 1984. "The Golden Indian." Akwesasne Notes , Late Summer: 
10 - 11 . 

Akwesasne Notes. 1985. Early Winter: 5. 

Gates, Henry Louis, Jr. 1991. "'Authenticity/ or the Lesson of Little Tree." 
New York Times Book Review, Nov. 24, p. 1. 

Hirschi, Ron. 1991. "Susan Jeffers' Brother Eagle, Sister Sky." WEB (Wonder- 
fully Exciting Books), 16.1 (Fall): 31-34. 

Lincoln, Kenneth. 1983. "Sending a Voice." In Native American Renaissance. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 

"Little Tree, Big Lies?" 1991. Time, Oct. 14, p. 33. 

"New Age Fable from an Old School Bigot?" 1991. Newsweek, Oct. 14, p. 62. 

Slapin, Beverly, and Doris Seale. 1992. Through Indian Eyes: The Native Expe- 
rience in Books for Children. Philadelphia: New Society Publishers. 

Vanderwerth, W. C. 1989. Indian Oratory: Famous Speeches by Noted Indian 
Chieftains. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 



239 



Appendix A: 

Geographical 

Contexts 



Native North American literatures have grown out of a wide diver- 
sity of geographical contexts, and it is important to recognize the pre- 
European as well as the more current cultural areas and tribal 
locations. Although few tribes still inhabit the same areas they did 
before European contact, many of the stories told today spring from 
those early roots. Also, many of the more contemporary literatures 
have been written in response to geographical movements and relo- 
cations. 

"Native North America," the first of the following three maps, 
printed in Keepers of the Earth, and included with permission from 
Michael J. Caduto, shows most of the Native North American cul- 
tural areas and tribal locations as they appeared around 1600. The 
second and third maps, printed in Native North American Writers and 
included with permission from Gale Research, depict the state and 
federally recognized U.S. Indian Reservations and the Indian com- 
munities that exist and thrive but have not been recognized as legal 
entities by state or federal governments. 



O 

ERIC 



255 



[ 



] 



240 



Roots and Branches 





25G 



[ 



] 



Appendix A: Geographical Contexts 



241 




Cultural areas and tribal locations of Native North Ameri- 
cans. This map shoivs tribal locations as they appeared 
around 1600 , except for the Seminole culture in the South- 
east and the Tuscaroras in the Northeast. The Seminoles 
formed from a group which withdrew from the Muskogee 
(Creek) and joined with several other groups on the Geor- 
gia/Florida border to form the Seminoles , a name which has 
been used since about 1775. In the eastern woodlands the 
Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) consist of six nations , the 
Cayuga, Mohawk, Oneida, Onondaga, Seneca and Tus- 
carora. The Tuscaroras were admitted to the Iroquois 
League in 1722 after many refugees from the Tuscarora 
Wars (1711-1713) in the Southeast fled northward. There 
are hundreds of other Cultures/Nations that are not 
included due to limited space. The generally recognized 
name of at least one distinct Culture is given in each area, 
emphasizing those with large populations, past and/or pre- 
sent. Traditional names are used where possible because 
many names in general use are not preferred by Native 
North Americans. 



o 

ERIC 



257 



] 



242 



Roots and Branches 



Mitchell Bay Band s 

Snoqualmoo Tribe 
of Whidbey Island 
Duwamish Indian Tribe , 
Snoqualamie Indian Tribe - 
Steilacoom Tribe - 
Chinook Indian Tribe, Inc. ^ 

N.W. Cherokee Wolf Band 
of SE. Cherokee 
Confederacy * 

Coos, Lower Umpqua, 

Siouslaw Tribe > 

Coquille Tribe . 

Chinook Tribe - 
Chetco Tribe - 
Hownonquet 
Community Assoc. • 

Melochundum Band of - 
Tolowa Indians 

Nor-El-Muk Band of - 
Wintun Indians 
Wintoon Indians - 
Big Meadows 
Lodge Tribe 
Yokayo Tribe 
Ohlone/Ccastanoan 
Muwekma Tribe 
Amah Band of 
Ohlone/Coastanoans 
Calaveras Co. Band 
of Miwok Indians 
Indian Canyon Band of 
Coastanoan/Mutsun Indians 
American Indian Council 
of Mariposa Co. 

Antelope Valley Indian 
Community— Washoe/Paiute 
of Antelope Valley 
Coastal Band of Chumash Indians 
Dunlap Band of Mono Indians 

United Lumbee Nation 
of North Carolina & America 

Coastanoan Band of Mission Indians 
Juaneno Band of Mission Indians 
Atahun Shoshones of San Juan Capistrano 

San Luis Rey Band of Mission Indians 



Marietta Band of Nooksacks 
/ y, Samish Indian Tribe 

Snohomish Tribe of Indians 
Noo-Wha-Ha Band 



Little Shell Tribe of Chippewas of Montana 

Little Shell Band 
of the North Dakota Tribe 




Tsimshian Tribal 
Council 



o 

ERIC 



253 



Appendix A: Geographical Contexts 



243 



Lac Vieux Desert Band 
of Chippewa Indians 



Lake Superior Chippewa 
I of Marquette, Inc. 

/ Little River Band of Ottawa Indians 

/ i 

f | Little Traverse Bay Band 

| | of Odawa Indians 

! Burt Lake Band of 




f the Mississippi . 
United Houma 
Nation 

Principal Creek Indian Nation 
E. of the Mississippi 
Florida Tribe of E. Creeks — 



Aroostook Band of Micmacs 
Maliseet Tribe 

Nipmuc Tribal Council 
of Massachusetts 
(Hassanamisco Band) 

Nipmuc Tribal Council 
of Massachusetts 
(Chaubunagungamang Band) 

Mashpee Tribe 

, Wampanoag Tribal 

^ Council of Gay Head, Inc. 

Narragansett Tribe of Indians 
— E. Pequots of Connecticut 
Paucatuck E. Pequots 
W.(Mashantucket) Pequot Tribe 
Mohegan Nation 
Montauk Indian Tribe 
Pamapaugh Mountain Indians 
— Nanaticoke Lenni-Lennapes 
— Nanaticoke Association 
Piscataway-Conoy Confederacy 
& Sub-Tribes, Inc. 

Piscataway Indians 
^ Chickahominy Indian Tribe 
E. Chickahominy Indian Tribe 

- Meherrin Indian Tribe 
— Hollister-Sapone Indian Tribe 
Hattadare Indian Tribe 

Kaweah Indian Nation, Inc. 

Faircloth Indian Tribe 

- Cherokees of Robison & 

' Coharie Intra-Tribal Council Adjoining Cos. 

— - Waccamaw Siouan Tribe 
Edisto Tribe ■ Hatteras Tuscarora 
Summerville ""7 Tuscarora Nation of North Carolina 
Indian Group Lumbee Tribe 

--- - — — Cane Break Band of E. Cherokees 

... Georgia Tribe of E. Cherokees 
— - S.E. Cherokee Confederacy 
Lower Muskogee Creek Tribe— E. of the Mississippi 
United Cherokees 

Topachula Tribe 

"■ Oklewaha Band of Seminoles 
Tuscola United Cherokees 
of Florida & Alabama, Inc. 



Machis Lower Alabama Creeks 




f i ^ 



259 



[ 



] 



244 



Roots and Branches 



Lower Elwha Lummi /® winomish 
Makah \ Jamestown/ / y Upper Skagit 
Ozette \ \ Klallam / Stillaguamish 

Quileut/v\ j //</Nooksack, Sauk Suiattle 
Pori Gamble''*^- \VT i* 5^>5C: Kootenai 

Quinault- 

Colville : 

Squaxin / / * Muckleshoot Spokane 
Island 4/V Puya i u P Coeur-i>-> 

Shoal water d'Alene y 
Chehalis/ A 



Turtle 

Mountain 



Fort Bidwell 



Sobob 
Ramona 
Cahuilla \ 
Pechanga 
Pala 
Pauma 
Rincon 
San Pasqual 
Mesa Grande 
Viejas 
Jamul 
Sycuan 
La Posta 
Campo 




(Alaska not to scale) 




2G0 



Appendix A: Geographical Contexts 



1 

245 



Bois Forte 

Deer Creek! Y e, T nilJion 
0 . - . \ \ Lake 

Red Lake . ^\ \ , Red cnff 



Devils 
Lake 

v Leech La 



&7 

White Earth 




Sisseton ; f'2&\ p. 

' L — ■ J / Fonri l 

Crow 1 Lac Courte-Oreilles D ■ , / 

-"Creek i. ; f rain ® M * 

Upper Sioux*. Shakopee V S . a n /\ 
Flandreau -! Lower Sioux _ p_Menominee\ 
.^Yankton Winnebago ? Stockbridge 

0 y Sac and Fox \ 

slo'uT ^Winnebago V 

Omaha v . 



H Federal Indian Reservations 
• Federal Indian Reservations 
A State Indian Reservations 



Hannahville 
Bay Mills 

Sault Ste Marie 



Houlton Maliseet - 



A zjx. Wampanoag 
Oil Springs >. \ Narragansett 

Mashantucket 
Pequot 
\ Paucatuck 
\ Pequot 
Shinnecock 
Poosepatuck 




Micmac 

Indian Township 

Pleasant Point 
Penobscot 



Brighton 

Seminole 



Dania 

Miccosukee 



o 

ERIC 



261 



246 



Appendix B: 
Historical Context 



Few history textbooks address the issue of federal Indian policy, 
while most contemporary writers — from the late 1800s onward — tell 
stories that reflect the impact of such policies on Native lives. It is 
important that teachers become familiar with some of the most signif- 
icant dates, policies, and consequences for tribal people. Not only 
have the policies resulted in Native artists' personal literary expres- 
sions — as well as deeply affecting the lives of generations of Native 
people — they have resulted in very personal and profoundly serious 
consequences, both positive and negative, for all Native children 
today. For a more comprehensive listing of historical and cultural 
events of the Native peoples of North America and Canada, teachers 
should consult an excellent resource for all grade levels: Chronology of 
Native North American History, edited by Duane Champagne, illus- 
trated with black-and-white paintings and photos, and published in 
1994 by Gale Research in Detroit, Michigan. In addition to federal 
policies, the Chronology includes short biographies; individual epi- 
sodes of strong Indian resistance; contributions by Indians to educa- 
tion, literature, and the general economy; many records of smallpox 
epidemics in which 90 percent of whole tribes died in one winter; 
purposeful destruction of the buffalo; and many other stories of 
genocide across the continent. 

In no way can Roots and Branches provide a complete list of U.S. 
government policies, acts, and programs during the past five hun- 
dred years. Neither can it begin to do justice to the devastating conse- 
quences tribal peoples have suffered and continue to suffer as a result 
of those policies — and as a result of countless broken treaties. How- 
ever, many of the storytellers and writers listed in the current volume 
have born witness — and their voices testify most powerfully — to the 
impact of such experiences on themselves and on their ancestors. The 
following chronology pretends to be no more than this, a "brief" list, 
so that teachers might begin to understand the historical contexts of 
the literatures they might use. 




J 



2G2 



Appendix B: Historical Context 



] 



247 



A Brief History 
of Federal 
Indian Policy 


1492 — As many as 18-30 million Native Americans lived on this con- 
tinent, according to current estimates by scholars. 

1789-1871 — Treaty Policy Period: U.S. government ostensibly treated 
Indian tribes — in more than 400 treaties — as sovereign foreign 
nations. The War Department handled these affairs from 1831 until 
1859, when Indian Affairs was transferred to Department of the Inte- 
rior. This policy ended with the Battle of the Little Bighorn. 

1790s — As agreed to in treaties, annuity payments to tribes began for 
services such as education and health, money or goods, in exchange 
for lands treatied or for lands taken without consent. 

July 22, 1790 — The first Trade and Intercourse Act read that "no sale 
of lands shall be made by any Indians, or any nation or persons. . . 
Essentially, this meant that tribes could not sell land without federal 
control. 

March 1, 1793 — The second Trade and Intercourse Act prohibited 
anyone without a license from trading with the Indians and pro- 
vided $20,000 for the purchase of animals and farm equipment. 

1803 — The "Jefferson Policy" discouraged Indian tribes from being 
nomadic hunters and instead encouraged and then forced them to 
become farmers, no matter where they lived. Congress appropriated 
$3,000 to civilize and educate the "heathens." 

May 28, 1830 — Viewing occupied Indian lands as a solution to its 
inability to pay soldiers who had fought in two wars against Eng- 
land, Congress authorized $500,000 to relocate Indian families to the 
Indian Territory. The Indian Removal Act determined Indian peo- 
ples — Cherokee, Choctaw, Chickasaw, Creek, Seminole, and 
others — would be moved west of the Mississippi to save them from 
European American "contamination," and to save them from 
"extinction." In tragic irony, 4,000 Cherokees died on that "Trail of 
Tears." The "Removal Era" lasted from 1830-1860. 

1831 — Chief Justice John Marshall's decision, regarding the Cherokee 
Nation v. Georgia, defined Indian tribes as "domestic dependent 
nations," subject to the U.S. Congress, not to state laws, defining the 
relationship between the United States government and the Indian 
nations as resembling that of a guardian to a ward; yet the western 
tribes were still handled as foreign nations until the late 1800s. 

1832 — A Supreme Court decision — Worcester v. Georgia — affirmed 
that Indian removal by the State of Georgia was illegal. Still, the 
Cherokee were forced to move west between 1835 and 1839. 

1834-1836 — In this period. 111 Indian schools were established by 
various religious organizations. 

June 30, 1834 — The Indian Trade and Intercourse Act insisted that all 
trade be conducted between tribes and the government rather than 
between individuals. This act defined Indian territory as "all that 
part of the United States west of the Mississippi . . . and not within 
any state to which the Indian title has not been extinguished." 


o 

ERIC 


263 



263 



248 



Roots and Branches 



[ 



1835-1850 — According to Champagne, the federal government 
invested monies it held for tribes — monies promised to Indian 
nations in exchange for land — in state bonds; when the states failed 
to pay interest, the Indian funds earned little money. 

March 3, 1847 — The Trade and Intercourse Act defined the proce- 
dures for eliminating the liquor trade among the Indians. 

1851-1880 — Beginning with Commissioner Luke Lea's doctrine, 
which called for the Indians' "concentration, their domestication and 
their incorporation," plans developed to drastically reduce the Indi- 
ans' land holdings, to make them wards of the government, and to 
break up the tribal structure. 

July 20, 1867 — The Peace Commission Act called for meetings with 
"hostile Indian tribes," with the intention to eliminate the "treaty 
process" and locate all Indians on confined areas of land. On August 
13, 1868, the Nez Perce signed the last and 370th pact. 

1868 — The Fourteenth Amendment granted citizenship to all men 
but not to Indians because they were members of "foreign nations." 

1870 — Grant's peace policy assigned supervision of reservations to 
churches after Congress prohibited army officers from being Indian 
agents. 

1871- 1887 — Reservation Policy Period — Land areas, created by 
treaties, were reserved by tribes within which they were expected to 
live; included in the Indian Appropriations Act was the stipulation 
that "no Indian Nation of Tribes within the territory of the United 
States shall be acknowledged or recognized as an independent 
nation, tribe or power with whom the United States may contract by 
treaty." 

1883 — Courts for Indian Offenses were established according to rules 
laid down by the Department of the Interior for the running of the 
reservations. 

March 3, 1885 — The Major Crimes Act declared that all Indian cases 
regarding major crimes would be tried in federal courts. 

1800 to 1900s — The "Assimilation Policy," enforced through agricul- 
ture and education and Christian churches, promoted the 
deculturation of all Indian peoples. 

Fall 1879 — General R. H. Pratt established the first Indian boarding 
school, located off a reservation at Carlisle, Pennsylvania. Pratt's phi- 
losophy of removal of students from family and tribe and the 
imposition of rigid military discipline characterized Indian educa- 
tion for the next fifty years. 

1887 — The General Allotment Act (or "Dawes Act") attempted to dis- 
solve the reservation system by forcing Indians to cease communal 
ways, to become individual farmers on small plots of land held "in 
trust" by the United States government. The reservation lands were 
not evenly distributed between individual tribal members or fami- 
lies; rather, heads of families were allotted 160 acres once they 



2G4 



Appendix B: Historical Context 



] 



249 



became "competent" or "civilized enough." The opportunity to 
become citizens would follow. The unallotted lands identified as sur- 
plus lands were then open to non-Indian settlement. However, this 
did not apply on all reservations, such as the Apache, Navajo, 
Papago, and Hopi. 

1893 — The Appropriation Act prevented rations in money or in kind 
from being distributed to any head of an Indian family for any chil- 
dren who did not attend school during the preceding year. 

1887-1934 — Allotment Policy Period (also known as the Assimila- 
tionist Policy Period) was finally viewed as coercive and a failure. 

Consequences of the Allotment Policy for tribes were as follows: 

■ In 1887, Indians held title to 137 million acres. 

■ By 1934, 52 million acres remained. 

■ 25 million acres of original allotted land had been transferred to 
non-Indian people. 

■ Boarding school education programs were established with the 
purpose of separating children from their Native peoples and 
cultures and enforcing assimilation procedures. 

■ Many Indian agents governed reservations with abuse of 
human rights and dignity, forbidding use of Native languages 
and the practice of cultural traditions. 

■ Economic development was a disaster, funds were misappro- 
priated, and people died of starvation and disease. 

■ By 1900, 250,000 Native American people remained of the esti- 
mated original 18-30 million. 

July 23, 1892 — The Intoxication in Indian Country Act forbid the sale 
and transportation of alcoholic beverages in Indian country. This was 
later repealed on August 15, 1953. 

August 15, 1894 — The Parent Consent for Education Act stressed the 
importance of parents or guardians granting permission for young 
people to attend boarding schools. 

1902 — The Civil Service Act was extended to the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs. 

1910 — The Sun Dance was forbidden because of the self-inflicted 
"torture." This proved to be a violation of the U.S. Constitution. 

1924 — The Indian Citizenship Act granted citizenship to those who 
had not become citizens through allotment. 

1928 — The "Miriam Report" revealed the truths of poverty and 
fraud, urged Congress to fulfill its treaty obligations in terms of 
health, education, and subsistence, and also indicted the Allotment 
Act for causing social genocide on the reservations. 

1933 — Franklin D. Roosevelt named John Collier, an Indian 
reformist, as Commissioner of Indian Affairs, in response to the 
Miriam Report. 





265 



250 



Roots and Branches 



1934-1936 — Repealing the General Allotment Act, Congress replaced 
it with the Johnson-O'Malley Act and amendments. This act, also 
part of the Indian "New Deal," granted contracting authority with 
the states to the Secretary of the Interior for Indian education, health, 
social welfare, and agricultural assistance, and schools, colleges, uni- 
versities, and other appropriate agencies. 

1934 — The Indian Reorganization Act (or "Wheeler-Howard Act") 
replaced treaty rights. It was written by academics who didn't like or 
didn't understand what was happening. The act was amended to give 
tribes the right to either accept or reject it. Ostensibly, it was a policy of 
self-determination. One hundred eighty-nine tribes agreed to its terms. 

The consequences of the Indian Reorganization Act for tribes were as 
follows: 



■ gave Indian tribes the authority to form businesses and estab- 
lish credit systems and rights for home rule; 

■ gave them the right to establish their own constitutions; 

■ provided clear criteria for tribal membership; 

■ abolished the Allotment Act of 1887; 

■ provided better education and economic development; 

■ provided the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) as supervisor of 
funds and lands, establishing the federal government as paternal 
trustee; 



■ exempted Indians from the draft; 

■ represented another federal move toward assimilation; 

■ applied one policy to 250 culturally diverse tribes; 

■ resulted in the present system in which tribes must receive 
approval before passing ordinances or amending constitutions; 

■ gave the Secretary of the Interior power to revoke tribal consti- 
tutions, even for tribes not reorganized under the act; 

■ resulted in tribes under this act having fewer rights than treaty 
tribes; 



■ provided tribal monies to build federal irrigation projects. 

1950s — Relocation was enacted as another attempt to mainstream 
Indians. The Bureau of Indian Affairs paid the expenses for an Indian 
family to move, helped obtain housing and jobs, and provided living 
expenses until the family could be self-sufficient. Over 1,000 Mon- 
tana Indians moved to California. In 1965, the government was 
spending $15 million per year on training. By 1970, 125,000 Indians 
were living in urban areas, but more than one-third ultimately 
returned to the reservations. 



The consequences of termination and relocation for Indian people 
were as follows: 

■ difficulty in adjusting to city life; 

■ unfamiliarity with jobs and no training; 




2GG 



Appendix B: Historical Context 



251 



■ those who left were potential leaders, leaving behind vacuums 
in leadership in many communities; 

■ demoralization as a result of discrimination in the cities; 

■ severe poverty for most, while many returned to reservations; 

■ establishment of an employment assistance program; 

■ establishment of adult vocational training in 1956; 

■ negation of trust between the federal government and the 
Indian people; 

■ development of the general belief that termination and reloca- 
tion were another form of genocide. Leonard Mountain Chief 
said, "The issue is still there and will never go away"; 

■ probable beginning for the current push for tribal sovereignty; 

■ resulted in Indians retreating from society, becoming more 
defensive, and viewing the rest of the world with even more 
suspicion; 

■ termination of thirteen tribes in spite of the fact that they were 
too poor to have representation at hearings; 

■ between 1954 and 1958, 1.8 million acres of Indian-owned land 
passed into non-Indian hands. 

1953 — Public Law 280 transferred the jurisdiction over civil and 
criminal law from the general government to the states. 

August 1, 1953 — Termination Resolution — House Concurrent 
Resolution 108 called for withdrawal of federal services to Indians, 
terminating its trust responsibilities, ending tribal sovereignty, health 
care, and most federal obligations to Indians as specified in treaties. 
Ostensibly, it was intended to free Indian peoples from reservations 
and allow them to "get out and work, so they could take care of 
themselves." Not until 1958 did the law declare that the tribes would 
be terminated only with their consent. The Termination Act was 
repealed on April 28, 1988. 

January 4, 1975 — The Indian Self-Determination and Education Act 
allowed Indians to provide for some of their own services by con- 
tract with the BLA. 

The consequences of Indian Self-Determination and Education Act 
for tribes were as follows: 

■ Contract schools could be governed by tribally elected school 
boards and operated with federal monies. 

■ Tribes could manage their housing programs, tribal courts, law 
and order agencies, career development programs, and other 
such entities. 

■ The BLA had the authority to provide technical assistance to 
tribes in the contract areas. 

■ Federal funding cutbacks affected monies for self- 
determination and education. 




267 



252 



[ 



Roots and Branches 



■ "Great Society" programs overwhelmed Indian tribes and 
made it difficult to plan, set priorities, and administer them. 

■ Still, new hope for self-determination developed. 

■ In 1980, government programs decreased, and this became 
more of a problem for Indians since they so thoroughly 
depended on the federal government economically and for 
social services. 

August 11, 1978 — The American Indian Religious Freedom Act, more 
symbol than legal obligation, recognized Indians' "inherent right of 
freedom to believe, express, and exercise their traditional religions." 
However, it did not require an agency to change action simply 
because of interference with Indian custom. 

August 24, 1978 — The Federal Acknowledgment Program estab- 
lishes parameters for recognizing an American Indian group as a 
tribe. 

June 11, 1981 — Civil Rights Commission Report chairman Arthur 
Flemming said that the government's policy toward American Indi- 
ans has been one of "inaction and missed opportunities." 

January 12, 1983 — The Indian Land Consolidation Act authorized 
the purchase, sale, and exchange of lands by Indian tribes. 

September 25, 1990 — The Carl D. Perkins Vocational Education Act 
provided funds for "the operation and improvement of tribal con- 
trolled post-secondary vocational institutions." 

November 2, 1990 — The Native American Languages Act was 
designed to preserve, protect, and promote the practice and develop- 
ment of Indian languages. 

In no way does the above chronology represent the entire 
Native historical experience. It merely recounts some of the major 
actions of the federal government toward Indian people in the United 
States. 



ERIC 




253 



Appendix C: 
Stereotypes — Sources 
and Definitions 



The following explication of several common stereotypes can offer 
only a minimum background for teachers and students, since they 
still strongly influence young people and adults across the continent. 
All Native Americans must deal with these stereotypes in one way or 
another every day, and so an understanding of their sources is essen- 
tial when reading literatures written by Native Americans as well as 
those written by non-Natives about Native people. When students 
understand the stereotypes and the ways they have been used by one 
group to gain power or control over another, the power of those 
stereotypes to negatively impact lives is diminished. 

Noble Savage 

The "Noble Savage" is frozen in the past, having lived in Utopia, per- 
fectly in tune with Nature, like Adam before the Fall. According to 
Bernard Sheehan, the "noble" stereotype originated with Jefferson's 
vision of a "perfect order on earth where the noble savage was 
equated with the environment: impulsive, unrestrained, unburdened 
by social conventions, simplicity, and content in a world that 
demanded nothing of him" (Sheehan 1973, 89-90). The Indians' 
"sense of superiority," the persistent Indian belief that their "way of 
life [was] more attractive than the European," and the many captured 
whites who "refused to return to civilization," all perpetuated the 
idea of the Noble Savage as mythical creature (Sheehan 1973, 113). In 
a denial of reality, the Noble Savage lived in his pastoral garden, and 
his life began to be viewed in connection with the Farmer — also "in 
perfect synchronization with nature" (Sheehan 1973, 101). Conse- 
quently, the view of the farmer as "the very best of men," with the 
possibility of the Indian and farmer joining in a perfect mix, devel- 
oped. The "Noble Savage" image frequently blames the bad white 
man for all the Indians' problems, as though the Indians are inca- 
pable of responsibly surviving themselves. 




269 



] 



254 



Roots and Branches 



Heathen 

The Random House Dictionary of the English Language traces "heath" to 
the Old English, and defines it as a "tract of open and uncultivated 
land; wasteland overgrown with shrubs" ( Random House 1967, 655). 
The term has also been used in connection with "the area where one 
was born" (655). It is easy to see how the "Noble Savage" would have 
been regarded as a "heathen." But when interest in "civilizing" the 
Indian grew, demanding a change in cultural practices, the definition 
in America of heathen changed to "anti-Christian." 

Savage 

According to Francis Jennings, "savage" began as a French word, 
sauvage, and was associated with "wild" and "woods" (Jennings 1976, 
74). From the early 1600s, European invaders regularly used the term 
"savage" rather than "peasant" to create — in England — favorable 
opinions to aggressive policies in America. However, when the 
colonists needed Indian peoples for trading purposes, they called them 
"Indians" or "native peoples," and they saved the term "savage" for 
occasions "when the necessity for defense [was] mentioned" (77). "To 
call a man a savage is to warrant his death and to leave him unknown 
and unmoumed" (12). Indians have been depicted as loving war, when 
there is little evidence of much intertribal warfare before contact. 
According to Sheehan, "Both whites and Indians took scalps, and colo- 
nial authorities encouraged the practice by paying bounties for these 
trophies" (Sheehan 1973, 166). John Smith turned from calling Indians 
"poore innocent soules," to "perfidious and inhumane people," and to 
"cruell beasts with a more unnaturall brutishness then beasts" after the 
"Jamestown Massacre" in 1622, when 347 settlers died. (However, John 
Smith, ignoring his own brand of negligent brutality, was hard pressed 
to explain the deaths of 6,000 Jamestown settlers due to "poor manage- 
ment" and starvation; see Jennings [1976, 72 to 79]). "Savagery" repre- 
sented the opposite of "civilization," and so later use of the word 
provided justification for European American efforts to educate Indian 
children. 

Wild 

The term "wild" was used to connect Indians with predatory animals, 
providing more justification for Europeans to control and exterminate. 
Shakespeare used this word to "express attributes of wildness, rude- 
ness, bestiality and cruelty; and the words were sometimes applied to 
persons" (Jennings 1976, 76). Mary Gloyne Byler, in her essay "Taking 
Another Look," suggests that "repeated juxtaposition of person and 
animal serves to instill and reinforce the image of American Indians as 
being not only subhuman but also inhuman beings" (Byler 1992, 89). 




270 



c 



Appendix C: Stereotypes — Sources and Definitions 



i 

255 



Princess or Squaw 

White male ethnographers originally defined and described Indian 
women according to their European cultural beliefs about the inferior 
roles of women. The ethnographers were no doubt influenced by 
early Biblical scholars and philosophers who argued that women 
were secondary to men since Eve had been created from Adam's rib. 
Some even suggested that people of color were not descendants of 
Adam and Eve. "Typically the Indian woman was either glorified as 
a princess , as in the tale of Pocahontas, or denigrated as a squaw. 
Indian females were most often described as passive, submissive, 
and inferior. Their work was trivialized as menial and monotonous, 
and they were considered beasts of burden or the property of savage 
males"(Bowker 1993, 33-34). The word "squaw," originates from the 
Algonquin language feminine ending "squa" and refers to the female 
genitals. Native Americans very strongly disapprove of the use of 
this word. In detail, Bowker explains the complexity of images of 
Native American women, arguing that in traditional Native societies 
and their cosmologies, the woman was "a primary force." She closes 
her discussion with a quote from Ella Deloria, an early twentieth- 
century Sioux anthropologist: 

Outsiders seeing women keep to themselves have frequently 
expressed a snap judgement that [Indian women] were regarded as 
inferior to the noble male. The simple fact is that woman had her own 
place and man his; they were not the same and neither inferior nor 
superior. The sharing of work also was according to sex. Both had to 
work hard, for their life made severe demands. (Bowker 1993, 36) 



Redskin 

Having nothing to do with skin color, originally, the "redskin" stereo- 
type may have two distinct sources. Europeans had applied the term 
to Algonquins in general and to the Delawares in particular, not 
because of their skin color but because they used "vermilion makeup, 
body paint, [made] from fat mixed with berry juice and minerals," 
which they would spend hours applying (America's 1978, 118). Indi- 
ans and colonists would trade beaver skins and rabbit skins, and the 
term was also used by colonists who connected Indians with bloody 
red skins, Indian scalps that settlers would collect after conflicts with 
Indians. 

Nomadic 

Although some tribes, especially the Plains Indians, followed game 
across hundreds of miles, "various tribes and bands did claim sover- 
eignty over specific areas of land, dwelling, hunting, and farming 



256 



e 



Roots and Branches 



within well-established boundaries," contradicting the belief that the 
land lay unoccupied and free (Byler 1992, 87). The Narragansetts, an 
eastern woodland people, cleared twice as much land as they used 
each year and let half of it lie fallow; "when the ground became infer- 
tile through constant replanting, those Indians who did not fertilize 
their lands — some of the coastal peoples did — removed their villages 
to new sites." This movement was regarded as cyclical, not nomadic. 
"When the colonists pretended that the Indians were mere nomads, 
the reason was to invoke international law doctrines applicable to 
vacant lands; such lands were available for seizure" (Jennings 1976, 
71). The "nomadic" stereotype is also connected to the "savage" 
stereotype because Jeffersonians believed that "such extensive acreage 
fostered the savage condition. The Indian was uncivilized, that is 
undisciplined, disordered in his manner of life, because he lived irre- 
sponsibly from the fat of the land." The Jeffersonian design for the 
Indians' future required that they be divested of their lands (Sheehan 
1973, 169-70). 

Uncivilized Savage, Existing in a Lower Level 
of Intellectual and Cultural Development 

When Indians failed to live up to the "perfect state of Nobility," 
exhibiting violence in reaction to European encroachment, the 
"utopian idiom" grew to carry "progressivist implications and led 
directly to the transformation of both the land and the native culture. 
Indian and land became enmeshed in an elaborate ideology that 
established change as the basic function of nature and perfection as 
its end." In other words, the Indian could grow to the perfect state of 
"civilization" after the ultimate in human development — the Euro- 
pean model (Sheehan 1973, 114-15). With civilization through mis- 
sions, schools, and federal money, the Indian would fully assimilate 
and convert from the "Uncivilized Savage" to become indistinguish- 
able from the white man (419). 

Children 

When the violent European American encroachment drew reactions 
from Indians, and when the "civilizing" programs (mentioned above) 
failed and Indians were dying, many reformers in government sug- 
gested programs which would treat the Indians as "children." Oper- 
ating under the assumptions that they knew best, that Indians had 
brought about their own destruction, and that they could make the 
Indian act in his own best interests even though it may have been 
against his inclinations, these reformers used paternalism to manipu- 
late the Indian. To accomplish this, reformers gave clothing, farm 
implements, and no money. A major promoter of the Jeffersonian 
"civilizing" program, Thomas L. McKenney wrote to the Senate in 



[ 



] 



Appendix C: Stereotypes — Sources and Definitions 



257 



1821 to explain the reasoning behind this policy: "Our Indians stand 
pretty much in the relation to the Government as do our children to 
us . . . equally dependent" (Sheehan 1973, 153). 

Anti-education 

Enforced through various Christian groups, federal government pol- 
icy promoted the distant boarding school experience and the conse- 
quent kidnaping of Indian children. Once removed from their tribal 
environment, these groups expected that the children would forget 
their culture and would assimilate into the dominant European 
American culture. The "anti-education" stereotype today may be 
grounded in their ancestors' boarding school experiences. Since at 
least five generations of Native Americans could associate education 
with punishment and deprivation. Native people may still regard 
"education" as a negative rather than positive experience. Further- 
more, Native children still experience the denegration of their cul- 
tures within contemporary public school classrooms. 

Undisciplined Children 

Jon Reyhner and Jeanne Eder, in "A History of Indian Education," 
cite a 1946 study by Pettitt which found that 

The lack of discipline [of Native children] noted by Europeans was 
more apparent than real. Indian communities used a number of meth- 
ods to ensure the proper behavior of children, however [many Native 
people deemed physical punishment as inappropriate] because chil- 
dren needed to leam to endure pain and hardship with courage. 

Since many Europeans regarded play as "sinful," having relied on 
physical punishment for misbehavior, they couldn't see the way 
Indian adults from various cultures were directing positively the 
behavior of their children through storytelling, shunning, and sham- 
ing (Reyhner and Eder 1992, 36). 

White Man’s Helper 

From Indians who helped the Spanish fight against other Indians, to 
Squanto and Powhatan, to Pocahontas and John Smith, to the novel. 
Sign of the Beaver, and to the Indians in the film Dances with Wolves, 
Indian people are regarded as being especially good when they help 
white people survive and conquer. This is especially true when sto- 
ries are written from the non-Indian point of view. 

Vanishing Americans 

Federal policy played a major role in the development of this stereo- 
type. With the Dawes Act (1887), the stress on individual ownership 



ERIC 



273 



] 



258 



Roots and Branches 



of land, and the influx of non-Indian landowners on Indian reserva- 
tions, policymakers believed that Indians would assimilate into the 
general white population, or else they would become extinct (Harger 
1902, 222-25). In 1900, most non-Indians believed that the Native 
peoples were the "Vanishing Americans" because the population had 
declined from as many as 20 million across the North American con- 
tinent to only 237,196 (Champagne 1994, 241). Today, many perceive 
the two million Indians living on reservations and in America's 
urban centers as a conquered people who cannot adapt to a sophisti- 
cated, technological society. Others, including federal agents, policy- 
makers, and educators, view the whole race as "vanishing" because 
of the prevalence of poverty, alcoholism, and dependency on welfare, 
while they fail to recognize and admit these problems prevail across 
the entire American population. Most important, the romantic "van- 
ishing" image serves as a deflector for honest confrontation with crit- 
ical issues while it operates to cover and hide five hundred years of 
oppression and genocide. Furthermore, teachers and texts reinforce 
the "vanishing" image when they restrict their definition of Indians 
to terms from a precontact cultural experience. 



Works Cited America's Fascinating Indian Heritage. 1978. Pleasantville, NY: Reader's 

Digest. 

Bowker, Ardy. 1993. Sisters in the Blood: The Education of Women in Native 
America. Bozeman: Montana State University, Center for 
Bilingual /Multicultural Education. 

Byler, Mary Gloyne. 1992. "Taking Another Look." In Through Indian Eyes: 
The Native Experience in Books for Children , eds. Beverly Slapin and 
Doris Seale, 89. Philadelphia: New Society. 

Champagne, Duane. 1994. Chronology of Native North American History. 
Detroit, MI: Gale Research. 

Harger, C. M. 1902. "The Indian's Last Stand." Outlook , 70 (January): 222-25. 

Jennings, Francis. 1976. The Invasion of America— Indians, Colonialism, and the 
Cant of Conquest. New York: Norton. 

Random House Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged Edition. 1967. 

Reyhner, Jon, and Jeannie Eder. 1992. "A History of Indian Education." In 
Teaching American Indian Students, ed. Jon Reyhner. Norman: Univer- 
sity of Oklahoma Press. 

Sheehan, Bernard. 1973. Seeds of Extinction — Jeffersonian Philanthropy and the 
American Indian. New York: Norton. 



0 

ERIC 



274 



259 



Appendix D: Cultural 
and Spiritual Contexts 



Philosophies 
from Montana 
Tribal Cultures 



Especially when reading and hearing literatures that are centered in a 
particular tribal consciousness, it is important that students become 
familiar with the cultural and spiritual contexts. Since Roots and 
Branches began with the seven Montana tribal cultures, I asked these 
reservation communities to provide statements showing what is most 
important to their tribes. I received responses from various sources 
including school boards, tribal councils, tribal culture committees, 
and individuals who had written their own. None would presume to 
speak for all their people, but the philosophies as written below do 
represent what they, as individuals or committees, believe. Not all I 
received are printed in this text out of respect for their wishes that 
their philosophies not be included in a "book for sale." The state- 
ments included here are examples of cultural philosophies that exist 
in all native communities, but they are also necessary background 
material for the study of Montana-based literatures. I suggest teachers 
and students read these philosophies and study the particular tribal 
histories when using selections based in these cultures, always main- 
taining a respect for the sacred nature of cultural materials. 




275 



3 



260 



c 

Roots and Branches 



Assiniboine/Gros Ventre 
(White Clay People), Fort Belknap 

The emblem of the Fort Belknap Reservation's seal, as illustrated by 
the traditional shield, symbolizes the shield's protection of the two 
tribes, the Gros Ventre and Assiniboine. 

The Circular shape of the shield symbolizes life itself, as per- 
ceived by the Indian belief of the constant cycle of life, each living 
thing dependent on each other for life. The killing of the buffalo 
enables the Indian to live and grow, and when his mortal remains 
return to the earth, it serves as food for the grasses of the prairie, 
which in turn feeds the buffalo, thus ensuring the constant cycle of 
life. 

The Four Directions and the Four Seasons are symbolized in 
the use of the four colors: Red-Summer, Yellow-Fall, White-Winter, 
and Green-Spring. 

Symbolizing the existence of two tribes, the Gros Ventre and 
Assiniboine on the reservation, who function as a whole, is the Buf- 
falo Skull. The colors divide it, yet the skull remains as one. The Skull 
has a jagged line from horn to horn representing the Milk River, a 
major tributary of the Missouri. 

Snake Butte is illustrated above the Skull. This butte is a well 
known landmark for Indian tribes throughout the north. The Spring, 
located on the north central part of the butte, is one of the few natural 
fresh water springs in the area. 

Snake Butte is also the place to seek out visions. Many tried, 
but very few succeeded in acquiring sacred power at this place. 

The two Arrowheads facing each other emphasize the strong 
traditional ties with the past. 

Seven Feathers hang from the Shield. There is a feather for 
every two of the twelve council members representing the reserva- 
tion's three districts and the center feather representing the tribal 
chairman. 

— excerpted from the philosophy expressed in 
"Seal of the Fort Belknap Reservation," 
Fort Belknap Indian Community, 
Gros Ventre and Assiniboine Tribes, 1980 

We recognize that the acquisition of knowledge and wisdom is a life- 
long process, and we are committed to development and implemen- 
tation of educational programs that will meet every individual tribal 
member's needs from child to elder. 

— excerpted from the "Educational Philosophy 
of the Assiniboine and Gros Ventre Tribes," 
Fort Belknap Reservation- Wide 
Education Committee, March 1980 



0 

ERIC 



276 



[ 



] 



Appendix D: Cultural and Spiritual Contexts 



261 



Fort Peck Dakota (Sioux) 

The Fort Peck Dakota Oyate (Sioux Indian People) are spiritual 
beings from our mother's womb. From the time our mother acknowl- 
edges the fact of conception and on to the completion of the second 
year of life, this period is where her spiritual influence is critical and 
most important. Ina (mother) would choose thoughts of harmony 
and well-being in the quietness and confidence of her meditation, 
such as to instill the greater idea of life and the love of Wakan Tanka 
(the Great Mystery) into the receptive nature (soul) of the unborn 
child and a sense that all things are related. During her times of 
silence and isolation, her moments flow together with the natural 
orders of peace and harmony for all things good. Her words and 
actions reflect her conscious union with all creation. This is the Dakota 
lifeway of the expectant mother, she is as one with the universe. 

When the special time in her life has come, the moment when 
she will be center to the miracle of life itself, she will offer prayer and 
give thanks. Even before Grandmothers, the Dakota women have 
been trained and prepared in mind, body, and spirit for this wonder- 
ment, the Dakota mother's holiest duty, her role in the great song of 
creation. 

In the life of all the Dakota, there is one inevitable duty, the 
duty of prayer, the daily recognition of the unseen and eternal. The 
Dakota spirituality began when god began. There is no need for set- 
ting apart one day of seven as a sacred day, the Dakota Oyate respect 
each day as a life itself. The Red Road (Spiritual Journey) of the Dakota 
is a pathway that begins with each new day. The Dakota Oyate dress 
each day with the finest truth, faith, justice, of bravery/ courage, forti- 
tude, generosity and a quest for wisdom. And in memory of that day- 
life which has passed them by, presents of industry, parenting, 
honesty, and fidelity will be left for the Dakota. 

Today, willingness and generosity are the foundation of the 
Dakota. No one person can say this is not so. The Dakota Oyate travel 
great distances to find places to share their special talents and time, as 
an effort to work together for the good of all life-forms. 

— HECHETU, SUNG'GLESKA HEMIYE, 
Poplar Creek, Fort Peck Indian Reservation 



EKLC 



277 



262 



Roots and Branches 



Blackfeet (The Pikuni Way) 

We Pikuni, above all, value honor and respect for the Creator, for 
self, our relatives, for all that exists because we are all related. When 
we give honor and respect to ourselves and to all that exists, then 
good things happen for us. This is the sacred way to live. We believe 
all people are spiritual beings because the Creator made us. We are of 
the Creator's Spirit, and it is because of these things that we exist. We 
keep our spiritual status by practicing these beliefs. Children must be 
allowed to become involved in the ceremonial life of our people as 
soon as they express an interest. 

We Pikuni affirm and demonstrate the importance of honor and 
respect by keeping our ceremonies, some of which are the Sweat 
Lodge, Give Away, Okan, Black Tail Dance, Beaver Bundle, and Thun- 
der Pipe. 

The name giving ceremony is our expression of the value and 
love we have for the individual child or person being honored. We 
give a distinct name to each person. In this way we honor each per- 
son's individual sacredness. Each person must be recognized for their 
differences. 

We must tell the stories of our origin. The stories of Napi are but 
some of them. Many think Napi is just a fool and a trickster. Some 
Napi stories are meant to entertain, to make people laugh and enjoy 
life. But we must also remember that Napi, the Old Man, the Grandfa- 
ther, is also a spiritual being. He is Napi Natosi, Sacred Elder, who was 
sent to earth by the Creator to help make the world. 

We Pikuni remember that each day is good, and it is a gift from 
the Creator. The early summer morning time is an example. It is the 
time of day when the birds and the animals sing and talk to the Cre- 
ator. Stormy days give us snow and rain which allow us to live. 

We are given many symbols to keep us thinking of our spiritual 
beginning. The color red (and the reason we paint our faces with red 
paint) is to remind us that the blood of our ancestors is in the earth 
and to show the Creator we are mindful that He made us from the 
Mother Earth. This is the miracle of our beginning. 

The responsibility of Pikuni adults today is to educate the chil- 
dren in our old ways. We must assume control of their learning. The 
responsibility of a Pikuni child is to listen and learn and thereby 
become a loving, spiritual being that is related to and respects all 
things. This is the only way we can live in peace and harmony. This is 
how we learn what it means to be a human being. 

This is the Pikuni Way given to us by Napi Natosi. 

— Long Standing Bear, Chief 



: 



i 

Appendix D: Cultural and Spiritual Contexts 



263 



Crow (Absorka) 

The four elements the Crows observe are: 

1. Through myth, legend, and history, the Crows believe that 
by displaying their loyalty, fidelity, to their clan uncles and aunts, 
their life will be in better harmony with their fellow tribesmen, as 
well as with the unpredictable elements of their immediate environ- 
ment in all ways — mentally, physically or spiritually. 

The two war bonnets at either side represent the thirteen origi- 
nal clans of the Crows, as does the rising sun, which also represents a 
bright future and a bright day. The Greasy Mouth Clan has the sun as 
its symbol. The twelve bright-orange rays represent the other twelve 
clans. The eleven paler-yellow rays represent the currently existing 
clans. 

The war bonnets also represent chiefs. Among its members 
each clan has an outstanding chief who has distinguished himself by 
accomplishing all the great deeds set by Crow standards and rules to 
attain leadership or chieftainship. 

2. The peace pipe represents just that — peace. The Crows offer 
peace prior to going on a journey, whether it's for a skirmish or 
encounter with an enemy or any other journey. They do this so they 
may be immune from the hazards of life and evade any misfortunate 
occurrence or incident. Only a chief has the right to carry the pipe. 

3. The Medicine Bundle represents all the fraternities within 
the Tobacco Society. From myth and legend came the Tobacco Society 
story — that the sacred plant was a gift from the Heavens and with the 
practice of its rituals, members of the Society will attain spiritual har- 
mony. 

4. The sweat lodge was another gift from the Heavens which 
came to the people through visions of Chosen Crows. Its ceremony 
was to be practiced for purification. The Chosen Crows were much 
like prophets in teaching a way of life for their fellow tribesmen. 

All of these four elements and the practices accompanying 
them are combined and carried out in rituals and ceremonies. 

The tipi represents the home of the Crows. Each Crow believes 
that the home is his second parents, where he has a place to return 
from any journey. Crow tipis are always erected having the door fac- 
ing toward the east. A Crow believes that he is entering into a new 
day with a bright future and leaving problems of the past with the 
passing darkness and coming into a bright new world again. In other 
words he is reborn each day. 

... In summary, the mountains, the rivers, the wildlife, the ele- 
ments of the universe, the change in cycle of seasons, the plant life — 
all of these were necessary for the Crows' survival in nomadic days. 




279 



264 



Roots and Branches 



The Crows believe that a supreme force somewhere designed all the 
elements; and the Crows observe all these blessings through their 
customs, traditions, their practices through nature, with the highest 
degree of respect. They observe these through the gifts handed down 
from visions of the chosen Crow Prophets. 

— excerpted from the "Crow Tribal Emblem and Flag" 
by Lloyd Old Coyote McGinnis, Dale K., 
and Floyd W. Sharrock. 1972. The Crow People. 

Phoenix: Indian Tribal Series, 102-4. 



Kootenai 



Preserve, Protect, 

Perpetuate and Enhance the 
Language and Culture of the 
Kootenai People 

— Kootenai Culture Program Motto 



Salish 

The Flathead Culture Committee seeks to preserve, protect, and per- 
petuate the living culture and traditional way of life of our people. 

We Salish cherish the gifts passed down to us from our elders, 
and we treasure the hope and promise embodied in our young peo- 
ple. The elders give us our guidance, and our hearts are grateful for 
their wisdom, their dreams and visions, their knowledge, their songs 
and words. Our elders, and our ancestors before them, received these 
gifts from the Creator, from Mother Earth, from the Grandfather; and 
it was and is their prayer that these things be carried on by the gener- 
ations to come. They have always told us to never give up, to keep 
living our culture, to keep practicing our old ways. Their prayers are 
being answered in our lives, in our working to carry on our ancient 
ways, in passing these things on to our young people: our native lan- 
guage, our traditional values of respect for all of life, our knowledge 
of how to live upon the land, our nurturing and healing of one 
another as members of a tribe. 

By passing on these things, we show our respect for the elders 
and our love for our young people; we ensure their future as Salish 
people. We work to mend the circle of our people, the passing of 
knowledge from generation to generation. It is for them, our next 
generation and all the generations yet to come, that we work. It is for 
them, and to them, that the elders wish to give the good things that 
we Salish have held for hundreds of generations. 

— Flathead Culture Committee 



O 

ERIC 



230 



c 



Appendix D: Cultural and Spiritual Contexts 



□ 

265 



Northern Cheyenne 

SWEET MEDICINE, ancient prophet of the Cheyenne people, pre- 
dicted the coming of the white man, and he predicted that many 
changes would then occur in the Cheyenne way of life. He foresaw 
the horse which would give surprising mobility to the people and 
that the buffalo would then disappear to be replaced by the white 
man's cattle. He prophesied that these events would cause the 
Cheyenne people to lose their old ways and to act in different and 
strange ways. 

According to SWEET MEDICINE, when this happened, 
Cheyenne youth would be trying to live adult lives before they were 
properly prepared. All of these predictions have come to pass and 
today youth do face responsibilities for which they are unprepared. 
The Cheyenne people were told long ago by SWEET MEDICINE that 
these changes in the Cheyenne way would come. The time has come 
for us to prepare the Cheyenne youth for these changes. 

In the time of the buffalo, the Cheyenne were a strong and self- 
sufficient people. Daily needs and constant dangers were met with 
pride under the leadership of wise men. The instruction by parents 
and relatives prepared the youth to meet the responsibilities so that 
when the land and the buffalo were forcibly taken from them, the 
Cheyenne people refused imprisonment and walked and fought 
from Oklahoma back to the Valley of the Rosebud in Montana. Here 
the Cheyenne people have lived in peace and poverty for one hun- 
dred years; however, our youth and many adults found themselves 
unprepared for the cultural genocide and harsh treatment in the 
school which was controlled by a distant government. In the past, 
when the school was a boarding school, it was used to separate chil- 
dren from their families and our culture. The school was used to 
repress our religion, language, and it was later used to indoctrinate 
our children with the values of the white man. 

Always there have been some sincere educators who attempted 
to educate our children, not to indoctrinate them. Gradually, the qual- 
ity of the school has been improved. But, we who must live with this 
education found it inadequate and inferior to the education of neigh- 
boring white people. 

We Northern Cheyenne people know before our Creator that 
we are responsible for the education of our youth. Cheyenne parents, 
grandparents, aunts, and uncles met this educational responsibility 
by controlling the education for our children. As human beings, we 
realize and recognize our responsibility to our children, and we rec- 
ognize further that time is required for dynamic community involve- 
ment in the school to be developed. Skepticism and fear of rejection 
based on past experiences will take considerable time to overcome. 



O 



281 



[ 



: 



266 



Roots and Branches 



As American citizens we understand the moral obligation (treaty 
with the Northern Cheyenne and Northern Arapaho, 1868) to pro- 
vide us with the necessary resources to educate our children. We 
have, therefore, decided by vote of the People of the Northern 
Cheyenne Reservation to assume control with commitment born of 
respect for our ancestors who lived, learned and fought on this land 
and with a concern for their descendants who learn to live on this 
land and in this country. 

We Northern Cheyenne believe that a good education will help 
provide our children with confidence, self-respect and the freedom of 
choice to help make them responsible adults. We believe that good 
education will help strengthen the self-discipline required for accept- 
able behavior. We believe our children should have the opportunity 
for a lifetime of learning and success in whatever profession they 
choose. We Northern Cheyenne intend to operate the Northern 
Cheyenne Schools by these beliefs so that when we look upon the 
education of our children, we will be able to say "It is good." 

Goals Adopted by the Northern Cheyenne Schools, 1994 

Long ago, the four chiefs and forty-four subchiefs regularly decided 
in council the movements and tasks for the tribe. Each morning, the 
subchiefs would then cry out reminders of the tasks to the awakening 
camp. As the designated spokesmen for education in our community, 
we set forth the following goals, which reflect the expectations of this 
Reservation. 

Students should be provided a friendly and healthy educa- 
tional atmosphere conducive to learning; should be encouraged to 
develop individual pride, confidence, self-respect, and initiative; and 
should be encouraged to develop responsible behavior. 

— excerpted from "Philosophy of Northern Cheyenne Schools," 
Northern Cheyenne School Board Policy Handbook 
(Board approved 5/11/96) 



26 7 



Appendix E: 

North Centra! 
Regional Publications 



Although this list doesn't represent all publications from the seven 
tribes in Montana and surrounding tribal communities, it can serve 
nonetheless as an example of the kinds of materials that have been 
written and compiled in tribal communities nationwide. Teachers 
who wish to use literatures that more accurately represent the histor- 
ical, cultural, and personal experiences of Native people may contact 
their local tribal college librarians, tribal education directors, and cul- 
ture committee chairpersons. The complete annotated bibliography 
of the following resources will be available by October of 1998 
through the Montana Office of Public Instruction, Helena, Montana. 
Wherever the title of a resource provides a clear indication of the con- 
tent, the annotation is not included. 

Allen, Minerva (Assiniboine). Basal Bilingual Readers. Ulus. Hank 
Chopwood, Frank Cuts the Rope, and Mike Brokie. Hays, MT: 
Hays/LodgePole Schools, 1988. 13-15 pp. each. 

Grade Level: P, I 

A series of books for teaching the Assiniboine and Gros Ventre 
languages to first- and second-grade level students. Secondary 
students can also appreciate the themes, conflicts, and tradi- 
tions that these stories portray. 

, ed. Campfire Stories of the Fort Belknap Community. Hays, MT: 

Hays/LodgePole Title IV Program, 1983. 

Grade Level: P, I 

A collection in which the voices of Fort Belknap elders can be 
heard as they tell the stories for their community. 



ERIC 




[ 



3 



268 



Roots and Branches 



. Spirits Rest. Illus. Aaron Freeland. Hays, MT: Hays/LodgePole 

Title IV Program. 24 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Minerva Allen's poetry, illustrated by secondary graphic art 
students. 

, ed. Stories By Our Elders: The Fort Belknap People. Illus. Frank 

Cuts the Rope and John D. Doney. Hays, MT: Hays/LodgePole 
Title IV Program, 1983. 160 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Thirty-five illustrated stories told by Jenny Gray, Hank Chop- 
wood, Lucille Chopwood, Wallace Chopwood, Vernie Bell, 
Estelle Blackbird, George Shields, Dora Helgeson, Theresa 
Lamebull, and Andrew Lamebull, and illustrated by Frank 
Cuts The Rope and John D. Doney. 

Ashabranner, Brent. Morning Star, Black-Sun. New York: Dodd, Mead, 
1982. 

Grade Level: S 

An examination of the issue of strip mining for coal and its 
impact on the reservation communities, specifically the North- 
ern Cheyenne. 

Assiniboine Memories: Legends of the Nakota People. Fort Belknap, MT: 
Fort Belknap Community Council, 1983. 138 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Traditional and historical stories told by Assiniboine elders. 

Bass, Althea. Night Walker and the Buffalo. Billings: Montana Council 
for Indian Education, 1972. 32 pp. 

Grade Level: I 

A contemporary Southern Cheyenne story. 

Beaverhead, Pete (Salish). Eagle Feathers: The Highest Honor. St. 
Ignatius, MT: Flathead Culture Committee, 1978. 

Grade Level: I 

A story about the role of eagle feathers in the Salish culture. 

. Legends of Scewene. St. Ignatius, MT: Flathead Culture Commit- 
tee, 1978. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Stories about the legendary Bigfoot. 



O 

ERIC 



28 j 



[ 



] 



Appendix E: North Central Regional Publications 



269 



. Wild Horse Roundup. St. Ignatius, MT: Flathead Culture Com- 
mittee, 1978. 

Grade Level: I 

Beaverhead's memories of some of the wild horse roundups on 
the Flathead reservation during the early years of the twentieth 
century before it was open to white homesteading. 

Bennett, Ben. Death, Too, for The-Heavy-Runner. Missoula, MT: Moun- 
tain Press, 1980. 170 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

A historical narrative of the Blackfeet, culminating in the tragic 
story of the Baker Massacre in the winter of 1870. 

Bilingual Readers (Cree). Box Elder, MT: Rocky Boy Transitional Bilin- 
gual Program, 1988. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Traditional stories that are used to teach the Cree language. 

Boas, Franz. Kutenai Tales. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 59. 
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1918. 

Grade Level: S 

Traditional and historical stories in both English and the Kute- 
nai language. 

Bryan, William L. Montana's Indians: Yesterday and Today. Helena: 
Montana Magazine, 1985. 

Grade Level: I, S 

The geographic, economic, historical, and cultural situation of 
each of the seven Montana Indian Reservations: Crow, Cheyenne, 
Flathead, RockyBoy (Chippewa /Cree), Fort Belknap (Assini- 
boine/Gros Ventre), Blackfeet, Fort Peck (Assiniboine /Sioux). 

Bull Shows, Harry(Crow). Legends of Chief Bald Eagle. As told to Hap 
Gilliland. Billings: Montana Council for Indian Education, 
1977. 40 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Exciting stories that are fun to read, as they demonstrate the 
importance of personal commitment to the welfare of the group. 

Carriker, Robert C. The Kalispel People. Indian Tribal Series. Phoenix: 
University of Arizona Press, 1973. 

Grade Level: I, S 

An interesting history of the Kalispel people of Washington State. 



erJc 



285 



270 






Roots and Branches 



Chamberlain, A. F. "The Coyote and the Owl: Tales of the Kootenay 
Indians." In Memoirs of the International Congress of Anthropology, 
ed. C. Staniland Wake, 282-286. Chicago: Schultz, 1894. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Several variations of a basic tale involving the Owl and the 
Coyote. 

Char-Koosta. Dixon and Pablo, MT, 1956 (November)- . 

The newspaper of the Salish, Pend d'Oreilles and Kootenai 
Tribes of the Flathead Reservation. 

Charging Eagle, Tom (Dakota) and Ron Zeilinger. Black Hills: Sacred 
Hills. Chamberlain, SD: Tipi Press, 1987. 

Grade Level: S 

A description of the Black Hills and their value as a spiritual 
and physical home to the Dakota Indians. 

Cheyenne Short Stories. Billings: Montana Council for Indian Educa- 
tion, 1977. 32 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Some of the stories teach the importance of staying one step 
ahead of the enemy and surviving through wisdom rather than 
force. The introduction includes an explanation of the Cheyenne 
story-telling tradition. 

Cheyenne Stories. Collected by Jennie Seminole Parker (Northern 
Cheyenne). Lame Deer, MT: Dull Knife College, 1993. 7 pp. 
(unpublished). 

Grade Level: P, I 

An excellent resource that includes six traditional stories with 
an explanation of oral traditions and their values for the teach- 
ing of children. 

Chief Chariot (Salish/Flathead). "Chief Chariot's Speech of 1876." 
Montana Journalism Review 15 (1972): 20-21. 

Grade Level: S 

A speech against a government decision that the Bitterroot 
Flathead Indians were subject to state and local taxation, origi- 
nally published in the Weekly Missoulian, April 26, 1876. 

Chief Joseph (Nez Perce). Chief Joseph's Own Story. Billings, MT: 
Council for Indian Education, 1972. 31 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

The story in Chief Joseph's own words, as he traveled to Wash- 
ington, DC, in 1879. 



c 



Appendix E: North Central Regional Publications 



~i 

271 



Clark, Ella. Guardian Spirit Quest. Illus. Alex Bull Tail. Billings: Mon- 
tana Reading Publications, 1974. 35 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

Stories reprinted from other published sources about the 
guardian spirit quests of seven individuals. 

Clark, Ella. In the Beginning: Indian Legends of Creation. Billings: Mon- 
tana Council for Indian Education, 1977. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Creation stories that teach the consequences of irresponsible 
behavior and explain the differences in the races, while they 
demonstrate the intimate relationship between human beings 
and the earth and the animals. 

Comes at Night, George (Blackfeet/Flathead). Roaming Days: Warrior 
Stories. Browning, MT: Blackfeet Heritage Program, 1978. 67 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

The history and culture of the Blackfeet people portrayed in ten 
short warrior stories that demonstrate the powerful influence 
of visionary and magical experiences the Blackfeet people have 
accepted as real. 

Crow Bilingual Books and Readers. Crow Agency, MT: Bilingual Materi- 
als Development Center, 1985. 

Grade Level: P, I 

This Crow bilingual program includes curriculum guides, sup- 
plementary workbooks, and video materials. 

1993 Crow Fair: 75th Diamond Jubilee. An illustrated "Special Supple- 
ment" from the Billings Area Newspaper Group Newspapers. 
1993 (Aug. 18). 

A photographic record of the annual powwow, parade, and cel- 
ebration of Crow culture and community. 

Crummett, Michael. Sundance: The 50th Anniversary Crow Indian Sun 
Dance. Helena, MT: Falcon Press, 1993. 92 pages. 

Grade Level: I, S 

An illustrated record of the 50th anniversary of the ceremony, 
which federal law had previously prohibited for over half a 
century. 

Curtis, Edward. The North American Indian. Vol. 4: The Absaroke or Crows. 
New York: Johnson Reprint, 1970. 244 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

Originally published in 1909, this book provides a cultural 
review of the Crow and Hidatsa peoples. 





272 



Roots and Branches 



Dempsey, Hugh A. Big Bear: The End of Freedom. Lincoln: University 
of Nebraska Press, 1984. 198 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

The story of the Cree's struggle for reservation land in Mon- 
tana after the Riel Rebellion. Other books by Dempsey include 
Crowfoot, Chief of the Blackfeet; Indian Tribes of Alberta; and Red 
Crow, Warrior Chief. 

Denny, Walter A. (Chippewa/Cree). Bird Stories. Box Elder, MT: 
Rocky Boy Transitional Bilingual Program, 1977. 36 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Stories with names written in the Cree language using both 
Cree and English syllabaries, and with each story closing with 
a lesson. 

. The Butterfly. Box Elder, MT: Rocky Boy Transitional Bilingual 

Program, 1987. 

Grade Level: P, I 

This primary book teaches children to accept themselves as 
they are. 

. The Eagle. Box Elder, MT: Rocky Boy Transitional Bilingual Pro- 
gram, 1987. 

Grade Level: P, I 

The custom and significance of the eagle for the Chippewa/ 
Cree people. 

. How the Turtle Got Its Shell. Box Elder, MT: Rocky Boy Transi- 
tional Bilingual Program, 1987. 

Grade Level: P, I 

A traditional storytelling about a wanderer who is often cold 
and wet, until he meets an old man who gives him "the home 
on his back." 

. Stories from the Old Ones. Ed. Harold E. Gray and Patricia Scott. 

Illus. William Daychild. Browning, MT: Bear Chief Educational 
Consultants, 1979. 79 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

A collection of twenty-three as-told-to stories, published for the 
first time. 



288 



[ 



Appendix E: North Central Regional Publications 



] 



273 



Dion, Joseph P. (Cree). My Tribe the Crees. Calgary, Alberta: Glenbow 
Museum. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Durgeloh, Bill, et al. (Salish/Kootenai). "Skool Loo — Legends from 
Here and There." Dovetail Magazine, 1.2 (Spring 1973): 30-40. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Three legends from the reservation. 

Farr, William E. The Reservation Blackfeet, 1882-1945: A Photographic 
History of Cultural Survival. Seattle: University of Washington 
Press, 1984. 210 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

A photographic study of the Blackfeet from many private 
collectors. 

Feather Earring, TurnsBack, Old Coyote, and Lela M. Puffer(Crow). 
Prairie Legends. Billings: Montana Council for Indian Educa- 
tion, 1978. 32 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

Stories reflecting the values of close observation, fortitude, 
commitment to a purpose, and interdependence between 
humans and animals. 

Fitzgerald, Michael O. Yellowtail: The Medicine Man and Sun Dance 
Chief Speaks of the Sacred Ways of the Crow. Norman: University 
of Oklahoma Press, 1991. 234 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

Insights into the religious center of the Crow Indians through 
the eyes of Thomas Yellowtail. 

Flannery, Regina. The Gros Ventre of Montana. Washington, DC: 
Catholic University Press, 1953. 

Grade Level: S 

Dr. Flannery obtained her stories from some of the oldest 
women in the tribe. 

Flathead Culture Committee. A Brief History of the Flathead Tribes. St. 
Ignatius, MT: Flathead Culture Committee, 1978. 

Grade Level: I, S 

An introduction to the history and culture of the Flathead 
tribes. 




289 



] 



274 



Roots and Branches 



Gathering. Poplar, MT: Fort Peck Community College, 1992. 43 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

An illustrated literary magazine, published by students at Fort 
Peck Community College. 

Gildart, Bert. "Mary Ground: A Memory of Two Centuries." Great 
Falls Tribune (4 Mar. 1990), Great Falls, Montana. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Biography of Mary Ground, who died on February 8, 1990, 
having lived through 107 years of starvation, disease, and war. 

Gilham, Dan, Sr. Handbook of Blackfeet Tribal Law. Browning, MT: 
Blackfeet Fleritage Program, 1979. 73 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

A history of Indian law and order. 

. Growing Up Indian. As told to Jo Rainbolt. Billings: Montana 

Indian Publications, 1975. 35 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Stories from the life of Louie Gingras, an 82-year-old Kootenai 
Indian. 

Gingras, Louie (Kootenai). Coyote and Kootenai. As told to Jo Rainbolt. 
Billings: Montana Council for Indian Education, 1977. 35 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

Humorous stories about the oldtimers (animals), which teach 
the value of following directions, being yourself, and showing 
respect for wildlife, as well as communicating the importance 
of being satisfied with who we are, what we have, and what we 
can do. 

Glacier Reporter (Blackfeet). Browning, MT 59417. 

Official publication for the Town of Browning and the Blackfeet 
Reservation. 

Gladstone, Jack (Blackfeet). Noble Heart; Buckskin Poet Society; Wolves 
on Sea and Plain; In the Shadow of Mt. Lassen; The Buffalo Cafe. 
Audio Cassettes and CDs. Kalispell, MT: Hawkstone Produc- 
tions, PO. Box 7626. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Original songs, based on historical events and persons and on 
traditional Native stories. 




.200 



[ 



Appendix E: North Central Regional Publications 



275 



Gone, Fred P. (Lakota/Gros Ventre). The Seven Visions of Bull Lodge as 
Told by His Daughter, Garter Snake. Ed. George Horse Capture. 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1980. 125 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

Healer and keeper of the Feathered Pipe, Bull Lodge was bom 
in 1802 and died in 1886. 

Good Strike, The Boy, and Joe Assiniboin (Assiniboine). How Horses 
Came to the Ha'A'Ninin. Billings, MT: Montana Council for 
Indian Education, 1980. 35 pp. 

Grade Level: P,I, S 

Three stories portraying the importance of respecting the 
words and advice of elders, generosity, and kindness. 

Ground, Mary (Blackfeet). Grass Woman Stories. Ed. Janet Bailey. 
Browning, MT: Blackfeet Heritage Program, 1978. 59 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Stories of the Pikuni people, including some about marriage 
customs and childbirth rituals, reflecting the culture from a 
woman's point of view, as well as some true-life stories of men, 
women, and children who suffer harsh and sometimes violent 
consequences when they neglect, betray, or show disrespect for 
their relatives and friends. 

Harrison, Michael. "Chief Chariot's Battle with Bureaucracy." Montana: 
The Magazine of Western History, 10.4 (Autumn 1960): 27-33. 

Grade Level: S 

The background and story of the struggle of Charlo (Salish) to 
remain in the Bitterroot Valley, and General Garfield's 1872 
visit to the Bitterroot Valley to negotiate with him. 

Hatheway, Flora (Crow). Chief Plenty Coups. Billings: Montana Read- 
ing Publications, 1981. 35 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

The significant relationships and experiences in the life of Chief 
Plenty Coups (Crow) (1838-1932), from the time he was ten 
years old until his death. 

. Old Man Coyote: Crow Legends of Creation. Indian Culture 

Series. Billings: Montana Reading Publications, 1970. 36 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

Old Man Coyote is "The Wise One sometimes also called Old 
Coyote, as the Father of all." 





] 



276 



[ 

Roots and Branches 



. The Little People: Crow Legends of Creation. Billings: Montana 

Council for Indian Education, 1971. 36 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

A collection of stories that communicate humor, gratitude for 
those who help and protect the people, and the importance of 
ceremony for the remembrance of gifts. 

Hildreth, Dolly, Viola Lindblad, and Richard Albent. The Money God: 
Stories of the Modern Indian. (Taos /Navajo). Billings, MT: Coun- 
cil for Indian Education. 32 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Stories demonstrating the values of the "old ways" and their 
continuing relevance for Indian life today while also providing 
a means for living "between two cultures." 

History of the Flathead Reservation, 1841-1934: Study Guide. Prepared 
by Ron Terriault (Salish). Pablo, MT: Salish/Kootenai College. 
Grade Level: I, S 

A study guide for a course taught at the Salish/Kootenai Col- 
lege. 

Holmes, Oliver M., ed. "Peregrinations of a Politician: James A. 
Garfield's Diary of a Trip to Montana in 1872." Montana: The 
Magazine of Western History, 6.4 (Autumn 1956): 34-45. 

Grade Level: S 

Holmes's version of James Garfield's diary of his trip to negoti- 
ate with Charlo in 1872. 

Horse Capture, George P. (Lakota/Gros Ventre). Pow Wow. Cody, WY: 
Buffalo Bill Historical Center, 1989. 64 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

With color and black-and-white photographs of dress and 
regional participants, this book can contribute to a better 
understanding of the Great Plains tradition. 

Howard, Helen Addison. "Indians and an Indian Agent: Chief Charlo 
and the Forged Document." Journal of the West, 5.3 (July 1966): 
379-397. 

Grade Level: S 

The story of the removal of Charlo (Salish/Kootenai) from the 
Bitterroot Valley, reprinted from Howard's Northwest Trail 

Blazers. 



Appendix E: North Central Regional Publications 






277 



Howard, Helen Addison. "The Men Who Saved the Buffalo." Journal 
of the West , 14.3 (July 1975): 122-129. 

Grade Level: S 

The story of Indian Agent Peter Ronan and Sam Walking Coy- 
ote and the establishment of the Pablo- Allard buffalo herd. 

Huberman, Robert G., assisted by Karen Pale Moon Huberman. Our 
Only Homeland: An Ecological Look at the Land of the Gms Ventre and 
Assiniboine. Hays, MT: Hays/LodgePole Public Schools, 1980. 

Grade Level: S 

Hungry Wolf, Adolf. Charlo's People: The Flathead Tribe. Invermere, BC: 
Good Medicine Books, 1971. 

Grade Level: S 

Sketches from Flathead history and personal sketches of some 
Flathead leaders. 

. Good Medicine in Glacier National Park. Golden, BC: Good Medi- 
cine Books, 1971. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Inspirational photos and stories from the days of the Blackfeet 
People. 

, comp. Legends from the Old People. Invermere, BC: Good Med- 
icine Books, 1972. 62 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Traditional Blackfeet stories. 

Hungry Wolf, Adolf, and Beverly Hungry Wolf (Blackfeet), eds. Chil- 
dren of the Sun. New York: Quill, 1987. 203 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

An illustrated collection of traditional and contemporary sto- 
ries by and about Indian children who grew up during the 
early 1900s. 

Hungry Wolf, Adolf, and Star Hungry Wolf (Blackfeet). Children of the 
Circle. Summertown, TN: Book Publishing, 1992. 160 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Black-and-white photographs of Native children from the 
Plateau, Plains, and Pueblo peoples. 

Indian Sentinel (Salish). St. Ignatius, MT. 

A Catholic Mission publication. 




293 



278 



Roots and Branches 



c 



In the New World. Ashland, MT: St. Labre Indian School, 1988. 

Grade Level: P, I 

A collection of poetry written by students of the Pretty Eagle 
School and the Saint Charles Mission (Crow). 

Karrunen, Robert, Joe Marshall, and Frederick Lefthand. Soldiers 
Falling into Camp: The Battles at the Rosebud and the Little Big Horn. 
Encampment, W Y: Affiliated Writers of America, 1992. 229 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

An easy-to-read narrative of these two battles, which incorpo- 
rates the voices of participants (Lakota and Cheyenne). 

Kidder, John. "Montana Miracle: It Saved the Buffalo." Montana: The 
Magazine of Western History, 15.2 (Spring 1965): 52-67. 

Grade Level: S 

The story of the Pablo-Allard buffalo herd on the Flathead 
Reservation. 

Kicking Woman, George (Blackfeet), and Molly Kicking Woman 
(Blackfeet). Sikawakassi'kokaan: Black Deer Lodge Design, Blackfeet 
Lodge Coloring Book. Browning, MT: Browning Bilingual Pro- 
gram, 1990. 20 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Explanations in both English and Blackfeet of the design and 
use of the Blackfeet Lodge, using the Blackfeet elders' Black 
Deer Lodge design as the basis of the story. 

Kipp, Neil. Pre-Columbian History of the Red Man (Before Anglo-Saxons). 
Ed. Roxanne DeMarce. Browning, MT: Blackfeet Heritage Pro- 
gram, 1960. 48 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

The author's view of the precontact Blackfeet experience, with 
information on how the Blackfeet communicated with other 
tribes, the importance of children, their religion, and different 
societies. 

Kipp, Woody (Blackfeet). "Living in the Absence of the Sacred." 
Words on Wilderness. Newsletter of the Wildlands Studies and 
Information Center, Missoula: University of Montana, 1993 
(Spring): 1-2. 

Grade Level: S 

An essay that contrasts the Native and non-Native world views, 
exploring such questions as "What is Sacred?" and "What on 




204 



Appendix E: North Central Regional Publications 



] 



279 



this earth is deserving of mankind's respect?" particularly in 
regard to wilderness issues such as the Badger-Two Medicine 
area and exploration for oil. 

Kootenai Culture Committee. How Martin Got His Spots. Beaverton, 
OR: Educational Systems, Inc., 1978. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Traditional Kootenai story. 

Law, Kathryn. Salish Folk Tales. Billings: Montana Indian Publications, 
1972. 40 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Stories showing the consequences of selfish behavior, espe- 
cially when that behavior jeopardizes the life of a relative. 

. Tales from the Bitterroot Valley and Other Salish Folk Stories. 

Billings: Montana Indian Publications, 1971. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

A collection of coyote stories as told by Agnes Vanderburg, 
Jerome Lumpry, Ignace Pierre, and Adele Adams that show the 
folly in setting unrealistic goals. 

Lewis, Elizabeth. Blackfeet Language Coloring Book. Browning, MT: 
Blackfeet Heritage Program, 1978. 67 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Pictures and names of animals, plant life, foods, and numbers 
printed in both the English and Blackfeet languages, with a 
Southern Piegan/Blackfeet pronunciation and spelling guide 
included for the teacher. 

Long Standing Bear Chief (Harold Gray) (Blackfoot). Ni-Kso-Ko-Wa: 
Blackfoot Spirituality, Traditions, Values, and Beliefs. Browning, 
MT: Spirit Talk Press, 1992. 68 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

According to the author in his Introduction, this book repre- 
sents "the values he wants his children to know, understand, 
and respect." 

Magorian, Jim. Keeper of Fire. Billings, MT: Council for Indian Educa- 
tion, 1984. 78 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

A portrayal of both Indians and whites in a realistic coming-of- 
age story. 



[ 



] 



280 



Roots and Branches 



Many Guns, Tom (Blackfeet). Pinto Horse Rider. Browning, MT: Black- 
feet Heritage Program, 1979. 67 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

The story of Many Guns's life translated from his native lan- 
guage, revealing the rich cultural heritage of the Blackfeet. 

Martinson, David (Ojibway). Manabozho and the Bullrushes. Duluth, 
MN: School District 709, 1975. 34 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

A story of the Ojibway trickster /transformer figure. 

. Shemay/The Bird in the Sugarbush. Duluth, MN: School District 

709, 1975. 29 pp. 

Grade Level: P 

A contemporary story about a grandmother who tells a story 
and a girl with a special sensitivity for the sadness of a bird. 

McAlear, J.F. The Fabulous Flathead: The Story of the Development of 
Montana's Indian Reservation. Poison, MT: Treasure State Publi- 
cation Company, 1962. 

Grade Level: S 

Anthropological information about the tribes who now live on 
the Flathead Reservation. 

McDonald, W. H. Creation Tales from the Salish. Billings, MT: Montana 
Council for Indian Education, 1973. 32 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

A collection of eight Coyote stories, beginning with the cre- 
ation of the earth. 

Medicine Crow, Joe. "The Effects of European Culture Contacts Upon 
the Economic, Social, and Religious Life of the Crow Indians." 
Thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of Southern 
California, 1939. 

Grade Level: S 

Medicine Crow, Joseph (Crow). A Handbook of Crow Indian Laws and 
Treaties. Crow Agency, MT: Daniel S. Press, 1966. 

Grade Level: S 

Joe Medicine Crow is the tribal historian and anthropologist. 

Merriam, Alan P. "Songs and Dances of the Flathead Indians." New 
York: Ethnic Folkways Library, 1953. 

Grade Level: I, S 



O 



Appendix E: North Central Regional Publications 



] 



281 



Mogor, Robert A. (Salish/Kootenai). Flathead, Kutenai, Pend d'Oreille 
Flannelboard Stories. (Mimeo). St. Ignatius, MT: Native American 
Cultural Awareness Program, St. Ignatius Elementary School 
District, 1975-76. 

Grade Level: S 

Traditional and historical stories of the Confederated Tribes 
drawn primarily from Char-Koosta, the Salish/Kootenai tribal 
newspaper. 

Montana Indians: Their History and Location. Helena: Montana Office of 
Public Instruction, 1992. 

Grade Level: I, S 

One of several Indian Education Resources that are available at 
no cost. 

Nicholsen, John. Chii-la-pe and the White Buffalo. Billings: Montana 
Council for Indian Education, 1981. 41 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

A story that teaches that rewards come to those who demon- 
strate respect and compassion for others. 

Old Coyote, Elnora A., and Jon Reyhner, eds. Teepees Are Folded: Amer- 
ican Indian Poetry. Billings: Montana Council for Indian Educa- 
tion, 1991. 44 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Contemporary poetry that connects with the old ways, while it 
also reflects on the issues which so many young Indians experi- 
ence today. 

Old Coyote, Henry (Crow), and Barney Old Coyote (Crow). Crow Sto- 
ries. Crow Agency, MT: Crow Tribal Publication, 1985. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Three stories, a Crow alphabet and pronunciation guide, and 
an appendix showing the Crow tribal structure. 

Old Coyote, Mickey (Crow), and Helene Smith. Apsaalooka: The Crow 
Nation Then and Now, Children of a Large Beaked Bird. Greens- 
burg, PA: McDonald /Sward, 1992-1993. 251 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

A comprehensive history of the Crow nation, together with the 
political, economic, and social situation today. 



ERIC 




282 



: 



Roots and Branches 



Old Coyote, Sally, and Joy Yellowtail Toineeta. Indian Tales of the 
Northern Plains. Billings, MT: Montana Council for Indian Edu- 
cation, 1971. 31 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Six stories from the Blackfeet, Crow, Arapaho, and others. 

. Indian Tales of the Northern Rockies. Billings: Montana Indian 

Publications, 1971. 31 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Several short tales from the Gros Ventre, Flathead, Crow, Sho- 
shone, Blackfeet, and Nez Perce. 

Parsons, Jackie. The Educational Movement of the Blackfeet Indians: 
1840-1979. Browning, MT: Blackfeet Heritage Program, 1980. 
45 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

Descriptions of mission schools, reservation day schools, gov- 
ernment boarding schools, public and private schools on the 
Blackfeet Reservation. 

Recollections of Fort Belknap’s Past. Fort Belknap Community Council. 
Fort Belknap, MT: Fort Belknap Education Department, 1982. 
204 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Twenty recollections of Gros Ventre and Assiniboine tribal 
elders about the years 1910 through 1945. 

Reese, Montana Lisle, ed. Legends of the Mighty Sioux. Interior, SD: 
Badlands National History Association, 1987. 158 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

A collection gathered by Reese and Indian workers of the 
South Dakota Writers' Project, representing the traditional 
Sioux stories, as told in their own language. 

Reyhner, Jon. Heart Butte, A Blackfeet Indian Community. Heart Butte 
and Billings, MT: Council for Indian Education, 1984. 24 pp. 
Grade Level: P, I 

A collection of photographs published by the Heart Butte Bilin- 
gual Program, depicting student life in Heart Butte. 



O 

ERIC 



203 



Appendix E: North Central Regional Publications 



a 



, ed. Stories of our Blackfeet Grandmothers. Heart Butte and 

Billings, MT: Council for Indian Education, 1984. 23 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Stories told by Blackfeet elders to students at the Heart Butte 
School during the spring of 1983, about Indian life in early 
Montana during the time of Indian Agency control. 

Rides at the Door (Blackfeet), and Darnell Davis, comp. Napi Stories. 
Browning, MT: Blackfeet Heritage Program, 1979. 38 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Stories of Napi, the Blackfeet trickster /transformer, through 
whose actions a cycle of existence began. 

Riggs, Stephen R. A Dakota-English Dictionary. St. Paul: Minnesota 
Historical Society Press, 1992. 665 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Salish Culture Committee. Coyote and the Man Who Sits on Top and 
Coyote and the Mean Mountain. Beaverton, OR: Educational Sys- 
tems, 1978. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Stories illustrated for younger readers. 

. Salish Coyote Stories. Beaverton, OR: Educational Systems, 1979. 

Grade Level: P, I 

A collection of stories for the fourth-grade reading level. 

Spirit Talk, 1.1 (Summer 1994). Browning, MT: Spirit Talk Press. 44 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

The first edition of a quarterly magazine published by Long 
Standing Bear Chief Mii-sa-mii-pai-poi-ii Nii-nohk Kyi-yo 
(Blackfoot), which includes book reviews, glossy color pho- 
tographs, stories, articles, and poetry. 

Spirit Whispers Three: St. Ignatius Anthology of Student Writing. St. 
Ignatius, MT: St. Ignatius High School Writing Lab. 1993. 123 pp. 
Grade Level: P, I, S 

A yearly publication representing the art, poetry, prose, and read- 
ing, typing, designing, editing, and organizing of St. Ignatius 
students in grades 7-12 on the Flathead Reservation. 




299 



[ 



] 



284 



Roots and Branches 



Sta-Al-TSA-Nix-SIN: Ghost. Browning, MT: Blackfeet Heritage Pro- 
gram, 1979. 47 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

Stories told in the winter, and in contemporary Blackfeet life, 
for entertainment and for social control, reinforcing Blackfeet 
religious beliefs, explaining events that were forewarned, and 
linking the known with the unknown. 

Swaney, Thomas "Bearhead" (Salish/ Kootenai). "'Bearhead' Swaney 
Takes Strong Stand." Montana Indian Health Board Newsletter 1.1 
(Oct. 1978): 4-6. Billings, MT. 

Grade Level: S 

A keynote address regarding the need for Indian unity for the 
September 1978 meeting of the Montana Indian Health Board 
at Billings, Montana. 

Tall Bull, Henry (Cheyenne), and Tom Weist. Cheyenne Fire Fighters. 
Billings: Montana Reading Publications, 1971. 39 pp. 

Grade Level: I 

A contemporary story about Cheyenne fire fighters who battle a 
fire in the Bob Marshall Wilderness west of Great Falls, Montana. 

. Cheyenne Legends of Creation. Billings: Montana Council for 

Indian Education, 1972. 32 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Stories beginning with Maheo, the Creator, turning mud into 
dust to make the "earth we walk on," and teaching about the 
interdependent relationship between human beings and ani- 
mals, and between human beings and their environment. 

. Cheyenne Warriors. Billings: Montana Council for Indian Edu- 
cation, 1983. 32 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Biographical stories of six nineteenth-century Cheyenne war- 
riors, both men and women, and their battles as told by those 
who participated in these events. 

. Grandfather and the Popping Machine. Billings: Montana Coun- 
cil for Indian Education, 1970. 32 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

A story about old man Raven, who buys the first Ford owned 
by a Cheyenne and assumes that he will understand the 
machine since he knows how to "break horses." 



[ 



] 



Appendix E: North Central Regional Publications 



285 



. The Rolling Head. Billings: Montana Council for Indian Educa- 
tion, 1971. 31 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

In his Introduction, Hap Gilliland explains that several plains 
tribes have tales about the "rolling head." 

. The Spotted Horse. Billings: Montana Reading Publications, 

1970. 32 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

The story of a Cheyenne boy who breaks a horse, saves the 
herd, and learns how to hunt buffalo from his father. 

. Ve'Ho: Cheyenne Folk Tales. Billings: Montana Reading Publi- 
cations, 1971. 32 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Ve'Ho, the Cheyenne trickster /transformer, in stories that 
entertain while they teach about the importance of being very 
observant and cautious, and the value of using ingenuity in 
solving problems. 

. The Winter Hunt. Billings: Montana Council for Indian Educa- 
tion, 1971. 31 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

Three stories that teach the values of wisdom, courage, brav- 
ery, and commitment to relatives. 

Tatsey, John (Blackfeet). The Black Moccasin — Life on the Blackfeet Indian 
Reservation. Ed. Paul T. DeVore. Intro. Mike Mansfield. C.W. 
Hill Printers, 1971. 

Grade Level: S 

A collection of Tatsey's weekly columns for the Glacier Reporter of 
Browning, Montana, during the late 1950s and early 1960s, 
including a verbatim transcription of tape recordings in which 
Tatsey interprets Blackfeet names, legends, and tribal ceremonies. 

Teit, James A. (Salish/Pend d'Oreille). "Pend d'Oreille Tales." Mem- 
oirs of the American Folk-Lore Society, Vol. II, 114-18. 1917. 

Grade Level: S 

Six Pend d'Oreille tales told by Michel Revais. 

. "The Salishan Tribes of the Western Plateaus." Annual Report 

of the Bureau of American Ethnology, No. 45 (1927/28): 295-396. 

Grade Level: I, S 




,301 



286 



Roots and Branches 



Throssel, Richard. Blue Thunder, Crow Indian Legend. Billings: Mon- 
tana Indian Publication Fund, 1976. 31 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I 

A story of the conflict between Little Light (Son of the Morning 
Star) and Blue Thunder (Crow) teaching the tragic conse- 
quences of selfish competitiveness and disregard for responsi- 
bilities between friends. 

Through The Eyes of an Indian. Browning, MT. 

A weekly publication serving the Blackfeet Nation. 

Wagner, Curly Bear (Blackfeet). Curly Bear's Blackfeet Stories. Hawk- 
stone Productions, 1996. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

An audiocassette of seven Napi stories, told by a traditional 
storyteller who asks questions of his audience and explains the 
important morals or traditional values in each. 

War Stories of the White Clay People. Fort Belknap, MT: Fort Belknap 
Education Department, Curriculum Development Project, 
1982.138 pp. 

Grade Level: P, I, S 

Stories told in the original local syntax that tell of the days when 
the White Clay People (the Gros Ventre) followed the buffalo. 

Weisel, George F. Ten Animal Myths of the Flathead Indians. Anthropol- 
ogy and Sociology Papers, No. 18. Missoula: University of 
Montana, 1959. 

Grade Level: I, S 

A collection of ten animal tales of the Flathead Indians as told 
by Ellen Big Sam. 

Weist, Katheryn. Belle Highwalking — The Narrative of a Northern 
Cheyenne Woman. Billings: Montana Council for Indian Educa- 
tion, 1982. 66 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 

A memoir blending Cheyenne cultural ways with the ways in 
which historical events and government programs affected the 
people. 

Williamson, John P. An English-Dakota Dictionary. St. Paul: Minnesota 
Historical Society Press, 1992. 264 pp. 

Grade Level: I, S 




3 02 



Appendix E: North Central Regional Publications 



287 



Woodcock, Christine (Salish/Kootenai). How the Chipmunk Got His 
Stripes on His Back. St. Ignatius, MT: Flathead Culture Commit- 
tee, 1978. 

Grade Level: P, I 

A traditional animal story with illustrations. 

Woodcock, Clarence (Salish/Kootenai). "The Heritage of the Flat- 
head: Worthy of Centennial Preservation." Montana: Magazine 
of Western History, 14.2 (Apr. 1964): 120-121. 

Grade Level: S 

An article calling for the preservation of the Flathead heritage. 

, comp. Salish/Pend D'Oreille Coyote Stories. Pablo, MT: Salish 

Flathead Culture Committee of the Confederated Salish and 
Kootenai Tribes, 1981. 79 pp. 

Grade Level: S 

A collection of stories used in a Native American studies class 
at the Salish/Kootenai College. 

Wotanin Wowapi. Poplar, MT: Fort Peck Reservation. 

Grade Level: I, S 

A newspaper of the Assiniboine/Sioux people on the Fort Peck 
Reservation. 



eric 




3 03 



288 



Appendix F: 
Commercial 
Resources 



The following list is not exhaustive, but it does include some larger 
distributors as well as a concentration of presses and distributors 
within the region of Montana, neighboring Plains states, and Canada. 
Similar small presses and distributors exist in every state across the 
continent, and teachers can contact individual tribal communities or 
state universities for information regarding local publications. 



Presses and 
Distributors 
of Native 
American 
Literatures 



Akwesasne Notes 

Mohawk Nation via 

Rooseveltown, NY 13683 

(Mohawk materials that can be used for K-12) 

American Indian Curricula Development Program 
c/o United Tribes Technical College 
3315 University Drive 
Bismarck, ND 58501 

(Plains nations curricula and teacher's guides for K-12) 



American Indian Studies Center 
University of Califomia-Los Angeles 
405 Hilgard Avenue 
Los Angeles, C A 90024 

Anishinabe Reading Materials 

Duluth Indian Education Advisory Committee 

Independent School District #709 

Lake Avenue and Second Street 

Duluth, MN 55802 

(Anishinabe books and teachers' guides for K-6) 



O 

ERIC 



301 



Appendix F: Commercial Resources 



289 



Badlands Natural History Association 
Highway 377 and 240 
Interior, SD 57750-9710 
Tel: 605-433-5489 

(Dakota, Lakota, Hidatsa, Mandan, and other materials) 

Blackfeet Heritage Program 
Browning, MT 59417 
Tel: 406-338-7411 
(Blackfeet materials for K-12) 

Canadian Alliance in Solidarity with Native Peoples 
PO. Box 574 
Station P 

Toronto, Ontario M5S 271 
Canada 

Canyon Records and Indian Arts 
4143 North 16th Street 
Phoenix, AZ 85016 
Tel: 602-266-4823 

Chelsea Curriculum Publications 

Dept. LT94 

Attn: School Division 

P.O. Box 5186 

Yeadon, PA 19050 

Tel: 1-800-362-9786 

Choctaw Heritage Press 
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians 
Route 7, Box 21 
Philadelphia, MS 39350 

Cross-Cultural Education Center 

PO. Box 66 

Park Hill, OK 74451 

(Cherokee, Creek, Chickasaw, Choctaw, and Seminole materials) 

Crow Bilingual Materials Development Center 

Route 1, Box 1001 

Hardin, MT 59034-9707 

Tel: 406-665-1304 

Fax: 406-665-2784 

(Crow materials for K-12) 





290 



Roots and Branches 



c 



Daybreak Star Press 
P.O. Box 99100 
Seattle, WA 98199 

(Northwest tribal materials for K-12) 

Dullknife College 

PO. Box 98 

Lame Deer, MT 59043 

Fax: 406-477-6219 

(Northern Cheyenne materials) 

Eagle Wing Press, Inc. 

P.O. Box 579 MO 
Naugatuck, CN 06770 

Featherstone Productions, Inc. 

P.O. Box 536 

Agency Village, SD 57262 

(Mandan, Hidatsa, Arickara, Dakota, Lakota, Ojibway, Navajo, 
Caddo, Kiowa, and Zuni traditional, contemporary, cultural, and 
historical music and stories) 

Fifth House 

620 Duchess Street 

Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7K 0R1 

Canada 

Tel: 1-800-565-9523 

Flathead Culture Committee 
P.O. Box 278 
Pablo, MT 59855 
Tel: 406-675-2700 

(Salish and Kootenai materials for K-12) 

Fort Belknap Education Department 
Fort Belknap Community Council 
P.O. Box 249 
Harlem, MT 59526 

(Assiniboine/Gros Ventre materials for K-12) 

Fulcrum Publishing 
Dept. KOE 

350 Indiana Street, Suite 350 
Golden, CO 80401-5093 
Tel: 1-800-992-2908 




30 



t> 



Appendix F: Commercial Resources 



] 



291 



Greenfield Review Press 
2 Middle Grove Road, P.O. Box 308 
Greenfield Center, NY 12833 
Tel: 518-583-1440 
Fax: 518-583-9741 

Greenhaven Press, Inc. 

PO. Box 289009 

San Diego, CA 92198-0009 

Hays/LodgePole Public Schools 

District No. 50 

P.O. Box 880 

Hays, MT 59527 

Tel: 406-673-3120 

(Assiniboine/Gros Ventre materials for K-8) 

Holy Cow! Press 
P.O. Box 3170 
Mount Royal Station 
Duluth, MN 55803 
Tel: 218-724-1653 

Indian Historian Press 
1493 Masonic Avenue 
San Francisco, CA 94117 

Indian Image Productions 
P.O. Box 3621 
Evansville, IN 47735 
(Greeting cards and calendars) 

Indian Rights Association 
1505 Race Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19102 

Minneapolis Public Schools 

Planning, Development, and Evaluation Department 
807 Northeast Broadway 
Minneapolis, MN 55413 

(Lakota, Ojibway/Chippewa, and Winnebago materials for K-12) 

Minnesota Chippewa Tribe 
P.O. Box 217 
Cass Lake, MN 56633 
(Chippewa materials for K-6) 




[ 



292 



I 

Roots and Branches 



Montana Council for Indian Education 

517 Rimrock Road 

Box 31215 

Billings, MT 59107 

Tel: 406-252-7451 

Montana Office of Public Instruction 
Indian Education Program 
PO. Box 202501 
Helena, MT 59620 
Tel: 406-444-3013 

Native American Center for the Living Arts, Inc. 
25 Rainbow Mall 
Niagara Falls, NY 14303 

Native American Cultural Awareness Program 

Salish Culture Committee 

PO. Box 418 

St. Ignatius, MT 59865 

(Salish, Kootenai, and other materials for K-12) 

Native American Materials Development Center 
407 Rio Grande Boulevard, NW 
Albuquerque, NM 87104 
(Navajo materials) 

The Native Booklist 
6125-11 Street SE, #9 
Calgary, Alberta T2H 2L6 
Canada 

North American Indian Travelling College 
R.R.#3 

Cornwall Island, Ontario K6H 5R7 
Canada 

Oyate 

2702 Mathews Street 
Berkeley, CA 94702 
Tel: 510-848-6700 
Fax: 510-848-4815 

Pemmican Publications, Inc. 

412 McGregor Street 
Winnepeg, Manitoba R2W 4X5 
Tel: 204-589-6346 



0 

ERIC 



303 



Appendix F: Commercial Resources 



293 



Rising Wolf, Inc. 

240 North Higgins Avenue, #4 
Missoula, MT 59801 

(Ojibway, Cree, Siksika materials for K-8) 

Rocky Boy Transitional Bilingual Program 
Rocky Boy Tribal High School 
Box Elder, MT 59521 
Tel: 406-395-4270 

(Chippewa /Cree materials for K-8) 

St. Labre Mission School 
Ashland, MT 59003 
Tel: 406-784-2347 

(Northern Cheyenne materials for K-8) 

Salish-Kootenai Community College 
P.O. Box 117 
Pablo, MT 59855 
Tel: 406-675-4800 
Fax: 406-675-4801 

Sinte Gleska University Bookstore 
Rosebud Sioux Reservation 
P.O. Box 156 
Mission, SD 57555 
Tel: 605-856-2733 

(Lakota books and musical recordings for K-12) 

Spirit Talk Press 
P.O. Box V 

Browning, MT 59417-3022 
Tel: 406-338-2882 
(Blackfeet materials) 

Sunset Productions Inc. 

369 Montezuma 
Santa Fe, NM 87501 
Tel: 1-800-829-5723 

Theytus Books 
Box 218 

Penticton, British Columbia V2A 6K3 
Canada 

Tel: 604-493-7181 
Fax: 604-493-5302 

(Coastal Salish, Metis, Okanagan and other materials for K-12) 





] 



294 Roots and Branches 





University of Nebraska Press 
P.O. Box 880480 
Lincoln, Nebraska 68588-0484 
Tel: 1-800-755-1105 
Fax: 1-800-526-2617 

University of Oklahoma Press 
1005 Asp Avenue 
Norman, Oklahoma 73019-0045 
Tel: 1-800-627-7377 
Fax: 1-800-735-0476 


CD-ROM 

Products 


Bibliography of Native North Americans. Santa Barbara, CA: 
ABC-Clio 

(Published annually, this CD-ROM database is a source for journals, 
books, and film, going back 500 years. The yearly cost is $1,418.) 


Internet 

Addresses 


Book Reviews 

http:/ / www.bookwire.com/hmr/Review/htour.html 
Native American Literature Online 

http:/ / web.maxwell.syr.edu/ nativeweb/ natlit/NAlit.html 
(Books, articles, and speeches, with the possibility for downloading 
whole texts such as a recent essay by Michael Dorris, "Mixed 
Blood.") 

True Stories for American Indian Youth 
http://indy4.fdl.cc.mn.us/ ~isk/ stories/ stories.html 
(Stories by Native Indian people — many of them students — who are 
on the Internet, as well as reviews and criticism of conventional pub- 
lications.) 


Audio 
and Video 
Distributors 


The following tribal culture committees and state organizations that 
are connected with the National Endowment for the Humanities or 
the National Endowment for the Arts are examples of good resources 
for locally produced videos. 

Big Sky Radio 
247 First Avenue East 
Kalispell, MT 59901 
Tel: 406-758-5713 

(Series of taped discussions about Northwest Native writers and 
their works, including D'Arcy McNickle, James Welch, Plenty 
Coups, Pretty-shield, and Sherman Alexie) 



310 



Appendix F: Commercial Resources 



□ 

295 



Educational Filmstrips and Video 
1291 19th Street 
Huntsville TX, 77340 

GPN 

University of Nebraska-Lincoln 
P.O. Box 80669 
Lincoln, NE 68501-0669 
Tel: 1-800-228-4630 

Greenfield Review Press 
2 Middle Grove Road 
PO. Box 308 

Greenfield Center, NY 12833 
Tel: 518-583-1440 

Hawkstone Productions 
P.O. Box 7626 
Kalispell, MT 59904 

The Montana Committee for the Humanities 

P.O. Box 8036 

Hellgate Station 

Missoula, MT 59807 

Tel: 406-243-6022 

Native Voice Public Television 
VCB Room 224 
Montana State University 
Bozeman, MT 59717 
Tel: 406-994-6223 

Oyate 

2702 Mathews Street 
Berkeley, CA 94702 
Tel: 510-848-6700 
Fax: 510-848-4815 

PBS Home Video 
WMHT Public Broadcasting 
P.O. Box 17 

Schenectady, NY 12301 
Tel: 1-800-950-9648 




296 



Author 




Dorothea Susag has taught high school English in Simms, Montana, 
for fourteen years, receiving the Teacher-of-the-Year Award from her 
school district in 1990 and a Christa McAuliffe Fellowship in 1992 for 
her proposal to develop a curriculum using Native American litera- 
tures in Montana schools. For the past six years, she has worked with 
Montana public school teachers and tribal resource people from 
Montana's reservation communities, while she studied Native his- 
tory, literatures, and cultures at the University of Montana. She has 
taught an elective in Montana literature, with an emphasis on Mon- 
tana Native American literatures and writers, and adult education 
Native American literature classes. A longtime member of NCTE and 
the Montana affiliate, she has conducted numerous workshops for 
teachers, has served as a consultant to schools in regard to Native 
American literature resources, and has published several articles and 
papers. 




31.2 



297 



About the Cover 



The painting on the front cover was created and provided by Jack 
Real Bird, who belongs to the Big Lodge and Piegan clans of the 
Crow Indians in Montana. Real Bird graduated from Montana State 
University with a degree in history and art. He uses a variety of 
materials to create his art — rock, hide, and paint. He resides in White 
River, Arizona, with his wife and two sons. His artwork is intended 
to affirm that he is "still on this earth and still a Crow Indian." 

Real Bird provides the following interpretation of his painting: 
The aspen tree shows the strength of the growing cycle of the earth 
and the power of the sun and the wind. The red on the left of the tree 
symbolizes summer; fall is depicted through the colors of the leaves; 
and the light color to the right represents winter. Winter is the time to 
tell stories of the tribes ("Old Man Coyote" and other stories). The 
coyote to the left of the tree tells humans the way his people (the coy- 
otes) live on this land. The man on the right thinks about this and in 
turn tells the children, who are listening. Other symbols on the right 
are also traditional images. The green below the tree represents the 
earth. The earth takes care of all people — clothing, feeding, and nour- 
ishing. The rising sun on the left symbolizes a sacred time, the begin- 
ning of a new day. The cycle of the sun is like our lives. We can look at 
the image and look on our lives, or we can take it to represent just one 
day at a time. From observing this cycle we learn how to survive. 



ERIC 




298 



Index 



Abenaki, Gluscabi, 

trickster /transformer, 113 
Absorka (Crow), philosophies of, 
263-64 

Achimoona, anthology, 124-25 
Alaska, Native life, unrealistic and 
romanticized view in George 
book, 222 

Alexie, Sherman (Spokane /Coeur 
d'Alene) 

further reading, 193 
"Introduction to Native American 
Literature" (poem), 47-49 
The Lone Ranger and Ton to Fistfight 
in Heaven , 141-43 
Allen, Minerva (Assiniboine) 
teaching Assiniboine and Gros 
Ventre languages, 267 
voices of Fort Belknap elders, 
267-68 

writer in anthology, 127-28 
Allen, Paula Gunn (Laguna /Sioux) 
anthology editor, 125 
circle of life tribal tradition, 37 
collection of "goddess" stories, 
136-37 

definition of Native American 
literature, 36 

educational resource, 112-13 
power of genocide and cultural 
and personal loss, 27 
writer in anthology, 129-30 
Allotment Policy Period, 249 
American Indian Religious Freedom 
Act, 252 

Ancestors, presence of, recurring 
motif in Native American 
literature, 45 

Anishinabe, presses and distributors 
of materials, 288 

Anthologies, bibliography of, 124-39 
Anti-education, definition and 
source of stereotype, 257 
Appropriation Act, 249 



Armstrong, Jeannette (Okanagan), 
193-94 

Assimilation Policy Period, 248-49 
Assiniboine 

historical and traditional stories of 
elders, 268 
philosophies of, 260 
stories of respecting elders, 275 
story "Bandit the Raccoon," 23 
teaching the language, 267 
Assiniboine /Gros Ventre, presses and 
distributors of materials, 290, 291 
At home within circles 
Achimoona , anthology, 124-25 
American Indian Stories by 

Zitkala-S4 secondary level unit, 
89-96, 191-93 

as-told-to autobiographies of 
Plenty Coups and Pretty-shield, 
165-67 

as-told-to autobiography of John 
Stands in Timber, 181 
Big Crow's historical story from 
Crazy Horse clan, 143 
The Chichi Hoohoo Boogeyman by 
Sneve, 179-80 

commitment to relatives and 
community, secondary level 
unit, 53-59 

contemporary novel by Michael 
Dorris, 154 

Dakota oral literature, 152-53 
Green Grass, Running Water by 
Thomas King, 164—65 
historical novel Morning Girl , 
153-54 

Mean Spirit by Linda Hogan, 
162-64 

memoir Halfbreed by Maria 
Campbell, 148-49 
memoir of Joseph Medicine Crow, 
171 

memoir of Two Leggings (Crow), 
183-84 




314 



memoirs of boyhood by Charles 
A. Eastman, 154-55 
Mourning Dove's Coyote Stories , 
173-74 

My Name is Seepeetza by Shirley 
Sterling, 181 

N. Scott Momaday's The Way to 
Rainy Mountain , secondary level 
unit, 78-80 

poetry and short stories based in 
Navajo philosophy, 182 
poetry with insight into ways we 
die or survive, 157 
short stories by Joseph Bruchac, 
146-47 

story of Mohawk, Flint Nation by 
Joseph Bruchac, 145-46 
sub themes, 18 
theme, 15-18 

Tracks by Louise Erdrich, 158-59 
traditional Blackfeet literature by 
Percy Bullchild, 147-48 
traditional stories of Sioux, 180 
works of D'Arcy McNickle, 

169-71 

works of James Welch, 185-86 
Audio and video distributors, Native 
American literatures, 294—95 

Badger-Two Medicine area, essay 
contrasting Native and non- 
Native environmental views, 
278-79 

Baker massacre 
Fools Crow by James Welch, 87 
historical narrative of, 269 
power of genocide, 27 
Banks, Lynne Reid, The Indian in the 
Cupboard , 19, 213-17 
Benchley, Nathaniel, vanishing 

Indian stereotype in Only Earth 
and Sky Last Forever , 217-18 
Between two worlds 
Achimoona, anthology, 124-25 



Index 



American Indian Stories by Zitkala- 
S3, secondary level unit, 89-96, 
191-93 

as-told-to autobiographies of 
Plenty Coups and Pretty-shield, 
165-67 

as-told-to autobiography of John 
Stands in Timber, 181 
as-told-to autobiography of Mary 
Crow Dog, 151 

Basic Skills Caucasian Americans 
Workbook by Slapin, 179 
best-known Native playwright 
Hanay Geiogamah, 159-60 
Big Crow's historical story from 
Crazy Horse clan, 143 
biography of Indian heroes and 
chiefs, 155-57 

Black Hawk autobiography, 144 
book based on true story of John 
Tatekeya, 150-51 
The Chichi Hoohoo Boogeyman by 
Sneve, 179-80 

commitment to relatives and 
community, secondary level 
unit, 53-59 
conflicts of living, 24 
Fools Crow by James Welch, 
secondary level unit, 81-88 
Green Grass, Running Water by 
Thomas King, 164-65 
The Grass Dancer by Susan Power, 
176-77 

historical fiction with Cherokee 
themes, 149-50 

House Made of Dawn by Momaday, 
171 

introduction to Native American 
literature, secondary level unit, 
69-71 

failing of Cecelia Capture by Janet 
Campbell Hale, 160-61 
Love Medicine by Louise Erdrich, 
157-58 

Mean Spirit by Linda Hogan, 162-64 
Mean Spirit, secondary level unit, 
97-101 

memoir from diary of visit with 
Chief Joseph, 190 
memoir Halfbreed by Maria 
Campbell, 148-49 
memoir of Grayson's service in 
Confederate army, 160 
memoir of Joseph Medicine Crow, 
171 



memoir of Two Leggings (Crow), 
183-84 

memoirs of boyhood by Charles 
A. Eastman, 154-55 
Mourning Dove's Cogewea, The 
Half-Blood , 173 

My Name is Seepeetza by Shirley 
Sterling, 181 

novel of victimization in social 
service system, 151-52 
oratory of resistance and 
revolution in American 
literature, secondary level unit, 
67-68 

The Owl's Song by Janet Campbell 
Hale, 161-62 

plays Toronto at Dreamer's Rock and 
Education is Our Right, 182-83 
poetry based in Navajo 
philosophy, 182 
subthemes, 25 
theme, 23-25 

Tracks by Louise Erdrich, 158-59 
Vizenor playing trickster in Dead 
Voices: Natural Agonies in the 
New World, 184-85 
Wolf song by Louis Owens, 175-76 
works of D'Arcy McNickle, 168-71 
works of James Welch, 185-89 
world view, myth, and bias in 
America's ethnic and cultural 
roots, secondary unit, 60-66 
writings of Leslie Marmon Silko, 
177-79 

writings of Sherman Alexie, 

141-43 

Bevis, William W., literary criticism 
resource, 123 

Bias and stereotypes in literature 
about Native Americans 
Basic Skills Caucasian Americans 
Workbook , 73-74 
identifying and evidence of 
stereotypes, 75-76 
secondary level unit, 72-77 
sources of specific stereotypes, 
74-75 

Bias in America's ethnic and cultural 
roots. See World view, myth, and 
bias in America's ethnic and 
cultural roots 

Big Crow, Moses Nelson (Lakota) 
further reading, 194 
Lakota version of story in Buffalo 
Woman by Paul Goble, 223 



A Legend from Crazy Horse Clan, 143 
Bigfoot, stories about legendary, 268 
Black Elk, as-told-to autobiography, 
174 

Blackfeet 

background on reservation, 82-83 
Bullchild, Percy, telling of 
transformer and culture hero 
Napi, 1-2 

collection of Tatsey's weekly 
columns for Glacier Reporter of 
Browning, Montana, 285 
educational movement of, 282 
Fools Crow by James Welch, 
secondary level unit, 81-88 
Heart Butte School photographs 
and stories, 282-83 
historical background, 83-84 
historical narrative of, 269 
history and culture portrayal in 
warrior stories, 271 
history of Indian law and order, 

274 

introductory reading selections, 70 
language coloring book, 279 
Neil Kipp's view of precontact 
experience, 278 
philosophies of, 262 
photographic study from private 
collectors, 273 
presses and distributors of 
materials, 288, 293 
resource of traditional literature by 
Percy Bullchild, 147-48 
stories of Napi, 

trickster/transformer, 283, 286 
stories of Pikuni people by Mary 
Ground, 275 

stories reinforcing religious beliefs 
and linking known with 
unknown, 284 

story of Many Guns's life, 280 
traditional stories by Hungry 
Wolf, 277 

Blackfeet /Blood, introductory 
reading selections, 70 
Blackfeet Lodge, story of design and 
use of, 278 

Blackfeet Reservation, geographic, 
economic, historical, and 
cultural situation of, 269 
Black Hawk (Sauk), autobiography, 
144 

Black Hills, description of Dakota 
Indians' home, 270 




300 



Index 



Boarding schools, Hogan's Mean 
Spirit, secondary level unit, 
97-101 

Bonnin, Gertrude Simmons. See 
Zitkala-SS (Yankton Sioux) 
Borland, Hal 

Native-authored books for 
comparison, 219 

When the Legends Die novel, 218-19 
Bowker, Ardy (Eastern Cherokee) 
historical and cultural resource, 109 
Sisters in the Blood, on impact of 
stereotypes on Native American 
women, 32 

Bradford, William, "Of Plymouth 
Plantation" in secondary level 
unit, 62 

Brant, Beth (Mohawk) 
anthology editor, 137 
essays in educational resource, 
118-19 

"Grandmothers of a New World" 
in secondary level unit, 63 
Brass, Eleanor (Cree), stories 

including trickster/ transformer 
Wesaketchuk, 144-45 
Bruchac, James (Abenaki), and Lee 
Francis (Laguna Pueblo), 
educational resource, 115-16 
Bruchac, Joseph (Abenaki) 
writer in anthology, 129-30 
anthology editor, 125-26 
collection of emerging Native 
writers, 138 

essays in educational resource, 
118-19 

further reading, 195-96 
historical and cultural resource, 109 
Native American Stories, 

remembering old ways, 10-11 
Native North American Literature, 7 
rites of passage stories, 137 
story of Mohawk, Flint Nation, 

145- 46 

Turtle Meat and Other Stories, 

146- 47 

Bruchac, Joseph (Abenaki), and 
Gayle Ross (Cherokee), stories 
with female protagonists, 138 
Bruchac, Joseph (Abenaki), and 
Michael Caduto, educational 
resource, 113-14 
Bullchild, Percy (Blackfeet) 

Blackfeet transformer and culture 
hero Napi, 1-2 



resource of traditional Blackfeet 
literature, 147-48 
Bull Lodge, visions of, as told by 
daughter, 275 

Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), 2 
relocation and mainstreaming 
Indians, 250-51 

Caduto, Michael 

map from Keepers of the Earth, 
240-41 

musical companion for 
educational resource, 119 
Caduto, Michael, and Joseph 
Bruchac (Abenaki) 
educational resource, 113-14 
Keepers series, 119-20 
Campbell, Maria (Metis) 
further reading, 196-97 
memoir Halfbreed, bestseller in 
Canada, 148-49 

Carl D. Perkins Vocational Education 
Act, 252 
Carter, Forrest 

autobiography of orphan in The 
Education of Little Tree, 219-21 
controversy due to social and 
ethnic heritage of Carter, 219-20 
The Education of Little Tree betraying 
non-Native voice, 20-21 
former Ku Klux Klan member, 21 
stereotypes, 220-21 
CD-ROM products. Native 
American literatures, 294 
Champagne, Duane 

Chronology of Native North 
American History editor, 246 
historical and cultural resource, 
102-3 

Change and growth 

Achimoona, anthology, 124-25 
American Indian Stories by 

Zitkala-SS (Gertrude Simmons 
Bonnin), 191-93 

ceremonies and rites of passage, 222 
The Chichi Hoohoo Boogeyman by 
Sneve, 179-80 

commitment to relatives and 
community, secondary level 
unit, 53-59 

Dakota oral literature, 153 
The Grass Dancer by Susan Power, 
176-77 

historical fiction with Cherokee 
themes, 149-50 



historical novel Morning Girl, 
153-54 

memoir Halfbreed by Maria 
Campbell, 148-49 
memoir of Two Leggings (Crow), 
183-84 

poetry with insight into ways we 
die or survive, 157 
story of Mohawk, Flint Nation by 
Joseph Bruchac, 145-46 
subthemes, 22-23 
theme, 18-22 

traditional Blackfeet literature by 
Percy Bullchild, 147-48 
traditional stories of Sioux, 180 
works of D'Arcy McNickle, 169 
Charbonneau, Eileen (Cherokee) 
further reading, 197 
historical fiction In the Time of the 
Wolves, 149-50 

Char-Koosta, Salish /Kootenai tribal 
newspaper, traditional and 
historical stories of 
Confederated Tribes, 281 
Charlo, Victor (Bitterroot Salish), 
writer in anthology, 128-29 
Charlo. See Chief Charlo 
(Salish /Kootenai) 

Chavis, Donna (Lumbee), quote 
from Women of the Native 
Struggle: Portraits and Testimony 
of Native American Women, 12 
Cherokee, Creek, Chickasaw, 

Choctaw, and Seminole, presses 
and distributors of materials, 
289 

Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, 247 
Cheyenne. See also Northern 

Cheyenne, Southern Cheyenne 
memoir blending culture and 
affect of programs /events on 
people, 286 

philosophies of Northern, 265-66 
traditional stories, 270 
trickster /transformer Ve'Ho, 285 
various works by Henry Tall Bull 
(Cheyenne) and Tom Weist, 
284-85 

Cheyenne Reservation, geographic, 
economic, historical, and 
cultural situation of, 269 
The Chichi Hoohoo Boogeyman, 
boogeyman. Crow chedah, 
Sioux chichi spirit, and Hopi 
hoohoo, 179-80 



er|c 



31G 



Index 



] 



301 



Chief Bald Eagle, book with legends 
of, 269 

Chief Charlo (Salish/Kootenai) 
background and story of, 275 
Holmes's version of James 

Garfield's diary of negotiations 
with, 276 

removal from Bitterroot Valley, 276 
sketches of Flathead history and 
tribe by Adolf Hungry Wolf, 277 
Chief Dull Knife, Cheyenne's flight 
from Oklahoma Indian 
Territory, 235 
Chief Joseph (Nez Perce) 
autobiography, 270 
biography by Kate Jassem, 227 
biography of Indian heroes and 
chiefs, 155-57 

romanticized account in Soun 
Tetoken's adoption by brother 
of, 236 

Chief Plenty Coups 
as-told-to autobiography of, 165-67 
relationships and experiences in 
life of, 275 

Chief Seattle. See also Chieftains, 
famous speeches by 
speech basis of book by Susan 
Jeffers, 227-29 

Chieftains, famous speeches by, 
134-35 
Children 

definition and source of 
stereotype, 256-57 
locating identities in literature, 5-6 
sacred nature of, recurring motif 
in Native American literature, 
45-46 

Chippewa, presses and distributors 
of materials, 291, 292 
Chronology of Native North American 
History , excellent historical 
resource, 246 

Circles in life, 15. See also At home 
within circles 
Civil Service Act, 249 
Clark, Ella, stories of guardian spirit 
quests and creation, 271 
Classification of genres. See Genre, 
classification of 

Coastal Salish, Metis, Okanagan, and 
others, presses and distributors 
of materials, 293 

Cochran, Jo Whitehorse (Lakota), 
writer in anthology, 129 



Comes at Night, George 

(Blackfeet/Flathead), history 
and culture portrayal in warrior 
stories, 271 

Commercial resources of Native 
American literatures 
audio and video distributors, 
294-95 

CD-ROM products, 294 
Internet addresses, 294 
presses and distributors, 288-94 
Commitment to relatives and 
community 

"Perma Red" by Debra Earling, 
57-58 

Runner in the Sun by D'Arcy 
McNickle, 55 

secondary level unit, 53-59 
unit goals, 53 

video The Lakota: One Nation on the 
Plains , 55 

Waterlily by Ella Deloria, 56-57 
Community. See Commitment to 
relatives and community 
Conflicts and differences. See 
Between two worlds 
Conley, Robert (Cherokee), further 
reading, 197 

Cook-Lynn, Elizabeth (Crow Creek 
Sioux) 

book based on true story of John 
Tatekeya, 150-51 
further reading, 197-98 
writer in anthology, 129-30 
Coyote 

Salish creation tales, 280 
stories by Mourning Dove, 

173-74 

stories for young readers, 283 
Coyote and Owl, variations of basic 
tale, 270 

Craven, Margaret, conflicts of Native 
people in "white world" in I 
Heard the Owl Call My Name , 
221-22 

Crazy Horse (Sioux) 

Big Crow's historical story from 
Crazy Horse clan, 143 
biography of Indian heroes and 
chiefs, 155-57 

oratory attributed to, 134-35 
Creation and environmental stories, 
113-14 

Creative writing for Native 
American students, 114-15 



Cree 

presses and distributors of 
materials, 292 

stories to teach language, 269 
stories with customs and 

traditions of Chippewa /Cree 
people, 272 

story of struggle for reservation 
land in Montana, 272 
traditional story of trickster/ 
transformer Wisahkecahk, 140 
Crow 

alphabet and pronunciation guide, 
281 

bilingual program, 271 
comprehensive history of Crow 
nation, 281 

insights through eyes of Thomas 
Yellowtail, 273 

introductory reading selections, 70 
philosophies of, 263-64 
photographic record of 
celebration, 271 
presses and distributors of 
materials, 289 

stories reflecting Crow values in 
Prairie Legends , 273 
Crow and Hidatsa people, cultural 
review of, 271 

Crow Dog, Mary (Lakota) and 
Richard Erdoes, as-told-to 
autobiography, 151 
Crow Reservation, geographic, 
economic, historical, and 
cultural situation of, 269 
Culleton, Beatrice (Metis) 
further reading, 198 
In Search of April Raintree, 151-52 
Cultural and personal loss and 
survival 

American Indian Stories by Zitkala- 
S3, secondary level unit, 89-96, 
191-93 

as-told-to autobiography of Black 
Elk, 174 

as-told-to autobiography of John 
Stands in Timber, 181 
as-told-to autobiography of Mary 
Crow Dog, 151 
as-told-to autobiography of 
Pretty-shield, 166-67 
at the helm of twilight by Anita 
Endrezze, 157 

best-known Native playwright 
Hanay Geiogamah, 159-60 




317 



[ 



] 



302 



Index 



Cultural and personal loss and 
survival (continued) 
biography of Indian heroes and 
chiefs, 155-57 

Black Hawk autobiography, 144 
book based on true story of John 
Tate key a, 150-51 
Dakota oral literature, 153 
Fools Crow by James Welch, 
secondary level unit, 81-88 
Green Grass, Running Water by 
Thomas King, 164-65 
The Grass Dancer by Susan Power, 
176-77 

interpreted memoir of Wooden 
Leg, 167-68 

introduction to Native American 
literature, secondary level unit, 
69-71 

Jailing of Cecelia Capture by Janet 
Campbell Hale, 160-61 
Love Medicine by Louise Erdrich, 
157-58 

Mean Spirit by Linda Hogan, 
162-64 

Mean Spirit, secondary level unit, 
97-101 

memoir Halfbreed by Maria 
Campbell, 148-49 
memoir of Grayson's service in 
Confederate army, 160 
memoirs of boyhood by Charles 
A. Eastman, 154-55 
My Name is Seepeetza by Shirley 
Sterling, 181 

novel of victimization in social 
service system, 151-52 
oratory of resistance and revolu- 
tion in American literature, 
secondary level unit, 67-68 
Owens's novels The Sharpest Sight 
and Wolfsong , 175-76 
The Owl's Song by Janet Campbell 
Hale, 161-62 

plays Toronto at Dreamer's Rock 
and Education is Our Right, 
182-83 

poetry based in Navajo 
philosophy, 182 

poetry In Mad Love and War by Joy 
Harjo, 162 

stories by Joseph Bruchac, 146-47 
subthemes, 29-30 
theme, 25-29 

Tracks by Louise Erdrich, 158-59 



Vizenor playing trickster in Dead 
Voices: Natural Agonies in the 
New World, 184-85 
The Way to Rainy Mountain by 
Momaday, 172 

works of D'Arcy McNickle, 168-71 
works of James Welch, 185-89 
writings of Leslie Marmon Silko, 
177-79 

writings of Sherman Alexie, 

141-43 

Cultural development inferior, 
definition and source of 
stereotype, 256 
Cultural resources, 102-12 
Custer, George Armstrong 

historical narrative Killing Custer 
by James Welch with Paul 
Stekler, 27, 188-S9 
myths of, 27 

Dakota-English dictionary, 283, 286 
Dakota Indians 
description of Black Hills, 270 
introductory reading selections, 
70-71 

presses and distributors of 
materials, 288, 290 
Dakota Oyate (Sioux), philosophies 
of, 261 

Dawes Act, 248-49 
Deloria, Ella Cara (Yankton Sioux) 
Dakota Texts and Waterlily, 152-53 
Water lily comparable to Buffalo 
Woman by Johnson, 229 
Waterlily in secondary level unit, 
56-57 

Deloria, Vine (Sioux), historical and 
cultural resource, 109 
Denny, Walter A. (Chippewa /Cree), 
stories with customs and 
traditions of Chippewa / Cree 
people, 272 

Dictionary, Dakota-English, 283, 286 
Discrimination, education affecting 
people of Native heritage, 5 
Distributors and presses. Native 
American literatures, 288-94 
Divorce, fragmentation, loneliness, 
and alienation, 12 
Dorris, Michael (Modoc) 
historical novel Morning Girl, 
153-54 

memoir of son suffering from fetal 
alcohol syndrome, 198 



Morning Girl in contrast to 
Thomasma's books, 20 
A Yellow Raft in Blue Water, 154 
on stereotypes, 32 
Dreams, reality and power of, 
recurring motif in Native 
American literature, 44-45 
Dull Knife (Cheyenne hero), 

biography of Indian heroes and 
chiefs, 155-57 

Eagle Walking Turtle [Gary McClain] 
(Choctaw), historical and 
cultural resource, 110 
Earling, Debra (Salish) 

"Perm a Red" in secondary level 
unit, 57-58 

writer in anthology, 127-28, 129 
Eastman, Charles A. (Santee Sioux) 
Indian Boyhood, 154-55 
Indian Heroes and Great Chieftains, 
155-57 

Old Indian Days, 154-55 
Education, Native idea of power, 
38-39 

Educational resources, 112-21 
Elders, importance of, recurring 
motif in Native American 
literature, 45-46 
Endrezze, Anita (Yaqui) 
at the helm of twilight, 157 
"The Girl Who Loved the Sky," 
28-29 

writer in anthology, 129-30 
Environmental and creation stories, 
113-14 

Erdrich, Louise (Chippewa) 

Love Medicine, 157-58 
Tracks, 158-59 

Ethnocentrism, attitude regarding 
own culture, 30 

European literatures. See Native and 
Western European literatures 
Extermination policy, Cheyenne 
Autumn by Mari Sandoz, 235 

Feather Earring, TumsBack, Old 
Coyote, and Lela M. Puffer 
(Crow), stories reflecting Crow 
values, 273 

Federal Acknowledgment Program, 
252 

Federal Indian policy 
brief history of, 247-52 
Indian removal, 103-4 




3 13 



Index 



] 



Fedullo, Mick 

educational resource, 114-15 
historical and cultural resource, 110 
Fetterman Fight, resource of conflict 
between Plains Indians and U.S. 
expansionism, 222-23 
Fixico, Donald, historical and 
cultural resource, 103 
Flathead Culture Committee (Salish) 
book introducing history and 
culture, 273 
philosophies of, 264 
Flathead Indians 

article calling for heritage 
preservation, 287 
songs and dances of, 280 
ten animal tales of, 286 
Flathead Reservation 
book of anthropological 

information about tribes on, 280 
guide for course at 
Salish/ Kootenai College, 276 
Foreman, Grant, historical and 
cultural resource, 103-4 
Fort Belknap Reservation 

(Assiniboine/Gros Ventre) 
geographic, economic, historical, 
and cultural situation of, 269 
philosophies of, 260 
recollections of Gros Ventre and 
Assiniboine tribal elders, 282 
Fort Peck Community College, 

Gathering , literary magazine by 
students, 274 

Fort Peck Indian Reservation 
(Assiniboine /Sioux) 
geographic, economic, historical, 
and cultural situation of, 269 
newspaper of Assiniboine /Sioux 
people, 287 
philosophies of, 261 
Fourteenth Amendment, 248 
Francis, Lee (Laguna Pueblo), and 
James Bruchac (Abedaki), 
educational resource, 115-16 
Fraser, Frances, tales about Napi, 
Blackfoot trickster/ transformer, 
159 

Gathering , literary magazine by Fort 
Peck Community College 
students, 274 

Geiogamah, Hanay (Kiowa), best- 

known Native playwright, 159-60 
General Allotment Act, 248-49 



Genocide, power of, and cultural 
and personal loss, 27 
Genre, classification of 

traditional Native American cycle 
of trickster /transformer or 
culture hero, 41—42 
Western European terms 
meaningless, 41 

Geographical locations. See Maps 
George, Jean Craighead, unrealistic 
and romanticized view of 
Native life in Alaska in Julie of 
the Wolves , 222 

Geronimo (Apache), memoir, 199 
Gingras, Louis (Kootenai), Coyote and 
Kootenai and Growing Up Indian , 
274 

Gladstone, Jack (Blackfeet), original 
songs based on traditional 
Native stories, 274 
Goble, Paul 

Brave Eagle's Account of the 
Fetterman Fight , 222-23 
Buffalo Woman (traditional story), 
223 

Death of the Iron Horse , 223-24 
Gone, Fred P (Lakota/Gros Ventre), 
visions of Bull Lodge as told by 
daughter, 275 

Government policies, acts and 
programs, 247-52 
Grayson, Chief H. G. (Creek), 
memoir of service in 
Confederate army, 160 
Green, Rayna 

"Pocahontas Perplex: The Image 
of Indian Women in American 
Culture" in secondary level 
unit, 63 

writer in anthology, 129-30 
Gros Ventre 

philosophies of, 260 
presses and distributors of 
materials, 290, 291 
stories from oldest women of tribe 
by Flannery, 273 

stories of days following buffalo, 
286 

Ground, Mary (Blackfeet) 
biography of, 274 
stories of Pikuni people, 275 
Growth and change. See Change and 
growth 

Guardian spirit quests, stories of 
seven individuals, 271 




,319 



303 



Hale, Janet Campbell (Coeur 
d'Alene) 

further reading, 200 
Jailing of Cecelia Capture , 160-61 
novels, 160-62 
writer in anthology, 128 
Harjo, Joy (Muskogee Creek) 

In Mad Love and War, 162 
"Remember" (poem), 13 
writer in anthology, 129-30 
Hatheway, Flora (Crow), stories of 
Chief Plenty Coups, Old Man 
Coyote, and Crow people, 
275-76 

Heart Butte School, photographs and 
stories told by Blackfeet elders, 
282-83 

Heathen, definition and source of 
stereotype, 254 

Henson, Lance (Southern Cheyenne) 
further reading, 201 
"we are a people" (poem), 17-18 
Hero, definition of, 42—43 
Hidatsa and Crow peoples, cultural 
review of, 271 
Highwater, Jamake 
controversy over identity, 225-26 
Anpao, mythological story of 
young man's travels for sake of 
beautiful girl, 224-26 
Highway, Thompson (Cree), The Rez 
Sisters , 201 

Hirschfelder, Arlene B., and Beverly 
Singer, anthology editors, 

126-27 

Historical resources, 102-12 
Chronology of Native North 
American History, 246 
History of federal Indian policy, 
247-52 

Hogan, Linda (Chickasaw) 
assumptions about universe in 
Mean Spirit, 37 
Mean Spirit, 162-64 
Mean Spirit, secondary level unit, 
97-101 

symbol examples in Mean Spirit, 
39-40 

writer in anthology, 129-30 
Hole-in-the-Day (Ojibway), 

biography of Indian heroes and 
chiefs, 155-57 

Home. See At home within circles 
Hoover, Herbert T., historical and 
cultural resource, 104 



304 



[ 



Index 



Howard, Helen Addison 
removal of Chief Charlo 
(Salish/ Kootenai), 276 
story of Indian agent Peter Ronan 
and Sam Walking Coyote, 277 
Hoxie, Frederick E., historical and 
cultural resource, 104 
Hudson, Jan, Szveetgrass with 
stereotypes demeaning and 
inaccurate, 226-27 
Humor and play, importance of, 
recurring motif in Native 
American literature, 46 
Hungry Wolf, Adolf, traditional 

Blackfeet stories and photos, 277 
Hungry Wolf, Adolf, and Beverly 
Hungry Wolf (Blackfeet), 
collection of stories by and 
about Indian children growing 
up in early 1900s, 277 
Hungry Wolf, Adolf, and Star 
Hungry Wolf (Blackfeet), 
photographs of Native children 
from Plateau, Plains, and Pueblo 
peoples, 277 

Iktomi, Dakota trickster/ transformer 
culture hero, 152, 192-93 
Imaginative writing for Native 
American students, 114-15 
Indian Citizenship Act, 249 
Indian communities, maps of, 242-43 
Indian existence, McLuhan's reliance 
on voices of the people, 232 
Indian Land Consolidation Act, 252 
Indian policy, brief history of federal, 
247-52 

Indian Removal Act, 247 
Indian Reorganization Act, 250 
Indian reservations, state and 
federally recognized, 239, 

244-45 

Indian Self-Determination and 
Education Act, 251 
consequences of, 251-52 
Indian storytelling, purposes of, 40-41 
Indian tales, Northern Plains and 
Northern Rockies tribes, 282 
Indian Trade and Intercourse Act, 

247 

Indian unity, keynote address 
regarding need for, 284 
Inferior cultural and intellectual 
development, definition and 
source of stereotype, 256 



Internet addresses. Native American 
literatures, 294 

Intoxication of Indian Country Act, 
249 

Inuit story, "Sedna, the Woman 
Under the Sea," 114 
Iroquois culture, portrayal in The 
Indian in the Cupboard , 19 

Jassem, Kate, biography of Chief 
Joseph (Nez Perce), 227 
Jeffers, Susan, Brother Eagle , Sister 
Sky , based on speech by Chief 
Seattle, 227-29 

Jefferson, Thomas, policies and effect 
on Indians, 106 
"Jefferson policy," 247 
Jennings, Francis 

historical and cultural resource, 105 
The Invasion of America: Indians , 
Colonialism , and the Cant of 
Conquest (historical resource), 
234 

Johnson, Dorothy M., fictional 
account of Oglala Sioux 
woman's life in Buffalo Woman , 
229 

Johnson-O'Malley Act, 250 
Johnston, Basil H. (Ojibway), Indian 
School Days and Ojibivay Tales , 
202 

Kalispel people, history of, 269 
King, Thomas (Cherokee) 

A Coyote Columbus Story and 
Medicine River , 203 
Green Grass , Running Water , 164-65 
Kipp, Woody (Blackfeet), essay 
contrasting Native and non- 
Native environmental views, 
278-79 

Kittredge, William, and Annick 

Smith, anthology editors, 127-28 
Kootenai 

Louie Gingras's books Coyote and 
Kootenai and Growing Up Indian , 
274 

philosophies of, 264 
traditional story, 279 
Kutenai, stories in, language, 269 

LaDuke, Winona (Mississippi Band 
Anishinabe), old ways for 
harmony and balance in 
creation, 12-13 



LaFarge, Oliver, Laughing Boy 
(historical fiction), 230 
LaFlesche, Francis (Omaha), memoir 
of "Sacred Child" in ceremonial 
rituals, 203 

Lakota creation story, 113 
Lakota, Ojibway /Chippewa, and 
Winnebago, presses and 
distributors of materials, 291 
Lakota cosmology, classification of, 
93-94 

Lemer, Andrea, anthology editor, 
128-29 
Lesley, Craig 
anthology editor, 129-30 
River Song, historical and personal 
conflicts as result of encroach- 
ment on Yakima lands, 230-31 
Lessons and values, traditional, 
13-14 

LeSueur, Meridel, Sparrow Hawk, 231 
Lifeways and stereotypes 
Basic Skills Caucasian Americans 
Workbook by Slapin, 179 
The Chichi Hoohoo Boogeyman by 
Sneve, 179-80 

The Grass Dancer by Susan Power, 
176-77 

memoir from diary of visit with 
Chief Joseph, 190 
memoir of Joseph Medicine Crow, 
171 

Mourning Dove's Cogewea, The 
Half-Blood, 173 

secondary level unit theme, 72-77 
theme, 30-33 

Wolf song by Louis Owens, 175-76 
works of D'Arcy McNickle, 170-71 
works of James Welch, 188-89 
world view, myth, and bias in 
America's ethnic and cultural 
roots, secondary unit, 60-66 
Lincoln, Kenneth, literary criticism 
resource, 123 
Linderman, Frank B. 

as-told-to autobiographies of Plenty 
Coups and Pretty-shield, 165-67 
story to educate children, 38-39 
Literary criticism resources, 121-23 
Literary purposes, Indian 
storytelling, 40-41 
Little Bighorn, Battle of 
historical narrative Killing Custer 
by James Welch with Paul 
Stekler, 188-89 



Index 



[ 



] 



305 



narrative of battle by Kammen et 
al, 278 

Littlebird, Harold (Laguna Pueblo), 
"A Circle Begins" (poem), 17 
Littlebird, Larry, writer in anthology, 
133-34 

Little Wolf, biography of Indian 
heroes and chiefs, 157 
Long Standing Bear Chief 

Blackfoot values for children to 
know, understand, and respect, 
279 

first edition of Spirit Talk , quarterly 
magazine by, 283 
Loss, cultural and personal, and 
survival. See Cultural and 
personal loss and survival 
Loss and survival, themes in Native 
American literatures, 46-49 

McLuhan, T. C, reliance on voices of 
the people, 232 
McNickle, D'Arcy (Salish) 

The Hawk is Hungry and Other 
Stories , 168-69 

historical and cultural resource, 
105 

importance of Coyote to Salish 
people, 42 

Indian Man (biography of Oliver 
LaFarge), 230 

Runner in the Sun: A Story of Indian 
Maize, 169 

Runner in the Sun in secondary 
unit, 55 

The Surrounded (first novel), 

169-70 

Wind from an Enemy (historical 
novel), 170-71 
writer in anthology, 127-28 
Major Crimes Act, 248 
Many Guns, Tom (Blackfeet), rich 
heritage through story of, 280 
Maps 

cultural areas and tribal locations 
of 1600, 240-41 

state and federally recognized 
reservations, 244-45 
tribes, 242^3 
Marias Massacre 

Fools Crow by James Welch, 86 
power of genocide, 27 
Marquis, Thomas (interpreter), 

interpreted memoir of Wooden 
Leg, 167-68 



Marriott, Alice, and Carol K. Rachlin, 
non-Native editors of Plains 
Indian Mythology, 231-32 
Mathews, John Joseph (Osage), 
stories of Osage people, 204 
Medicine Crow, Joseph (Crow) 
memoir, 171 
tribal historian and 
anthropologist, 280 
"Melting pot" society, forcing 
assimilation, 24 

Memory, importance of, recurring 
motif in Native American 
literature, 45 
Miriam Report, 249 
Mohawk, Flint Nation, story by 
Joseph Bruchac, 145-46 
Momaday, N. Scott (Kiowa) 
further reading, 205 
House Made of Dawn, 171 
"Name" poem, 126 
relevance of storyteller and his art, 
11 

Tosamah, trickster of House Made 
of Dawn, 42 

The Way to Rainy Mountain, 172 
The Way to Rainy Mountain, 
secondary level unit, 78-80 
writer in anthology, 129-30 
Montana Indian Reservations, 
geographic, economic, 
historical, and cultural situation 
of, 269 

Montana tribal cultures, 

philosophies from, 259-66 
Motifs, recurring 
everyone and everything is 
related, 44 

importance of play and humor, 46 
reality and power of dreams, 44-45 
real presence of ancestors and 
importance of memory, 45 
sacred nature of children and 
importance of elders, 45—16 
Mourning Dove 

(Okanagan/Colville) 
autobiography of, 205 
Cogewea, The Half-Blood and Coyote 
Stories, 173-74 

response to reading A Salishan 
Autobiography, 5 
Myth in America's ethnic and 

cultural roots. See World view, 
myth, and bias in America's 
ethnic and cultural roots 



Nabokov, Peter, anthology editor, 
130-31 

Nanapush, Ojibway trickster/ 
transformer figure, 158-59 

Napi 

audiocassette of seven stories, 286 
Blackfeet trickster/ transformer 
and culture hero, 1-2 

Nardo, Don, attempting to 

contradict stereotypes in The 
Indian Wars, 232-33 

"Native American" and "Indian," 
terminology, 8-9 

Native American Languages Act, 

252 

Native American literatures. See also 
Commercial resources of Native 
American literatures 
children locating identities, 5-6 
contemporary writers' definitions 
of, 47 

definition of, 36 
establishing individual and 
unique identities, 6-7 
heroes of, 42^3 
non-Native authors reinforcing 
negative stereotypes, 19-22 
philosophy, scope, and challenge, 
7-9 

secondary level unit, 69-71 
video in secondary level unit, 63 
why teach, 3-7 

The Native Americans video series, 
historical and cultural resource, 
105-6 

Native American writers 

incorporation of trickster and 
range of behaviors, 42 
refusing to accept image of 
"Indian as artifact," 29 
stories reflecting impact of 
common histories on past and 
present, 28 

Native and Western European 
literatures 

classification of genres, 41—12 
cultural and literary elements, 

37 - 19 

definition and practice of power, 

38- 39 

definition of "hero," 42^3 
literary purposes, 40—11 
meaning and function of symbol, 

39- 10 

organizational patterns, 43-44 




3 21 



306 



c 



Index 



Native and Western European 
literatures ( continued ) 
recurring motives in Native 
American Literature, 44-46 
themes of loss and survival, 46-49 
underlying assumptions about 
universe, 37-38 

Native North Americans, cultural 
areas and tribal locations of 
1600, 240-41 

Native stories, traditional 

importance of family and home, 

15-16 

intimate interdependency between 
humans and nature, 16-17 
Navajo 

poetry and short stories based in 
Navajo philosophy, 182 
presses and distributors of 
materials, 292 

Neihardt, John G., as-told-to 
autobiography of Black Elk, 

174 

Nez Perce (Chief Joseph), biography 
of Indian heroes and chiefs, 
155-57 

Niatum, Duane (Klallam), anthology, 
131 

Noble savage, definition and source 
of stereotype, 253 
Nomadic, definition and source of 
stereotype, 255-56 
Non-Native authors, 213-37 
Non-Native readers, outsiders, 41 
Northern Cheyenne 
book on impact of strip mining on 
reservation, 268 
philosophies of, 265-66 
presses and distributors of 
materials, 289, 293 
Northwest tribal, presses and 
distributors of materials, 289 

O'Dell, Scott, perpetuating vanishing 
Indian stereotype in Island of the 
Blue Dolphins , 233-34 
Oglala Sioux medicine man, as-told- 
to autobiography, 174 
Ojibway 

presses and distributors of 
materials, 291, 292 
trickster /transformer figure story 
by Martinson, 280 
Old Man Coyote, Crow legends by 
Flora Hatheway, 275 



Old ways. See also Remembering the 
old ways 

restoring harmony and balance 
within creation, 12-13 
Oliver, Eileen Iscoff, Crossing the 
Mainstream: Multicultural 
Perspectives in Teaching Literature, 
6 

Oral tradition, transmitting culture, 
values, and teaching, 12 
Oratory of resistance and revolution 
in American literature, 
secondary level unit, 67-68 
Organizational patterns, of Indian 
oral and written literatures, 
43-44 

Ortiz, Simon J. (Acoma Pueblo), 
history of European contact 
from 1492 to present, 205-6 
Osage, history from 1500-1970, 
98-100 

Owens, Louis (Choctaw /Cherokee) 
literary criticism resource, 121-22 
novels The Sharpest Sight and 
Wolfsong, 175-76 
Owls, communicator of death to 
loved ones in Cree and Salish 
traditions, 222 

Pablo-Allard buffalo herd 
story by John Kidder, 278 
story of establishment of by 
Howard, 277 

Parent Consent for Education Act, 
249 

Peace Commission Act, 247 
Petroglyphs, limiting teaching of 
Native American to study of, 

11 

Pikuni (Blackfeet) 
philosophies of, 262 
stories by Mary Ground, 275 
Plains Indians, mythology by non- 
Native editors, 231-32 
Plains nations, presses and 

distributors of materials, 288 
Plains Native American Literature, 
educational resource, 117-18 
Play and humor, importance of, 
recurring motif in Native 
American literature, 46 
Plenty, Len (Crow), "The Bighorn 
River" (poem), 16-17 
Plenty Coups, Chief. See Chief Plenty 
Coups 



Poetry 

at the helm oftzvilight, Anita 
Endrezze, 157 

"The Bighorn River," Len Plenty, 

16- 17 

A Breeze Swept Through, Luci 
Tapahonso, 182 
"A Circle Begins," Harold 
Littlebird, 17 

Dancing on the Rim of the World: 
Anthology of Northwest Native 
American Writing, 128 
"The Girl Who Loved the Sky," 
Anita Endrezze, 28-29 
Harper's Anthology of 20th Century 
Native American Poetry, 131 
In Mad Love and War, Joy Harjo, 
162 

"Introduction to Native American 
Literature," Sherman Alexie, 
47-49 

"My Family," Delia Spotted Bear, 
16 

Native American Literature: A Brief 
Introduction and Anthology, 135 
"Remember," Joy Harjo, 13 
Rising Voices : Writings of Young 
Native Americans, 126-27 
Saanii Dahataal: The Women Are 
Singing, Luci Tapahonso, 182 
secondary level activity, 58-59 
Seven Hands, Seven Hearts, 
Elizabeth Woody, 190 
Songs from this Earth on Turtle's 
Back (anthology), 28-29, 125 
Storyteller, Leslie Marmon Silko, 
178 

Summer in the Spring, Gerald 
Vizenor, 210 

"Sure You Can Ask Me a Personal 
Question," Diane Bums, 32-33 
"we are a people," Lance Henson, 

17- 18 

Porter, Frank W., historical and 
cultural resource, 104 
Pourir, Olivia (Lakota), quote from 
Women of the Native Struggle: 
Portraits and Testimony of Native 
American Women, 11 
Power 

definition and practice of, 38-39 
Native versus Western European, 
38 

Power, Susan (Sioux), The Grass 
Dancer, 176-77 



Index 



[ 



307 



Prejudice and discrimination, story 
"Bandit the Raccoon," 23 
Presses and distributors. Native 
American literatures, 288-94 
Pretty Eagle School, poetry by 
students of, 278 

Princess or squaw, definition and 
source of stereotype, 255 
Pushmataha, famous speeches by, 
134-35 

Rapada, Kimberly Kai, importance 
of personal, familial, and 
cultural pride, 22 
Redskin, definition and source of 
stereotype, 255 
Relationship of everyone and 

everything, recurring motif in 
Native American literature, 

44 

Relatives. See Commitment to 
relatives and community 
Relocation and termination, 

consequences for Indian people, 
250-51 

Remembering the old ways 
Achimoona, anthology, 124-25 
American Indian Stories by 

Zitkala-S4 secondary level unit, 
89-96, 191-93 

as-told-to autobiographies of 
Plenty Coups and Pretty-shield, 
165-67 

as-told-to autobiography of Black 
Elk, 174 

as-told-to autobiography of John 
Stands in Timber, 181 
Big Crow's historical story from 
Crazy Horse clan, 143 
biography of Indian heroes and 
chiefs, 155-57 

The Chichi Hoohoo Boogeyman by 
Sneve, 179-80 

commitment to relatives and 
community, secondary level 
unit, 53-59 

Cree trickster/ transformer 
Wesaketchuk, 1 44 - 4 5 
Dakota oral literature, 152-53 
Fools Crow by James Welch, 
secondary level unit, 81-88 
Green Grass , Running Water by 
Thomas King, 164-65 
The Grass Dancer by Susan Power, 
176-77 







historical fiction with Cherokee 
themes, 149-50 
historical novel Morning Girl , 
153-54 

Hogan's Mean Spirit , secondary 
level unit, 97-101 
House Made of Dawn by Momaday, 
171 

interpreted memoir of Wooden 
Leg, 167-68 

introduction to Native American 
literature, secondary level unit, 
69-71 

Love Medicine by Louise Erdrich, 
157-58 

memoir from diary of visit with 
Chief Joseph, 190 
memoir Halfbreed by Maria 
Campbell, 148-49 
memoir of Two Leggings (Crow), 
183-84 

memoirs of boyhood by Charles 
A. Eastman, 154-55 
Mourning Dove's Cogewea, The 
Half-Blood and Coyote Stories , 
173-74 

Owens's novels The Sharpest Sight 
and Wolfsong, 175-76 
The Owl's Song by Janet Campbell 
Hale, 161-62 

plays Toronto at Dreamer's Rock and 
Education is Our Right , 182-83 
poetry and short stories based in 
Navajo philosophy, 182 
short stories by Joseph Bruchac, 
146-47 

story of Mohawk, Flint Nation by 
Joseph Bruchac, 145-46 
subthemes, 15 
tales about Napi, Blackfoot 
trickster/ transformer, 159 
theme, 10-14 

Tracks by Louise Erdrich, 158-59 
traditional Blackfeet literature by 
Percy Bullchild, 147-48 
traditional Cree story, 140 
traditional stories of Sioux, 180 
Vizenor playing trickster in Dead 
Voices: Natural Agonies in the 
New World , 184-85 
The Way to Rainy Mountain by 
Momaday, 172 
The Way to Rainy Mountain, 
secondary level unit, 78-80 
works of D'Arcy McNickle, 169-70 



works of James Welch, 185-87 
world view, myth, and bias in 
America's ethnic and cultural 
roots, secondary unit, 60-66 
writings of Sherman Alexie, 

141-43 

Reservation Policy Period, 248 
Reservations, state and federally 
recognized, 239, 2 44 - 4 5 
Resistance in American literature. 

See Oratory of resistance and 
revolution in American 
literature 

Resources. See Teacher resources 
"Returning the Gift," July 1992 
conference, 115-16 
Revolution in American literature. 
See Oratory of resistance and 
revolution in American 
literature 

Richter, Conrad, historical 

inaccuracy and stereotypes in 
The Light in the Forest , 234 
Riley, Patricia (Cherokee), anthology 
editor, 131-32 

Rocky Boy (Chippewa /Cree) 
Reservation, geographic, 
economic, historical, and 
cultural situation of, 269 
Roots and Branches 
limitations of, 8 

philosophy, scope, and challenges, 
7-9 

spelling variations, 9 
Rosebud battle, narrative of battle by 
Kammen et al., 278 
Rosen, Kenneth, anthology editor, 
133-34 

Ruoff, A. LaVonne Brown, literary 
criticism resource, 122, 123 

Saint Charles Mission (Crow), poetry 
by students of, 278 
Salish 

book about role of eagle feathers 
in culture, 268 

Coyote stories including creation, 
280 

introductory reading selections, 70 
Pend d'Oreille tales, 285 
philosophies of, 264 
tales of Bitterroot Valley and other 
folk stories, 279 

Salish Culture Committee, Coyote 
stories for young readers, 283 



323 



] 



308 



c 

Index 



Salish/ Kootenai 

legends from reservation, 273 
presses and distributors of 
materials, 290, 292 
traditional chipmunk story, 287 
tribal newspaper, Char-Koosta, 
traditional and historical stories 
of Confederated Tribes, 281 
Salish/Kootenai/Coeur d'Alene, 
introductory reading selections, 
70 

Salish /Kootenai College 
collection of stories for Native 
American studies class at, 287 
guide for history course of 
Flathead Reservation, 276 
Salmon, dependence on for food 
supply in River Song by Craig 
Lesley, 230-31 

Sandoz, Mari, Cheyenne Autumn 
portrayal of Cheyenne's flight 
from Oklahoma Indian 
Territory, 235 

Sauk culture, in growing-up story 
Sparrow Hawk by LeSueur, 231 
Savage 

definition and source of 
stereotype, 254 

The Invasion of America by Francis 
Jennings, 64 
Seminole 

presses and distributors of 
materials, 289 

tribal location and origin, 240-41 
Sheehan, Bernard W., historical and 
cultural resource, 106 
Sign language, educational resource, 
121 

Siksika, presses and distributors of 
materials, 292 

Silko, Leslie Marmon (Laguna Pueblo) 
contemporary Indian experience 
in Ceremony, 177-78 
letters with James Wright, 207 
stories in Laguna tradition in 
Storyteller, 178-79 
writer in anthology, 133 
Sioux 

philosophies of, 261 
stories gathered by Reese and 
Indian workers of South Dakota 
Writers' Project, 282 
Slapin, Beverly 

Basic Skills Caucasian Americans 
Workbook, 179 



useful comments against 
stereotypes, 217 
Slapin, Beverly, and Doris Seale 
(Santee /Cree) 

"The Bloody Trail of Columbus 
Day" in secondary level unit, 61 
educational resource, 118-19 
Smith, John, "The General History of 
Virginia" in secondary level 
unit, 62 

Sneve, Virginia Driving Hawk 
(Lakota) 

The Chichi Hoohoo Boogeuman, 
179-80 

The Chichi Hoohoo Boogeyman in 
contrast to The Indian in the 
Cupboard, 19-20 
further reading, 207-8 
historical and cultural resource, 
112 

useful comments against 
stereotypes, 217 

Songs, original, based on traditional 
Native stories, 274 
Southern Cheyenne, contemporary 
story, 268 

Speare, Elizabeth George, 

stereotypical Indian-helps-the- 
white-man theme in The Sign of 
the Beaver, 235-36 

Speeches by noted Indian chieftains, 
134-35 

Spokane Reservation, writings of 
Sherman Alexie, 141-43 
Spotted Bear, Delia (Crow), impor- 
tance of family and home, 16 
Squaw or princess, definition and 
source of stereotype, 255 
Standing Bear, Luther (Sioux) 
further reading, 208 
traditional stories of Sioux, 180 
Stands in Timber, John (Cheyenne), 
and Margot Liberty, as-told-to 
autobiography, 181 
Steinbeck, John, "America and 

Americans" in secondary level 
unit, 64 

Stereotypes. See also Bias and 

stereotype in literature about 
Native Americans; Lifeways 
and stereotypes 
anti-education, 257 
attempting to contradict 

stereotypes in The Indian Wars, 
232-33 



children, 256-57 

definitions and sources of, 253-58 
eighteen money, 2 
heathen, 254 

historical inaccuracy and, in The 
Light in the Forest by Richter, 234 
Indian-helps-the-white-man 
theme in The Sign of the Beaver, 
235-36 

Little Bear in The Indian in the 
Cupboard, 213-17 
most common of "vanishing 
American," 25-26 
noble savage, 253 
nomadic, 255-56 
overcoming, 2-3 
perpetuation by movies, books, 
and stories, 31 
power of images, 6 
princess or squaw, 255 
redskin, 255 

result of ethnocentrism, 30 
romanticized account in Soun 
Tetoken: Nez Perce Boy, 236 
savage, 254 

uncivilized savage, existing in 
lower level of intellectual and 
cultural development, 256 
undisciplined children, 257 
vanishing Americans, 257-58 
vanishing Indian, in O'Dell's 
Island of the Blue Dolphins, 

233-34 

white man's helper, 257 
why and how to read and learn 
about, 30-31 
wild, 254 

Sterling, Shirley (Interior Salish), My 
Name Is Seepeetza, novel in diary 
form, 181 

Stonechild, Murray (Cree), tensions 
of living between two worlds, 

23 

Story 

action of remembering values 
necessary for survival, 10-11 
purposes in Native cultures, 40-41 
Sim Dance, 249 
illustrated record of 50th 
anniversary Crow Indian, 271 
Survival and loss themes in Native 
American literatures, 46-49 
Survival and loss, cultural and 
personal. See Cultural and 
personal loss and survival 




3 24 



Index 



I 

309 



Surviving Columbus: The Story of the 
Pueblo People , video in 
secondary level unit, 63 
Sweet Medicine, ancient prophet of 
Cheyenne, 265-66 
Symbol, meaning and function of, 
39-10 

Tall Bull, Henry (Cheyenne), and 
Tom Wei st, various Cheyenne 
stories, 284-85 

TallMountain, Mary (Koyukon 
Athabascan), 209 
Tapahonso, Luci (Navajo), poetry 
and short stories based in 
Navajo philosophy, 182 
Tatsey, John (Blackfeet), writer in 
anthology, 127-28 
Taylor, Drew Hayden (Ojibway), 
plays Toronto at Dreamer's Rock 
and Education Is Our Right , 
182-83 

Teacher resources 
educational, 112-21 
historical and cultural, 102-12 
literary criticism, 121-23 
Teaching American Indian Students , 
educational resource, 118 
Tecumseh, famous speeches by, 
134-35 

Termination and relocation, 

consequences for Indian people, 
250-51 

Termination Resolution, 251 
Terminology, "Native American" 
versus "Indian," 8-9 
Thomasma, Ken, Soun Te token: Nez 
Perce Boy , 20, 236 

Thunderheart (movie), comparison 
with Mean Spirit by Hogan, 
163-64 

Trade and Intercourse Acts, 247 
Traditional lessons and values, 13-14 
Traditional values, relevance for life 
today, 11-12 

Tribal cultures, Montana, 

philosophies from, 259-66 
Tribal locations and cultural areas of 
Native North Americans in 
1600, 240-41 

Tribes, Indian, maps of, 242—43 
Trickster/ transformer or culture hero 
Coyote stories, 173-74, 280, 283 
Coyote trickster novel by Thomas 
King, 164-65 



Gluscabi, Abenaki trickster/ 
transformer, 113 
Iktomi, Dakota 

trickster /transformer culture 
hero, 152, 192-93 

incorporation of Indian writers, 42 
Nanapush, Ojibway trickster/ 
transformer figure, 158-59 
Napi, audiocassette of seven 
stories, 286 
Napi, Blackfoot 

trickster /transformer, 159, 283, 
286 

Napi, transformer and culture 
hero by Bullchild, 1-2 
Ojibway trickster/ transformer 
figure story by Martinson, 280 
Tosamah, trickster of House Made 
of Dawn, 42 

traditional Native American cycle, 
41-42 

Ve'Ho, Cheyenne 

trickster /transformer, 284-85 
Vizenor playing trickster in Dead 
Voices: Natural Agonies in the 
New World, 184-85 
Wesaketchuk, 

trickster /transformer stories, 
144-45 

Wisahkecahk, Cree 
trickster /transformer, 140 

Tuscaroras, tribal location and 
origin, 240—41 

Two Leggings (Crow), memoir, 
183-84 

Ude, Wayne, traditional mythology 
and contemporary fiction 
Becoming Coyote, 236-37 

Uncivilized savage, intellectually 
and culturally inferior, defini- 
tion and source of stereotype, 
256 

Undisciplined children, definition 
and source of stereotype, 257 

Universe, underlying assumptions 
about, 37-38 

Values, traditional, relevance for life 
today, 11-12 

Values and lessons, traditional, 

13-14 

Vanderwerth, W. C. 

compilation of famous speeches 
by Indian chieftains, 134-35 



contrast to Brother Eagle, Sister Sky: 
A Message from Chief Seattle, 
227-29 

Vanishing Americans 
definition and source of 
stereotype, 257-58 
fallacy in stereotype, 26 
perpetuating stereotype in 
O'Dell's Island of the Blue 
Dolphins, 233-34 
stereotype of Native people, 

25-26 

Ve'Ho, Cheyenne 

trickster/ transformer, 284-85 

Video and audio distributors, 

Native American literatures, 
294-95 

Vision quests, change and growth 
subtheme, 22 

Vizenor, Gerald (Chippewa) 
anthology editor, 135-36 
author playing trickster in Dead 
Voices: Natural Agonies in the 
New World, 184-85 
definition of Native American 
literature, 36 
further reading, 209-10 
Ojibway prose collection, 139 
writer in anthology, 129-30 

Wagner, Curly Bear (Blackfeet), 
audiocassette of seven Napi 
stories, 286 

Walker, Deward E., Jr., anthology 
including trickster (Coyote), 

136 

Washburn, Wilcomb E., "Document 
5 of Personal Relations: Captain 
John Smith" in The Indian and the 
White Man in secondary level 
unit, 63-64 

Weasel Head, Linda (Salish), writer 
in anthology, 127-28 

Welch, James (Blackfeet/ Gros 
Ventre) 

alcoholism in The Death of Jim 
Loney, 185 

editor of "Tribes" volume of 
Ploughshares, 187-88 
Fools Crow, secondary level unit, 
81-88 

further reading, 211 
Killing Custer, 27 

lifeways of Pikuni people in Fools 
Crow, 185-86 




325 



c 



310 



i 

Index 



James Welch ( continued ) 

power of genocide and cultural 
and personal loss, 27 
sacred medicine bundle carrying 
power for universe, 39 
searching for identity in Winter in 
the Blood , 186-87 
writer in anthologies, 127-30 
Welch, James (Blackfeet/Gros 
Ventre), with Paul Stekler, 
historical narrative Killing 
Custer , 188-89 

Wesaketchuk, trickster / transformer 
stories, 144-45 

Western European literatures. See 
Native and Western European 
literatures 

"Wheeler-Howard Act," 250 
White children adopted by Indians, 
reluctance to return to families, 
234 

White Clay People, See Gros Ventre 
White Face, Charmaine (Oglala 
Lakota), quote from Women of 
the Native Struggle: Portraits and 
Testimony of Native American 
Women, 11 

Whiteman, Roberta Hill (Oneida), 
writer in anthology, 127-28 
White man's helper, definition and 
source of stereotype, 257 
Wild, definition and source of 
stereotype, 254 

Winnebago, presses and distributors 
of materials, 291 
Wisahkecahk, Cree trickster/ 
transformer, 140 



Women of the Native Struggle: 

Portraits and Testimony of Native 
American Women, relevance of 
traditional values for life today, 
11-12 

Wood, Erskine, memoir from diary 
of visit with Chief Joseph, 190 
Wooden Leg, interpreted memoir, 
167-68 

Woodhead, Henry, historical and 
cultural resource, 102 
Woody, Elizabeth (Yakama/Warm 
Springs/ Wasco/Navajo) 
poetry, story, and essay in Seven 
Hands, Seven Hearts , 190-91 
writer in anthology, 129-30 
Worcester v. Georgia, 247 
Wordcraft Circle, 115-16 
Worlds, between two. See Between 
two worlds 

World view, myth, and bias in 
America's ethnic and cultural 
roots 

''America and Americans'' by John 
Steinbeck, 64 

''The Bloody Trail of Columbus 
Day'' by Slapin and Seale, 61 
''Document 5 of Personal 
Relations; Captain John Smith'' 
in The Indian and the White Man 
by Wilcomb E. Washburn, 63-64 
''The General History of Virginia'' 
by John Smith, 62 
''Grandmothers of a New World'' 
by Beth Brant, 63 
"Of Plymouth Plantation" by 
William Bradford, 62 



"Pocahontas Perplex: The Image 
of Indian Women in American 
Culture" by Rayna Green, 63 
secondary level unit, 60-66 
Surviving Columbus: The Story of the 
Pueblo People and Native 
Americans films, 63 

Wotanin Wowapi, newspaper of 
Assiniboine/ Sioux people at 
Fort Peck Reservation, 287 

Yankton reservation, background of, 
Zitkala-SYs heritage, 91-93 

Yellow Robe, Rosebud (Lakota) 
growing-up experiences in 
Tonweya and the Eagles, 14 
legendary Lakota stories, 211 

Zitkala-Sa (Yankton Sioux) 

American Indian Legends, 212 
autobiographical essay, short 
story, 191-93 

Zitkala-Sa's American Indian Stories 
"An Indian Teacher among 
Indians," 96 

background of Lakota system of 
bands and alliances, 90-91 
classification of Lakota cosmology, 
93-94 

experiences of Native children, 
21-22 

"Impressions of an Indian 
Childhood," 95 
"School Days," 95-96 
secondary level unit, 89-96 
Yankton reservation: 1858-1902, 
91-93 





J, . ■, «. .. & 

This valuable resource book offers 'teachers an opportunity to ■. \ * 

learn, and to* te^fiiabout Native 'AirieKcanJiieratu res Jn,» $*.' 

context. Starting with a discussion of themes, rationales, and ^ ? 

subthemes, Dorothea Susag moves to an examination of the ‘ 1 

historical and literary contexts that frame the literary work of ' 

Native peoples. Lessons, units, and activities keyed to grade' . I 
level offer practical support. Detailed annotated bibliographies 
direct the teacher to a wealth of possibilities and to other 
resources— historical, cultural, and educational. Teachers will 

#» i 

find reference lists of anthologies containing every genre of j 
writing from biographies and memoirs to poetry and 
traditional stories; even works about Native peoples by non- 
Native authors are listed, offering yet another perspective to j 
the collection. Supporting materials include discussions of 
stereotypes and of the cultural and spiritual contexts of 
tribal cultures. 

Susag, who has spent her professional life in north central 
Montana, offers the reader an abundance of resources. 

Author, storyteller, and scholar Joseph Bruchac — who has 
dedicated his career to raising awareness of authentic Native 
American cultures and voices — commends her efforts. Roots 
and Branches fills a long-existing gap by providing a 
comprehensive resource to teachers looking to incorporate 
? Native American literatures into their classrooms. 



National Council of Teachers of English 
1111 W. Kenyon Road, Urbana, Illinois 61801-1096 
800-369-6283 or 21 7-328-3870 
http://www.ncte.org 



ISBN 0-81 4 1 4195-1 



ERIC 



0814 



141953 








l/.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASIS 




This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)” form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release 
form (either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 




