DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 267 937 

AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



RC 015 564 

Loeb, Catherine, Comp. 

North American Indian Worner; Selected Sources. 
Wisconsin Univ. System. Women's Studies Librarian at 
Large . 
Feb 65 
20p. 

Reference Materials - Bibliographies (131) 
MP01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

♦American Indian Culture; 'American Indian History; 
♦American Indian Literature; 'American Indians; 
Anthologies; Anthropology; Art; Bibliographies; 
Biographies; Canada Natives; *Females; Literary 
Criticism; Literature Reviews; North Americans; Oral 
History; 'Political Issues; Religion; Tribes; womens 
Studies 

ABSTRACT 

Over 100 annotated entries are listed in this 
bibliography, which cites books, chapters in books, and articles 
pertaining to Indian women — past and present— living in what are now 
the United States and Canada. Sources trom the last two decades are 
emphasized, particularly those that speak to the political concerns 
of the period. Entries are listed alphabetically under 5 headings: 
(1) anthropology, religion, and history— 27 entries; (2) 
autobiography, biography, and oral history— 16 entries; (3) art and 
literature: anthologies and criticism— 19 entries; (4) contemporary 
status, politics, and activism— 36 entries; and (5) bibliographies 
and reviews of the literature — 9 entries. The brief annotations 
indicate the focus of the work and, in some cases, evaluate the 
content. Reference is made to five additional bibliographies 
pertaining to Native American women, and addresses are listed for 
hard-to-locate titles. (JHZ) 



*********************************************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 
*********************************************************************** 



9 

ERIC 



The University of Wisconsin System 



WOMEN'S STUDIES UMAWAN-AT-LARGE 

112A Memorial Library / 721 State Street / Mad boo, Wl 53706 Tel. 606/263-5754 



NORTH AMERICAN INDIAN WOMEN: SELECTED SOURCES # ^i*™**************** 

ment do not necessarily represent official NIE 
position or policy 

This bibliography cites books, chapters 1n books, and articles pertaining to 
Indian women— past and present— living 1n what are now the United States and 
Canada. Emphasized here are sources from the last two decades, particularly 
those which speak to the political concerns of this period. Material on 
Indigenous women of Mexico, Central and South America has been omitted; some 
leads to materials on this topic may be found 1n another bibliography 1n this 
series, "Women and Politics 1n Latin Arorlca: A Selective Bibliography," 
compiled by Susan Searing (February 1984), I have also largely omitted 
empirical studies from the social sciences; Individual works of fiction and 
poetry, and single-author critical studies; and the bulk of autobiographical 
sources and studies of native women's art. 

Readers desiring to go beyond the bounds of this brief listing should turn 
first to Rayna Green's comprehensive guide, Native American Women; A Contextual 
Bibliography . American Indian Women: Telling Their Lives by Sretchen M. 
Batai lie and Kathleen Mullen sands provides a detailed examination of Indian 
women's autobiography, Rayna Green's That's What She Said: Contemporary Poetry 
and Fiction by Native American Women , together with Dexter Usher's The Third 
Woman: Minority Women Writers of the United States , will Introduce readers to 
creative literature by contemporary Indian women wr1 ters . 

The bibliography 1s 1n four parts: 

1. Anthropology, Religion, History; 

2. Autobiography, Biography, Oral History; 

3. Art and Literature: Anthologies and Criticism; 

4. Contemporary Status, Politics, and Activism; 

5. Bibliographies and Reviews of the Literature. 

I have examined most items; exceptions are noted in the text, 
hard- to- locate titles are included at the end. 



1. Anthropology, Religion, History 

Albers, Patricia, and Beatrice Medicine, eds. The Hidden Half: Studies of 
Plains Indian Women . Washington, DC: University Press of America, 1983. 

The ten papers in *Ms volume draw upon data from ethnological, 
ethnohistorical , and contemporary field research; a common purpose is to ask new 
questions of the available data, providing a corrective to earlier accounts 1n 
which Plains Indian women are typically seen through the lens of U.S. /European 
values and experience. All but two of the articles focus on the pre- reservation 
period . 



U S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

NATIONAL INSTITUTE Of EDUCATION 

ZCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 
^is document has been reproduced at 
received from the person or orgartfatton 
originating it 

Minor changes have been made to improve 
r eproductiOn qua.ity 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THU 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED B' 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE! 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



Addresses for 



Universities: EauClaire, Greer Bay, LaCrosse, Madison, Milwaukee, Oshkosh, Parks.de, Plattev.lle, River Falls, Stevens Point, Stout Superior Whitewater 
iP^^l^Tl Baraboo/Sauk County, Barron County, Fond du Lac, Fox Villey, Manitowoc Cour.tv, Marathon County, Marinette County 
Marshf,eld/Wood Count', Bedford, Richland, Rock County, Sheboygan County, Washing Co.mty, Wn«kesha County Extension: Statewide 



2 



Allen, Paula Gunn. "Beloved Women" and "Lesbians 1n American Indian Cultures." 
Conditions 7 (v.3, no.l, Spring 1981): 65-87. 

Allen's poem, "Beloved Women," begins: "It 1s not known 1f those/who warred 
and hunted on the plains/chanted and hexed 1n the h1lls/d1v1ned and healed in 
the mountains/ gazed and walked beneath the seas/were Lesbians/..." (p. 65). In 
the article which follows, "Lesbians 1n American Indian Cultures," Allen 
speculates on the possible existence and meaning of lesbianism within 
traditional Indian culture- T h1s Issue of Conditions also Includes poetry by 
Joy Harjo and Wendy Rose, a ction by Linda Hogan. 

American Indian Quarterly , 6, ro.1/2 (Spring/Summer 1982): special Issue on 
Navajo women. 

A collection of articles examining "processes of change and continuity as 
experienced by Navajo women" (p. 2). Includes: "Traditional Navajo Women: 
Ethnographic and Life History Portrayals" (Charlotte J. FMsble); "An 
Ethnography of the Navajo Reproductive Cycle" (Anne Wright); "Navajo Women 1n 
the City: Le« ons From a Quarter-Century of Relocation" (Ann Metcalf); "Life Is 
Harder Here: .he Case of the Urban Navajo Women" (Joyce Grlffen); "Ladles, 
Livestock, Land and Lucre: Women's Networks and Social Status on the Western 
Navajo Reservation" (Christine Conte); "Navajo Sandpa1nt1ngs: The Importance of 
Sex Roles 1n Craft Reproduction" (Nancy J. Parezo); "The Status of Navajo Women" 
(Mary Shepardson); "Cultural Influences on Nuvajo Mothers with Disabled 
Children" (Jennie R. Joe); "Books b> Navajo Women" (a bibliography compiled by 
the editors of AIQ ). 

Baskln, Cyndy. "Women 1n Iroquois Society." Canadian Woman Studles/Les Cahlers 
de la femme 4, no. 2 (Winter 1982): 42-46. 

Brief discussion of the power of women 1n traditional Iroquois society. 

Brown, Judith K. "Economic Organization and the Position of Women Among the 
Iroquois." Ethnohi story 17, no.3-4 (Summer-Fall 1970): 151-167. 

Brown compares the status of women among the Iroquois and the Bemba of 
Northern Rhodesia. She concludes that the high status of Iroquois women was not 
simply "a historical curiosity" (p.164), but that 1t "reflected their control of 
their tribe's economic organization" (p. 151). 

Cruikshank, Julie. "Becoming a Woman in Athapaskan Society: Changing Traditions 
on the Upper Yukon River." Western Canadian Journal of Anthropology 5, no .2 
(1975): 1-14, 

On puberty seclusion 1n Athapaskan society— changes over time, and the 
relationship between these changes and changes 1n Athapaskan women's roles in 
general . 

Curtis, Edward S. In a Sacred Manner We Live: Photographs of the North American 
Indian . Bar re, MA: Barre Publishers, WIT, 

Photographic record of Indian peoples of turn-of-the-c?ntury western North 
America, selected from Curtis' complete twenty-volume work, The North American 
Indian (1907-1930). Photos of women of the Teton Sioux, Comanche, Hopi , Apache, 
Papago, Mohave, Cayuse, Yakima, Chinook, Kutenai , Zuni , °a;io, Hupa, Suguamish, 
Sail sham, Noatak. 

Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies 6, no. 3 (Fall lCdl): "Native American 
Women." Guest editor: Linda Hogan. 

Included 1n this special Issue are poetry, ficton, reviews, essays, oral 
history, and a twenty- five- page unannotated bibliography. Among the 



J 



3 



contributors are editor Linda Hogan, Wendy Rose, Joy Harjo, Rayna Green, Paula 
Cunn Allen, Shirley H111 W1tt, and Bea Medicine. 

Hungry Wolf, Beverly. The Ways of My Grandmothers . New York: Morrow, 1980. 

"Today's world 1s so crowded that we often turn to books 1n order to 
experience what life was like 1n other times and other cultures. But there are 
no such books about my Indian grandmothers of the Blackfoot Nation, Including my 
division, the Bloods. There are books that tell about horse stealing, buffalo 
hunting, and war raiding. But the reader would have to assume that Indian women 
lived boring lives of drudgery, and that their minds were empty of stories and 
anecdotes - (p. 16). This collection of myths, legends, practical lore, and 
customs 1s the result of Beverly Hungry Wolf's efforts to learn all she could of 
"the ways of her grandmothers." 

Jaskoskl, Helen. "My Heart W111 Go Out: Healing Songs of Native American 
Women." International Journal of Women's Studies 4 a no .2 (March/ Apr 11 1981): 
118-134. 

Jaskoskl discusses women's use of poetry as a healing agent 1n native 
cultures. 

Jensen, Joan M. With These Hands: Women Working on the Land . Old Westbury, NY: 
Feminist Press; New York: McGraw-Hill, 1981. 

Chapter One, "In the Beginning: Native American Women," offers a very brief 
overview and a series of short documents on native women's relation to the land 
before and after European colonization. 

Katz, Jane B., ed. I Am the F1re of Time: Voices of Native American Women . New 
York: E.P. Outton, 1977. 

Very brief selections—often excerpted from longer works—are organized Into 
two sections, "From the Tribal World" and "Voices of Today," and by topic within 
these sections. Included are ceremonial songs, prayers, oral histories, 
memoirs, poetry, prose, and photographs. Presents an adequate Introduction, but 
researchers may dislike the fragmentation of represented works. 

Kldwell, CUra Sue. "The Power of Women in Three American Indian Societies." 
Journal of Ethnic Studies 6, no.3 (Fall 1978): 113-121. 

Examines women's access to power in traditional Ojibwa, Wlmebago, and 
Menominee cultures. 

Klein, Laura F. "Contending with Colonization: Tlingit Men and Women 1n 
Change." In Women and Colonization: Anthropological Perspectives , pp.88-108. 
Mona Etlenne and Eleanor Leacock, eds. New York: Praeger Books, 1980. 

Klein examines the Impact of colonization on the sex roles of the Alaskan 
Tlinglt. Her study is based on nearly two years of fleldwork. See also her 
article '"She's One of Us, You Krow' : The Public Life of TUnglt Women: 
Tradition, History and Contemporary Perspectives," 1n the Western Canadian 
Journal of Anthropology v.6, no.3, 1976, pp. 164-183. 

Landes, Ruth. The Ojibwa Woman . New York: Columbia University Press, 1338; 
reprint New York: Norton, 1971. 

Originally published in 1938, this ethnographic stuiy of women in the Ojibwa 
culture of Western Ontario was one of the first book-length examinations of the 
lives of native women. Landes devotes the bulk of her text to the life cycle of 
Ojibwa women (youth, marriage, occupations, "abnormal 1 ties") . A final chapter 
presents three brief life histories. 



ERLC 



4 



Mathes, Valerie Shlrer. "A New Look at the Role of women 1n Indian Society." 
American Indian Quarterly 2. no.2 (Summer 1975): 131-139. 

Mathes briefly reviews the status of women 1n traditional Indian societies, 
with comparisons to tne status of white women. 

Medicine, Bea. "American Indian Women: Spirituality and Status." Bread & 
Roses: A Women's Journal of Issues and the Arts 2. no. 3 (Autumn 1980): 14-18. 

"The road to civilization was the destruction of native beliefs and 
languages which form the basis for the philosophical and ethical systems of 
Native Americans. It speaks to the spiritual resilience cf native peoples of 
the New World that native belief systems have persisted at all" (p.15). After 
Introductory remarks on tribal differences 1n native spirituality, Medicine 
discusses women's spiritual rites of passage among the Lakota Sioux. 

Medicine, Beatrice. "Indian Women: Tribal Identity as Status Quo." In Woman's 
Nature: Rationalizations of Inequality , pp. 63-73. Marian Lowe and Ruth Hubbard, 
eds. New York: Pergamon Press, 1983. 

"Beatrice Medicine examines the complex and frequently contradictory Ideas 
of woman's nature among Lakota Sioux due to the Interplay of the values of the 
dominant white culture with native values. She examines some of the ways that 
native cultural norms are being revived and reinterpreted as a means of 
eslstlng continuing encroachments of the white economy and society, especially 
as they affent women" (p.63). Medicine 1s also author of The Native American 
Woman: A Perspective (Austin, TX: National Educational Laboratory Publishers, 
1978), a critical overview of the historical and anthropological literature. 

Nlethammer, Carolyn. Daughters of the Earth: The Lives and Legends of American 

Indian Wom en. New York: Collier Books, 1977. 

In thfs~1llustrated Introductory survey, Nlethammer organizes her discussion 
of the pre-contact lives of No.th American Indian women by topic: childbirth; 
growing up; menarche and menopause; courtship and marriage; economic 
contributions; leadership roles; war; crafts and recreation; sexuality; 
religion; and aging. Tribal distinctions are made 1n the text. Nlethammer 
worked from early writings of anthropologists, Interviews, and contemporary 
feminist anthropology. 

Paper, Jordan. "The Forgotten Grandmothers: Amerindian Women and Religion 1n 
Colonized North America." Canadian Woman Studies/Les Cah lers de la femme 5, 

no .2 (Winter 1983): 48-51. " " 

According to Paper, male bias among the missionaries, travellers, and 
ethnologists who have described native spirituality has obscured the significant 
roles of women. He briefly discusses these roles 1n selected pre-contact 
cultures, transformations resulting from contact, and the contemporary 
situation. 

Powers, Maria N. "Menstruation and Reproduction: An Oglala Case." Signs: 
Journal of Women in Culture and Society 6, no.l (Autumn 1980): 54-65. 

Powers notes that anthropologists— looking through a Western lens--have 
tended to Interpret taboos surrounding menstruation 1n native cultures as 
"symbols of woman's defilement" (p. 54). In contra**, she examines the myths and 
rituals related to female puberty and to menstruation as "aspects of the same 
phenomenon, which emphasizes the importance of the female reproductive role" 
(pp.54-55). 



5 



Schlegel, Alice. "Sexual Antagonism Among the Sexually Egalitarian Hopi." 
Ethos: Journal of the Society for Psychological Anthr opology 7, no ,2 (Summer 

1979): 124-141. 1 

Pointing out that most studies of sexual antagonism focus on male dominated 
societies, Schlegel turns her attention to the Hop1 of Arizona, demonstrating 
that "sexual antagonism 1s not precluded by sexual equality" (p. 140). She 
locates the Hop1 antagonisms 1n the brother-sister and husband-wife dyads, and 
discusses controlled end uncontrolled form of aggression. 

Terrell, John Upton, and Donna M. Terrell. Indian Women of the Western Morning: 
Their Life In Early America . New York: Dial Press, 1974. 

A superficial survey of Indian women's lives 1n traditional native 
societies. 

Van K1rk, Sylvia. "The Role of Native Women 1n the Fur Trade Society of Western 
Canada, 1670-1830." Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies 7. no.3 (1984): 9-13. 

Depicts "the v1taT~role native women... played in the opening of the Canadian 
West..." (p. 12), as trappers, producers of food and clothing, diplomats, and 
peacemakers fn fur trade society. Van Kirk's research has been published at 
greater length 1n her book, "Many Tender Ties": Women 1n Fur Trade Society 1n 
Western Canada, 1670-1830 (University or Oklahoma Press, 1983). ~ 

Welst, Katherlne M "Plains Indian Women: An Assessment." In Anthropology on 
the Great Plains , pp. 255-271. W. Raymond Wood and Margot Liberty, eds. 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1980. 
(Not seen.) 

Western Canadian Journal of Anthropology 6. no.3 (1976): "Cross-Sex Relations: 
Native Peoples." 

Contents: "Women 1n Groups: Women's Ritual Sodalities 1n Native North 
America" (Ann Thrift Nelson); "Old Woman Had Great Power" (Alice B. Kehoe); 
"Erosion of Power—An Economic Basis for the Selective Conservatism of Seneca 
Women 1n the Nineteenth Century" (Diane Rothenberg); "'She's One of Us, You 
Know'— The Public Life of TUnglt Women: Traditional, Historical, and 
Contemporary Perspectives" (Laura F. Klein); "The Role of Women in Indian 
Activism" (Rachel A. Bonney). 

Wilson, Terry P. "Osage Indian Women During a Century of Change, 1870-1980." 
Prologue: Journal of the National Archives 14, no.4 (Winter 1982): 185-201. 



2. Autobiography, Biography, Oral History 

Blackman, Margaret B. During My Time: Florence Edenshaw Davidson, A Hal da 
Woman . Seattle, London: University of Washington Press; Vancouver, Toronto: 
Douglas & Mclntyre, 1983. 

Blackwood Introduces Florence Davidson's narrative with background material 
on the Haida, Indian people of the Queen Charlotte Islands off the coast of 
British Columbia, with particular attention given to sex roles. Davidson's life 
history "1s the account of one who faithfully fulfilled the expected role of 
women in her society ... .her narrative presents a picture of an Individual 
operating in a culture neither traditionally Haida nor fully Canadian, a culture 
undergoing tremendous change ..." (p«7). 



6 



6 



Brsnd 9 Johanna* The Life and Death of Anna Mae Aquash . Toronto: James Lor1mer f 

1978. 

Born on the Micmac Reserve m Nova Scotia, Anna Mae Plctou (later Aquash) 
grew up knowing reservation poverty Intimately. As an adult 1n the late sixties 
and early seventies, Aquash became active 1n the American Indian Movement (AIM); 
participating 1n the 1983 occupation at Wounded Knee, working on many grassroots 
projects, and eventually becoming part of the AIM leadership. She was murd* ~ed 
on the P1ne Ridge Reservation 1n 1976, under circumstances that suggested FBI 
knowledge and/or Involvement* This well-written biography Informs the reader 
not simply about the life of Aquash, but also about the systematic harassment of 
Indian activists by the FBI and the experience of Indian women 1n the movement. 
Aquash's life 1s also the focus of a documentary film, N Ann1e Mae: Brave Hearted 
Woman," made 1n 1979 by Lan Brooke R1tz (see Weatherford and Seubert under 
"Bibliographies and Reviews of the Literature" below). 

Braudy, Susan. "Buffy Salnte Marie: 'Native North American Me. 1 " Ms. 3, rio.9 
(March 1975): 14, 16-18. ~ 
Profile of the Cree singer and activist. 

Broker, Ignatla. Night Flying Woman: An Ojlbway Narrative . St. Paul: Minnesota 
Historical Society Press, 1983. 

Broker addresses her narrative to her grandchildren, "that generation of 
Ojlbway who do not know what the reservation means, or the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs, or the tangled treaties..." (p.3). Broker has lived 1n Minneapolis 
since 1941, when she came to work 1n the war Industry. In this book, she tells 
her urban-raised children and grandchildren about her great-area t-grandmot her, 
Night Flying Woman, whose life spanned the period of Indians removal to the 
reservations. 

Campbell, Maria. Half-Breed . New York: Saturday Review Press, 1973; reprint 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1982. 

Campbell tells her own life story against a backdrop of the history of the 
Metis tribe 1n Canada. Her tale 1s dramatic and painful, recounting her coming 
of age through episodes of drug addiction, alcoholism, and prostitution, with 
extreme poverty the recurrent theme. The bleakness of the story 1s mitigated by 
the author's growing political consciousness and, ultimately, her sense of hope. 

Canfleld, Gae Whitney. Sarah Wlnnemucca of the Northern Palutes . Norman: 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1983. 

Sarah Wlnnemucca's autobiography , Life Among thePiutgsj Their Wrongs and 
Claims (1883), was one of the first published works by an American Indian. 
Canfleld' s new biography 1s the first book-length study of Wlnnemucca (1844?- 
1 391 ) t who worked as an advocate for her people, thp Northern Palutes , during 
the 1870s and 1880s, 1n the face of encroaching settlement and attacks by 
whites. 

Clark, Ella Elizabeth, and Margot Edmonds. Sacagawea of the Lewis and Clark 
Expedition . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980. 

Sacagawea was of great use to the white explorers of the Lewis and Clark 
Expedition; white historians, novelists, and playwrights have immortalized (ana 
embellished) the tale ever since. That Sacagawea' s Importance to Native 
American history may have been skewed by white bias 1s an important point to 
make; it does not, however, diminish her true contributions. Biographies of 
Sacagawea are many. Clark and Edmonds base their account, which covers both the 
Expedition and Sacagawea's later life, on the original journals of Lewis and 



ERLC 



7 



7 



Clark and recorded personal testimony, aiming to retrieve fact and dispell myth. 
"It was the Missouri River, not the yojng Indian mother, that served as the 
Expedition's 'principal guide.'... Though [Sacagawea] was not the guide for the 
Expedition, she was Important to them as an Interpreter and In other ways" 
(p. 16). Brief bibliography of books, articles, and manuscript sources. 

Coles, Robert, and Jane Hallowell Coles. Women of Crisis II: Lives of Work a nd 
Dreams . New York: Delacorte Press/Seymour Lawrence, 1980. 

part four, "Climbing the Mesa," te^ls the story of Maria, who puzzles over 
the question of what it means to be a Pueblo living In an Anglo-dominated 
society. 

Crulkshank, Julie. The Stolen Women: Female Journeys In Taglsh and Tutchone . 
Ottawa: National Museums of Canada, 1983 ~ (Canadian ethnology service, paper 
no .87) 

Presents oral narratives collected by the author from Athapaskan women 
living In the southern Yukon Territory, with an analysis which examines "ways In 
which [the] stories reflect differential access of men and women to power" 
(p.111). 

Deer, Ada, with R.E. Simon, Jr. Speaking Out . Chicago: onlldren's Press, 1970. 
(Not seen.) 

Hlwalklng, Belle. Belle HI walking: The Narrative of a Northern Cheyenne Woman . 
Edited by "Catherine M. Welst. Billings: Montana Council for Indian Education, 
1979. 

(Not seen.) 

James, Edward T., et al., eds. Notable American Women. 1607-195C: A 
Biographical Dictionary . 3 vols. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard 
University Press, 1971. 

Notab'e American Women has earned great respect for Its succinct and 
meticulously researched essays. The Index lists thlr'.y Indian women under the 
headings "Indian Captives," "Indian Reform Advocates," and "Indian Women." Each 
essay Is followed by thorough bibliographic documentation. Volumes 1-3 cover 
women who died no later than 1950; Notable American Women: The Modern Period , 
edited by Barbara Slcherman and Carol Hurd Green (1980), extends coverage to 
women who died before 1976, Including Indian women Muriel Wright and Ella 
Oelorla. 

Kelley, Jane Holden. Yaqul Women: Contemporary Life Histories . Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press, 1978. 

Narratives documenting the lives of Yaqul women. Introduction by the 
editor. 

Lee, Bobble. Bobble Lee, Indian Rebel: Struggles of a Native Canadian Woman . 
Edited by Don Barnett and Rich Sterling. Richmond, B.C.: LSM Information 
Center, 1975. 
(Not seen.) 

Mountain Wolf Woman. Mountain Wolf Woman, Sister of Crashing Thunder: The 
Autobiography of a Winnebago Indian . Edited by Nancy Oestreich Lurie. Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1961. 

Classic autobiography, sensitively edited by Nancy Lurie. Mountain Wolf 
Woman relates In detail her earliest recollections of Black River Falls, 



8 



8 



Wisconsin— growing up, marriage, the ritual use of peyote. Mountain Wolf 
Woman's brother's story was published In the twenties (Paul Radin, Crashing 
Thunder, 1926). 



3. Art and Literature: Anthologies and Criticism 

Allen, Paula Gunn, ed. Studies 1n American Indian Literature: Critical Essays 
and Course Desi i ns . New ioric: noaern Language Association of America, 1983. 

Edited by poet and novelist Paula Gunn Allen, this volume covers o'/al 
literature; personal narrative, autobiography, and intermediate literature; 
American Indian women's literature; modern and contemporary American Indian 
literature; the Indian 1n American Literature; and a section on resources, 
Including a guide to anthologies, texts, and research. Allen's essay, "The 
Sacred Hoop: A Contemporary Perspective, 11 opens the section on oral literature. 
Articles 1n the section on Indian women's literature are: "Transformation of 
Tradition: Autobiographical Works by American Indiv \ Women 14 (Gretchen Batallle); 
"Grandmother Sp1der f s Lifeline 11 (Susan J. Scarberry); "Ain't Seen You Since: 
Dissent among Female Relatives in American Indian Women's Poetry" (Patricia 
Clark Smith); "The Feminine Landscape of Leslie Manwon Silko's Ceremony" (Paula 
Gunn Allen); and "Teaching American Indian Women's Literature" (Including three 
course designs) • 

Anderson, Marilyn J. "The Best of Two Worlds: The Pocahontas Legend as Treated 
in Early American Drama." The Indian Historian 12, no. 2 (Summer 1979): 54-59, 
64. 

Bannan, Helen M. "Spider Woman's Web: Mothers and Daughters 1n Southwestern 
Native American Literature." In The Lost Tradition: Mothers and Daughters 1n 
Literature , pp.268- 279. Cathy Davidson and E.M. Broner, eds. New York: Ungar, 
1980. 

(Not seen.) 

Book Forum 5, no.3, 1981: "American Indians Today: Thought, Literature, Art." 

Includes: "The Grace That Remains: American Indian Women's Literature" 
(Paula Gunn Allen); "The Novel and Oral Tradition: An Interview with Leslie 
Marmon $11 ko" (Elaine Jahner) . 

Calyx: A Journal of Art and Literature by Women 8, no.2 (Sprang 1984): "Bearing 
Wltness/Sobrevlvlendo: An Anthology of Native AmeMcan/Latina Art and 
Literature." Guest editors: Jo Cochran, et al . 

" Bearing Wltness/Sobreviylendo 1s the tangible expression of the power 
shared by Native and Latlna/Chlcana cultures" (p. 4). Jo Cochran, Diane Glancy, 
and Mary Tallmountaln were the Native American editors for this beautifully 
produced anthology, which includes reproductions of the artwork of Lillian Pitt, 
Linda Lomahaftewa, and Charleen Touchette; the poetry of Wendy Rose, Paula Gunn 
Allen, Vickie Sears, Elizabeth Cook-Lynn, and Jo Cochran (among others); and the 
fiction of Phyllis Wolf, Beth Brant, Sue Redbird Cochran, and Linda Hogan. 

Cochran, Jo, J.T. Stewart, and Mayuml Tsutakawa, eds. Gather 1ng Ground : New 
Writing and Art by Northwest Women of Color . Seattle: The Seal Press, 1984. 

Gathering Ground presents contemporary writing by women of color, with a 
regional emphasis on the Northwestern United States. Native contributors are Jo 
Cochran, Debra Cecil le Earling, Kathleen Shaye Hill, Edna Jackson, and Vickie 
Sears. Other contributors Include black, Cuban-American, Filipino-American, 



ERLC 



9 



9 



Hawaiian, Kcfrean-American, Chinese-American, and Chlcana women. "Listening In: 
A Conversation with the Editors of Gathering Ground 1 * speaks to the question of 
what defines a Third World woman writer. 

Contact 11 5, no. 27/28/29 (Fall-Winter 1982/W1nter-Spring 1983): "Wonen Writing 
(5n7 

Reviews of work by Wendy Rose, Linda Hogan, Mary Tal iMountain; reviews by 
Joy Harjo, Diane Burns, Paula Gunn Allen; poem by Elizabeth Woody. 

Fisher, Dexter, ed. The Third World Woman; Minority Women Writers of the United 
States. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1980. 

TTsher does a beautiful job of introducing the contemporary literatures of 
American Indian, black, Chlcana, and Asian-American women writers to her 
readers. She begins each section with an introduction that provides historical 
background and an overview of the literature. This 1s followed by three sub- 
sections: "Contexts" (selections "that illuminate the historical and cultural 
circumstances within which the fiction and poetry have been nurtured" (p.xxx); 
"Traditions, Narratives, and Fiction"; and ^Poetry." A list of additional 
readings follows each section. Four appendices at the end of the book off»r 
suggestions for discussion and for paper-writing. Among the Indian authors 
Included here are Leslie Harmon Silko, Wenoy Rose, Joy Harjo, Judity Ivaloo 
Volborth, Roberta H111, and Paula Gunn Allen. There is very little overlap 
between this anthology and Rayna Green's That's What She Said (see below) . 

Green, Rayna. "The Pocahontas Perplex: The Image of Women in American Culture." 
Massachusetts Review 16, no.4 (Autumn 1975): 698-714. 

Green reviews the use of Princess (Pocahontas) and squaw images 1n American 
art and folklore, arguing that Pocahontas and the squaw offer unendurable 
metaphors for the lives of Indian women" (p .714) . 

Green, Rayna, ed. That's What She Said: Contemporary Poetry and Fiction by 
Native American Womeru Bloomlngton: Indiana University Press, 1984. 

In her evocative Introduction, Green affirms that stories have always been 
told by native women "in clay or reeds, in wool or cotton, in grass or paint or 
words to songs" (p. 3). The writers collected here are from many tribes and 
represent the diversity of Indian women's experience; they speak of both 
tradition and change. Included are both well-known writers such as Paula Gunn 
Allen, Joy Harjo, Linda Hogan, and Wendy Rose, and the lesser-known. A glossary 
and a bibliography of works by and about native women writers (including some 
criticism) complete the volume. 

Greenfield Review 9, no.3/4 (Winter 1981/82): "American Indian Writings." 

Writings by Joy Harjo, Paula Gunn Allen, Phyllis Wolf, Linda Hogan, Wendy 
Rose, Diane Burns, Marilou Bonham- Thompson, and Charlotte de Clue; reviews; 
photographs. 

Highwater, Jamake, ed. Words in the Blood: Contemporary Indian Writers of Nort h 
a nd South America . New York: NAL/Meridian, 1984. 

Includes writings by Leslie Marmon Silko, Wendy Rose, Joy Harjo, Anita 
Endrezze-Danielson, and Roberta Hill Whiteman. Unfortunately there is no woman 
representative of South American Indian writing. 



10 



10 



Hobson, Geary, ed. The Remembered Earth: An Anthology of Contemporary Native 
American Literature . Albuquerque. NM: Red Earth Press. 1979: Albuquerque. NM: 
university of New Mexico Press, 1981. 

Includes the writings of Joy Karjo, Linda Hogan, Sandle Nelson, Susan Shown 
Harjo, Anna L. Walters, Paula Gunn Allen (Including her essay, "The Sac re J 
Hoop"), Leslie Marmon S1lko, Carol Lee Sanchez, Elizabeth Cook-Lynn, Wendy Rose, 
Mary Tal lmountaln, and others. No bibliography. 

Katz, Jane B., ed. This Song i Remembers j Self-Portraits of Native Americans 1n 
t..a Arts . Boston: Hougnton Mifflin, 1980. 

Katz Interweaves oral history with her own commentary 1n this series of 
profiles of Indlrn and Eskimo artists. The women artists are: Pltseolak, Eskimo 
graphic artist; Pearl Sunrise, Navajo weaver and basketmaker; Mary Morez, Navajo 
painter; Grace Medicine Flower, Tewa potter; Heler Hardin, Tewa painter; Cecilia 
WMte, T11ng1t dancer; and Leslie Sllko, Laguna poet and novelist. 

Lincoln, Kenneth. Native American Renaissance . Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1983. 

Discusses Paula Gunn Allen, Wendy Rose, and Leslie Marmon Sllko, the latter 
In a separate chapter entitled "Grandmother Storyteller: Leslie Sllko." 

New America: A Journal of American and Southwestern Culture 4. no. 3 (1982): 
"Women Artists and Writers of the Southwest." 

Includes "Navajo Matriarchs," a photographic essay by Abigail Adler; "Spider 
Woman's Art: A Brief History of Navajo Weaving," by Marian Rodee; and more. 

Rubinstein, Charlotte Sti-e1fer. American Women Artists: From Early Indian Times 
to the Present . New York: Avon; Boston, MA: G.K. Hall, 1982. 

Chapter one, "Native Americans: The First American Women Artists," looks 
briefly at weaving, leather painting, qulllwork, beadwork. basket making, 
ceramics, and twentieth-century Native American painting and sculpture. A l*st 
of references appears at the back of the volume. 

Shantlh 4. no.2 (Summer/Fall 1979): "Native American Issue." Guest editors: 
Roberta H111 and Brian Swann. 

Essay by Leslie Marmon Sllko; poetry by Paula Gunn Allen, Roberta H1 "» 1 , 
Linda Hogan, Wendy Rose, Mary Tal lmountaln, and others; fiction by Paula Gunn 
Allen and Mary Tal lmountaln. 

Withers, Josephine. "Inult Women Artists: An Art Essay." FS: Feminist Studie s 
10, no.l (Spring 1984): 85-96. 

Withers writes an Introduction to nine reproductions of Inult stonecuts, 
discussing their use of traditional and contemporary imagery. The artists are: 
Ashevak Kenojuak, Jessie Oonark, Janet Kigusiuq, Hannah Kigusluq, Myra 
Kukiiysut, Helen Kalvak, r.nd Agnes Nanogak. 



4. Contemporary Status, Politics, and Activisir 

Al il katuktuk, Jeela. "Canada: Stranger in My Own Land." Ms. 2, no.8 (February 
197*): 8-10. ~~ 

"Our identity 1s our culture, our language, and our land, and we watch 
helplessly as we see each part slipping away," writes AHlkatuktuk, an Inuit 
woman who lives in a small settlement north of the Arctic Circle. In this 
article, she describes the many incursions of white society. 



0 

ERIC 



11 



Almqulst. Elizabeth McTaggart. Minorities, Gender, and Work , Lexington, MA: 
Lexington Books, 1979. 

A summary of the available literature (through 1979) on U.S. minorities 1n 
the labor force, with specific attention given to each Individual group 
(American Indians, blacks, Spanish-heritage minorities, and Asian minorities), 
and to women within each group. Name and subject Indexes. 

BHcksllver, Edith. The Ethnic American Woman: Problems, Protests, Lifestyle . 
Dubuque, I A: Kendal 1 /Hunt, 1978. 

Includes contributions by several Indian women, Including Joy Karjo, Buffy 
Sa1nte-Mar1e, and Leslie S1lko. 

Braudy, Susan. M, We Will Remember 1 Survival School: The Women and Children of 
the American Indian Movement. * Ms. 5, no 1 (July 1976): 77-80, 94, 120. 

Braudy writes of her visit at the M We W111 Remember* survival school 1n 
South Dakota, run by women of the American Indian Movement: "We teach at our 
school that Indians are fighting for their survival as people* (p.78). 

Chrystos. "N1d1shentfk (Sisters).* Maenad: A Women's Literary Journal 2. no.2 
(Winter 1982): 23-32. ' 

In this special Issue on M The Lesbian/Heterosexual Split,* Chrystos takes a 
very critical view of separatism, arguing that 1t divides and hurts women. 
Separatism *. ..doesn't fit my real life/ she writes, *or Indeed, the real life 
of any Indian lesbian I know. When one 1s a member of the smallest minority in 
existence (Native American), one 1s hardly comfortable separating oneself from 
all thit one HAS* (p.24). 

Conference on the Educational and Occupational Needs of American Indian Women, 
1976* Conference on the Educational and Occupational Needs of American Indian 
Women. Washington: National Institute of Education, 1980. 

Ten papers by participants at a 1976 conference. Topics Include employment 
and educational status of Indian women; health problems; foster care and 
adoptions of Indian children; Indian boarding schools; tribal Interests and 
diversity; transition from reservations to urban settings; and organizing Indian 
women • 

Dillingham, Brlnt. "Indian Women and IHS Sterilization Practices.* American 
Indian Journal 3, no.l (January 1977): :7-28. 

Brief article on sterilization abuse of Indian women. Subsequent articles 
on the topic by the same author appear In American Indian Journal July 1977, 
September 1977, and January 1978 , 

Glese, Paula. "Free Sarah Bad Heart Bull (and the Other Custer Defendants). 11 
North Country Anvil no. 13 (October/November 1974): 64-71. 

Sarah Bad Heart Bull, mother of ten children, was arrested during a 
demonstration organized 1n Custer, SD, by AIM to protest the lenient sentence 
handad down to the murderer of her son {one of the events leading up to the 
Wounded Knee occupation). Glese 1 s article includes a transcript of Sarah's 
story as told during a radio Interview. 

Goodwill, Jean Cuthand. "A New Horizon for Native Women in Canada." In Citizen 
P articipation In Canada: A Book of Readings , p; .362-370. James A. Draper, ed. 
Toronto: New Press, 1971. " 

On Canadian native women's poMtlcal activism. (Not seen.) 

12 



12 



Green, Rayna. "Diary of a Native American Feminist." M«i. 11, no.1/2 
(July/August 1982): 170-172, 211-213. 

Green chronlclts the thoughts and emotions sparked by a number of gatherings 
of native women, from 1977 to 1981. The overriding theme 1s one of unity and 
hope. 

Huyghe, Patrick, and David Konlgsberg. "Bury My Heart at New York City." ilew 
Yp£k 12, no.8 (February 19, 1979): 53-57. 

A report on New York City's nearly ten thousand Iidlans, with brief profiles 
of women doing grassroots organizing for Indian urb< • survival. 

Jalmes, Marie Annette. "Towards a New Image of American Indian Women: The 
Renewing Power of the Feminine." Journal of American Indian Education v. 22 

(August 1982): 293-300. 

(Not seen.) 

Jamleson, Kathleen Macleoa. "Human Rights: Indian Women Need Not Appeal." 
Branching Out: Canadian Magazine for Women " 6. no.2 (1979): 11-13. 

On the fight by Canadian Indian women married to non-Indian men to regal » 
their status as Indians. Jamleson reports on the exclusion of the Indian Act 
from the jurisdiction of the Canadian Human Rights Act. 

Jamleson, Kathleen. "Sisters Under the Skin: An Exploration of the Implications 
of Feminist-Material 1st Perspective Research." Canadian Ethnic Studies/Etudes 
ethniques au Canada 13, no.l (1981): 130-143. 

damieson very briefly discusses feminist thought and historical materialism 
In an effort to develop a feminist materialist conceptual framework for 
understanding the situation of Indian women as "a singularly oppressed group 1n 
Canada" (p. 131). She goes on to consider the Implications of her conclusions 
for feminism. 

LaChapelle, Caroline. "Beyond Barriers: Native Women and the Women's Movement." 
In Still Ain't Satlsfledl Canadian Feminism Today , pp. 257-264. Maureen 
Fitzgerald, Connie Guberman, and Margie Wolfe, eds. Toronto: Women's Press, 
1982. 

LaChapelle (an Ojlbwa) briefly surveys the status of Canadian Indians and 
contemporary Canadian Indian women's struggles, then goes on to discuss the 
complex relationship between Indian women and the Canadian women's movement. 

Mathes, Valerie Shlrer. "Native \'^r1can Women 1n Medicine and the Military." 
Journal of the West 21. no.2 (April 1982): 41-48. 
(Not seen.) 

Mathur, Mary F. Fleming. "Who Cares. ..That a Woman's Work Is Never Done...." 
Indian Historian 4, no.2 (Summer 1971): 11-15. 

On questions raised by the women's liberation movet..ont. Mathur advocates 
looking to ethnographic studies of women cross-culturally for a comparative 
uridfc.-standlng of women's status, and briefly surveys the status of women in 
traditional Indian cultures. 

Metcalf, Ann. "From Schoolgirl to Mother: The Effects of Education on Navajo 
Women." Social Problems 23 (June 1976): 535-544. 

Most Navajo children are removed from their homes to atteM federally 
operated boarding schools, a policy Metcalf views as an Instance of the colonial 



ERIC 



13 



oppression of Indians. Her study found that these educational experiences 
"detrimentally affected the adult self-esteem and maternal attitudes of Navajo 
women" ( p«535) « 

Metcalf, Ann. "Reservation-Born, City-Bred: Native American Women and Children 
1n the C1t'. M In Sex-Roles 1n Changing Cultures . Ann McElroy and Carolyn 
Matthiasson, eds. Buffalo: State University of New York Press, 1980. 
(Not seen.) 

Metoyer, Cheryl A. "The Native American Woman/ In The Study of Women: 
Enlarging Perspectives QfSocIa] Reality , pp. 329-335. Eloise C. Snyder, ed. 
New York: Harper I Row, 1979. 

A brief discussion of racism and sexism as these shape the lives of Native 
American women. 

Miller, Dorothy I. "Native American Women: Leadership Images « H 
Integrateducation v. 16 (January/February 1978): 37-3f , 
[Not seen.) 

Moraga, Cherrfe, and Gloria Anzaldua, eds. This Bridge Called Ky Back: Writings 
by Radical Women of Color . Watertown, MA: °ersepnone press, 1981; reprint New 
York: Kitchen Table Women of Color Press, 1984. 

This anthology 1s stirring testimony to the coming together of U.S. women of 
color 1n the '80s. Latlnas, black, Asian- American, and American Indian women- 
lesbian and "straight"— contribute poems, letters, and a variety of first-person 
accounts* A brief selected bibliography concluding the volume Includes a 
separate section on Native American women. 

Murphy. Sharon. "Women 1n Native American Journalism." In Native American 
Press in Wisconsin and the Nation , pp. 65-6 9. James P. Oanky, Maureen t. riady, 
and Richard Joseph Morris, eds. Madison: University of Wisconsin Library 
School, 1982. (Available from: Publications Committee, Library School of the 
University cf Wisconsin, 600 N. Park St., Madison, WI 53706). 

Brief survey of Indian women journalists 1n the past and present. 

Native Self- Sufficiency *» no.3/4 (September 1981): special Issue on women. 

J ncl udes "Sage Advice From a Long Time Activist," an Interview with Tulallp 
activist Janet Mc Cloud; "The Women's Dance: Reclaiming Our Powers on the Female 
Side of Life," by Katsl Cook, a Mohawk lay midwife and women 1 s health organizer; 
"Parrlsh: A Porno Shaman," an article by Otis Parrlsh and Paula Hammett on Essie 
Plnola Parrlsh Plwoya, a Kashaya spiritual leader; "An Urban Perspective ," by 
Gall Chehak, a young Klamath mother and activist on Issues facing urban Indian 
women; "The Porno Basketweavers," a photographic essay; "A Woman 1 s Ways/ an 
Interview with Judy Swamp, a Mohawk living at Akwesasne; "Native Political 
Organizing 1n Nevada: A Woman's Perspective," by Dagmar Thorpe, an activist or, 
Indian Issues since the Alcatraz occupation; and "Navajo Organizer Leads Fight 
Against Uranium," an Interview with Elsie Pesn:aka1, an organizer from New 
Mexico. 



14 



14 



off our backs 11 , nc.2 (February 1981): special section on Native American 
Women. 

Includes: "Rita S11k-Naun1 vs. the State/ by Pelican Lee and Jane W1ng, on 
a Lakota woman on trial for defending her son against two Oklahoma City Airport 
security officers; "In Honor of the Women Warriors/ by Winona La Duke f a member 
of Women cf All Red Nations; a book review; and news on the Canadian Indian 
Act's discrimination against Indian womer married to non-Indians. 

Plalnswoman 7. no. 4 (December 1983): special Issue on Indian women. 

This Issue of Plalnswoman grew out of the Leadership Training Conference for 
American Indian Women held In Grand Forks, ND, 1n June, 1983. The sixteen-page 
Issue Includes reflections by and conversations with participants, along with 
additional writings by women active 1n Indian women's Issues. This Is 
Plalnswoman 's second special Issue on Indian women. 

Plalnswoman 8» no.4 (December 1984): "Indian Women." 

Articles on Louise Erdrich, author of a recently published novel entitled 
Love Medicine , and Margaret Hawk, u Lakota woman; poems by Gloria. Dye. 

Russell, Scott C, and Mark B. McDonald. "The Economic Contributions of Women 
In a Rural, Western Navajo Community." American Indian Quarterly 6, no.3/4 
(Fall/Winter 1982): 262-282. 
(Not seen.) 

Sinister Wisdom no.22/23 (1983): "A Gathering of Spirit." Guest editor: Beth 
Brant (Degonwadontl) . 2nd expanded edition, 1984. 

"I believe 1n each and every Indian woman whose words and pictures He 
between the pages of this magazine. We are here. Ages twenty-one to sixty- 
five. Lesbian and heterosexual. Representing forty Nations.... We have a 
spirit of rage. We are angry women. Angry at white men and their 
perversions.... We are angry at Indian men for their refusals of us.... We are 
angry at a so-called > women l s movement 1 that always seems to forget we exist 
(pp.8, 7). This 1s an emotionally searing and politically enlightening 
collection of artwork, poetry, fiction, Interviews, letters, and essays. Among 
the contributors are well-known writers Hke Linda Hogan, Wendy Rose, Bea 
Medicine, Joy Harjo, and Carol Lee Sanchez, as well as women never before 
published (Including a number of women serving time 1n prison). The special 
Issue concludes with a brief selected bibliography of sources by and about North 
American Indian women. 

Stelner, Stan. The Ne* Indians . New York: Harper & Row, 1968. 

This journalistic account of Indian poli Jcal consciousness and movements of 
the sixties Includes a brief chapter on Indian women's Involvement, "The 
Changing Woman." 

Temkln, Merle, Carol Stern, ane Margie Bowker. "Listening to Native American 
Women." Heresies 13 (v.4, no.l, 1981): 17-21. 

Interviews with native women involved in activism around environmental and 
energy issues. (Not seen.) 

United States. Women's Bureau. American Indian Women . Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1977. 
(Not seen.) 



ERIC 



15 



United States. Women's Bureau. Native American Women and Equal Opportunity; 
How to Get Ahead In the Federal Government . Washington, DC: Women s Bureau; tor 
sale by Supt. or Docs.» U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1979. 

Indian women jc<» among the lowest peld workers 1n the U.S. economy, and they 
suffer the hlghost incidence of poverty of any group 1n the country. This 
report presents the results of a seminar conducted to explore related Issues. 
Includes an overview of the status of Indian working women, Information to aid 
women 1n s» a k1ng employment (especially with the federal government), and a 11st 
of recommendations to Improve the status of Indian women 1n the federal 
government . 

WUherow, Judith. "Native American Mother." Quest; A Feminist Quarterly 3, 
no .4 (Spring 1977): 29-33. 

WUherow responds to the qualifications specified by a "Mother of the Year" 
contest, showing how they embody the white, middle-class standards that 
consistently exclude or denigrate native women. 

Witt, Shirley H111. "The Brave-Hearted Women." Akwesasne Notes 8. no.2 (Early 
Summer 1976): 16-17. 

W1tt writes of the women active 1n the occupation of Wounded Knee and Its 
aftermath, with a particular focus on Anna Mae Aquash, murdered In early 1976. 
(See also Th e Life and Death of Anna Mae Aquash, by Johanna Brand 1n 
"Autobiography, Biography, Oral History" above.) 

Witt, Shirley Hill. "Native Women Today: Sexism and the Indian Woman." C1v1l 
Rights Digest 6, no .3 (Spring 1974): 29-35. 

Shirley W1tt discusses the education, employment, and health of native 
American women, focusing on the particular effects that the U.S. government's 
ass1m1lat1on-or1ented programs have had on women. 

Wittnock, Laura Waterman. "Native American Women: Twilight of a Long 
Maidenhood." In Comparative Perspectives of Third World Women , pp. 207 -228. 
Beve^y Lindsay, ed. new York: Praeger, l^o. 

WUtstock briefly reviews the historic*; legacy of white colonialism, 
racism, and genocide, then examines thr current status of Indian women, Indian 
women's organizations, and their response to feminism. 

WUtstock, Laura Waterman. "Native American Women 1n the Feminist M111eu." In 
Contemporary Native American Address , pp. 373-376. John R. Maestas, ed. Salt 
Lake City: Brlgham Young University, 1976. 

In an excerpt from a statement delivered at the 1975 Women 1n Law 
Conference, WUtstock points out that differences 1n tribal culture call Into 
question generalizations about all native women and their relation to feminism. 

W ords of Today's American Indian Women: Ohoyo Makachl: A First Collection o f 
Oratory by American I nd I an/ Alaskan Native Women . Compiled by Ohoyo Resource 
Center staff; Owanah Anaerson, Director; Sedeltd Verble, Editor. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Education; Wichita Falls, TX: distributed by Ohoyo, Inc., 
1981. 

D roceed1ngs of a conference held 1n 1981, with talks on the current status 
of Indian women, networking, education and educational equity, leadership 
development, and Indian women 1n administration. Seven additional speeches from 
other meetings are included. "Ohoyo Makachl" translates as "women speak (say 
that)." 



ERIC 



16 



16 



Yazzie, Ethelou. "Special Problems of Indian Women 1n Education." In 
Contemporary Native American Address , pp. 360-372. John R. Maestas, ed. Salt 
Lake City: Brlgham Young University, 1976. 

In an address to the 1975 Southwest Indian Women 1 s Conference, Yazzie 
reviewed the deficiencies of education available to Indian girls, and the 
requisites for Improving opportunities. 



5. Bibliographies and Reviews of the Literature 

Anderson, Owanah. Ohoyo One Thousand: A Resource Guide of American 
Indian/Alaska Native women . Wichita Fails, TX: Ohoyo Resource Center, 1982. 

Biographical directory to 1004 American Indian/Alaskan Native women from 231 
tribes, with skills 1n Indian priority and women 1 s agenda Issues. Individuals 
are listed alphabetically, and Indexed by area of expertise, tribe, and state. 
Listings Include address, tribe, birth place and date, occupation, and a lengthy 
description of the Individual's contributions and achievements. 

Bataille, Gretchen M., and Kathleen Mullen Sands. American Indian Women: 
Telling Their lives . Lincoln: University of NebrasFa Press, 1984. 

Batal »le and Sands examine the tradition of Indian women's autobiography 
from a literary perspective in this valuable guide to the genre. After 
contrasting Indian women's narratives w*th other types of autobiography (e.g., 
slave narratives) and analyzing the work of anthropologists in recording Indian 
life histories, the authors undertake more detailed analysis of several notable 
autobiographies: Papago Women by Marie Chona; Mountain Wolf Woman ; A Pima Past 
by Anna Moore Shaw; Me and Mine by Helen Sekaquaptewa; and Hal [breed Dy Maria 
Campbell. A final chapter speculates on future narratives by Indian women. The 
volume concludes with a fifty-page annotated bibliography of Indian women's 
autobiography (Including manuscripts) and biography, as well as selected 
ethnographic and historical studies, contemporary literature and criticism, and 
additional resources. Brief index. An earlier bibliography by Bataille 
appeared 1n Concerns: Newsletter of the Women's Caucus of the Modern Languages 
(Summer 19807T 

Beldler, Peter 6., and Marlon F. Egge. The American Indian in Short Fiction: An 
Annotated Bibliography . Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1979. 

Lists and provides plot summaries for 880 short stories by Indian and non- 
Indian authors published since 1890 that feature Indian characters. Researchers 
interested in the portrayal of Indian women 1n short fiction will find the 
volume 1 s organization frustrating: stories are listed alphabetically by author, 
and the subject index provides no categories specifically relevant to women. 
Also includes an Indian tribes index. 

Danky, James P., ed. Native American Periodicals and Newspapers, 1828*1982: 
Bibliography, Publishing Record^ and Holdings . Compiled by Maureen E. Hady. 
We st port, CT: Greenwood Press, 1984. 

Provides access to nearly 1200 Native American periodicals in 146 libraries 
in North America, reflecting 150 years of periodical publishing. Entries are 
arranged alphabetically by title, with additional access by geographic, editor, 
publisher, subject, catch-word-subtitles, and chronological Index. 



ERLC 



17 



17 



Green, Rayna. Native American Women; A Contextual Bibliography . Bloomlngton: 
Indiana University Press, 1983. 

Green's opening chapter (a revised version of an essay that originally 
appeared 1n the Winter 1980 Issue of Signs) reviews the literature on native 
women chronoK^ 11y, assessing trends from the late seventeenth century to the 
present with a critical and vigilantly political eye— from European tales of 
"princesses" and "saints* to ethnographic accounts of rites and customs; from 
autobiographies and narratives to endless studies of native "pathology/ The 
annotated bibliography which follows Includes 672 citations to bocks, articles, 
films, dissertations, reports, tapes, documents, and records, the bulk of them 
from the last twenty years. Green 1 s sharply evaluative annotations will help 
the researcher find her way through the diverse literature. Oate and subject 
Indexes follow. This bibliography omits creative literature and literary 
criticism, but Green's anthology. That's What She Said , helps fill 1n the gap. 

Green, Rayna. "Native American Women: A Review Essay." Signs: A Journal of 
Women In Culture and Society 6. no.2 (Winter 1980): 248-267. 

This definitive essay appears 1n revised form with an expanded, annotated 
bibliography 1n Green's Native American Women: A Contextual Bibliography . 

Jacobs, Sue-Ellen. "Berdache: A Brief Review of the Literature." Colorado 
Anthropology 1 (1977): 25-40. 

Review of the literature on Indian cross-sex behavior. (Not seen.) 

Koehler, Lyle. "Native Women of the Americas: A Bibliography." Frontiers: A 
Journal of Women Studies 6. no.3 (Fall 1981): 73-101. 

covers bibliographies, history, ethnography, religion, economics, sociology, 
biography and autobiography, art, and nonf lotion writing by native women. 
Unannotated. 

Oshana, Maryann. Women of Color: A Filmography of Minority and Third World 
Women . New York: Garland, 1985. 

describes nearly 150 English- language films made between 1930 and 1983 
featuring American Indian women characters. Includes films with stereotyped 
Indian characters, many even played by white women, as Oshana's aim was "to 
suggest the variety and types of characters to which women of color have been 
relegated" (p.1x). Films with native women characters— identified by tribe, 
when possible— are listed 1n the "Minority/Third World Classification Index." 

Weatherford, Elizabeth, with Eraella Seubert, eds. Native Americans on Film and 
Video . New York: Museum of the American Indian Heye Foundation, 1981. 

This thoroughly annotated guide lists twenty-nine films under the heading 
"Women" in the Index, but many core of the appro, lately four hundred films 
included here will be relevant to the study of native women. Primarily produced 
between 1970 and 1981, films were selected for "clarity of viewpoint, the input 
of Native Americans, technical quality and the documentation of critical issues 
and of information formerly unavailable on film or videotape" (p.6). 
Distributors addresses are provided. 



ERIC 



18 



18 



ERIC 



Addresses 

Akwesasne Notes , Mohawk Nation, via Roosevel town, NY 13683. 

American Indian Journal , 927 15th St., NW, Suite 200, Washington, DC 20005. 

American Indian Quarterly , University of California, Native American Studies, 
3415 Dwinelle H.Jl, Berkeley, CA 94720. 

Barre Publishers, 419 Park Ave. So., New York, NY 10016. 

Branching Out 1s no longer publishing. 

Bread A Roses 1s no longer publishing. 

Calyx , P.O. Box B, CorvalUs, OR 97339. 

Canadian Woman Studies , 204 Founders College, York University, 4700 Keele St., 
Downsvlew, Ontario M3J 1P3, Canada. 

Children's Press, Inc., 1224 W. Van Buren St., Chicago, IL 60607. 
Conditions , P.O. Box 56A, Van Brunt Station, Brooklyn, ny 11215. 
Contact II , 50 Broadway, 4th Floor, New York, NY 10004. 

FS, Feminist Studies , Women's Studies Program, University of Maryland, College 
pane, ID ZU/42. 

Frontiers , Women Studies Program, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309. 
Greenfield Review , R.D. 1, Box 80, Greenfield Center, NY 12833. 
Heresies, P.O. Box 766, Canal Street Station, New York, NY 11013. 
Indian Historian 1s no longer publishing. 

international Journal of Women's Studies , Eden Press, P.O. Box 51, St. Albans, 
VT 05478. 

Journal of American Indian Education, Arizona State University, Center for 
Indian Education, College of Education, Farmer 302, Tempe, AZ 852C7. 

Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press, Box 2753, Rockefeller Center Station, New 
York, NY 10185. 

Maenad 1s no longer publishing. 

Minnesota Historical Society Press, 690 Cedar St., St. Paul, MN 55101. 

Montana Council for Indian Education, 1810 N. Third Ave., Billings, MT 59101* 

Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, Broadway at 155th St., New York, 
NY 10032. 



IS 



19 



ERIC 



National Museums of Canada, 300 W. Laurier Ave., Ottawa, K1A 0M8-T, Canada. 

Native Self-sufficiency , Tribal Sovereignty Program, P.O. Box 10, Forestvllle, 
CA 95436. 

New America , American Studies Dept., University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 
87131. 

North Country Anvil , Box 37, Winona, MN 55957. 

off our backs , 1841 Columbia Rd., NW, Room 212, Washington, DC 20009. 

Ohoyo Resource Center, 2301 Midwestern Parkway, Suite 214, Wichita Falls, TX 
76308. 

Plainswoman . P.O. Box 8027, Grand Forks, NO 58202. 

Quest is no longer publishing. 

Seal Press, 312 Washington, Seattle, WA 98104. 

Shantlh, P\0. Box 125, Bay Ridge Station, Brooklyn, NY 11220. 

Sinister Wisdom , P.O. Box 1023, Rockland, ME 04841. 

Women's Press, 16 Baldwin St., Toronto, Ontario M5T 1L2, Canada. 



Compiled by Catherine Loeb 
February 1985 



20 



