DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 364 896 



CS 21A 134 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Hindman, Jane E. 

"I Think of That Mountain as My Maternal 
Grandmother": Constructing Self and Other through 
landscape* 
Dec 93 

8p, ; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Modern Language Association (Toronto, Canada, 
December 27-30, 1993). 

Speeches/Conference Papers (150) — Viewpoints 
(Opinion/Position Papers, Essays, etc.) (120) 

MFOl/PCOl Pius Postage, 

^American Indian Culture; American Indian Literature; 
American Indians; ^Cultural Context; Ethical 
Instruction; Hcgher Education; ''^Moral Values; *Oral 
Tradition; ''^Story Telling 

Apache (Tribe); ^Discourse Communities; Landscapes; 
^^Rhetorical Strategies 



ABSTRACT 

In the Western Apache discourse community, landscape 
is not just the realm of nature in its sheer physicality. Neither are 
places in the landscape to be read as metaphors. Rather, places, 
visual things by reason of their identification with aspects of 
social hierarchy are literally giving moral messages, are imploring 
people to live right. This phenomenon operates in many if not all 
Native American rhetorics, though the content of the cultural texts, 
the specific moral message, varies among communities. And because the 
context essential to interpreting the messages is part of the shared 
knowledge of the discourse community, the "Other" cannot hear them. 
Unlike Western rhetorics that privilege product over process and 
discourse over silence, and that assign to the speaker /wri ter 
responsibility for meaning-making. Native American rhetorics are 
listener responsible. The process of identifying with another 
discourse community, that is, of acquiring its shared knowledge, is 
lengthy and requires great patience, (RS) 



Vc Vc Vc * * * * * Vc i< Vf V c * * * ?V * ft >V *r ?V iV V c * ?V * A * ^: * * A * * * :V Vc -k iz Vc Ve Vc i^-ki^-k Vc k k * k k Vc 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

from the original document. ''^ 

*:(tiV^V***yc?V*:'?:^r*Vlfyr****ftftft***ftft**ft*ft:^c*Vi:ftftftyi::fr*^* 



U.». OCnkMTMNTOF CDUCATWN "PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THI^ 

OllK*<i>{<iuuMK..iRn«.rch.Mimixov.m«M MATERIAL HAS p^cn GRANTED BY 

toocATioN*i.«»uRC6|.NFORM*r«ON j^^^ £^ Hlndnian 



"Ij^OThit documtni ht» b««n reproduced 
r«c*iv*d from ihc ptiton or (MOvmzaiiOn 

°S;>'S;iSJrXu^;y*'^*""*'^''''"^^^^ 'I think o^f that mountain as ray maternal grandmother' i 
— , , , Constructing SeH and Other Through Landscape 

• Po«ni» of or opinion* Mated in ih.sdoco * TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 

meni do r^ot n«c«SMfily r«pr«»«r^j ptficui iki ir/-»Di* ATir^».i ^.ri.-rer, ..-r..«v 

OCRi po».tK5n or pot.cy IN FORMATION CENTER (ERIC).'* 

An Important impetus ior this paper quietly abides, euen now as I speak, 
on a certain portion oi the Hugh Norrls Trail, the leg that ascends to Uasson 
Peak, the highest point in the Tucson Mountains O'f southern Arizona. For over 
^ fourteen years now, I have been worshipping the sunset ^rom a colossal hunk oi 
^ rock outcropping about a mile up this trail. This history su^^uses the hike 
^ up with significant sites along the way that I haven^t precisely named but 

that I certainly recognize and that evoke important lessons 5or me whenever I 
O go. Sometimes I tell people the "names," the stories oi the places when they 
^ come up the trail with me. Only a <ffw hundred yards <from the trailhead, I 

might announce, "This is where I sat with Diane^s brother on our first date," 
and point to large-boulder wi th'-smooth-f 1 at-top-good-f or-si tt i ng, the rock 
where I learned about getting rid early oi men who don^t like the outdoors but 
do like to Keep me trapped Inside where they do their groping. "And here, 
here^s where I used to have to stop to catch my breath when I still smoked 
cigarettes," I might say as we sail past rock-ln-a-bend-wi th-cactus-growing- 
from-top." "Oh, and look, here^s the rock where Thorn took that picture oi my 
wrecked face after that bike accident I had when I was drunk. God, that life 
was awful. And speaking of which. > .over there^'s where I once saw a vision 
years ago when I was doing mushrooms: "Eat at Ernle^s" was spelled out by the 
plants on the land. Down there, behind that ledge, that cubby-hole-rock-wi th- 
the-black-stai n is where 1 built a fireplace and actually hauled firewood all 
the way up the mountain just so I could sit on my rock and stare at the open 
sky and the fire at the same time. My attorney ex-boyfriend scolded me for a 
wish so silly. No wonder we didn^'t make It." And then, eventually, even with 
a new friend, we simply stop talking and just look and look and look, absorb- 
ing the record and myth of the land. 

As you can surely see, this place is most vital to me, to my history. 
It^s where I take people if I already know that I like them or if I want to 
discover whether or not I might. It^s a good spot to take prospective 
friends/lovers because, by telling them the stories of my place, I construct 
myself for them, show them the self that I see myself as and that I want them 
to see me as. Similarly, In their responses to the place and to my stories 
about what makes it "mine," they construct themselves in ways I know how to 
measure. I can decide with great accuracy if they are friend or — like Diane^s 
brother — foe. And most of all, "my" hunk of rock is an Ideal place to take 
old friends because I^m at home there, because together we review the stories 
of the spot and reinterpret them in light of what we know now. Or maybe as we 
walk up the mountain, we create new stories to tell and re*tell. This is a 
place where selves are continually being re- and de-constructed. 
, Perhaps you too have had such an experience with landscape and language. 

^ If so, I Invite you to think on that experience, your place. If, like mine, 

!2 your education and upbringing are primarily western and jinglo — this sort of 

^ relationship with the land might best Invoke for you an aspect of American 

^ Indian rhetorics that I explore today. For in that episttmology there^'s much 

more consequence and significance in knowing a landscape than simply apprecia- 
tion of scenes and sounds, of nature in Its sheer physical ity. Landscape 
speaks more than an imperative to respect and care for the environment. In 
what I call Native American rhetorics — an American Indian understanding of 
text and ethos — landscape and language are inextricably connected, story and 
place are indistinguishable, morality and setting are interdependent in Native 



3 



2 



BEST COPY AVAIUBIE 



Grandnother Mountain — 2 

American rhetorics. 

Keith Basso^s article called "Stalk ing wi th Stories' explains this 
interconnection well. Based on some peculiar descriptions oi landscape he^'d 
heard irom the Uestern Apaches living in the Cibeque conimunityi Basso examines 
"names, places, and moral narrative among the Uestern Apache' and the 
provocative descriptions oi their land that his informants gave: 

I think oi that mountain called ^white rocks lie above in a compact 
cluster^ as if it i^ere my maternal grandmother [one woman says] . I 
recall stories oi how it once Mas at that mountain. The stories told to 
me were like arrows. Elsewhere, hearing that mountainous name I see it. 
Its name is like a picture. Stories go to work on you like arrows. 

and 

One time I went to L.A. training for mechanic. It was no good, sure no 
good. I start d inking. . .getting into trouble with my wife. It was 
bad, I forget about this country here around Cibeque. I forget the names 
and stories. 1 don^t hear them in my mind anymore. I forget how to live 
right, forget how to be strong. (Basso, pp, 98-97) 

The genre of stories to which these speakers are referring is the 
historical (as opposed to mythic) tale. Unlike other Ulestern Apache tales, 
historical tales f ormulaical ly open and close with a place name designating 
where the events of the story occurred. This practice accounts for the 
incredible density of distinct place names in a relatively sparsely populated 
area like Cibeque. Because in the Apache language one word place names 
constitute a complete sentence (as in 'men-stand-above-here-and-there' or 
■coarse-textured-rocks-1 ie-abovc-in-a-dense-cluster') , the names conjure a 
distinct image of a location. The historical tales set in these specific 
locations are about brief events that happened in the actual (as opposed to 
the mythic) past and that 'focus on persons who suffer misfortune as the 
consequence of actions that violate Apache standards for acceptable social 
behavior' (101). Their purpose is to 'alarm and criticize social delinquents 
<or as the Apache say to ''shoot'' them)' <100); in other words, the stories are 
'^about^ the system of rules and v^.lues according to which Apaches expect each 
other to organize and regulate their lives' (101). Clearly, the tales are a 
means by which Uestern Apache construct themselves. 

Further, the stories provide a means by which inhabitants impute morality 
into their physical surroundings, make their land their ethical center, for 
the places themselves are seen as containing the "morals' of the stories. 
This view of 1 and-as-ethos is not unique to the Uestern Apache. Hoijer^s 
explanation of Navajo storytelling claims that 'unless narrated i^ents are 
spat ial ly anchored their significance is somehow reduced and cannot be 
properly assessed' (101). In talking about 'Language aiid Literature from a 
Pueblo Indian Perspect i ve |* Leslie SiK^o also describes this nexus of 
landscape and story: 'stories cannot be separated from geographical loca- 
tions, from actual physical places within the land. . .And the stories are so 
much a part of these places that it is almost impossible for future genera- 
tions to lose the stories because there are so many imposing geological 
elements' (49). Thus, a statement made by Basso's consultant Annie Peaches, 
'The land makes people live right,' can be seen as a literal claim. 



Grandraotrtri' Mountain — 3 



Silicons decUration that future generat i ons wl 1 1 not be able to lose the 
stories because oi the imposition oi geological elements brings into focus 
what some Native American rhetorics describe as landscape's capacity to stalk 
people. "A great deal oi the story is believed to be inside the listeneri" 
she says, and thus we see that, in addition to being about the history oi 
Csayl Pueblo Indians, these stories are also about the audience; "the story- 
teller's role is to draw the story out oi the listeners' (57). Basso confirms 
that for the Uestern Apache: 

every historical tale is also 'about' the person at whom it is directed. 
• .[for its telling is] always prompted by an individual having committed 
one or more social offenses to which the act of narration, together with 
the tale itself, is Intended as a critical and remedial response" (108). 

Let me very briefly explain one of Basso's examples, but please Keep in 
mind how stripped of its rich context such a necessarily brief recounting must 
be. The place is cal 1 ed men-stand-above-here-and-there . This place is 
associated with a story about an Apache policeman who arrested another Apache 
for kill ing a white man's cow during a time of disease and malnutrition for 
the Apaches. The Apache policeman character is an object of ridicule for even 
think ino about arresting a fellow Apache for what is seen as a totally 
acceptable butchering of the cow for food, the Apache policeman character 
makes a fool of himself in this story which serves as a "harsh indictment of 
persons who join with outsiders against members of their own community and 
who. . .parade the attitudes and mannerisms of white men' <Basso 108) It 
happened at men-stand-above-here-and-there . 

During Basso's stay on the reservation, this story was told at a small 
birthday party by the maternal grandmother of a 17 year old Apache woman. Two 
weeks earlier the teenager had appeared at a girls' puberty ceremonial in 
Cibeque wearing pink rollers in her hair despite the fact that it's very 
important for the wanen to keep their hair loose and flowing during the 
ceremony. Soon after hearing her grandmother tell the story of the would-be 
white Apache policemani the young woman left the party, because — as the 
grandmother said — "I shot her with an arrow." Two years 1 ater , the girl 
explained to Basso how she realized that her grandmother had been talking 
about her in that story and so she threw her rollers away. Uhen Basso pointed 
out the place called men-stand-above-here-and-there , a place only a few 
hundred yards from the young woman's camp, the woman smiled and said softly in 
her own language, "I know that place. It stalks me every day." (110) 

This example demonstrates how crucial understanding context is to the 
comprehension of an American Indian storytelling event. The Uestern Apache 
historical tales, for instance, are always accompanied by a tacit but essen- 
tial metacommunicati ve message from speaker to hearer, the gist of which is 
this: 

I know that you have acted in a way similar or analogous to the way in 
which someone acted in the story I am telling you. If you continue to 
act in this way, something similar or analogous to what happened to the 
character in the story might also happen to you. (108) 

As in the African American practice of signifying, in this t^'pe of storytell- 
ing, the 1 istener bears the responsibility for interpreting and choosing 



4 



Grandnothtr Mount4in — 4 

whether or not to act on the netacomuni cat i ve message; even though others in 
the audience nay 'fully understand 1:he speaker^s intent, they do not discuss it 
(at least not in the context in which the speaker delivers the message and 
probably never in the presence o^ the intended hearer). The listener 'for whom 
the message is intended may or may not ever verbally express her comprehension 
oi the message. In addition, her comprehension may, in 'fact probably will, 
occur outside O'f the storytelling event. But when it does occur , as the 
Apache say. 

All O'f a sudden it h i ts you! It^s like an arrow, they say. Sometimes it 
Just bounces oH — it^s too soft and you don^t think about anything. But 
when it^s strong it goes in deep and starts working on your mind right 
away. No one says anything to you, only that story is all, but now you 
know that people have been watching you and talking about you. They 
don^t like how you have been acting. (Basso 111-112) 

[Further], the Apaches contend that i'f the message is taken to heart by 
the person at whont the tale is aimed — and if, in conjunction with lessons 
drawn 'from the tale itseH, he or she resolves to improve his or her 
behavior — a lasting bond will have been created between that individual 
and the site or sites at which event in the tale took place (Basso 108- 
109) 

This bond between a person and a place enables the landscape's capacity 
to stalk someone. A similar bond between the storyteller and the intended 
target O'f the story connects the geographical site O'f the tale with the 
storyteller. These stalking storytellers are usually the grandparents, aunts, 
or uncles O'f the target, that is, the one intended to hear the story, the one 
who needs moral direction. Thus, someone who has been "shot' by her grand- 
mother's arrow, who's heard her grandmother tell a story that happened at a 
particular mountain, may come to think O'f that mountain as her maternal 
grandmother. Long a^fter the grandparents or uncles or aunts who are the 
storytellers are gone, the 

geographical locations, together with the crisp mental "pictures" O'f them 
presented by their names, serve admirably in this capacity, inviting 
people to recall their earlier 'failings and encouraging them to resolve, 
once again, to avoid them in the 'future. (Basso 113) 

Ue can see how 'for the Uestern Apache, landscape is the ethos O'f a 
people, how geographical features 'function as "indispensable mnemonic pegs on 
which to hang the moral teachings O'f their history" (Basso 114). An "objecti- 
fication O'f the symbolic content O'f cultural categories" ( Portrai t 16). 
Landscape becomes a cultural text itseH, a text that can be read and inter- 
preted. 

Thus, we can also see the sense in Silko's claim that it's impossible 'for 
'future generations to 'forget these stories because the geology is so imposing. 
Ue can understand the 'former mechanic trainee saying that because he 'forgot . 
about the land when he moved to L.A., he 'forgot how to live right and be 
strong. Those o'f you 'familiar with N. Scott Momaday's House O'f Dawn might 
recall the catastrophes that be'fell Abel when he left the land O'f his home and 
went to L.A.. In 'fact, in "Han Hade O'f Uords," Homaday declares that 



5 



Y 



Srandnothtr Mountain — 5 

The Native American ethic with respect to the physical uorld is a matter 
oi reciprocal appropriation: appropriation in which man invests himseH 
in the landscape, and at the same time Incorporates the landscape into 
his own most fundamental experience. , .[The Indian! is someone who 
thinks O'f himseH in a particular way and his idea comprehends his 
relationship to the physical world. He imagines himseH in terms o^f that 
relationship, (qtd. in Basso 115) 

Certainly we can see the logic in the notion that the Native teerican con- 
structs him or her self through landscape. 

By extension might we not also conclude that the Native American con- 
structs 'Other' through landscape as well? Consider, ^or example, how 
contextually bound is the rhetorical force of the historical tales and the 
interpretive functions of the sites in which they occurred, li the 'story- 
teller's role Cisl* . .to draw the story out of the listeners' (Silko 57), 
then understanding the tales requires a 'kind of shared experience [which] 
grows out of a strong community base' <Silko 57). Those who do not share the 
experiences, are not of the community^ are 'Other': they don't understand the 
language and they certainly don't have the power to speak it. 

Though some of us may be unfamiliar with the concept of landscape itself 
as cultural text, this process of constructing self and other through dis- 
course is certainly not unfamiliar, not unique to Native American discourse. 
In any discourse community, 'Otherness' is determined by a lack of power, a 
lack that in part stems from insufficient knowledge of a very particular sort, 
the knowledge that one must have in order to know what "things" are say- 
ing/meaning to speakers of a certain language. Consider Kenneth Burke's 
concept of identification. In 'Rhetoric, Poetics and Philosophy' Burke 
discusses the impact of this concept the notion that things are "visual 
words'. . .[which arel in effect communicating such sheerly rituralistic 
images as '1 am round' or 'I am farther off than I see^' <27). Such an 
empistemology insists that "things" cannot communicate values, are not 
cultural texts; rather, values are communicated by metaphor. Burke claims, 
however, that 

the concept of 'identification' brings up further considerations. . .in 
the intermediate relationship between the realm of nature <in its sheer 
physical ity) and the realm of the social. . .Things, as 'visual words,' 
are not Just saying the kind of things that some naturalists might 
consider as literal geometric and mechanistic 'facts.' Things, by reason 
of their identification wi th aspects of social hierarchy, are saying 
things like. . .'I am a threat to the likes of you' or 'I stand for the 
promise of reward.' [Because! natural things become identified with 
social judgments. • .they are not Just 'visual words,' as in Turbayne's 
metaphor, [ratherl they embody in all literalness, for man the symbol- 
using animal, a realm of motivation. (27-28) 

Ue have seen that in the Uestern Apache discourse community landscape is 
not Just the realm of nature in its sheer physicality. Neither are places in 
the landscape to be read as metaphors. Rather, places, visual 'things [in the 
landscape] by reason of their identification with aspects of social hierarchy' 
are literally giving mo'^al messages, are imploring people to live reght. Ue 
have also seen that this phenomenon operates in many if not all Native 
American rhetorics, though of course the content of the cultural texts, the 

^ BEST copy AVHUBU 

ERIC^ 



Grandmothtr HountAin 



~ 6 



specific moral message, varies among communities. And because the context 
essential to interpreting the messages is part oi the shared knowledge of the 
discourse coonunity, the "Other" can^t hear them. Not unless or until 'Other' 
can experience the landscape through the eyes and ears of members of the 
discourse connunity will 'Other' learn landscape^'s identification with aspects 
of the Native American social hierarchy. 

Unlike Uestern rhetorics that privilege product over process and dis- 
course over silence, that assiijn to the speaker/writer responsibility for 
meaning-makingy Native American rhetorics are listener responsible. Story- 
tellers leave many spaces, many gaps for the audience to fill in with its 
shared knowledge. Burke might call this persuasion by enthymeme, an argument 
whose missing proposition is filled in by the audience, by a mutual identifi- 
cation that draws them closer together. In Silko^s famous comparison of the 
oral tradition to a spider^s web, she describes the emergent quality of Native 
American rhetorics: 'As with the web, the structure will emerge as it is made 
and you must simply listen and trust, as the Pueblo people do, that meaning 
will be made* <54) . 

The process oi identifying wi th another discourse community, that is of 
acquiring its shared knowledge, is lengthy and requires great patience. At 
the outset of Keith Basso's two year project that resulted in 'Stalking with 
Stories,* for instance, his primary collaborator, Nick Thompson, tells him to 
'learn the names of all these places.' None oi the logistics or interpreta- 
tion of the practice of stalking with stories was discussed until Basso had 
learned the names of hundreds of places in the community and listened to the 
stories of events that had happened in those places. Meaning could not emerge 
until he had acquired some of the shared knowledge of the Uest?r=n Apache 
living around Cibeque, until he had shed at least some of his status as 
'other' to that discourse community. The prerequisite was long and careful 
1 istening. 

The conclusion I draw here Is that if I want to be able to read land- 
scape as a cultural text, I need to listen to it. As an obvious 'Other' to 
these Native American rhetorics I've been discussing but an equally obvious 
lover of landscape, I contend that if I want to understand even a bit about 
the 'shared knowledge' that an American Indian tradition brings to ^he land, 
then I need to be silent and listen. Perhaps I need to dedicate av many as 
fourteen years to getting to know one place. I need to attend to an Indian 
credo like the one N. Scott Homaday presents in *Han Made of Words': 

a [wolman ought to concentrate. . . on the remembered earth. ISlhe ought 
to give. . .up to a particular landscape. . .to wonder about it, to dwell 
upon it. [Slhe ought to imagine that Islhe touches it with Iher] hands 
at every season and listens to the sounds that are made upon it. . .to 
imagine the creatures that are there and all the faintest motions in the 
wind. . .to recollect the glare of no one and all the colors of the dawn 
and dusk. (164-16?}) 



Jane E. Hindknan 
Engl ish Department 
Unlwerlsty of Arizona 
Tucson A2 85721 



i 



Grandmother Mountain — 7 



Uorks Cited 

Basso, Keith. Portraits o-f 'The Uhitenian;* Linouistic Play and Cultural 
Symbols ^ono the Uestern Apache . New York: Cambridge UP, 1979. 



. ''StalkinQ with Stories': Names, Places, and Moral Narrative 

AnonQ the Uestern Apache.' Ueste_rn Apache Lanauaoe and Culture; Essay 

in Linguistic Anthropology. Tucson: Univ. o^f Airzona Press, 1990, 99- 

137. 



Burke, Kenneth. "Rhetoric, Poetics, and Philosophy." Rhetoric. Philosophy, 
and Literatures An Exploration . Ed. Don M. Burks. West Lafayette: 
Purdue UP, 1978. 15-33. 



Homaday, N. Scott. House Made o-f Dawn . New York: Harper Row, 1966. 



"Man Made o-f Uords." 



Silko, Leslie Marmon. 'Language and Literature ^rom a Pueblo Indian Perspec 
tlve.' English Literature: Open! no Up the Canon . Eds. Leslie Fielder 
and Houston Baker. Baltimore: John Hopkins UP, 1981. 54-72. 



8 



