DOCUMENT RESUME 

ED 389 482 RC 020 320 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 



Archibald, Joanne; And Others 

Organization of Educational Services in Sparsely 

Populated Regions of Canada. 

Department of Indian Affairs and Northern 

Development, Ottawa (Ontario). 

Jun 95 

190p. 

Information Analyses (070) — Reports - 
Research/Technical (143) — Tests/Evaluation 
Instruments (160) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC08 Plus Postage. 

Administrative Organization; *American Indian 
Education; Canada Natives; Case Studies; Consortia; 
Educational Administration; Educational Change; 
Educational Cooperation; Educational Research; 
Education Service Centers; Elementary Secondary 
Education; Foreign Countries; intermediate 
Administrative Units; Rural Areas; *Rural Education; 
School Districts; Self Determination; *Shared 
Resources and Services; *Small Schools; *Technical 
Assistance 

*Canada; Cooperative Educational Service Agencies 



ABSTRACT 

This report identifies and examines current 
approaches to the provision of second- and third-level ser ices in 
provincial school systems serving remote areas of Canada, and 
assesses the applicability of these approaches for First Nations 
schools. Second-level services are typically provided at the school 
board or system level and include curriculum adaptation, consultants, 
legal advice, and program implementation. Third-level services are 
offered by the provincial ministry and include curriculum 
development, research, evaluation, policy development, and general 
goals or standards for education. A literature review examines 
advantages and disadvantages of small school-community contexts, the 
central question of equity regarding rural student access to a 
variety of programs and educational benefits, and trends in 
administrative organization toward cooperation and sharing. Eleven 
case studies describe and analyze educational innovations in sparsely 
populated areas of Canada and the United States. Each case describes 
clients served; types of educational support services; financing and 
scope of services; control, decision making, and accountability; 
adaptations; and outcomes. Five developments were initiated by 
governments primarily in response to political and economic factors, 
three came about because of school board action to solve problems and 
improve services, and three were the result of communities driven by 
minority cultural aspirations. Organizational arrangements include 
cooperative services agencies, consortia, multidistrict school 
boards, interdistrict cooperative agreements, a distance learning 
center, and (U.S.) regional educational laboratories. In all cases, 
the emphasis was on decentralization, collaboration, and local 
control. However, collaborative processes are slower than 
hierarchical, ones; implementation of cooperative arrangements was 
usually slow" and sometimes painful. The last section of the report 
addresses implications for Aboriginal use of provincial aducational 
services. The goal of self-determination must guide decisions about 
how services, practices, and policies from non-Native education 
rr.9^> institutions are screened and adapted to First Nations schools. 

Appendices contain 86 references, student and parent survey results, 
and other data collected in the study. (LP) 




W- - 



'■■..r-i&m 



Research & Analysis Directorate 



-'Mm 

• If 



.3* 




ORGANIZATION OF EDUCATIONAL 
SERVICES IN SPARSELY POPULATED 
REGIONS OF CANADA 



Direction de la recherche 
et de l'analyse 



" ."••^ki 



ml 



>A,VT 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



^ »ec« 



U S DEPARTMENT Of EDUCATION 
Otitce ot Educai*onai Research and tmcwovemeni 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 
TThis doc u men i has been reproduced *s 
received from the p«fion or organisation 
ongmattng it 
tl Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction Quality 

• Points ol v«* or opinions staled m this docu- 
ment do not necasu'ity represent official 
OERI position or policy 



'BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



ORGANIZATION OF EDUCATIONAL 
SERVICES IN SPARSELY POPULATED 
REGIONS OF CANADA 



Prepared by 

Joanne Archibald 
Dr. Eber Hampton 
Dr. Earl Newton 

of the 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College 
June 1995 



The views expressed in this report are those of 
the authors and not necessarily those of the 
Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



This project could not have been completed without the support and contributions of 
dozens of people. Office staff personnel in the departments of education, universities and 
school boards have been very helpful and pleasant in assisting to arrange visits and 
interviews and in providing print materials. Education officials, usually directors of 
education, were generous in sharing time and valuable insights. The success of the 
projects examined in this study is due in no small measure to outstanding leadership - to 
people who see how services to students in small schools covld be improved and who 
worked effectively with others to bring it about. This whole study revolved around 
Marlene Lerat-Stetner and others in the executive offices of the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College. Personnel with the Department of Indian Affairs and Northern 
Development Canada made valuable contributions. Lori Hlady, as research assistant, 
located and synthesized related literature and research. It is with much gratitude to all 
of these people that the three members of the study team submit this report with a sense 
of humility and respect. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 



Executive Summary i 

1.0 Introduction 1 

2.0 The Study 3 

2.1 Objective 3 

2.2 Research Questions 3 

2.3 Methodology 3 

2.4 Assumptions, Delimitations, Limitations 4 

2.5 Definitions 5 

2.6 Organization of the Report 6 

3.0 Literature Review 7 

3.1 Organization for Education in Canada 7 

3.2 Education in Sparsely Populated Regions 8 

3.2.1 Small Communities 9 

3.2.2 Small Schools 15 

3.2.3 Trends and Issues 20 

3.3 Innovative Approaches to the Provision of Educational Services 26 

3.3.1 Australia 26 

3.3.2 United States 27 

3.3.3 Canada 29 

3.4 Change in Educational Organizations 30 

4.0 Case Studies Within Provincial Systems 35 

4.1 Conceptual Framework 35 

4.2 Case Studies 38 

4.2.1 The Northwest Ontario School Boards' 

Cooperative ServicesProgram 39 

4.2.2 North Bay Region School Boards' Consortia 43 

4.2.3 Educational Reform in New Brunswick 47 

4.2.4 The Clare-Argyle Acadian School Board 51 

4.2.5 Francophone School Boards in Saskatchewan 53 

4.2.6 Commission Scolaire du Littoral 57 

4.2.7 Shared Services in Saskatchewan 61 

4.2.8 The Aboriginal Education Branch 65 

4.2.9 The Alberta Distance Learning Centre 69 

4.2.10 The Frontier School Division 74 

4.2.11 U.S. Regional Educational Laboratories 79 

4.3 Summary 84 



ERIC 



Page 



5.0 Educational Services for First Nations 89 

5.1 Deconstructing the Primary Myth of Discovery 89 

5.2 First Nations People Look at Educational Services: Four Options 95 

5.2.1 Option 1, Implement current best practices 96 

5.2.2 Option 2, Reject non-First Nations practices 98 

5.2.3 Option 3, Take the best of both worlds 99 

5.2.4 Option 4, Value Based choice 99 

5.3 Traditional First Nations Values Related to Education 100 

5.4 Recommendations for a First Nations Process of 
Developing Second and Third Level Educational Services 

for First Nations Schools 102 

5.4.1 An action/values process 102 

5.4.2 First Nations university initiatives 104 

5.4.3 Governance 104 



References 
Appendices 



106 
113 



Appendix A: Sample Student and Parent Survey Results 
Appendix B: Pathways to Implementing Change 

Appendix C: Northwest Ontario School Board's Cooperative Services Program 

• Matrix of Services to Clients 

• Agreement 

Appendix D: Educational Reform in New Brunswick 

• Ministerial Statement - Schools, Orderly Places of Learning 

• Ministerial Statement - Community Involvement in Schools 
Appendix E: Commission Scolaire du Littoral, Quebec 

• Organizational Structure 
Appendix F: Shared Services in Saskatchewan 

• Documentation 

Appendix G: Aboriginal Education Branch 

• Contract for Curriculum Development 
Appendix H: Alberta Distance Learning Centre 

• ADLC Learning System - Course Components 
Appendix I: Frontier School Division 

• Bridging School and Community Response Teams 

• Board Priorities Development Process 

• Student Needs Referral Process 

Appendix J: United States Regional Educational Laboratories 

• Goals 2000: Educate America Act - Titles 

• Section 319 - State and Local Government Control 

• Regional Educational Laboratories - Legislation 



a 

ERIC 



LIST OF TABLES 



Page 



TABLE 1 Rural-Urban Differences 11 

TABLE 2 Potential Costs and Benefits of 

Rural Communities and Education 12 

TABLE 3 Twenty Clues to Rural Community Survival 14 

TABLE 4 Advantages and Disadvantages of Small Rural Schools 18 

TABLE 5 Capitalizing on the Context of Small School Communities 19 

TABLE 6 Strategic Planning-Foothills School Division 24 

TABLE 7 Strategic Planning-Abbotsford Model 25 

TABLE 8 Classification of Major State Rural Strategies 28 

TABLE 9 Summary of Case Studies 85 



LIST OF FIGURES 

FIGURE 1 Processes Common to all Organizations 3 1 

FIGURE 2 Framework for Analyzing Organizational Behavior 36 



0 

ERIC 



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



They told me to tell you the time is now. 
They want you to know how they feel. 
So listen carefully, look toward the sun. 
The Elders are watching. 
(Bouchard & Vickers, 1990). 

The objectives of this study were to (1) identify and examine current approaches to the 
provision of second and third level services in provincial school systems serving remote 
areas of Canada and (2) to assess their applicability for First Nations schools. Research 
questions focused attention on: clients being served; types and scope of service; process 
for decision making, control and accountability; adaptations; and outcomes. The research 
methodology included: 

(1) Gathering data by means of a review of current literature about small, rural 
communities and schools in Canadian, Australian, and American contexts, to 
identify trends and issues. 

(2) Examining ten innovative approaches from across Canada for the provision of 
services. For each case study, a site visit was made, an interview was conducted 
and print material were reviewed. Case study findings were analyzed within 
conceptual frameworks which stressed political, structural, human resource and 
symbolic/cultural aspects of educational organizations. 

(3) Two members of the research team also developed a First Nations conceptual 
framework with which to assess the applicability of the second and third level 
services. 

Literature Review 

The literature review indicated that, while both advantages and disadvantages of small 
school-community contexts are recognized, there is a central issue around the question of 
equity - that is, equity of student access to a variety of programs and equity of benefit 
from schooling. The Charter. Treaties and recent court decisions combined with stronger, 
united voices of people from isolated communities add urgency to the issue. It is further 
exacerbated by economic problems, declining population (enrollment), public pressure for 
accountability and lack of agreement about indicators of quality in schooling. The 
literature also included reports of many new approaches to addressing the equity issue by 
improving support services to small schools in sparsely populated regions. 

Case Studies 

Five of the innovative approaches were initiated by governments primarily in response to 
political and economic factors, three have come about because of the response of school 
boards to technical problems and three are the result of groups of communities being 



i 



driven by cultural aspirations. Clients range from governments wanting to offer 
leadership and service to all partners in education to single purpose projects for volume 
purchasing, Aboriginal education, distance teaming or improving service to students with 
special needs. There was found to be emphasis in all cases on decentralization, 
collaboration and local control. Accountability also received considerable attention, not 
only through the usual financial audits and elections, but also by means of conditional 
funding, regular program reviews and contracting out for services. 

Success is associated with several factors. In the community-initiated projects strong 
minority cultural factors (Acadian, Francophone and Anglophone) provided impetus and 
focus to the efforts of the people. Provincial governments in each case responded with 
new political structures and financial support and the minority groups agreed to work 
within provincial legislation for education. Other examples of integrated, focused 
developments are the numerous reforms in New Brunswick and the general operations of 
the Frontier School Division in Manitoba. Consortia of school boards for purchasing, 
consulting, supervision, distance education and other services are to be commended for 
trying new approaches but they typically lack integration with other aspects of schooling 
and encounter difficulties because strategic planning, problem solving, decision making 
and conflict resolution skills have not been developed to a level equal to the challenges 
and tasks before the groups. A related finding is that consortia usually do not have strong 
information systems as a basis for decision making, accountability and evaluation. 

In many ways the innovative approaches investigated in this study are somewhere 
between two world views: (1) the traditional, hierarchical organizations for education 
based on beliefs in absolute truths and relatively stable conditions and, (2) emerging 
paradigms of constructed knowledge, shared leadership and networks of lifelong learners 
relating to a complex and uncertain environment. The concluding section of the paper 
provides some insight into the perspectives of First Nations toward support services for 
education and how they could be effectively implemented. 

First Nations Conceptual Framework 

In order to develop a First Nations conceptual framework, for evaluating applicability of 
public/provincial educational second and third level services, the research team 
acknowledged the need to stop the predominant approach of education for assimilation, 
which has predominated First Nations schooling since contact with the non-native 
missionaries. The goal of education for self-determination was advocated, with a 
recommendation to re-examine the 1973 policy of Indian Control of Indian Education, for 
philosophical and conceptual guidance. The question What does First Nations control of 
First Nations education mean? must guide decisions about how services, practices, and 
policies from the non-Native education institutions are screened and adapted to First 
Nations schools. The research team recommended the development and articulation of 
First Nations community cultural values to provide the framework to identify, select, 
implement,, and evaluate the second and third level educational services from provincial 
educational systems. Cultural traditions, and stories were provided as examples of 
processes to develop a true First Nations educational framework. 



ERIC 



Four options were identified as possible approaches: 

(1) to implement current best practices from provincial educational systems; 

(2) to reject non-First Nations practices; 

(3) to take the best of both worlds; and 

(4) to develop a value based choice. 

These options were presented as matters of degree rather than mutually separate 
alternatives. 

Further research is required to realistically evaluate the applicability of second and third 
level services and to assist in the development of appropriate First Nations educational 
services which will achieve the goal of education for self-determination. Suggested 
guideline for the research included: 

- it should be contracted to a First Nations organization; 

-*j*t should have direct participation of a sample of Band schools and educational 
authorities; 

- it should use an action research/case study methodology; 

- it should suggest some priorities for services and delivery arrangements; 

- it should test an implementation strategy and make recommendations for 

implementation; 

The implementation strategy should: 

- identify and describe in a local context First Nations values for making 

educational decisions; 

- develop concrete examples of values for use in educational processes; 

- develop an inventory of First Nations educational assets at the school, 

community/tribal Nation, and educational authority levels; 

- develop a menu of second and third level services to be provided; 

- set up a delivery arrangement with associated costs and evaluation processes; 

- implement services and continue ongoing evaluation of outcomes. 



ORGANIZATION FOR SECOND AND THIRD LEVEL SERVICES IN 

ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOLS IN SPARSELY 

POPULATED 

REGIONS OF CANADA 



1.0 INTRODUCTION 



Rural education has been a focus of attention in many countries for most of this century. 
In 1908 the National Rural Education Association was established in the United States. 
Australia has always been a leader in providing for education in vast, remote areas. 
Formal, international studies of education for rural development were commissioned about 
twenty years ago by IBRD (World Bank) and UNICEF in countries such as Cuba, Kenya, 
Sri Lanka, Colombia and the Philippines (Ahmed and Coombs, 1975). Later, the Centre 
for Educational Research and Innovation and the Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development (OECD) sponsored a study of rural education in countries such as 
Portugal, Scotland, New Zealand, Finland and Norway. In this decade: burgeoning global 
population has caused leaders to think that more people will have to move to sparsely 
populated areas; economic problems have highlighted the importance of developing 
human resources in all parts of the country; environmental concerns include damage done 
in remote areas by agriculture, mining, lumber and fishing industries; shifting value 
systems question whether "bigger is better"; technological advances make it possible to 
live in the country but be connected to the larger society; and the stronger voices of 
Aboriginal and other non-urban groups have combined to put learning and living in 
sparsely populated areas on national agendas. Considerations such as these prompted 
Canada's Department of Indian and Northern Development (DIAND) to have an 
investigation done into second and third level services for provincial elementary and 
secondary schools in rural and remote regions of the country. 



2.0 THE STUDY 

2.1 OBJECTIVE 

The objective of this study was to identify the current approaches to the 
organization and scale of second and third level educational support services 
provided to non-Aboriginal elementary and secondary schools in sparsely 
populated regions of Canada. 



2.2 RESEARCH QUESTIONS 

For each case studied answers to the following questions were sought. 

a) What is the profile of the client population? 

b) What types of services are available? 

c) Are there "rules of thumb" or regulations governing the extent to which 
services are provided? 

d) What are the processes for decision-making, control and accountability 
at each level? 

e) How do the organizations adapt to changing environmental 
circumstances? 

f) What organizational designs, processes, administration, and/or 
agreements are most effective in sparsely populated areas. 



2.3 METHODOLOGY 



The general approach to this study was naturalistic in the sense that it was holistic 
and contextual with emphasis on insiders' views. Owens (1982) elaborated by 
stating that naturalistic inquiry "seeks to illuminate social realities, human 
perceptions, and organizational realities untainted by the intrusion of formal 
measurement procedures or re-ordering the situation to fit the preconceived notions 
of the investigator". While emphasis was on qualitative data, some quantitative 
information was required to answer the research questions. 

The conceptual framework, presented in detail in section 4.0, is consistent with the 
general approach and appropriate for analyses of findings related to the research 
questions. Its use enabled the researchers to consider multiple political, technical 
and cultural factors interacting over time in each site. 

Specific procedures of the study team included: 

• library searches based on the Educational Resources Information Center and 
the Education Index; 

• the collection of print material from departments of education and case study 
sites across Canada; 

• an interview with the Editor of the Small Schools Network in Toronto; 



ERIC 



• fifteen in-depth interviews at eleven sites in eight provinces and in the 
Northwest Territories; 

• a summary of material from earlier work in Canada and in rural education 
centers in Colorado and in Western Australia; 

• careful consideration of the applicability and implications of findings for First 
Nations' schools across Canada, and 

• addressing the question of trustworthiness of naturalistic studies (Guba, 1981) 
by using earlier studies of some cases to extend the period of time during 
which data were collected, drawing upon multiple sources of data, describing 
context in some detail, building perception checks into interviews and 
engaging in extensive peer debriefing. 

ASSUMPTIONS. DELIMITATIONS AND LIMITATIONS 

Research team members recognized the complexity of organizational developments 
particularly when examined holistically in context. It is assumed, however, with 
the delimitations and limitations set forth below, that useful, credible findings have 
been generated from this study. It is further assumed that schools in sparsely 
populated areas need, and will continue to require, support services and that there 
is no one best way to provide them - hence, the need to examine multiple sites 
and carefully consider contextual factors which shape developments. A final 
assumption is that knowledge is gained incrementally so it is important to build 
upon what has been learned in earlier, related studies and to realize that this 
investigation will lead to questions as well as to working hypotheses grounded in 
certain contexts. 

This study was delimited to ten developments across Canada. Data collection wai 
confined to one major interview and to related print materials in each site during 
October and November, 1994 - a "snapshot" in the history of an organizational 
change. Further, virtually all interviews were with school system administrators 
who were concentrating on the implementation of policy. Interviews with policy 
developers or with clients for whom the policy was intended were not possible 
within the parameters of this study. 

There are also inherent limitations to work of this nature. Respondents may 
hesitate to share their views honestly for political or other reasons. The study 
team must also record a bias toward community -based education supported by 
system, provincial and even federal levels of the organization for education. 



2.5 DEFINITIONS 

Several definitions are central to this study: 

• Small schools are those located in small communities of fewer than 5,000 
people. This term is more general than remote or rural (which is usually 
associated with agriculture) and it is more convenient than repeatedly using 
the expression "sparsely populated areas". 

• First level services are provided in the school on a daily basis. Examples 
include teachers, para-professionals, administrative support, local curriculum 
adaptations and provisions for responding to students with special needs. 

• Second level services are typically provided at the school board or system 
level. Examples include curriculum adaptation, consultants, legal advice, 
program implementation, supervision and staff development. Some tribal 
councils offer services at this level. 

• Third level services are offered by the ministry. They include 
curriculum/program development, research, evaluation, policy development 
and general goals or standards for education. 

• Ministry/Department of Education is a major component of provincial 
government operations. Headed by an elected Minister of Education, the 
Department is prominent not only because of the size of its budget but alaO 
due to the importance which people attach to elementary (approximately 
grades one to eight) and secondary (high school) education. A recent trend 
is for departments of education to include advanced (post-secondary) 
education. In Saskatchewan, for example, the department is Saskatchewan 
Education, Training and Employment. 

Departments, as noted above, are responsible for all aspects of education - 
organizational structure, funding, facilities, courses of study, teacher 
certification, policy, goals, standards and evaluation. Many departments have 
regional offices at various locations in the province. 

• School boards operate within provincial legislation. In this study the term is 
used to mean elected boards in non-urban areas responsible for schooling in 
typically, ten to twelve communities. Boards have duties set forth in 
legislation for second level services, as indicated above, and also for school 
facilities, staff, student transportation and annual reports to rate payers. 

• Local boards operate at the community level. They are usually elected. Their 
primary role is to advise the system board on local matters in relation to 
facilities, staff and local curriculum particularly in areas such as religious 
education, sex education and second languages. 



9 

ERIC 

ummmmmim 



• Schooling and education have different meaning. Schooling refers to "going 
to school" usually between the ages of about five and eighteen. Education, 
a broader term, is a lifelong pursuit for all age groups in the total community. 

ORGANIZATION OF THE REPORT 

The starting point for this report is to remind readers of some peculiarities in the 
organization for education in Canada compared to other countries. Special 
challenges in providing for education m sparsely populated regions are then 
presented. Innovative approaches to providing educational services in Australia, 
the United States and Canada are outlined as background for a review of change 
processes in educational organizations. The central major portion of the report is 
the presentation and analysis of data from the case studies across Canada. The 
two Aboriginal members of the study team share their views of educational 
services for First Nations in relation to the findings of this investigation in the 
final section. 



3.0 LITERATURE REVIEW 



The purpose of this literature review is to assemble a knowledge base for a study 
of second and third level services to small schools within provincial systems. 
Priority was given to materials published within the last few years and special 
efforts were made to locate Canadian studies. 



I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 

r 



ERIC 



3.1 ORGANIZATION FOR EDUCATION IN CANADA 

It is important to realize before considering Euro-Canadian organization for 
education, that First Nations had emphasized, and facilitated, learning for centuries 
before Europeans arrived on the continent. We can see a priority for learning in 
the words of Smith Atimoyoo, a Cree Elder who went to Teachers' College with 
one of the study team members. He also attached a spiritual meaning to learning 
and growing when he said: 

We believe that in using our minds and bodies to the 
highest level possible, we were following in the way of the 
flowers and who were giving their greatest honor to the 
Creator by blossoming to the highest level of perfection 
(1979). 

Unfortunately, Europeans failed to recognize and appreciate the learning and 
knowledge of First Nations. They proceeded to set up their own system. 

Section 93 of the British North America Act of 1867 (now the Constitution Act) 
gave to the provinces the exclusive right to make laws in relation to education "in 
and for each province" with protection of minority rights as they existed when a 
region became a province. It is beyond the purposes of this study to review 
provincial organizations for education but some observations are relevant to our 
purposes. 

• As early as 1872 the organization for education in Canada was seriously 
questioned in a letter from Sir John A. Macdonald to Egerton Ryerson. He 
expressed the view that education is vital in shaping a nation and regretted 
that it had not been made a federal responsibility. 

• There are many similarities among provinces in terms of organizational 
structures for education, legislation, standards, curricula and arrangements for 
funding. At the same time there are important differences: for example, only 
Ontario, Saskatchewan and Alberta have separate (Catholic) schools, Quebec 
has a dual system and Newfoundland has denominational school boards. 

• Currently all provinces have major reviews and/or reforms underway in 
attempts to respond to pressures related to the economy, equity, 
accountability, governance, delivery and quality of schools. 



lu 



National organizations such as the Assembly of First Nations, the National 
Metis Council, the Canadian Education Association, the Canadian School 
Trustees' Association, the Canadian Teachers' Federation and the Council of 
Ministers of Education are increasingly prominent. 

Reports such as Canada at the Crossroads (Porter, 1991) link the country's 
performance in the international market directly to education. Training for 
employment, national testing of elementary and secondary students and 
minority rights to education are major public issues. 

Treaty rights io education for First Nations are generally accepted and 
supported despite some questions of interpretation. 

Education in Canada, compared to many countries including the United States 
and Australia, is decentralized. Providing services to small school 
communities is, nevertheless, a major challenge. 



EDUCATION IN SPARSELY POPULATED REGIONS 

Facts and figures confirm general observations and media reports regarding 
urbanization as a major social phenomenon in Canada during the last half century. 
The Canadian Global Almanac, 1994, shows that the percentage of Canada's 
population considered rural has dropped from 45.5 percent in 1941 to 23.4 percent 
in 1991. What is surprising to many is that in 1986 only 14.9 percent of the rural 
population was engaged in farming and the number has no doubt decreased since 
then. It is important, then, not to assume an agricultural economic base in small 
school communities - it may be fishing, forestry, mining, tourism or, in recent 
years, entrepreneurs working out of home with the assistance of communications 
technology. 

In preparing this section of the report the study team wished to emphasize the 
importance of recognizing and respecting the rich diversity among small 
communities and the people who live in them. While we present general 
descriptions and summaries of trends and issues, the importance of recognizing 
unique features in every context cannot be overstated. 



8 



3.2.1 Small Communities 



Dynamics of small communities and their connections to the larger society have 
been studied and written about for centuries. For purposes of this paper only a 
selected sample will be reported. 

A 1968 book which still receives a good dea! of attention was Small Town in 
Mass Soci ety: Class. Power and Religion in a Rural Community by Vidich and 
Bensman. The central message is that the agencies and culture of mass 
institutions had penetrated so called "isolated" communities to the point where 
mere was not a dichotomous difference between urban and rural. Land grants, 
utility companies and marketing boards, for example, controlled small 
communities according to these writers and there was no basis in fact of 
democratic self-determination. The same point was made in 1976 by Terreberry 
who described most small communities as stable in terms of mobility of people, 
ethnic homogeneity, economic base and values. The external environment, 
however, was turbulent because the accelerating rate and complexity of change 
meant no one system (community) could predict and control consequences of their 
actions. Community officials, thus, would feel powerless in relation to the 
interactive effects of political, economic and social systems. Another perspective 
was added by Sher (1977) who said that political conservatism and cultural 
homogeneity in rural areas supports stable conditions. Boyd and Immeghart 
(1977) added that isolation, traditional localized values and shortage of resources 
make change difficult. 

Not all authorities are so pessimistic about the viability of small communities. 
McGivney and Moynihan (1972) were critical of the work of Vidich and Bensman 
and claimed the concept of community was thriving at least in a political sense 
as governments favored sparsely populated areas. They stressed the need to see 
schools and communities both horizontally (internally) and vertically (connections 
to the larger society). Using such a framework, both schools and communities 
could be labelled as "local" or "cosmopolitan". Luther and Wall (1986) have 
published material on a strategic planning approach to developing entrepreneurial 
communities. DeWitt, Batie and Norris (1988) think trends of economic hardship 
and population decline can be reversed if communities mobilize their energy and 
resources to support long-term, broadly-based economic development and if 
governments and communities forge new alliances. A 1989 report to the Congress 
of the United States described the rural context as being diverse and economically 
unstable yet called for reforms in education with the reminder that there is "no one 
best system". Haas and Lambert (1992) note chronic problems yet see hope in 
new approaches to support services. 



I 
I 



A synthesis of views of small schools/communities in the United States has been 
presented by Nachtigal and Carlson. As part of his 1982 book Rural Education: 
In Search of a Better Way. Nachtigal summarized rural-urban differences - see 
Table 1. More recently Carlson presented views of the potential costs and benefits 
of rural school-community development as shown in Table 2. He is pointing out 



ERIC 



that both life and education in rural communities have costs and benefits from 
various perspectives. In the first row of the table, for example, from a psycho- 
social perspective, rural school-communities experience fragmentation of families 
as young people move away, more people at risk, diverse needs and excessive 
demands on schools. On the "up side" there is more awareness of general needs 
than in urban areas, more volunteerism, more apparent need for knowledge and 
hence increased recognition of the importance of schools - we have all heard of 
fights in rural areas regarding school closure. In appreciating rural-urban 
differences, however, it is important to recognize the complexity of life in either 
context and to respect the great diversity among both urban and rural communities. 



ERIC 



10 



Table X 

Rural-Urban Differon^ 
~ Rural " UrbalT 



Personal/tightly linked 
Generalists 
Homogeneous 
Nonbureaucratic 
Verbal communication 
Who said it 

Time measured by seasons 
Traditional values 
Entrepreneur 

"Make do" response to environment 

Self-sufficiency 
Less disposable income 
Less formal education 
Smaller 

Low population density 
Acquaintances - fewer, diverse in 

age/culture 
School - to preserve local culture/ 

community 
Teachers - central to community 
Students - known by everyone 



Impersonal/loose 

Specialists 

Heterogeneous 

Bureaucratic 

Written communication 

What was said 

Time by the dock/calendar 

Liberal values 

Corporate persons 

Rational planning to control 

environment 
Leave problem solving to experts 
More disposable income 
More formal education 
Larger 

Higher population density 
Acquaintances - many, similar to 
self 

School - to get ahead in the world 

Teachers - separate from community 
Students - known by teachers and friends 



Adapted from Paul NachtigaL Rural Educati on: In Searrh of a Better Wav. (1982), 
page 270. 




Table 2 

Potential Costs and Benefits of Rural Communities and Education 



Dimension 



Rural Commni ties/Areas 
Costs Benefits 



Rural Education 
Costs Benefits 



Psycho- 
Social 



Political 



♦fragmentation 
of families (1 
parent families) 

*incr eased at- 
risk, dependent 
populations 



♦greater awareness 
of general needs 

♦return to grass- 
roots & self help 
(volunteer ism) 



♦diversity of needs 

♦excessive demands 
of public schools 
(schools as social 
service centers) 

♦displaced energy in 
coping with change 



♦loss of local 
control 



♦local political 
activism 



♦greater dispar- ♦recognition of 
ity of SEE groups interdependence 

♦shift of power ♦need to make 
to metro centers critical choices 

♦colonization of 
rural areas 



♦divided/polarized 
communities 

♦rejection of school 
budgets 

♦increased compet- 
ition for limited 
resources 

♦teacher unioniza- 
tion 



♦need for know- 
ledge 

♦recognition 
of importance 
of schools 

♦importance of 
individual choice 



♦education plays a 
more central role 

♦greater involve- 
ment of parents fc 
community members 



♦loss of the 
rural ethic b 
• spirit 

♦dichotomizing 
Cultural of the arts It 
economic devel- 
opment 

♦diminution of 
the humanities 



♦recapturing of 
rural history St 
meaning 

♦a return to more 
fundamental values 
of family t 
community 

♦grassroots devel- 
opment of the arts 



♦lowering of self 
esteem 

♦arts seen as 

frivolous 

♦rural schools 
seen as inferior 

♦unbridled school 
consolidation 



♦a rediscovery of 
rural values t 
history 

♦arts t> humanities 
more widely 
accepted 

♦greater emphasis 
on ethics 



From Robert V. Carlson, The Costs and Benefits of an Investment in 
Rural Education from a Psvchosocial-Political-Cultural Perspective . 
A paper delivered at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational 
Research Association, Boston, MA, 1990. 



a 

ERIC 



The researchers were not able to locate much literature or research regarding the 
development of small school/communities in Canada. Saskatchewan, perhaps like 
other provinces, has had a number of provincial studies and initiatives not 
typically available through library systems. Included in relatively recent 
developments in Saskatchewan are: a provincial government discussion paper 
Rural Educ ation: Options for the '80's (1981); a report of a task force called 
Strategy for the Develo pment of Rural Saskatchewan (1985); numerous planning 
studies in rural school jurisdictions (for example, Dibski, Newton and Sackney, 
1988, Newton, Krause and Wilson, 1990); School Finance and Governance 
Review by Langlois and Scharf (1991); The Changing Role of Rural 
Communities in an Urbanizing World by Stabler, Olfert and Fulton (1992) - a 
study of 598 communities in the province based on central place (main service 
centres) theory; and Building a Community for Learning: Integrated School-Based 
Services (1992) published by the Research Centre of the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association. Currently the provincial government is in the process of 
decentralizing economic development and health care through the creation of 
community and regional boards. Time limitations did not make it possible to 
search for similar information in other parts of the country. 

It is fair to say that small communities on this continent have been studied 
extensively. Concerns centre around economic instability, declining population 
and quality of education and of life. Some authorities see a revival of small 
communities based upon changing values, improved planning for economic 
development and increasingly apparent needs to undertake some redistribution of 
our planet's growing population into regions where there is space and where other 
natural resources arc more plentiful than in metropolitan areas. The future of 
small communities, however, is a question and the Heartland Centre for 
Leadership development offers twenty clues to community survival as listed in 
Table 3. Another clue is undoubtedly the extent to which various studies and 
reports are followed by related action based upon an integrated view of the 
community and the school. 



13 



Table 3 



Twen: V clues to rural community surviva l 



I. Evidence of community pride 

2 Emphasis on quality in business and community life 

3. Willingness to invest in the future 

4. Participatory approach to community decision-making 

5. Cooperative community spirit 

6. Realistic appraisal of future opportunities 

7. Awareness of competitive positioning 

8. Knowledge of physical environment 

9. Active economic development program 

10. Deliberate transition of power to a younger generation of leaders 

II. Acceptance of women in leadership roles 
12 Strong belief in and support for education 

13. Problem-solving approach to providing health care 

14. Strong multi-generational family orientation 

15. Strong presence of traditional institutions that are integral to community life 

16. Attention to sound and well-maintained infrastructure 

17. Careful use of fiscal resources 

18. Sophisticated use of information resources 

19. Willingness to seek help from the outside 

20. Conviction that, in the long run, you have to do it yourself 



Heartland Center for Leadership Development, Lincoln, Nebraska. 



o 



14 



3.2.2 Small Schools 



Small schools, like small communities, have been examined from many 
perspectives and, again like the communities in which they exist, there appears to 
be both an "up side" and a "down side". Hull (1986), for example, noted that 
many small schools suffer from limited resources, restricted curriculum and 
isolation yet the tradition of sharing is evident. Matthes and Carlson (1986) found 
small schools to be insulated and with fewer opportunities for personal and 
professional growth yet many teachers chose small schools for advantages in pace 
of living, cost of living and "smallness". Barker (1985) claimed that many 
problems related to finances, shortages of teachers, changing social values and 
special interest groups were magnified in small high schools yet, due to smaller 
size, they offered the best opportunities to create a positive climate for teaching 
and learning. Foster and Martinize (1985) noted that small schools experience 
difficulty in staffing and in offering a wide variety of curriculum options yet 
students seemed more involved in activities that develop leadership qualities and 
close working relationships. 

A major 1987 study (Talbert and others) compared 39 schools in rural Tennessee 
with a national sample in the Good Schools Project. The data analyses showed 
many statistically significant differences. Rural Tennessee teachers and students: 
had more traditional values regarding education; felt less support from parents and 
community; saw their schools as having fewer resources; found lower levels of 
commitment among teachers, staff and students; and though! their schools were 
reaching fewer of their goals compared to those in the Good School Project. The 
Tennessee rural teachers also saw critical thinking skills as less important than the 
Project teachers. Students in the Tennessee schools perceived teachers as 
encouraging critical thinking less, using less variety in instruction and placing 
more emphasis on the textbook. The rural teachers and students shared lower 
academic expectations. Administratively, rural Tennessee teachers felt less 
involvement in decision-making, lower levels of cooperation among teachers, less 
frequent recognition and less concern for each other. Of particular importance to 
this review is that the rural teachers were less positive than the other teachers 
regarding facilities and support services. 

Other literature focuses specifically on various forms of support for teachers in 
small schools. Reed and Busby (1985) have said that teachers need incentives to 
teach in small schools and that social, monetary and psychological needs must all 
be considered. Trentham and Schaer (1985) found that rural teachers gained 
satisfaction primarily from students and peers whereas urban teachers drew 
satisfaction from having good facilities and opportunities for social and cultural 
development. In another rural-urban comparison, Matthes and Carlson (1986) 
summarized that teachers in small schools highlighted support from parents and 
community while those in urban contexts viewed administrative support as more 
important. Many writers report that teachers in small schools typically have 
limited opportunities for professional development or to be exposed to new ideas. 
In a Canadian context, Newton (1990 b) studied teachers' perceptions of support 



ERIC 



15 



a 

ERIC 



for program change. His findings indicate that teachers' most influential sources 
of support were their own professional preparation, extra effort and autonomy. 
Opportunities for inservice education were ranked high but organized staff 
development activities at the school level were relatively infrequent. When asked 
specifically about support for implementing multiple innovations, teachers said the 
most common forms of assistance were the superintendent, related teaching 
materials and discussion with other teachers. As early as 1980 a centre for the 
education of rural teachers specifically was established at Kent State University, 
Salem Campus, in partnership with local school districts in the Appalachian 
Region. More recent initiatives include ongoing staff development utilizing 
distance education technology (for example, Knapczyk, Brush, Champion, 
Hubbard and Rhodes, 1992; and Kendall, 1992). 

Students, of course, are at the centre of the education enterprise and students in 
small schools have been the focus of many studies. It is generally agreed that 
"smallness" and lower pupil-teacher ratios make it possible to give individual 
attention and to personalize learning. In the minds of many, long bus rides and 
fewer curriculum options offset any advantages. Examples of studies into effects 
of small school communities on students include: Tuaglia and Mclntire (1990) 
who described an Aspirations Project to raise aspirations of high school students 
for post-secondary education, improve academic performance, strengthen 
interpersonal relations and heighten self-efficacy of students and teachers; Phelps 
and Prock (1991) who found that in small schools equality of opportunity is an 
issue because there is more poverty, a higher percentage of handicapped, neglect 
of the gifted and a disproportionate amount of attention given to male students; 
and Berkeley and Ludlow (1991) who found a lack of trained personnel to address 
the problems of special needs students. Concerning levels of achievement in small 
schools, Sher (1988) claimed that there was no compelling evidence that larger 
schools provided a better education or cost savings to the state or to the district. 
A 1985 review of provincial diploma test results in Alberta showed that students 
in schools of fewer than 200 students had results above the provincial average in 
three subjects, below in three and equal in one. These results seem typical and 
inconclusive as to whether student outcomes are better in small or large schools. 
Rural-urban comparisons are certainly open to question because they are usually 
based upon narrow, provincial or standardized examinations which reflect the 
"industrial" model of education. We also need to be reminded of the great 
diversity among both small and large schools. 

A development in this decade is to consider both schools and communities 
holistically - to recognize the interdependence among various parts of schools and 
communities and also to realize that schools and communities are dependent upon 
each other. This latter point was highlighted by Newton and Wright (1987) in a 
Canadian context, by Nachtigal (1991) in the United States and by an Australian, 
McLean (1981). Nachtigal observed that curricula, usually designed with urban 
needs in mind, are often at ode's with local values and beliefs. Moreover, in his 
view, achieving success in school means leaving the community so a wedge is 
driven between the school and the community. 

o • 16 



A useful summary of the advantages and disadvantages of small schools was 
presented to a prairie forum in Manitoba in 1990 - see Table 4. A sample of 
student and parent survey results is shown in Appendix A (Newton, Krause and 
Wilson, 1990). It can be seen that the highest percentages of students agreed with 
statements about high expectations for their achievement and about teachers' 
knowledge/preparation. The fewest agree with positive statements about student 
behavior, participation in decisions, teachers' personal interest in students and 
school spirit. Parents typically were found to have positive views about the school 
and its staff. The concerns of many centre around lack of voice in school matters 
and the general operation of the school system. The results of this survey and 
others, including some in Alberta, reveal that many potential advantages of small 
schools are not being realized. The challenge of course is to build upon the 
advantages of small schools and to minimize the disadvantages through ongoing 
school development programs. Newton and Newton (1992) have outlined in Table 
5 how some school systems in sparsely populated areas have capitalized on 
context. 



ERIC 



17 



Table 4 



Advantages and DisaHva^ges of Small ft u ral SrhnnU 



Factor 



Advantages 



Disadvantages 



Financial 
Administration 



Teachers 



Students 

Community 

Guidance 
Atmosphere 



Program 



Other 



Less bureaucracy and red tape 
Flatter organization 
Principal knows students 



Lower pupil /teacher ratio 
Teacher knows students 
Teacher closer to overall 
administration of school and 
more aware of administrative 
concerns 

Better able to integrate curriculum 
concepts across multiple subjects 
More involvement in extra- 
curricular activities 
More leadership opportunities 
Achievement is equivalent to 
achievement in larger urban schools 
School is center of community 
High levels of community 
support for school 



Teachers able to offer personal 
guidance and counselling 

More humane and productive 
More involvement of students 
teachers and community in 
cooperative ventures means 
better attitudes and higher 
expectations 

Results on achievement tests 
are often as good as results in 
larger schools and in some 
cases better (science may be an 
exception) 

Good achievement potential in 
the affective domain 
Greater community awareness 
and acceptance of school policy 



Higher than average costs 
Principal has few peers with 
whom to interact 

Lack of administrative assistance 
makes it necessary for principal 
to engage in administrative details 
Must prepare and provide more 
courses 

Teachers have few peers with 
whom to interact 



Students experience modest 
culture shock when moving out 
of the community for further 
education or employment 

Small schools may 
resist change 
Lack of cultural diversity 
limits opportunities for 
broad socialization 
School may be unduly 
influenced by 
community values 
Smallness and remoteness 
may lead to feelings 
of inferiority 



Limited program choice 

Limited resources 

Little up-to-date technology 

Lack of specialists capable of 

demonstrating excellence in 

areas of curriculum (e.g., 

fine arts, athletics, academics) 



Source: 



Warren Hathaway, "Rural Education: Challenges and Opportunities " 
Praine Forum on Rural Education, Brandon, Manitoba, November, 1990. 



ERIC 



I 
I 



i 

1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 



I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 



ERIC 



Table 5 



Capitalizing on the Ccmt^t n ( c m?)l < ~\ x00 \ Community 



Context 



Typical Advantages 



1. small population 

people know each other well 



2. low pupil-teacher ratios 
teacher generalists 
multi-grades 



3. small operation 

administrators well known 



Typical Disadvantages 

4. isolation 

local politics and values 



5. teacher recruitment, retention 
professional development 



6. vulnerability to personnel 
changes 



Capitalizing 



school-community integration 
locally relevant curriculum 
"hands on" learning in the "real" 
world 

individual attention 

more student participation in 

discussion, leadership etc. 

peer coaching, cooperative learning 

program continuity 

clearer, stronger voices of 
stakeholders 

enhanced parent-community 
involvement 

change is faster - less "red tape" 



vision for a sense of "pulling 
together" 

monitoring and evaluation for 

realization of progress 

need strong information systems 

for environmental scanning 

distance education for total 

community 

incentives re housing, leadership 
opportunities etc. 
professional development, 
networks 

farsighted personnel policies, 
exchanges, etc. 

a learning organization involving 
all stakeholders 



Fr ° m Earle Newton and Patti Newton, Voices, Vision and vitality 
Redesigning Small Schools .( 1992 ) . p. 142. 



f~0 



19 



It is important to note that the focus has shifted in the last decade from early 
attention to teachers in classrooms, to thinking of the school as the unit of change 
and now to seeing that effective school improvement requires concentrated effort 
at many levels of organization. The school-community is the focus of school 
development plans which are required in Western Australia. The Rural Initiative 
Program in the United States, operated through ten regional laboratories, is to 
i upport and coordinate the efforts of school communities, school boards and/or 
states engaged in cooperative ventures (Sanders, 1990). Crandall, Eiseman and 
Louis (1986) concluded that schools on their own have limited human resources 
for development and tend to get bogged down with competing priorities and local 
politics. A 1986 study by Fullan, Anderson and Newton included a county system 
in eastern Ontario where curriculum implementation was supported by system 
priorities and commitment, sound procedures, administrative leadership, high 
expectations, open climate, finances, selective use of external consultants and a 
spirit of continuous development. In that case, difficulties were related to teacher 
overload, lack of school-level leadership, limited financial resources, complexity 
of the implementation model, lack of clarity about the role of the school board and 
changes in board membership. 

Small schools have been examined closely in the past decade, sometimes for 
economic or political reasons - like the threat of closure, and on other occasions 
because of concern about effectiveness or quality. Several trends and issues have 
emerged. 



3.2.3 Trends and Issues 



The issues seem similar among countries and over the last several years. After 
thorough study through the National Centre for Research on Rural Education at 
the University of Western Australia in 1981 it was concluded that major issues 
center around school-community relations, finance, Aboriginal education, teacher 
training, curriculum and decentralization of educational decision-making (Darnell 
and Simpon, p. 225). On another continent ten years later, the Federal Interagency 
Committee on Education in the United States identified their most compelling 
concerns to be school effectiveness, curriculum, school-community partnerships, 
human resources, use of technology, finance and governance ( Journal of Research 
in Rural Education, editorial, p. 89). Current issues regarding small schools in 
Canada are commonly agreed to be quality of schooling, finance, equity, 
community involvement, accountability and governance. The current central issue 
in education in sparsely populated areas is equity. This means equity of access 
to a broad range of programs for students and equity of benefit. A court found 
funding for rural education in West Virginia unconstitutional. Canadian courts 
have decided that Francophone parents have the right to manage and control their 
own schools where numbers warrant. Parents in New Brunswick recently took a 
school board to court for lack of collaboration in a decision to change school 
calendars and won. The Charter, Treaties, increased recognition of human and 
Treaty rights and court decisions all emphasize equity. The issue in relation to 



ERIC 



20 



schooling in sparsely populated areas is further exacerbated by economic 
problems, population (enrollment) decline, stronger, united demands of the public 
and lack of agreement about indicators of quality in schooling. Most provinces 
have initiatives underway to address the issues and several trends and dilemmas 
are discernible. 

• The emerging view in rural education (Nachtigal, 1991 ; Sher, 1988) that there 
is "no one best way" to provide for education in sparsely populated areas is 
consistent with new paradigm positions that knowledge, rather than being 
absolute and universal, is relative and socially constructed - instead of being 
"scientific" it is "situated" in a particular context (Hargreaves, 1994). 

• Related to new ideas about knowledge is a shift from hierarchy, control and 
power (those who have "the" knowledge) in organizations to decentralization, 
networks and shared power built in to organizations through communication, 
decision-making and problem-solving processes - (see, for example, Ogawa 
and Bossert, 1989; Senge, 1990; and Mitchell, 1994). 

• In response to many factors, including scarcity, organizations have been 
described by Whetten (1981) as moving from closed, rational systems with 
administrators as problem solvers (one "right" answer) to being open, political 
entities with administrators as dilemma managers. An elaboration of this 
point has been made by Patterson, Purkey and Parker (1986) in their book 
Productive School Systems for a Nonrational World . There are many 
dilemmas in education in small school communities including the need to 
balance local and cosmopolitan norms and values, rural education as 
preparation for life in cities, and standardized (national) tests which are 
antithetical to the "hands on", inclusive nature of rural education (Haas and 
Lambert, 1992). 

• A major issue, in the opinion of authorities such as Nachtigal (192) is that 
standards for schooling reflect an industrial, urban model. He highlights the 
need to emphasize what small schools are - instead of what thev are not in 
comparison to urban schools. 

• There is a strong trend toward more holistic approaches to the improvement 
of education. This is emphasis on the big picture (Fullan, 1991) or systemic 
thinking (Senge, 1990). At the root of this trend is the realization that 
"everything is connected to everything else" - our global community shares 
responsibility for the environment, commodity prices in Canada are affected 
by drought in Australia and even at a local level schools and communities are 
interdependent. It is interesting to realize that holistic views are an important 
part of the tradition of many First Nations. 



• After decades of specialization and fragmentation, major developments are 
now underway to integrate the school curriculum, the school and community, 



and services to children and families "at risk". Partnerships and communities 
of learners are advocated by regional educational laboratories in the United 
States and by school systems across Canada. Experience with many short- 
lived school reforms has highlighted the importance of integrated authority 
and support at school, system and provincial/regional levels. A manifestation 
of this trend is the growing prominence of regional services for small schools 
and communities. 



• There are many exciting developments related to distance education 
technology. According to Dr. John Davis, editor of Canada's Small Schools 
Network Newsletter, this area promises to have the greatest impact in 
providing support services to small school communities. 

• Another discernible trend is related to public pressure for accountability. 
Carkhuff (1988) stresses the importance of both human and information 
capital. He asserts that effective organizations have current, relevant 
information particularly in regard to strategic, social issues. Schools 
traditionally have had very weak bases of information for documenting 
success and for making decisions. This is beginning to change with emphasis 
on conceptual clarity, quality indicators, monitoring and evaluation - see 
McEwen and Chow (1991) regarding the implementation of indicator systems 
in Alberta. Alcorn (1993) reporting on experience with decentralization of 
schooling in New Zealand warns, however, that strict accountability may 
inhibit learning and narrow the curriculum. 

• A part of trends regarding the nature of knowledge, organizational processes 
and the need for better information, is emphasis on listening to the "voices" 
of students, parents, teachers and community in a systematic way - not only 
when people are angry or excited. It is increasingly recognized that there are 
multiple realities - what is "really" going on at a particular school depends 
upon who you ask. Everyone sees things differently and considerable effort 
must be put into getting a composite picture of "what is" and "what could or 
should be" - a shared vision. A leader is a person who has a mental picture 
of how things could be better and who has the skills to enter into dialogue 
with others to develop a sense of direction (vision) for a school community. 
Decker (1992) stresses the need to look beyond the school to a learning 
community. According to Howley (1994) we need to move from a 
mechanistic view of schools as organizations to a more naturalistic view of 
schools as communities. One writer quoted an African proverb. "It takes a 
village to raise a child." 

• A development which brings many of the trends together is the increased use 
of strategic planning in education. Strategy is required to establish priorities 
and to implement desired changes as there are many obstacles. In other 
words, strategic thinking precedes strategic planning and strategic action 
follows it. There are many advocates of organizational strategy including 
Decision Processes International and The Cambridge Group. Application of 



a 

ERIC 



3 



22 



1 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

ERIC 



strategic planning in one Alberta and one British Columbia school system is 
shown on the following two pages. 

Trends can be summarized with words such as situated knowledge, shared 
leadership, open systems, respect, integration, technology, information, listening 
and strategic planning. Many would argue that with these trends small schools 
will cease trying to be like big schools. There are some innovative approaches to 
supporting small schools in that endeavor. 



J.* 



23 



Table 6 



In the province of Alberta the Ministry requires school systems to adopt and 
implement policies for the evaluation of students, teachers, programs, schools and 
systems. A related system review of Foothills School Division included a 
recommended model for a planning cycle which is shown below: 



DIDn 
WORK? 



System 

Mission 

Statement 



DECIDING 
WHAT TO DO 



DOING 
IT 



Evaluation 
and Renewal 



1 



Implementation 
and Monitoring 



Budget 
Requirements 

for each 
Responsibility 

Area 



1 



3 Year Action 
Plan for each 
Responsibility 
Areas 



Leadership 
and Process 



Vision 



System Goals 



Implementation 
Strategies by 
Areas of 
Responsibility 



Objectives for 
Responsibility 
Areas 



DECIDING HOW TO DO IT 



Developed by: C Allan and E Yates, 1989. 

Areas of responsibility are considered to be administration, curriculum, 
maintenance, finance, etc. 



ERIC 



24 



3 



Table 7 



The Abbotsford Model for strategic planning in a school has been developed by School District 34 
"Ctearbrooi, British Columbia. The model is shown below. The Directorof School ^ SnV 
article sta es "One must understand, however, that strategic planning requires flexMUy Na- 
tion of a rigki step by step process may be more destrucuTe than product EacSool rSLt 
adopt the plan with a clear understanding of its specific attributes, and with a view to developing 
future directions for its situation:- P. 12, D. Truscott, The Canada firWi S 8 



Analysis of past "team" successes 



Examination of 
internal considerations 

Mission statement 
Staff development focus 
Student needs 
Teacher needs 
School culture 



Examination of 
external considerations 
. Ministry goals 

■ Curriculum changes 

■ District-wide goals 
School community 
expectations 



Figure 1 

Strategic Planning: 
The Abbotsford Model 



"Brainstorming" new directions 



Prioritize team goals 



Process repeats 
annually 



Formulate action statements 

. Team goals 
. Strategies 
. Resources 

. Staff development plan 
. Timelines 
. Persons responsible 
. Goal evaluation 



Departmental 
planning 



Personal 
planning 



25 



3.3 INNOVATIVE APPROACHES TO THE 

PROVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SERVICES 



3.3.1 Development in Australia 

During February, 1991 one member of the study team had an opportunity to work 
at the Centre for Rural Education, University of Western Australia and to visit 
schools in the "outback" with a state regional superintendent - there are no system- 
level boards and superintendents as we know them in Canada. The following 
review is based upon observations and print materials collected. 

Australia has always faced major challenges in providing schooling in sparsely 
populated areas. Western Australia has only 1.3 million people in an area the size 
of Western Europe and over one million of those live in Perth. In the country as 
a whole the approximately 30 percent of the people who live in rural areas provide 
over 80 percent of the exports. Attention to rural life is clearly in the national 
interest yet economic problems are very serious. 

The Federal (Commonwealth) Government of Australia in 1989 adopted a strategy 
for rural education and training entitled A Fair Go . It was designed to address 
concerns about low grade 12 completion rates, access to education and training for 
all age groups and opportunities for rural women, Aboriginals and ethnic groups. 
The Commonwealth Government has also sponsored a Country Areas Program 
whereby over $14 million is currently spent on educational excursion programs, 
cultural enrichment, consultancy services, professional development, regional 
newspapers and teleconferencing. A priority throughout has been on community 
involvement. There is also a Disadvantaged Schools Program based on the 
principle of integrated reform of all aspects of school operation. 

State initiatives include a national conference on rural education hosted by 
Western Australia in 1979. Later the State Department of Education became 
involved in an OECD project and produced a series of monographs on rural 
education. One of these monographs identified problems in rural education related 
to isolation, uncertain commodity prices, increasing ethnic diversity, lack of 
educational opportunities and disproportionate costs of schooling. Initiatives to 
counter some of the difficulties include transportation services, boarding schools, 
hostels, a correspondence school, Schools of the Air, an Isolated Students' 
Matriculation Program, a residential centre for students with learning difficulties 
and their parents, Aboriginal schools, Teaching Cottages for upgrading and a Rural 
Integration Program for preschoolers. All schools in Western Australia are 
required to involve parents and community in formulating annual School 
Development Plans to be approved by regional offices of the ministry, 
implemented, monitored and evaluated. 

According to a recent report in the Small Schools Network Newsletter by Boylan 
(1994) federal and state initiatives in Australia to support education in sparsely 
populated areas continue to be a top priority. 




3.3.2 Developments in the United States 



The National Rural Education Association, as reported earlier, was formed in 1908 
and rural America continues to receive a good deal of national attention. After 
publishing Rural Education: In Search of a Better Wav in 1982, Paul Nachtigal 
has presented papers to the National Conference of State Legislatures and to the 
National Governors' Association (Nachtigal and Haas, 1988; Nachtigal and Hobbs, 
1988). Jones (1989) in reporting on the development of a new national rural 
policy, states "After a period of 'rural renaissance' in the 60's and 70's we are 
faced with the realization that rural America is losing jobs, losing business, losing 
people and losing confidence" (p. 41). She adds that developing effective 
leadership and decision-making capacity is at the heart of rural development 

The United States Department of Education has an office of Educational Research 
and Improvement which operates ten regional educational laboratories throughout 
the country. One of the study team members worked in the Mid-Continent 
Laboratory (McRel) in Colorado in the fall of 1990. The following paragraph is 
based upon his observations and print material collected. 

McRel serves the states of Colorado, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, 
South Dakota and Wyoming. About half of the 2,452 school districts have fewer 
than 250 students and over 80 percent have fewer than 1,000. In response to 
factors such as isolation and a shattered economy, McRel is offering leadership, 
research, training and coordination in working towards a new vision of schooling. 
Emphasis is on restructuring schools, boundary changes, community involvement, 
redesigning the curriculum, leadership development, new ways to empower 
students and teachers and performance-based evaluation. McRel does not endorse 
single, simple solutions - it is inquiry oriented and responsive. Regional 
laboratories also coordinate other major national undertakings such as the Rural 
Initiative Program (Sanders, 1990). 

There is also initiative at the state level integrated with, and supported by, 
Regional Laboratories. Within the last decade, for example, a major study of 40 
rural schools in Tennessee has been conducted, there has been a report of a special 
task force in West Virginia called Schools in Crisis: Students at Risk and South 
Dakota is developing a program to integrate the education program with local 
economic development. A classification of rural strategies in the United States by 
Stephens (1992) is shown in Table 8. Authorities such as Nachtigal and Sher 
(1981) believe that the industrial age was destructive to rural America. They 
suggest that advances in technology, developments such as sustainable agriculture 
and changing values will support the renewal of many small school-communities. 



ERIC 



3u 



27 



Table 8 



Classification of Major State Rural Strategies 




Major Strategies 


miliary intern Appears to 
be Enhancement of the 
Quality of 


State Policy 
Instrument(s) 
Commonly Used 


seek reorganization of small enrollment size 
districts into larger administrative units 


institutional capacity or 
rural systems 


mandates and/or 
inducements 


promote use of tocaify-deterrnined, muBklistrict 
sharing of whole-grades and/or staff 


instructional program of 
rural school 


inducements 


promote use of tocaJJy-govemed, multi-district regional 
single-program schools Jor special populations of 
students 


instructional programming 
for special populations 


inducements and 
system-changing 


promote use of locally-governed, multi-district regional 
comprehensive secondary schools 


institutional capacity of rural 
systems 


inducements and 
system-cnanging 


seek creation of state network of locals-sponsored, 
Hmrted-purpose regional service centers 


Instructional programming for 
special populations 


inducements and 
system-changing 


seek creation of state network of localty-govemed. 
comprehensive regional service centers 


instructional program of rural 
schools 


mandates, 
inducements, and 
system-changing 


seek establishment of state network of state-governed, 
regional technical assistance centers 


professional staff 


mandates and 
system-changing 


promote use of distant-teaming technologies 


instructional program of rural 
schools 


inducements 


seek modifications in state funrjng formulas to reflect 
sparsMy; other revenue enhancement measures 


institutional capacity of rural 
systems 


mandates 



28 

37 

ERIC 



3.3.3 Developments in Canada 



Unlike the United States and Australia, the federal government in Canada leaves 
elementary and secondary education, rural ana urban, to the provinces. The 
exception is the responsibility of the federal government, under treaties, for the 
education of First Nations. 

A review of the Canadian Education Association handbook reveals that most 
provincial ministries have service-oriented departments such as curriculum, special 
education, distance education and native education. They also provide pupil 
transportation grants, build sparsity factors into funding formulae and t in some 
cases, have Native teacher education programs but they do not as far as the study 
team has been able to determine, have major initiatives focused on small schools. 
In this section, therefore, attention will be given primarily to school board 
initiatives, in most cases with provincial support, and to one major provincial 
program focused on school improvement. 

In Voices. Vision and Vitality: Redesigning Small Schools (1992) Newton and 
Newton include 30 examples of promising developments in small schools in 
Australia, the United States and Canada. These range from school children 
growing trees for a mining company to high school students having membership 
in the Chamber of Commerce to making involvement of parents a major priority. 
In 1993 Newton and Knight compiled a book, Understanding Change in 
Education: Rural and Remote Regions of Canada, based upon descriptions and 
analyses of projects for education in rural and remote regions of Canada. 
Examples include: 

• The development of education and community in a Cree village of northern 
Saskatchewan; 

• Creating divisional boards of education in the Northwest Territories; 

• School board cooperation to provide services to isolated districts of 
northwestern Ontario; 

• Improved participation of parents in areas of Manitoba and Brit.sh Columbia; 

• Distance education services in Alberta and Newfoundland; 

• Experiential programs to keep Yukon students in school; 

• A study of teacher supply and demand in rural Nova Scotia; and 

• A centre to develop administrative leadership in New Brunswick. 

Details and outcomes are reported in the book. Findings regarding change process 
in educational organizations are outlined in the next section of this report 



JC 

ummmmmim 



29 



As a result of the Minister's Curriculum and Instruction Review the Government 
of Saskatchewan published a booklet in 1985 with the title School Improvement: 
Building a more Effective Learning Environment . Key components of school 
improvement were identified as: school-based change, long-term planning, 
collaborative decision-making, problem-solving approach, effective inservice 
education, adequate support and resources, regular communication, systematic 
evaluation and strong leadership. The school improvement process was designed 
to include getting started, reviewing the school, setting goals, seeking solutions, 
developing action plans, implementation, monitoring and evaluation. There was 
a high level of participation among stakeholders and the focus for improvement 
efforts could be on various characteristics of effective schools drawn from the 
literature. The program began with 13 pilot schools in 1986-87 and grew to 
approximately 120 schools (most of them small) within five years. Throughout 
there were summer workshops, binders of resource materials, provincial support 
personnel and networking sessions during the school year. People tended to start 
the program on a "high" but after two or three years energy waned and results 
were difficult to document. In 1992 the program was discontinued. More details 
are available in Newton (1990 c) and outcomes in terms of learning are shared in 
the next section. 

It is apparent from the examples in this section that change processes even in 
small school communities are very complex. The good news is that much has 
been learned about how to make the implementation of innovations successful. 

3.4 CHANGE IN EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS 

The topic of change leads inevitably to examination of definition and needs. The 
word "organization" comes from the root word "organ" which connotes life and 
performing a vital function. Etzionis' (1961) classic definition of organizations as 
dynamic social units deliberately constructed and reconstructed to accomplish 
specific goals also highlights function and change. Processes common to all 
organizations have been illustrated by Weisbord (1976) - see Figure 1. 
Organizational needs have been identified by Selznick (1957): 

• security in relation to forces in the environment, 

• stability in lines of authority and communication, 

• predictability in informal relations, 

• continuity in policy and the sources of its determination, and 

• homogeneity of outlook regarding the meaning and role of the organization. 



a 

ERIC 



3j 



30 



1 



I 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 



o 

ERIC 



figure I 

Prooesses P atron to all O rganizati^ 

Purposes 
What business are we in? 



Hew do we manage conflict? 



Helpful MechanisriB 
Are efforts coordinated? 



Structure 

How do we divide up 
the work? 



Leadership 

Daes someone keep the 
boxes in balance? 




Rewards 

So all needed tasks 
have incentives? 




EHVI RONMBNT 



Adapted from Marvin R. Weisbord (1976) 



31 



Another perspective has been provided by Miles (1965) who identified characteristics of 
healthy organizations to be goal focus, communication adequacy, optimal power 
equalization, resource utilization, cohesiveness, morale, innovativeness, autonomy, 
adaptation and problem-solving capabilities. It may be assumed that if organizations are 
"healthy" they will adapt successfully to changing conditions but educational 
organizations, compared to those in the private sector, present major challenges according 
to Miles. First, educational organizations are domesticated in the sense that they have 
not, traditionally, had to compete for survival. Instead of having profit as an incentive 
and a focus, they typically have multiple, unclear goals which also makes evaluation of 
personnel and/or program problematic. They are known to have low levels of 
interdependence, input variability, little investment in technology, weak information bases 
and high vulnerability to external criticism. 

During the last two decades much has been learned about changing processes in 
educational organizations. A major contribution was made by Per Dalin who was 
instrumental in establishing International Management Training for Educational Change 
through OECD in 1976. His 1978 book, Limits to Educational Change , highlights four 
categories of factors which affect change processes: environment, education setting, the 
innovation and the implementation strategy. He also drew attention to value, power, 
psychological and practical barriers to effective implementation. The leading Canadian 
authority in educational change is Michael Fullan, Dean of Education, University of 
Toronto. His recent work stresses the dynamic nature of change processes which include 
phases of initiation, implementation and continuation over a period of at least three to 
five years. He and others have shifted emphasis from study of single innovations at the 
school level to investigation of multiple innovations which are affected by interacting 
factors at the school-community, system and provincial levels. Further insight into 
change processes can be gained from the Saskatchewan School Improvement Program 
(Newton, 1990) and from analysis of projects across Canada brought together by Newton 
and Knight, 1993. 

After seven years of experience with an intuitively appealing and strongly supported 
provincial school improvement program, the findings were as follows: 

• School improvement requires an integration of school-level and system-level initiative 
and leadership . Even strong provincial leadership connecting with schools is not 
sufficient to implement or continue improvement. 

• There must be an integration of authority and supp ort with line administrators at both 
the school and system level actively and visibly involved. 

• School improvement initiatives should begin with attention to mission-vision-goals 
and leadership . Leaders help people to picture "how things could be better" and they 
are able to establish a spirit for the process of everyone working together to make 
improvements. 



ERIC 



32 



• "Think big but start small" in order to make some early success possible. This 
advice is common but we often fail to realize that early success requires goal clarity , 
monitoring and evaluation . 

• More and continuing attention must be given to school culture defined simply as "the 
way we do things around here" and to political considerations of negotiation, 
discretion, incentives and distribution of power. The greatest barriers had to do with 
cultural and political factors - the nonrational considerations. 

• Continuation and spread of school improvement programs does not happen 
"naturally". In fact there are specific threats particularly personnel changes, career 
advancement and competing priorities. Continuation and spread require deliberate 
efforts by administrators reflected in a balance of pressure and support over many 
years. 

• More must be done to help the general public and educators realize that renewal is 
an on-going process if organizations are "healthy". To many people, the words 
"school improvement" imply weakness or the need for remedial measures. 

• As the pace and complexity of change in our increasingly global community 
accelerates and as public expectations for schooling soar, school organizations are 
going to need to appoint more personnel whose primary responsibility is analysis of 
environmental conditions and provision for effective change processes. In other 
words there must be a broader vision and a futuristic orientation if school 
improvement efforts are to be effective and continuous. 



The following points are drawn from analysis of cases in Understanding Change in 
Education: Rural and Remote Regions of Canada ; 

• The conceptual framework provided by Tichy (1980), House (1981) and Corbett and 
Rossman (1989) with emphasis on interacting cycles of political, technical or cultural 
factors being dominant is useful in further understanding change processes in 
educational organizations. 

• Many of the changes being implemented were in response to an identified need - 
problem solving as compared to opportunism. Since the change was seen by 
participants as a workable solution to a real problem its source (top down or bottom 
up) did not seem to be a factor. 

• Change was found not to be a predetermined, linear, rational process but one of 
adaptive problem solving. Most innovations required adaptation over time in order 
to keep addressing the identified problem. 

• A spirit of cooperation and an ability to reconcile divergent views in relation to "the 
bigger picture" were found to be important. 



ERIC 



33 



• In one form or another leadership was a key ingredient to successful change. Leaders 
were committed to the change and showed initiative, persistence, persuasiveness, 
decisiveness, boldness, vision or process skills as required by the occasion. 

A general finding was that there are advantages in small school communities in relation 
to schooling and in bringing about change successfully. In comparison to major urban 
contexts there are many examples to suggest that "You can do that here ". 

In many ways successful change processes for education in sparsely populated areas are 
leading towards what Senge (1990) has labelled a "learning organization". He says. 

At the heart of a learning organization is a shift of mind - from seeing ourselves as 
separate from the world to connected to the world, from seeing problems as caused by 
someone or something "out there" to seeing how our own actions create the problems 
we experience. A learning organization is a place where people are continually 
discovering how they create their reality. And how they can change it. (p. 12-13). 

Senge has identified five disciplines (developmental paths for acquiring certain skills or 
competencies) that are essential for creating organizations that can truly leam: 

1. Systems Thinking - seeing "the big picture", holistic; 

2. Mental Models - surfacing and examining our assumptions and beliefs - our lens for 
viewing the world; 

3. Personal Mastery - continually clarifying and deepening our personal view, 
continually learning; 

4. Building a Shared Vision - pictures of the future, common caring; and 

5. Team Learning - starts with dialogue to link individual, group and, organizational 
learning. 

He concludes: 

In a learning organization, leaders are designers, stewards (of a vision), and 
teachers. They are responsible for building organizations where people 
continually expand their capabilities to understand complexity, clarify vision, 
and improve shared mental models - that is they are responsible for learning, 
(p. 340). 

Senge's views may sound idealistic but the study team has found indicators of the 
disciplines in various small school-communities and such contexts appear to have 
many advantages for the promotion of learning organizations - communities of 
learners - schools as centres of learning for people of all ages. 



4o 34 



4.0 



CASE STUDIES WITHIN PROVINCIAL SYSTEMS 



In section 3.0 attention was drawn to the organization for education in Canada, to 
small school community contexts and to various innovations (changes) that are being 
made to improve educational services. This section is devoted to a description and 
analysis often innovations in the provincial school systems of Canada and one from 
the United States for the provision of second and third level services in sparsely 
populated regions. First it is necessary to present a conceptual framework within 
which we may think more deeply and analyze changes that are underway. 



4.1 CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 

Organizational needs and processes, outlined earlier in this report, as well as the 
concepts of organizational health and organizational learning help us to gain insight 
into how and why educational organizations are constructed and reconstructed. 
Carlson (1990), building on work by Bolman and Deal (1984), presented a more 
comprehensive framework in the Research in Rural Education journal. It can be seen 
in Figure 2 that he considers four approaches - structural, human resource, symbolic 
and political - to analysis of organizational behavior. 



4-, 



35 



Figure 2 

Framework for Analyzing Organizational Behavior 



STRUCTURAL APPROACH 



POUCTICA1. APPROACH 



- how is Power Distributed? 

• Who Are The Partisan 6reuo»? 

- what Conflicts Exist and How Resolved in 
The Past? 

- Whos Art The Powtr Brokers? 

- What Art Tht Ltvtis of Trust and 
Distrust? 

- Who Art Tht Informal leaders? 




- What is Tht 5a I arc* Between Centralized 
And Decentralized Controls? 

- How is integration And Differentiation Of 
Function* nanagtd? 

- what Goals And Boundaries Exist? 

- How is Coordination Facilitated? 

- how Art Decision* Made 



HUMAN RESOURCE APPROACH 



SYMBOLIC APPROACH 



• What Art The Organization * Symbols? 

• what Rituals Art Practiced? 

- what Beliefs Art Exhibited? 

- what Myths Or Stories Exist? 

- whet Significance Do People Piece On Any Of Tht Above items? 

- What Are The Underlying Assumption* Of The Above? 

- how Does The Above Combine To Define The 0. „ mirations Culture? 

- What image Do People Have Of Their organization? 

- what Meaning Do People Attach To Their work And/Or workplace? 



- what Human Needs at* Or Are Not Being Met? 
• What incentives Are Provided? 

- how Are People Recognized? 

- what Training Is Provided? 

- How Are People s Needs integrated with Tasks? 

- What Evidence is There Of Organizational 
Adaptation Or withdrawal <e.g.. Absenteeism, 
Passivity. Restriction)? 

- What isThetevel Of Employee Participation? 



ERIC 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



4o 



36 



I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 



A conceptual framework must encompass the reality of the phenomena being studied 
and be consistent with the design of the study. For our purposes in this study of 
innovative approaches to providing services to schools the conceptual framework had 
to be broad and comprehensive in keeping with a holistic approach and it had to 
include contextual as well as organizational factors. Moreover it had to provide for 
the time dimension because organizations change through phases over several years. 
In other words, the framework must enable and encourage us to deal with complexity. 
The conceptual framework described below has these features and its utility has been 
tested in small school community contexts by Gulka (1992) and by Newton and 
Knight (1993). 

Building upon earlier work by Tichy (1980) regarding life cycles in organizations and 
by House (1981) regarding categories of factors affecting change processes, Corbett 
and Rossman have developed and tested a conceptual framework for the analysis of 
change processes in education. As shown in Appendix B, they depict three streams 
of interacting political, technical and cultural factors affecting change processes, 
positively or negatively, as antecedent, intervening or outcome variables. Examples 
in each stream include: 

• Political - the use of authority and power to make decisions and to influence 
people through incentives, persuasion, and the interaction of contextual factors. 

• Technical - the factors usually included in studies of change such as quality of 
the innovation, resources, staff development, planning and opportunity for 
adaptation. 

• Cultural - stresses local values and beliefs about "what is" and "what ought to 
be". The meaning that local school community people attach to events is a key 
consideration. 



Each stream is described as being a causal network within which key behaviors, 
participant attitudes, contextual conditions and events in the change process are 
segregated or come together. They represent a composite "story" of change in a 
particular situation. In the following section eleven stories are shared. 

In this study, political, structural (including, also, degree of formalization), human 
resource and symbolic approaches to analysis, as depicted in Figure 2, were used. 
Throughout, interaction of variables and dominant factors at various stages in the 
development, as illustrated by Corbett and Rossman, were examined. 



37 



4.2 CASE STUDIES 



Preceding sections of this paper pertain to the general organization of education in 
Canada, small communities, small schools and trends and issues in providing support 
services. This information is essential background for considering each of the 
following cases. Cases from across Canada are presented in the order that site visits 
were made: 

• Cooperative Services Program - N.W. Ontario School Boards; 

• North Bay Area School Boards' Consortia; 

• Educational Reform in New Brunswick; 

• The Clare-Argyle Acadian School Board-Nova Scotia; 

• Francophone School Boards in Saskatchewan; 

• Commission Scolaire du Littoral, Quebec; 

• Saskatchewan Shared Services; 

• Aboriginal Education Branch, British Columbia; 

• Alberta Distance Learning Centre; and 

• Frontier School Division, Manitoba. 



There was also collaboration with personnel from the Dehcho School Division Board, 
N.W.T. and with the executive of the Small Schools Special Interest Council of the 
Newfoundland and Labrador Teachers' Association. For comparative purposes the 
final case study is from the United States. 

After each case study is introduced, a summary of findings related to the research 
questions is presented (section 2.2). The final major topic for each case is a 
discussion of findings within the conceptual frameworks (section 4.1). The eleven 
cases are summarized in the form of a matrix and major findings are highlighted at 
the end of this section. 



ERIC 



38 



4.2.1 The Northwestern Ontario School Boards' Cooperative Services Program 



4.2.1.1 Introduction 

The setting for this case is a vast geographic region - some communities being 600 
kilometers apart - north and west of Thunder Bay. People live in isolated 
communities some of which have only radio phones and air travel for connecting 
with the larger society. Other communities are on a major highway relatively close 
to Thunder Bay. Many areas have suffered from the closure of mines and from cuts 
in the forest industry. 1 

In 1976 a group of supervisory officers of the Regional Office, Ministry of 
Education, requested business and accounting services for a number of isolated school 
boards which were not able to meet provincial expectations in those aspects of their 
operation. In 1977 a Cooperative Services Unit, the predecessor of the current 
program, began to deliver business and accounting services. The Unit began by 
working within the organizational structure of the Umfreville District School Area 
Board which had previously dissolved because the school had burned down and 
students were attending school elsewhere. 

Over the years the number of services increased as did the number of boards utilizing 
the services. These boards are referred to as client boards. In 1988 a review was 
conducted resulting in some changes in the form of a two-year pilot project. An 
evaluation of the pilot project was central in bringing about the latest developments 
which are described in this section. 

According to the Cooperative Services Program brochure, its purpose is to provide 
a wide variety of administrative and curriculum services for members and clients, in 
northwestern Ontario who, because of their small size, cannot economically meet all 
needs internally on their own. The Cooperative Services Program supports boards 
in providing facilities, staff, school programs and general leadership as required, by 
provincial legislation. It is a service organization. 



4.2.1.2 Findings 
Clients 

School boards, with not more than 1,000 students under its care, are considered to 
be the clients as they may enter into agreements with the Cooperative Services 
Program. Delivery of services, however, brings personnel into direct contact with 



ERIC 



'information is based upon an interview with the current CEO, a chapter in 
Understanding Change in Education: Rural and Remote Regions of Canada edited 
by Newton and Knight, a report of a 1989-1991 pilot project, a copy of the 
agreement which governs the Program, a booklet and a brochure. 

3 4o 39 



students, teachers, administrators, support staff and community groups. It should be 
noted that schools range in size from 12 students to about 300. Some have no 
Aboriginal students and some have only Aboriginal students. Some First Nations, 
with band status but no reserve, called upon the Cooperative Services Program to 
assist them in formulating proposals and agreements for land acquisition. Clients also 
include Catholic school boards and some who request French language services. The 
Agreement also provides for boards of private schools to be clients. 



Types of Service 

The services which isolated school boards may purchase from the Cooperative 
Services Program include: 

• business/financial/accounting; 

• educational consulting in areas such as curriculum, computers, language arts, 
primary and special education; 

• professional (staff) development; 

• supervision; 

• teacher recruitment; 

• capital project assistance; 

• Territorial Student Program - counselling and contact for those who leave 
small communities to go to secondary school (usually in Thunder Bay); 

• a First Nations Educational Transitions Project, funded by DIAND, to assist 6 
communities as they move towards reserve status and having their own 
infrastructure for education; and 

• joint projects in relation to employment equity, transition years into the world 
of work, Drug Education and Family Violence. 



A table of client boards and services is shown in Appendix CI. 



Financing and Scope of Service 

Isolated school boards receive from 92 to 99 percent of their funding directly from 
the ministry according to funding guidelines which include provision for support 
services. Project-specific grants and other incentives for local initiative are also 
available. With these funds, school boards may enter into an agreement with the 
Cooperative Services Program by having the chairperson and secretary-treasurer sign 
a Request for Participation form on which specific services are requested. The 
agreement is completed with the signature of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) 
acting as attorney-in-fact for the Cooperative Services Program's Board of Directors. 
Member boards have a representative on the Board of Directors and may purchase 
services at cost plus 20 percent. Non-member boards pay cost plus 30 percent. 
These funds above cost are used to operate the Cooperative Services Program (staff, 



ERIC 



4j 



40 



facilities, materials, etc.). Agreements are signed for a three-year period and notice 
of termination must be given at least 6 months in advance. 



I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 



ERJC 



The provincial government seems to be moving out of providing direct services to 
school boards. They appear to support the Cooperative Services Program because if 
a board wishes to purchase services from any other agency their plan must be 
approved by the Regional Director of Education from the ministry. 



Processes - Control. Decision-Making and Accountability 

The Cooperative Services Program is governed by its member boards with each 
appointing one of its members to the Program's Board of Directors. The new 
structure, designed to maintain local autonomy, has two tiers: The Program Board 
of Directors and the local member or client boards elected at the community level. 

An agreement governs the formation and operation of the Cooperative Services 
Program Board. The Agreement includes details regarding purpose, membership, 
participation, power and authority of the Board of Directors, decision-making, 
liability, insurance, meetings, records, accounts and termination. A copy of the 
Agreement is included in Appendix C2. 

The local boards have the usual responsibilities to provide programs, staff, facilities 
and transportation and to manage funds all within provincial legislation and 
regulations. They are accountable in a number of ways: to the public by having 
financial statements audited; to the province for operating according to provincial 
legislation; and to the electorate who exercise their franchise on election day. 

Several points should be noted regarding the operation of the Program Board of 
Directors. Each year they appoint a chair, a vice-chair and three other members to 
form an Executive. They are authorized to appoint a chief executive officer and 
other staff as required with the CEO being designated as attorney-in-fact to sign 
agreements with clients and to implement the Agreement. 

The Program Board is authorized by members to receive fees for contracts, to retain 
an auditor, to have legal counsel and an insurance agent, to have bank accounts, to 
invest funds, to pay taxes, to approve budgets, to appoint committees and to do 
whatever else it deems necessary to carry out the terms and spirit of the Agreement. 
A quorum is set at one more than fifty percent of the members and all decisions are 
by majority vote with ties being lost. 

The chief executive officer is accountable to the Program Board and it is stated 
explicitly that the appointment of attorney-in-fact can be revoked by a majority vote 
of the Board at a meeting called for that specific purpose. It was learned during 
interviews that the full Board meets only about four times a year so major 
responsibility for day-to-day operations falls on the Executive and the CEO. It was 
said, for example, that cases of conflict or dispute are referred first to the CEO, then, 

L)J 41 



if necessary, to the Executive and, finally, there is provision for the call of a special 
meeting. 

Services are actually delivered by people called supervisory officers hired to fulfil a 
particular contract. Before the two-tier structure was implemented these people often 
felt caught between local boards and the Ministry. Now they are employed by client 
boards and become their advocates.. 



Adaptations - Outcomes 

A major adaptation to both local needs and to provincial priorities, noted above, is 
that the Cooperative Services Program is operated by its own Board and no longer 
reports to the Ministry. There is apparently some question about whether or not the 
provincial social contract legislation should apply to it. Over an 1 8-year period many 
changes have been made in structure, operations and personnel in response to 
problems centering around legitimacy of the original structure, the name, funding, 
boundaries of operation and lines of authority. Recent adaptations include the new 
name, restructuring, expansion to a "supermarket" of services, formal agreements over 
longer periods of time and assurances of autonomy particularly to Catholic boards 
and to First Nations. These adaptations are important outcomes of the project. 



4.2.1.3 Analysis and Discussion 



This development began with a problem-solving approach by regional ministry 
officials. Early organizational structures were questioned from a legal perspective, 
funding was uncertain and responsibilities were unclear. Needs were met, however, 
and incrementally services expanded and responsibility shifted from the province to 
a Program Board of Directors. Throughout there has been a belief that boards can 
provide better service by working together than they can on their own. 

Politically, power moved to member boards. Members boards work together to 
provide service but local autonomy is preserved in that each board decides which 
services it requires and under what conditions. Provision of service has been 
decentralized from the province to the northwest Ontario school boards and it has 
been privatized in the sense that it is market driven. The structure is formal 
according to the Agreement but processes for the determination and delivery of 
services are not explicit. Coordination, control and decision-making rests with the 
Program Board. The existence of the Program Board, however, depends upon the 
ministry continuing to provide funds to member boards for support services and upon 
the services delivered being satisfactory to client boards and to the ministry. 

Personnel hired by the Cooperative Services Program have to adjust to much more 
uncertainty and accountability than is the case in typical public educational 
organizations. Demands are high, time lines are short and distances are great. Many 
supervisory officers are people who have retired from regular employment by boards 



ERIC 



42 



in the region and they welcome opportunities to do part-time work. Time will tell 
if employment by a service organization such as the Cooperative Services Program 
will be challenging and satisfying to full-time career professionals at various stages 
in their career. Perhaps cultural and symbolic changes are taking place to the point 
where educators find their personal and professional needs being met in organizations 
that are outside of the regular provincial school systems. 

The future of the Northwest Ontario School Boards' Cooperative Services Program 
will depend upon member boards continuing to see the "big picture", to be sensitive 
to the need for local autonomy and to emphasize quality service with built-in 
flexibility and accountability. 

4.2.2 North Bay, Region School Boards' Consortia 

4.2.2.1 Introduction 

The Setting for this case, as in the previous one, is northern Ontario. North Bay is 
approximately 350 kilometers north of Toronto in the Algonquin Park region between 
Georgian Bay and the border of the province of Quebec. 

Two factors have had an important impact on initiatives by school boards in the 
North Bay area. The Director of Education for the Nipissing Board is a strong 
advocate of organizational change particularly outsourcing (Drucker, 1993) whereby 
services not central to the organization are purchased. 1 In a school system the focus 
is on the classroom and on the central service teachers offer to students. Outside 
sources are those that could be used to provide other services such as maintenance, 
information, purchasing and speech therapy. This way the central organization stays 
smaller and gains advantages of lower cost and better service according to supporters 
of that approach. A second factor affecting developments reported here is political - 
school boards support cooperative endeavors and the provincial government provides 
a grant to boards taking innovative approaches to purchasing and to pupil 
transportation. 

School boards in the area are responding to high cost pressures and to provincial 
social contract legislation in various ways. The Nipissing Board of Education 
centered in North Bay, for example, is searching for new and better ways of 
managing its operations. It is currently reviewing and revising office procedures in 
secondary schools, the work being done by custodial staff and several aspects of its 
business transactions including purchasing. This case is focused on procedures 
currently being implemented by a consortium of eight school boards to realize cost 



Sources of information include a site visit for interviews with three officials, 
including the Director of the Nipissing Board of Education, policy statements, 
minutes of meetings and other print materials. 



43 



savings by purchasing materials cooperatively. More specifically, the stated purposes 
of the Consortium Purchasing Group are to: 



• jointly invite tenders or quotations for commonly used items; 

• encourage standardization of specifications; 

• exchange market information; 

• purchase in volume at lower unit prices; 

• support professional development and efficiency through joint study and 
evaluation of state-of-the-art managerial processes; and 

• avoid duplication of effort. 

So far two consortia have been formed - one among eight school boards and another 
involving the two Nipissing boards and community agencies such as the city 
administration, the hospital board and the university. A community consortium in 
Thunder Bay, known as the Lakehead Consortium Purchasing Group, was reviewed 
in developing the latter. Existing legislation enables school boards to enter into 
agreements to form consortia. 



The member boards of education are Haliburton, Muskoka, Nipissing, Nipissing 
District Catholic, West Parry Sound, East Parry Sound, Timiskaming and 
Timiskaming District Catholic. School systems range in size from 8 to 28 schools 
and from 2,450 to 10,400 students. Most are mixed urban and rural contexts. The 
Purchasing Consortia does not deal directly with personnel at the school level - it 
operates at the school system level. 

Types of Services 

A survey of the 8 member boards was used to determine needs and reactions to 
sharing staff, a fee for bulk purchasing, warehouse space and courier/delivery service. 
To date, there is bulk purchasing of paper towelling, toilet tissue, janitorial supplies, 
lamps/bulbs, fine paper, computer paper, photocopiers and computer hardware. 
Boards also cooperate in the call for, and awarding of, capital tenders. 

Financing and Scope of Service 

The Purchasing Consortia has no staff and hence no overhead/administrative costs 
Member school boards each pay their own costs for participating in the Consortium 
Purchasing Group. These are limited to travel and meeting costs for the board's 
representative. The terms of reference for cooperative purchasing state that only 
goods and services with potential cost reduction will be considered. 



4.2.2.2 



Findings 



Clients 




44 



ERIC 



Processes - Control. Decision Making and Accountability 



According to interviews, at least one school board in the Consortia is committed to 
partnership so processes facilitating partnership are supported. It was further stated 
that partnership may be seen by some as loss of identity and control but that the 
budget process starts at the grassroots where students are seen as clients. Teachers 
and principals have influence through school councils and a school-based budgeting 
process where local priorities can govern budget decisions. There may be $10,000.00 
for supplies and equipment, for example, and some school councils may purchase art 
supplies, another a piano and a third audio-visual equipment. Within this general 
framework, the terms of reference for the Consortia Purchasing Group specify a 
number of procedures outlined below. 

The Cooperative Purchasing Group is made up of a representative from each 
participating school board. Officers of the group are to be a chair, a vice-chair and 
a recording secretary, each elected for a 2-year term by the membership. Typical 
duties for each are listed. Meetings may be called by the chair or at the request of 
any three members and they must be at least quarterly. Guidelines for operation state 
that it is understood that all agencies will act in their own best interests in deciding 
whether or not to be included in a particular tender. Procedures for tenders include 
review by all members before advertising, opening tenders publicly with at least two 
members present and remaining committed to tenders once they are finalized. It is 
also understood mat tenders may include different product specifications, delivery 
points and/or terms of payment as required by different boards. Decisions by boards 
not to be part of a tender are to be recorded in the minutes. Once committed, each 
agency is responsible for receiving and for paying its portion of a joint tender. It can 
be seen that Purchasing Group members are accountable to each other and, no doubt, 
through their boards to the electorate. 



Adaptations 

The Consortia are in early stages of development but adaptations have been made to 
provide flexibility in tenders for variations in specifications, delivery and payment. 



Outcomes 

Major outcomes are in terms of savings. It is reported that 13 percent more supplies 
were purchased for 7 percent less cost. One school board is said to have saved 
$20,000 on copiers and its cost per copy has been reduced by SO percent. Another 
example is the cost of chairs being reduced frorr S27.00 to $18.75. 

A statement of benefits from the Purchasing Group in addition to cost savings 
includes common commodity specifications to ensure high quality, price protection, 
shared expertise, reduction of duplication by purchasing departments, reduced 



45 



shipping and handling costs, increased professional development, higher productivity 
and political support. 

Risks and concerns have also been shared. It was pointed out that Cooperative 
purchasing may not be an advantage to suppliers - especially local ones. It has 
been found, too, that not all members realize savings on all purchases, that 
common purchasing policies have to be developed, that some individuals, at times, 
feel they are losing control and that it is sometimes difficult to form a cohesive, 
effective group. 

The general success of the Consortium Purchasing Group has led to discussions about 
expanding cooperative efforts to include transportation, student services, legal advice 
and several additional aspects of business such as banking, insurance and employee 
benefits. Members are also considering the cooperative hiring of specialists in areas 
like special education. The success of the Kent Area Administrators' Group, 
including the city of Chatham, is cited in support of these possibilities. 



4.2.2.3 Analysis and Discussion 

There are several developments taking place among North Bay area school boards: 
examination of internal management operations in response to provincial Social 
Contract Legislation; outsourcing for services is being driven by high cost pressures; 
and a consortia among eight school boards focused on volume purchasing. Links 
have been established with similar projects elsewhere in the province. Local political 
leaders are reportedly committed to collaboration and system administrators 
conceptualize and advocate restructuring. The early success of the Consortium 
Purchasing Group and the presence of several key supporting factors, noted above, 
point to continuation and expansion of consortia among school boards in the North 
Bay Region. 

The School Boards' Consortia, to date, however, have been focused on political, 
structural and financial aspects. These are technical, relatively "clear cut" changes 
with a specific, shared goal - saving dollars. Expansion into other areas such as pupil 
transportation, banking/investment, curriculum implementation and services for 
students with special needs will be much more complicated as there will more 
diversity of opinion regarding goals and processes. Concerns have already been 
expressed about difficulties encountered in building strong, cohesive groups and in 
forming partnerships when some people see it as loss of some control/autonomy. 

In terms of a conceptual framework, the School Boards' Consortia is strong in 
political and structural aspects but there are challenges ahead in relation to human 
resources and symbolic/cultural change - "the way we do things around here". 



a 

ERIC 

ummmmmim 



4.2.3 Educational Reform in New Brunswick 



4.2.3.1 Introduction 

New Brunswick is a province of about 750,000 people of whom more than one-third 
are French-speaking Acadians. Most of the population is distributed in small 
communities by the sea and along river valleys - fewer than one-third live in cities 
of more than 50,000. The economy, dominated by forestry, mining, fishing and 
agriculture has been struggling despite the relative success of the Irving and McCain 
family enterprises. The rural population is declining. 

New Brunswick is Canada's only officially bilingual province. The Anglophone and 
Francophone branches of the Department of Education operate separately except for 
the broad policy frameworks and the funding model. 1 

In 1992 there was a New Brunswick Commission on Excellence in Education and 
amalgamation of school boards was undertaken. The result was new legislation 
requiring a reduction in the number of boards from 42 to 18 - 12 Anglophone and 
6 Francophone. 

In the fall of 1993, the Department of Education issued Education 2000: Preparing 
S tudents for the New Century . That document is intended to set broad policy and 
program direction for English language school systems for the next three to five 
years. It includes a mission statement, beliefs and the view that students, teachers 
and successful schools are at the center of the educational enterprise. There are also 
sections devoted to curriculum, expectations and accountability, roles and 
responsibilities, leadership development and partnerships. The concluding portions 
are Ministerial statements on schools as orderly places of learning and on community 
involvement in schools (see appendix Dl). Part of that involvement has been a 1994 
discussion paper on high school issues and a follow-up conference of partners, 
including students. 

This case is unique in that readers are challenged to think about all aspects of 
education for learners of all ages in an entire province and to consider how various 
aspects are interrelated. The focus of our attention is the amalgamation of school 
boards and tue central role of the newly-structured boards in bringing about reform. 



Information for this report is taken from Education 2000. the High School Issues 
Discussion guide, the 1992-1993 annual report of the Department of Education, a 
site visit and an interview. 

bo 

ERIC °° 



4.2.3.2 Findings 



Clients 

From the beginning of the reform, political leaders have stated that the student is at 
the center and that all other changes, including the amalgamation of school boards, 
are designed to better serve students. All school districts in the province have been 
affected by amalgamation. The political picture has changed and restructuring has 
taken place. It was pointed out during an interview that ideas have also been brought 
together in the new boards because they represent larger geographic areas and more 
diversity in communities and in board membership. According to reports more 
services are shared now. School boards, it appears, not only shape reform but are 
shaped by it. They are both managers and clients. 



Types of Service 

The central service in the entire reform effort is reported to be the contact between 
student and teacher. The 1992-1993 annual report of New Brunswick Education, 
Student Services Branch, lists the following activities: integration of students with 
special needs into regular classrooms; a comprehensive model for guidance; 
partnerships with communities; excellence in education initiatives; specialized support 
in areas such as speech pathology; programs for at risk students; a youth 
apprenticeship program; and evaluation of several programs. The role of the newly- 
structured boards is to consider local needs and to determine how various services 
can best be delivered to students for whom they have responsibility. 



Financing and Scope of Service 

Elementary and secondary education is funded totally by the province. According 
to the 1992 - 1993 annual report, there were 139,900 students in 18 school districts 
with a professional staff of 8494. The pupil/teacher ratio was 16.5:1. Expenditures 
amounted to approximately $598 million plus $42 million for capital costs. The 
report also states that $38.6 million will be expended over a four-year period on 
various reforms. During an interview it was said that $6 million has been saved by 
school board amalgamation and that those funds will be redistributed to maintain low 
pupil/teacher ratios. 

The funding formula used to allocate monies to school districts includes factors to 
support small schools in remote areas. It also includes costs of special education 
based on average numbers of students with various special needs and on particular 
local circumstances. 



ERIC 



5 



48 



Processes - Roles r Responsibilities and Accountability 



The Education 2000 document from the ministry is explicit in relation to key 
processes. It is said that the involvement of parents and community is an essential 
ingredient in quality education and principles of respect, diversity and flexibility are 
endorsed. A manifestation of this position is that there are local, community boards 
in some areas to provide input to the amalgamated board. Emphasis on parental 
participation is also supported by a recent court decision in favor of parents who 
charged that there had been lack of consultation in a board decision to change the 
school calendar year. 

It is observed in Education 2000 that the role of the Department of Education has 
been quite predominant compared to other provinces but that this has ensured 
consistent standards and equitable funding. While the Department is expected to 
continue to play a central role in policy development, monitoring and implementation, 
Education 2000 includes plans to devolve to school districts responsibility for direct 
delivery of programs and services to schools and to students. School boards are 
urged to accept a strengthened role in. 

• setting educational goals; 

• managing resources; 

• assessing achievements; and 

• creating partnerships. 

The New Brunswick School Trustees' Association is reported to be informing trustees 
of the potential benefits of devoting more time and effort to educational matters and 
less to administrative details. Considerable attention is given in Education 2000 to 
clarifying the roles of elected officials and administrators in bringing about reform - 
the former concentrating on determining system priorities and on developing policy 
and the latter on policy implementation and on day-to-day operations. 

Accountability is also addressed directly in Education 2000 . It is stated that the 
education system needs to be more accountable to the public for the results of dollars 
invested through the use of performance indicators related to both student and system 
outcomes. To bring this about, curriculum documents are to define "up front" 
expectations of students - what they should know and be able to do at each grade 
level. New Brunswick is also cooperating with other Maritime provinces to develop 
a performance-based curriculum in mathematics and science at the senior high school 
level. Similar work is underway in other subjects to move towards an outcomes- 
based curriculum. 



r ■ 



49 



Adaptations 



Beginning in the late 1980's, through the New Brunswick Center for Educational 
Administration, there has been emphasis on topics such as leadership, team building, 
cooperative learning, peer coaching and conflict management all within a school 
organization. Education 2000 shifts attention to school - community relations and to 
the need for on-going strategic planning processes. An example of this adaptation 
is the many connections made in the New Brunswick reforms among student 
learning, community participation and the economic development of the province. 



Outcomes 



More focused, integrated action to implement Education 2000 is reported. Leadership 
is being seen at school, system and provincial levels despite some fears about the 
amalgamation of school boards. Some boards are said to be bogged down in crisis 
management and struggling with the realization that increased participation brings 
with it conflict and complexity as well as the potential for a more effective, 
responsive organization. 



4.2.3.3 Analysis and Discussion 

This case features strong provincial, political leadership and a holistic, integrated 
approach to reform in education driven both by economic necessity and by strong 
beliefs in the importance of student-teacher relations. The amalgamation of school 
boards, essentially to reallocate funds from middle management to the classroom 
level, has been accompanied by emphasis upon the importance of the role of the 
newly-formed boards. Political and structural/organizational aspects of the reform 
have received careful attention. 

Earlier initiatives ir New Brunswick education centering around school staff 
development and leadership have, no doubt, helped to prepare teachers and principals 
for Education 2000 . In other words, human resources had been strengthened prior 
to the current reforms. 

Inherent problems in educational organizations such as goal ambiguity, low levels of 
interdependence, unclear roles and lack of attention to evaluation have been addressed 
in the current reforms? Early indications are that partners see their efforts as focused 
and integrated. The next challenge will be to determine indicators of success at all 
levels, to monitor operations and to evaluate outcomes so that accountability forms 
the basis for on-going, strategic planning. Only then will partners become true 
believers in the reforms, willing to change the symbols and culture of their school- 
community. 



ERIC 



50 



I 

I 

I 

1 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

1 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 



4.2.4 The Qare-Argyle Acadian School Board 



4.2.4.1 Introduction 

Small Acadian villages along the south west coast of Nova Scotia, separated by the 
city of Yarmouth, are the subject of this case. Rich in history and culture, this region 
includes the only university in the province where the language of operation is 
French - St. Anne's University. This report is about the formation of the only school 
board in Nova Scotia in which French is the official language. 1 

Early in the 1980's the province of Nova Scotia was bringing about the amalgamation 
of school boards. The leaders of the Clare school board and community and those 
of Argyle believed that if they united, despite having the city of Yarmouth between 
them, they could avoid being subsumed within a larger board dominated by 
Anglophones. A board chair, who is now head of a provincial Acadian federation, 
a superintendent who offered leadership at the provincial level and a supportive 
minister of education were instrumental in the adoption of legislation for the creation 
of the Clare Argyle Board in 1981. The distinguishing feature of the Board is that 
its official language of operation is French although it also serves Anglophones and 
offers some programs in English. 



4.2.4.2 Findings 
Clients 

The client group includes both Francophone and Anglophone linguistic communities 
in the Clare Argyle districts. 



Types of Service 

The Clare Argyle Board provides all of the services expected of a board under the 
Education Act of Nova Scotia (1992). Emphasis in all Board operations is on the 
French language and culture but service is also provided in English - in fact, three 
of the 13 schools are English schools and the two high schools operate in both 
English and French. 

Additional services include the provision of French language curriculum and teaching 
materials. Special education services are offered through a contract with a hospital 
in Yarmouth. 



Information for this case is drawn from a site visit, an interview, an annual report 
and a linguistic policy statement. 

3 ■■) 



Financing - Scope of Service 



From the 1993-1994 annual report it can be seen that the Clare Argyle Board had 
3,056 students in 13 schools. The budget of approximately $16 million is based upon 
revenues from the province ($13 million), municipal grants ($1.8 million) and a 
federal contributions ($0.4 million). The Board does not levy local taxes. The 
provincial funds include the general formula and grants for transportation, special 
education, driver education and French special projects. 

An indication of finances and service priorities can be found in the comment, during 
an interview, that it had been too costly to provide special education services from 
within the school system so a contract was made to have them supplied at less cost 
in order to maintain the French language curriculum support service. In other words, 
creative problem solving preserved an essential service. 



Processes - Responsibilities and Accountability 

The Clare Argyle Board operates within the provincial organization for education and 
its responsibilities are specified in the Education Act of Nova Scotia (1992). It 
should be noted that the Department of Education has a Francophone Branch in 
which Clare Argyle officials have worked from time to time. 

The Clare Argyle Board has 8 members - 4 from Clare and 4 from Argyle. Currently 
all Board members are Francophone but this has not always been the case. The 
Board in addition to regular decisions about budget allocations, staffing and facilities, 
is faced with the possibility of closing three small schools. Studies of alternatives 
to closure are underway and the Board recognizes that parents want "a say". 

Accountability is provided for in the usual way through audits, annual meetings and 
school board elections. 



Adaptations 

An official of the Board said, "you can't go it alone. You have to cooperate". 
Accordingly, the Board operates English schools, has English and French streams in 
its high schools, has French immersion schools for Anglophones and offers 
simultaneous translation of all its written and oral communications. 

The Board adapts to public opinion directly at times. In order to meet expectations 
of both areas, the Board has its administrative office in Clare and its business office 
in Argyle. To avoid possible public criticism for having an expensive "second" 
school system, the administrative offices are in the lower level of an older school 
building. 



ERIC 



52 



I 
1 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
1 
I 
1 
I 
1 
1 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 

"* o 

ERIC 



Outcomes 

The Clare Argyle Board has apparently been generally successful in its 12-year 
history. The Schools and communities are both focused on strengthening the French- 
Acadian language and culture. Acadian community cultural activities are said to 
make an important contribution. 

The French curriculum is seen as stronger at the elementary school level than it is 
in high schools. Leaders would also like to see high schools become more open to 
the people - to their presence, to their voices and to their participation in decision- 
making. 



4.2.4.3 Analysis and Discussion 

The creation of the Clare Argyle Acadian Board can be traced to the determination 
of a small group of people who wanted to work together to enhance their language 
and culture, to political action by a group of teachers and to visionary leadership at 
both the local and provincial levels. Another key factor is considered to be the 
willingness to cooperate and adapt-for example, to operate within the Provincial 
Education Act and to have English schools. 

Compared to earlier cases which originated with school boards and/or governments, 
this one grew from communities with aspirations which they articulated and presented 
to government. Changes in power, politics and structure were kept to a minimum 
and accommodations were made as required. The development of the Clare Argyle 
Board, because of its grassroots origin, is strong from a human resource perspective. 
The focus on language and culture forms the basis for symbolic and cultural 
attributes. One factor contributing to these features is that the Board's Chief 
Executive Officer was raised in one of the communities and was a teacher and 
administrator in the school system before assuming his current responsibilities five 
years ago. 



4.2.5 Francophone School Boards in Saskatchewan 

4.2.5.1 Introduction 

This case, like the last one, describes how education has been restructured to meet 
the aspirations of people in Francophone communities. The differences are in 
context, as the eight communities in this case are spread over several hundred 
kilometers in Saskatchewan, and in time as most of the developments reported here 



53 



occurred within the last five years. In the province as a whole, fewer than five 
percent of the approximately one million people are Francophone. 1 

The beginning of the creation of Francophone schools boards in Saskatchewan is 
related to Section 23 of The Charter of Rights and Freedoms of the Canadian 
Constitution, to three court decisions confirming the right of Francophones to manage 
and control their schools where there are sufficient numbers and to unsatisfactory 
results in having Francophones represented on provincial school boards. Another 
contributing factor was a 1988 agreement on Francophone education between the 
province and the federal government. The agreement stipulated that, if the province 
would provide for Francophone governance of education, the federal government 
would provide funding of $3 million per year for the first five years of the agreement 
and a decrease of 10 percent per year for another five years. Following the 
agreement, a committee was formed with the approval of the provincial cabinet and 
with the participation of Francophone communities and all major education partners 
including the provincial organizations of school trustees, teachers and directors of 
education. The committee report, known as the Gallant Report after the chair, 
formed the basis for Francophone school boards in Saskatchewan. 

4.2.5.2 Findings 
Clients 

The clients in this case are Francophone parents whose mother tongue is French and 
who still understand the language, or have received elementary education in French 
or have at least one child who has received or is receiving education in French. 
There are eight communities in Saskatchewan with sufficient numbers of clients to 
form a school board. 

Types of Service 

As in the example of the Clare Argyle Board, Francophone boards in Saskatchewan 
operate within the Provincial Education Act (1988) and provide the services that 
provincial boards do. Emphasis is on French language and culture. A unique feature 
of the structure is a province-wide service organization, the Conseil general des 
ecoles fransaskoises, to coordinate and provide services in French to the Fransaskois 
schools. This body will have a permanent staff of professionals to provide services 
in French. Since this operation is not official until January 1, 1995, we do not know 
specifically what services will be provided nor to what extent. The difference in 
structure is that in the regular provincial system local (community) boards are only 



Information for this case is taken from a 1989 report to the Minister of Education 
from the Coordinating Committee for the Governance of Francophone Schools by 
Francophones, a booklet of questions and answers from the Fransaskois School 
Component Task Force (1993), a review paper confirmed by Francophone Board 
officials and an interview. 



54 



advisory to the board of education which may include 10 or 12 communities in its 
jurisdiction. For Fransaskois schools, local boards have authority similar to boards 
of education. 

Financing 

The community school boards, the conseil scolcdre, will not levy local taxes but will 
receive all of their funds from the Department. In effect, the local tax portion is 
transferred to the conseil scolmre by the provincial Department. All incremental 
costs related to establishing the boards will be funded with federal monies. Each 
local board will transfer some funds to the general board according to a formula yet 
to be determined. The Department may also contribute to the operation of the 
general service board. 

Processes - Powers. Decision-Making and Accountability 

The powers of the local Francophone boards are generally equal to those of 
provincial boards of education. There are some notable exceptions: 

• Francophone boards cannot levy taxes, nor borrow money as provincial boards 
do; 

• Only parents who have children in a Fransaskois school, not the entire 
community, can vote in board elections. This is to comply with Section 23 of 
the Charter which gives rights only to parents; 

• A Francophone board cannot discontinue a grade level nor close the last school 
under its jurisdiction without the approval of the general board; and 

• Francophone boards do not have the power to enter into service agreements with 
other boards since that is a responsibility of the general board. 

The general board is made up of one elected member from each local board. It is 
to have a chief executive officer who may also serve as director of education for one 
or more local boards. (That, in fact, is the case. There is one director of education 
for five boards in the northern part of the province. The director for the three boards 
in the south is also CEO for the general board.) Similarly, the treasurer of the 
general board may work part-time for local boards. 

As noted, the general board is primarily to serve local boards but it has one other 
main function. It is to receive and consider proposals for the creation of new conseil 
scoldres and make recommendations to the Minister. A list of criteria for reviewing 
proposals is based upon decisions of the Supreme Court that give priority to meeting 
the pedagogical needs of students over economic considerations. According to 
documents reviewed for this case, the Minister is bound by the recommendation of 
the conseil general to accept or reject a proposal. Judicial reviews are provided for 
and the government retains control through grant funding. 



55 



Other terms of the agreement underlying the formation of the Francophone Boards 
provide for the transfer of teaching staff and for the recognition of only the conseil 
scolaire to provide French first language education in a school division within which 
they exist. Other boards may offer French immersion programs. 

A Francophone board will be accountable only to parents sending children to their 
schools - not to the community at large. The board, with a finite budget, will be 
accountable to the users of the system. 



Adaptations 

To date, adaptations include having the operation of Francophone boards integrated 
into the provincial Education Act instead of creating a parallel structure and asking 
the majority to financially support two separate operations. Another adaptation is 
having only two directors of education for the eight boards in order to save funds for 
school-level operations and to avoid possible criticism for operating what some may 
consider to be a separate, expensive school system when "times are tough". 

Outcomes 

The Francophone communities are pleased with the formation of Francophone school 
boards. They credit the province with going beyond Francophone representation on 
provincial school boards to the creation of totally Francophone boards. As one 
Francophone official stated, "Before we were always asking. Now we will be 
deciding". He went on to say that Francophones in Saskatchewan will be in charge 
of their destiny and so will become better citizens within priorities of the province. 

4.2.5.3 Analysis and Discussion 

This change, like the last case, started at the community level with the support of the 
Charter, court decisions and the principle of equity. Other crucial factors in the 
creation of the Francophone boards in Saskatchewan are considered to be the 
appointment of an impartial, credible Francophone from out-of-province to chair the 
1989 committee. The meaningful involvement of major partners at that stage was 
also, no doubt, fundamental to reaching an agreement. 

So far, political and structural matters have been addressed. The emphasis on French 
language and culture will provide a focus for symbolic and cultural aspects of the 
organization. The immediate challenge is likely to be in relation to human resources 
- to offer leadership and support for school staff development, for process skill 
development among boards and for on-going school community collaboration and 
strategic planning. 



Go 



56 



4.2.6 Commission Scolairc du littoral 
4.2.6.1 Introduction 



Fourteen small, isolated fishing villages spread along 450 kilometers of the Lower 
Norm Shore, province of Quebec, provide the setting for this case. 1 Many of the 
villages are accessible only by air or by water as no roads have been built. Prior to 
1963 the clergy had operated schools in the ten Anglophone villages, four 
Francophone communities and two Indian reservations. 

In 1963 leaders from the 16 communities formed an informal council to consider the 
needs of the people particularly for economic development. They passed a resolution 
in favor of a new organization for schooling their 2,000 students which would not 
divide people into religious nor linguistic groups. 

Bill 41 passed by the Legislative Assembly of Quebec in 1967 authorized the 
creation of a school board for the 16 communities along the lower North Shore. 
Cabinet named an administrator, an assistant and two or three other people to act as 
a school board (See Appendix E for the current organizational structure). They were 
given authority to delegate some responsibilities to a school committee which they 
could appoint for each village. 

After a local competition, by Order in Council in 1975, the name of The Du Littoral 
School Municipality was adopted for the region. "Littoral" means coastline in 
French. 



4.2.6.2 Finding s 
Clients 

The clients in this case are people in 16 communities along the Lower North Shore. 
Today there are 14 communities as the two First Nations negotiated a withdrawal so 
they could exercise more control over the education of their children. 

Through the provision of facilities and staff the 940-students are served directly in 
schools ranging in size from 5 to 234 students. Nine of the 16 schools have fewer 
than 50 students. Often board personnel work with client groups - parents, teachers, 
administrators and school committees. 



ERIC 



1 This report is based upon a site visit to the administrative offices in Sept-Iles, an 
interview and various print materials including Bill 4 1 under which the Commission 
was formed, Bill 48 regarding the inclusion of Anticosti Island, an organizational 
chart and a document outlining the Parents' Advisory Committee. 



Funding an d Services 



In addition to the usual services of providing administration, facilities, staff, 
cumculum and equipment there are additional provisions. Teachers receive an 
isolation allowance, furnished accommodation at minimal cost, three personal trips 
with family per year and support for professional development. Students with special 
needs are served through a contract with a Montreal group whereby specialists visit 
each community for one week twice a year to work with students, teachers and 
parents. There are also distance education services. The two high schools are 
linked to schools in Montreal, for example, through an audio-computer system. 



Processes - Control. Accountability and Decision-Making 



I 
I 



The Littoral Board is funded entirely by the province of Quebec. In the early years | 
the budget was described as "open" meaning that the province provided funds as 
required. Later a ceiling on expenditures was established but the Board could not m 
keep costs within those limits. In 1990 this resulted in funding regulations being £ 
adopted specifically for the littoral Board. They provide for a low student-teacher 
ratio in recognition of many multigrade classrooms. The current ratios for Littoral m 
are fewer than 12 to one at the primary and elementary levels and fewer than 8 to $ 
one at the high school level. Both are less than one-half of average provincial ratios. 
In addition, regulations provide for religious education, drop-out prevention programs, 
school improvement, drug education, libraries, a milk program, adult education and 
three education consultants in the areas of special education and curriculum. A 
special feature of the regulations is that schools are guaranteed regardless of 
enrollment - currently the six smallest schools have 5, 7, 12, 14, 19 and 20 students. 



I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 



In many respects schooling along the Lower North Shore is government controlled. 
The government appoints the administrator who reports to the Minister of Education 
through the Deputy. The government allocates funds. In addition, Littoral schools 
use provincial curricula and are governed by provincial legislation. When Bill 41 B 
was passed in 1967, according to one interviewee, the government saw it as an * 
opportunity to focus attention on English minority groups and to experiment with a m 
non-denominational school board. Now the government is said to be decentralizing ■ 
decision-making in curriculum, instruction and resource materials to school boards, 
schools and teachers. 



I 



Along with a high level of government control there is emphasis on local autonomy 
in the operations of the Littoral Board. In one situation, for example, parents refused m 
to send their students 100 kilometers to a high school in a neighboring community ■ 
with provision for them to return home ten times a year. Instead they chose to send 
their students over 400 kilometers to Sept-Ues where they have only three trips home 
per year. Local autonomy is respected. 



There is also provision for community input into decision making. There are two 
general assemblies each year made up of the elected presidents of the 14 local 



I 
I 



ERIC 



58 



committees. It is said to be, "Their agenda - their meeting". There is also an 
Executive Committee with two members being named as Commissioners (School 
Board members). In addition, there are regular meetings of administrators and an 
Administrative Advisory Committee. The budget provides for all meetings and 
assemblies. 

During the current school year a Parents' Advisory Committee is being formed. 
Established under Law 107, it is made up of eight parents, who are not members of 
a school staff, elected by their peers to represent a municipality /sector. The two 
parents who are on the Parents' Advisory Committee will also be members of the 
Board. Meetings are to be every 8 to 10 weeks at various locations. The functions 
of the Committee are to advise the Board on the organization of services, strategic 
planning, allocation of funds, implementation of policies or programs, criteria for 
hiring personnel and policy development. Rules of operation have been agreed to 
and a code of ethics has been adopted. The Committee has been established in 
recognition of the great diversity among communities and also in order to give people 
an opportunity to learn about school board operations - to have them consider what 
is best for the region as a whole not just their own community. 

In summary, the actual operations of the Littoral Board were found not to be as "top 
down" as they appear to be on paper. One reason for this is leadership the style of 
the Administrator who was raised in one of the communities and was a teacher in 
another when the Littoral Board was formed. 



Adaptations 

Over the years the Quebec government has made adaptations to provide schooling in 
communities of the Lower North Shore. Bill 41 established the Board and funding 
regulations recognize the need for low student teacher ratios and for small schools 
in isolated communities to stay open. 

The Board also has made changes over the years. Initial priorities were school 
facilities and equipment whereas today emphasis is on communication and computer 
technology and on parental involvement. In the early years, all high school students 
were sent out of the region and now secondary education is offered in four Littoral 
communities. It was not possible to effectively provide for students with special 
needs only by flying experts in periodically so local teacher aides have been hired. 
Consultants have been employed to assist teachers in adapting to multi-grade 
classrooms and to alleviate problems of isolation by providing information about 
current developments in education elsewhere. Another adaptation was the negotiated 
withdrawal of the two First Nations from the Littoral Board. 



ERIC 



G 



59 



Outcomes 



During an interview it was pointed out that in the early 1960's most of the isolated 
communities had only one room schools with virtually no books or equipment. Over 
the 27 years of its operation the Littoral Board has been very successful in providing 
facilities, equipment and staff. A new organization was created to meet the needs of 
the people for schooling and financial support was provided beyond what would have 
ordinarily been expected. 

Beyond the obvious success, students' learning outcomes are also increasing. In 
1989, for instance, 55 percent of the grade eleven students passed provincial exams 
and in the last year 75 percent passed. 

Attention now has shifted to staff development, school-community relations and 
parental involvement where there is perceived need for improvement. 

4.2.6.3 Analysis and Discussion 

Many factors over many years have contributed to the creation and generally 
successful operation of the Littoral School Board. At the outset community leaders 
cooperated and made their aspirations known to government. The government 
approved a new structure for the operation of schools and also provided funding 
beyond the ordinary. Board administrators have been sensitive to communities and 
also credible and competent in the eyes of government. Social, cultural, religious, 
linguistic, economic and political factors all contributed in the years when 
responsibility for schooling shifted from the clergy to the new Littoral Board. 

Now, as governments decentralize and as there is increased emphasis on parent- 
community involvement in education, new challenges emerge for the Littoral Board. 
As with Francophone Boards in Saskatchewan, parents are going to want to be 
deciding - not always asking. The Littoral Board is likely to need restructuring in 
the near future as its actual operations are already more decentralized than the 
structure is. From a political perspective power will need to shift, for example, so 
people elect their board and hire their own director and staff. Current developments 
will strengthen human resources - school staffs and community leaders. 

In the foreseeable future, with all due respect to what has been accomplished in its 
27 year history, the control of the Littoral Board will probably shift to the people. 
Organizational and community cultures will change accordingly. 



ERIC 



Gj 



60 



4.2.7 Shared Services in Saskatchewan 



4.2.7.1 



Saskatchewan is a sparsely populated province with approximately one million people 
scattered over about 650,000 square kilometers. Rural population has been declining 
as has the agriculture industry. In the early 1980's concerns surfaced about the 
quality of education in the sixty rural school divisions some of which were 
experiencing enrollment decline of over thirty percent. 

One area of concern was providing services for students with special needs. Based 
upon the belief that rural school divisions could share services to achieve economies 
of scale, and after a period of consultation, the Shared Services Model was adopted 
by the Department of Education in 1982 in order to implement provincial special 
education policy. 1 

Initially, 16 Shared Services Units, with four or five school divisions in each, were 
formed. All school divisions except the four in Regina and Saskatoon had been 
invited to participate. In 1988 the Northern Region of the province was added. 

The Shared Services Model is an organizational structure to provide program funding 
for additional specialized services. According to a 1982 government document the 
objectives are to: 

• provide an avenue for local districts to retain local autonomy while attaining the 
power to participate in more broadly-based programs; 

• enable the Department of Education to provide funding for specific programs 
which individual boards could not provide; and 

• establish and support joint planning among school divisions to improve 
educational services. 

In 1993 an evaluation of a pilot project in one service unit was conducted. Results 
are reported later in this section under the heading: Outcomes. 



4.2. 7.2 Findings 
Clients 

The clients are students with special needs. They include the deaf, blind, mentally 
handicapped, orthopedically handicapped, chronically ill and those with multiple 
disabilities. Included also are those with needs in learning (for example, the gifted), 



' Information is taken from the original policy document, a 1993 policy statement, 
an evaluation of a pilot project, a formal interview, numerous site visits and several 
informal discussions. 

o 7 u 61 



ERIC 



behavior, speech and/or language. (Types of handicaps and special needs are defined 
in The Special Education Policy Manual. 1987.) Other students defined as at risk by 
the management committee may also be served. Recently First Nations students have 
been included as one Tribal Council shares in the costs and administration of a 
service unit. Clients live in rural and northern areas, on reserves and in towns and 
small cities. 



Types of Service 

Services must include speech/language pathology and educational psychology. These 
services are to supplement, not replace, services that are provided by school divisions. 
They are intended to support educators in providing instruction which will prevent 
or alleviate problems and to provide direct service to individual students. 
Professional staff are served by a computer bulletin board program for information 
and for on-going professional and program development. 

Financing and Scone of Service 

A general guideline of the government is to provide one professional staff for every 
2,000 students and service areas are to serve about 7,000 students taking into 
consideration distance and natural boundaries. Hence, 3.5 full-time equivalents are 
provided for each service area Service areas are expected to be within one of the 
five regions of the province. The Department's regional offices each have a director, 
a curriculum coordinator and a special education coordinator. The Shared Services 
Model is in addition to that support. 

The Department of Education provides conditional funding for shared services 
directly to school divisions, on a per pupil basis, upon receipt of a program plan from 
the unit. 



Processes - Management. Planning and Conditions 

Participation in Shared Services in voluntary respecting the fact that all school 
divisions, except four urban ones, have a right to be included. Joint agreements must 
be signed by one elected school board member from each school division that decides 
to participate in a Shared Services Unit. The agreement, to be filed with the 
Department and formulated in keeping with Section 96 of the E ducation Act 1978), 
must specify: 

• duties of a Management Committee; 

• duties of a Program Steering Committee; 

• responsibilities of the facilitating board including employee benefits, working 
conditions and staff supervision/evaluation; 

• dispersal of assets; and 

O 62 

ERIC 



I 
I 

1 
1 
1 
I 
I 
1 
1 
1 
1 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

ERIC 



• term of the agreement. 

Provincial policy guidelines state the Management Committee is to include: one 
board member from each participating school division unless it is declined; the 
director of education, or designate, from each board; the regional director of 
education or designate from the Ministry of Education, and other members as 
determined by agreement. Only board members have a vote. The Management 
Committee is to administer program funds, set policy for the operation of the unit, 
hire staff, ensure joint planning, supervise the delivery of service and have a Program 
Committee. 

The Program Committee is to include the regional coordinator of special education, 
professional staff from participating school divisions and others as determined by the 
agreement. Together with the Management Committee, the Program Committee is 
to develop and to present to the Department a Shared Services Program Plan which 
includes objectives, a description of services to be offered, an outline of the service 
delivery model, provision for formative program review and an outline of how 
services will be integrated with those provided by school divisions. 

Staffing beyond the two required (speech/language pathology and educational 
psychology) is to be determined by each unit but qualifications of professional staff 
must meet the standards set forth in the Special Education Policy Manual (1987). 
The Department urges units to employ full-time personnel whenever possible to be 
consistent with the intent of the Model and to provide program continuity and 
integration. 

A summary of documentation required for the Shared Services Model is shown is 
Appendix F. It can be seen that the Shared Services Model enables school boards 
to better serve students with special needs but that funds are not provided unless 
Departmental expectations for management, planning and local contributions are met. 
In this way the Department exercises considerable control and builds accountability 
into management processes. 



Adaptations 

One unit has 12,000 students and four full-time equivalents. Another, in a very 
sparsely populated area, has only 3,500 students and 1.75 full-time professional staff. 
Another unit has been doing a pilot project for four years whereby the structure is 
decentralized to permit 2 to 3 school divisions to employ Shared Services 
professional staff. This was done in response to problems with staff retention and 
job satisfaction. In addition to these adaptations the Program Plan for each unit is 
to take local needs and conditions into consideration. 



63 



Outcomes 



Generally, the Shared Services Model is reported to be working well but better in 
some areas than others. Some units, which have emphasized team building and 
cooperation, have been better able to retain staff. 

Units are continually improving upon models of delivery. The role of unit 
professional staff tends to be shifting from diagnosis (testing) to working with 
teachers on an on-going basis (programming). 

The evaluation of the pilot project, where operations were further decentralized to 
smaller units, led to the following conclusions: 

• Student needs are better met in terms of more follow-up work with teachers and 
parents, more direct service to students and more prompt action to referrals; 

• Boards appear to be more willing to "top up" funds when personnel are 
employed locally; 

• There is more accountability to parents and to administrators; 

• Administrative and travel costs are lower so more funds are available for 
"contact" hours; and 

• Problems in recruiting and retaining staff have been alleviated. 



4.2.7.3 Analysis and Discussion 

Over a period of 22 years, the Saskatchewan Shared Services Model has, in a general 
way, met its objectives to provide additional services to students with special needs, 
to establish collaborative planning processes and to preserve local autonomy. 
Political and structural aspects of the Model have received careful attention. The 
problems areas have centered around human resources - staffing, job satisfaction and 
incentives - and around the symbolic and cultural aspects of organizational 
development. There are current concerns about perceived lack of collaboration by 
the Department with school system personnel. There are strong emotions and beliefs 
around the integration of special needs students into regular classrooms. There is a 
tendency to isolate special needs students and specialists who work with them from 
the central operations of classrooms, schools and school systems. In the Shared 
Services Model examined here incremental change in organizational structures, 
processes and cultures is taking place all in order to better serve students with special 
needs. 



' o 64 

ERIC 

ummmmmim 



4.2.8 The Aboriginal Education Branch - B.C. Ministry 



4.2.8.1 Introdu ctio n 

The Sullivan Royal Commission in 1988 recommended major reforms for education 
in British Columbia. Early efforts to implement changes such as flexible dates for 
beginning school and anecdotal reporting to replace letter grades caused enough 
public opposition that many reforms were dropped in the fall of 1993. New 
government initiatives were expected. 

In September 1994 the Ministry of Education made strategic priorities public. The 
document Putting Policies into Practice: Implementation Guide 1 set forth a list of 
principles for governance, responsibilities for implementation and an indication of 
Ministry support. It also included a mission statement for B.C. education together 
with related goals and strategic initiatives. For each initiative, policy directions, 
resource materials, support activities and funding are described. Aboriginal education 
is one of the 13 strategic initiatives. In other documents, as well, it is stated that the 
Ministry is committed to improving education for First Nation learners through 
cooperation and collaboration with First Nations communities and with school 
divisions of the province. The Aboriginal Education Branch has major and central 
responsibility for bringing that about. 

The Aboriginal Education Branch (AEB) was established during the earlier reform 
period (about four years ago) as part of a reorganization of the Department of 
Education. The following current objectives of the Branch have evolved from earlier 
work and from research into the needs and priorities of school divisions. The Branch 
is committed to: 

• Increasing the relevance and responsiveness of the school system to First Nations 
students; 

• Increasing awareness of First Nations culture among all learners; 

• Helping to ensure that First Nations children retain and preserve their linguistic 
and cultural heritage; 

• Helping to ensure that First Nations students in the public school system have 
the same opportunities for achievement as others; and 

• Establishing partnerships and supporting First Nations education initiatives. 

It should be noted that there are over 550,000 students, K-12, in provincial schools. 
More than 30,000 are of Aboriginal ancestry - about 10,000 are on reserve as defined 
by Federal policy with others being status off-reserve, non-status or Metis. In British 
Columbia about 26,000 students are participating in Aboriginal programs in one of 



1 This document has been a major reference for this case. A copy of the Sullivan 
Commission report, First Nations curriculum materials, and numerous documents 
from the Aboriginal Education Branch have also been used. A site visit and an 
interview provided additional information. 



65 



the 75 school districts. There are 192 First Nations in the province which speak 32 
languages and operate 113 band schools. 



4.2.8.2 Findings 
Clients 

The primary clients are said to be the 75 school districts of the province. The Branch 
also, however, in facilitating cooperation and collaboration works with bands, tribal 
councils, other Aboriginal agencies and numerous other groups and organizations 
with an interest in Aboriginal education. 



Types of Service 

An Aboriginal Education Branch document lists the following initiatives: 

• Language and Culture Curriculum Development contracts for work to be done 
in partnership with First Nations and with school districts for use in the public 
school system; 

• First Nations Awareness StafFDevelopment Grants to broaden awareness, respect 
and appreciation of First Nations culture; 

• Information to school districts and bands regarding local education agreements; 

• Completion of a provincial First Nations Studies Curriculum/Assessment 
Framework; 

• Development of a B.C. First Nations Studies 12 curriculum to be implemented 
in all provincial secondary schools; 

• Establishment of a university transition program for promising Aboriginal grade 
eleven students; 

• Ongoing infusion of Aboriginal history and culture into provincial curriculum; 

• Establishment of a clearing house for locally developed Aboriginal education 
curriculum resource materials; 

• Development of an Aboriginal Awareness module for administrators; 

• Development of an Aboriginal education telecommunications/computer network 
for the province; and 

• Development of support programs and documents for Aboriginal support 
workers. 



Financing and Scope of Service 

Funding from the Ministry for 1994-1995 is $1.5 million. Over $1.2 million of this 
is allocated for curriculum and staff development contracts. According to information 
from an interview this represents increasing commitment from government. It was 
also said, however, that the Branch was too small to meet increasing expectations in 
the field and to deliver all of the services needed. The approach to gain increased 



66 



funding is to assess needs and prepare an issue paper for the consideration of senior 
administrators and finally the provincial Treasury Board. 

A related area of funding for service is the negotiation of local agreements between 
First Nations and provincial school divisions. These agreements, about 40 in number, 
provide for funds to go directly from DIAND to First Nations so that fees for service 
can be negotiated with provincial school districts for reserve students to attend 
provincial schools. Prior to the agreements, funds went directly from the federal 
government to school districts and First Nations people had no voice in determining 
the kind, scope or quality of service. 



Processes - Responsibilities. Contracts and Accountability 

Responsibilities for the implementation of strategic priorities like Aboriginal 
education are set forth in the Ministry's, September 1994, Guide. There it is stated 
that the Ministry is to provide leadership and support for implementation, school 
boards are to organize planning and allocation of financial, human and learning 
resources and teachers and school administrators are to participate in planning and 
do the actual implementation. Responsibilities for students to take advantage of 
opportunities, for parents to support them and for other agencies to enter into 
partnerships are also set forth. 

Specific Ministry support is to be funding, materials, liaison, representation on school 
and district committees, consultation, collaboration, evaluation, reporting and 
communication. It is clear that the Aboriginal Education Branch, as the main agency 
of government in that strategic area, is to connect with and work through provincial 
school districts. 

In practice, the Aboriginal Education Branch does much of its work through contracts 
with Aboriginal organizations and school divisions. A copy of contract materials is 
shown in Appendix G. It can be seen that a contract proposal must be 
comprehensive and sponsored by an Aboriginal organization. Finalization of a 
contract includes an accountability agreement in relation to both finances and 
performance. 

Another aspect of accountability deserves attention. General funding for school 
divisions is by block funding which includes incremental funding for Aboriginal 
education in the amount of approximately $990.00 per student. In order to provide 
increased accountability and equity the Minister in early 1994 announced that special 
efforts would be made to ensure that funds targeted for Aboriginal education were 
used as intended. In other words, a school division has to have a specific program, 
usually developed through the Aboriginal Education Branch, in order to access 
targeted funds. 



a 

ERIC 



* U 



67 



Adaptations 



Technical adaptations have also been made. There were administrative and technical 
problems with large contracts in the $100,000 range so now typical curriculum 
contracts are between $25,000 and $50,000. It has been found also that developed 
curricula were not being implemented so some contracts now are specifically for 
curriculum implementation. 



Outcomes 



Study team members have examined detailed, attractive curriculum materials and 
have watched powerful video tapes produced through contracts with the Aboriginal 
Education Branch. Provincial curriculum documents are presently being implemented 
and 26,000 students are in Aboriginal Education Programs. 



4.2.8.3 



In symbolic and cultural areas the Aboriginal Education Branch is closely linked with 
some school divisions which have contracts and Aboriginal Education programs. In 
these districts symbolic leadership and organizational culture are changing but it is 
only a beginning. Many other districts are less involved. To date only 26,000 of 
550,000 students in the province take Aboriginal programs. Quality materials have 



ERIC 



68 



I 
I 



During an interview it was said that adaptations are continuous because the socio- | 
political and cultural milieu for both government and First Nations is always 

changing. An example given was the recently completed framework agreement m 

regarding Treaty rights. g 



I 
I 
i 
1 
1 
I 



It should be noted too that Aboriginal organizations strengthen one another. At the 
University of British Columbia there is a Native Indian Teacher Education Program 
and a First Nations House of Learning. During an interview an Aboriginal institute 
of technology and First Nations language institute were mentioned as valuable 
partners in Aboriginal education. Jj 



Analysis and Discussion £| 

Roles and responsibilities for the Ministry's strategic priorities have been clarified. 

This greatly facilitates and focuses the work of the Aboriginal Education Branch - 8 

they are to provide support to school divisions within existing structures. In this 

sense, political and structural components of the Branch are clear. — . 

I 

From the perspective of human resources the Aboriginal Education Branch is 
problematic. While cooperative and collaborative approaches are intuitively « 
appealing and politically "correct" they are complicated and costly in terms of the 9 
time and energy required to make them effective. This is a need to build process 
skills among large numbers of partners and to avoid the "burn out" of Branch staff. m 

I 
I 
I 
I 



>') ■ : 
t i 



been produced, however, and increased attention to implementation may increase 
enrollment in Aboriginal programs. 

There is a question of process compared to product regarding curriculum 
development. Developing a curriculum is typically a rich learning experience in itself 
even before it is implemented. This raises the question of whether or not each school 
division should produce its own material utilizing collaborative processes for a 
context-specific product. An alternative would be to establish broader, even 
provincial, networks for curriculum development and devote the time and energy 
saved to implementation. 

Trends in school curriculum are towards integration and holistic approaches. There 
are indications that the Aboriginal Education Branch is advocating Aboriginal 
education as an integral part of the ongoing development of schools and school 
systems - only then will the changes be truly effective and lasting. 



4.2.9 The Alberta Distance Learning Centre 

4.2.9.1 Introduction 

The Alberta Distance Learning Centre is located in a modern looking, two storey 
building of steel and glass in Barrhead, about 120 kilometers northwest of Edmonton. 
Its location was part of a government plan to decentralize service centres to various 
towns throughout the province. Opened officially in 1984, the central mandate of the 
Alberta Distance Learning Centre was to build upon the history of service of the 
Alberta Correspondence School by applying distance learning technology to its 
operations. In 1987 there was a general reorganization of education in Alberta 
including the appointment of a new director to the Centre to "get on with the job". 1 

In 1987, as well, a Distance Learning Small Schools project was launched by the 
Department of Education in ten school divisions - 13 schools - in southeastern 
Alberta. That project was designed, in part, to address a problem of low completion 
rates among Alberta Correspondence School students and to provide more equitable 
program offerings for rural students in small schools. In a three year period the 
project grew to 139 schools and was incorporated into the Alberta Distance Learning 
Centre. A detailed report of the project is available from a chapter by Bosetti and 
Gee (1993). 

The present government in Alberta is committed to a balanced budget within three 
years. The number of school divisions in the province is being reduced from 1 60 to 



Information is based upon a site visit, a formal interview and informal discussions 
with several staff members. Print materials such as a Director's 1 993 report, 
classroom handbooks and Guides for Developing Distance Learning Courseware 
have also been used. 

r> ' 

» J 69 



57 , effective Januaiy 1995, and the Distance Learning Centre is expected to be "hit 
hard" by funding cuts. 



4.2.9.2 Findings 
Clients 

Alberta has about 2.5 million people. About 500,000 of these are students in 
elementary and secondary schools. The work of the Alberta Distance Learning 
Centre is focused on the approximately 19,000 students who are enrolled in its 
courses - traditionally called correspondence school students. In 1992-1993: 628 
students were at the elementary level taking 2,010 courses; 1,483 were at the junior 
high level taking 4,600 courses; and 17,001 were enrolled in 23,596 high school 
courses. Many are said to live in isolated areas but more than half are within 75 
kilometers of Edmonton. When asked why these people were not in regular high 
schools, the reply was that they may not function well there, they want flexible study 
hours or they may be in penal institutions. The Centre is a partner with several 
businesses in running an Outreach program in the West Edmonton Mall. In all, the 
Centre is involved in 1 1 Outreach programs in Alberta. 

Another client group is Francophone communities. Twelve communities are meeting 
to consider distance learning options and the Centre is working with one of them to 
create an effective program. 

In total, about 45 percent of the students enrolled with the centre are 19 years of age 
or older - beyond regular high school age. 

Clients for distance learning implementation include 12 distance learning consortia 
among school jurisdictions. In one of the larger ones, 25 schools cooperate to assist 
learners in using distance education technology. 



Types of Service. Scope and Budget 



The following table shows three aspects of the Centre's operation: 



Function 


Full Time 
Equivalents 


Budcet 


• Instructional Services to registered 
students 


36.5 


$2,717,259. 


• Program Design and Development 


31 


$2,541,279. 


• Distance Learning Implementation 


Consultative staff 
as required 


$191,521. 


• Support and Student Services 


43.5 


$2,372,231. 


• Senior Administration 


2 


$148,210. 



o 

ERIC 



70 



i- j 



Each year approximately $1.7 million from student fees is put into general 
revenue. Fees for a full course are $25.00 for an independent learner and $100.00 
for a school or jurisdiction sponsored student. There are also fees of $25.00 for 
traditional print materials or $50.00 for newer distance learning materials 
packages. A detailed file of material provides guidelines for producing distance 
learning courseware. Course components are shown in Appendix HI. An 
indication of materials produced is contained in the following excerpts from a 
1993 Director's report: 

• CA1 (Macintosh) 

The software Authorware Professional has been used to create a computer-assisted 
learning package for the entire course. The learning package runs in a Macintosh 
environment. Currently, ADLC has completed a final release version (1) for 
Mathematics 30 and beta version CD for Mathematics 13, 20, 23 and 33. Beta 
version CD for Mathematics 31 is in final development. In addition, a beta 
release Windows CD for Mathematics 30 is in final development. 

• LMS(DEC) 

Learning Management System (LMS) runs on a Digital Equipment Corporation 
VAX Computer and allows questions to be coded according to course, module 
and objective, cognitive level, difficulty level, and question type (multiple choice, 
true/false, short answer, random numerical, and teacher-marked). Question codes 
can men be used to tailor tests for individual or class use. Students can use the 
computer to ask for tests to be printed and to enter answers to those tests. 
Teachers have control over the sequence of material to be tested, the integrity of 
the test (open book or supervised), and the passing grades required to ensure that 
students are mastering the material before proceeding to a new topic. LMS 
generates parallel versions of tests so that students can have several attempts to 
demonstrate mastery of a subject. 

The management functions of LMS include the ability for teachers to keep track 
of students' progress, to build report cards to send to parents, and to see in which 
areas students are having difficulty. 

ADLC currently supports question banks in Mathematics 10, 13, 14, 23, 24, 30, 
31, and 33. The following courses are in beta testing: Social Studies 10, 20, 13 
and 23; Accounting 10, 20 and Mathematics 7. Teacher resources are available 
for Science 14, Biology 30, Chemistry 30, Physics 30, and Mathematics 8 and 9. 
Work is under way in Social Studies 30 and 33, Accounting 30 and Science 7, 8, 
9, 10 and 24. 

• LXR (Macintosh) 

LXR Test is an application software designed for question banking. We currently 
have 100 LXR users. Question banks for Math 10, 13, 20, 30, 31 and Social 
Studies 8 are available now. Development is taking place in Mathematics 14, 24, 
23 and 33; Social Studies 9, 10, 13, 20, 23, 30 and 33; Science 10; Biology 20; 



ERIC 



71 



Chemistry 20; Physics 20; Mathematics 7, 8, and 9; Science 7, 8, and 9. 
Mathematics 20 is available in French. The questions being placed in question 
banks using program LXR Test provide a valuable resource for teachers who are 
creating assignments, quizzes, and tests for students. Recent enhancements allow 
sorting by course, module, objective, and question type. Further enhancements are 
currently being made that will allow sorting by cognitive level and degree of 
difficulty. 

• Video 

The following ADLC video programs are now available: 
CALM 20: Surviving the Interview; Mathematics 10: Multiplying Polynomials; 
Mathematics 13: Multiplying Polynomials; Accounting 10: Debit and Credit; 
Mathematics 10: Freddie Factor; Mathematics 13: Freddie Factor; Mathematics 
23: Freddie Factor; Calm 20: Building Communication Skills; Mechanics 12: an 
Oil Change: The Easy Way; ; Mathematics 30: Discovering Conies Services - 1. 
Cutting the Curves; 2. Graphing the Curves; 3. Defining the Focus: 4. 
Eccentricity; Mathematics 10, 13: Joe Skeptic and Tilley Tile. 

Processes. Adaptations and outcomes 

Early in its history the Alberta Distance Learning Centre, on the basis of 
expressed needs from the field, decided to concentrate on mathematics and science 
courses at the high school level. Attention then shifted to other high school 
courses. Current needs are said to be revision of the content and delivery of 
courses at lower grade levels. 

More sophisticated processes with partners and related adaptations are described 
in the Director's 1993 report: 

• Integration of Compulsory Video in Courses 

ADLC's venture into making videos mandatory in student studies has resulted in 
interesting issues that have had to be resolved. It should be noted that these 
videos are part of the wrap-around design to an authorized commercial text (as the 
primary reference) and, secondarily, as an effort to reduce development and 
production/publication. 

The following outcomes, concerns and issues have resulted from this change in 
the design of distance learning course materials: 

1 . We've reduced the size of materials and costs of production. 

2. We've encountered a host of new problems in acquisitions and licensing 
of video resources. 

3. We've had to implement a caution fee for loan versus sale of the videos to 
reduce cost and make the fees reasonable and accessible to students. 



72 



4. We've encountered a positive reaction from students for video; 

encountered a negative reaction if we charge full duplication costs; 
experienced a decline in registrations until we instituted the loan option. 

• Compression and Cost Cutting Production Requirements - Partnership with 
Xerox Canada 

Because of Treasury directives to lower production costs (and consequently 
Learning Resources Distributing Centre debt in the Revolving Account) ADLC 
and LRDC, in conjunction with Xerox Canada, have introduced improvement in 
the design-production-publishing process. Within the next 1-2 years, these costs 
must be reduced by 20-30%. Alberta Education extended into Spring/92 a 
partnership with Xerox Canada to establish new efficiencies in document 
production as a benchmark initiative for all government sectors. This partnership 
and initiative (signed off by the Minister) is entitled the Document Improvement 
and Process Engineering (DIPE) project. 

Preliminary outcomes indicate the ability to save 20-30% of production/publication 
costs if compression techniques (scholar's margin, white space, elimination of 
peripherals, reduction in size and use of graphics; and so on) are employed. 

• Just-In-Time (JIT) Publication 

An outcome of the DIPE initiative is the application of JIT publication of distance 
learning resources. Recent technology advancement now allows PageMaker files 
used in ADLC to be integrated with the Interlead system and electronically 
downloaded to Docutech for publication. While delivery is in black-white shades, 
it is a cost effective measure. While ADLC is concerned with color reproductions, 
the schools are Xeroxing 2-3 color materials and are not complaining about 
instructional impact (cost and quality) with students. 

A pilot project to transfer all junior and senior level math PageMaker files (12 
courses) to the JIT format will be initiated shortly. Given the Western Canada 
CAI project, JIT publications, on-line throughout the four provinces, could become 
a reality. 

• MultiMedia Secondary Science Project 

ADLC has proposed an interprovincial/territorial initiative to develop a multimedia 
science package in secondary science (physics, chemistry, biology). The project 
would be modeled on the data base concept being used in the CAI Secondary 
Math National Strategy on New Media Technologies in Education initiative. This 
proposal is one of the distance learning/technology action group recommendations 
included in the Western Protocol Agreement. The concept underlying this project 
is the development of a database of CAI lessons presented in a highly visual 
presentation of foundation concepts in one of the three discipline sciences. 

In terms of improved service to students, consultation and collaboration with 
partners and materials produced the Alberta Distance Learning Centre has been 
generally successful. Development of materials and revision of courses, however, 
is very labor intensive and, therefore, costly. 



73 



4.2.9.3 



Analysis and Discussion 



The Alberta Distance Learning Centre was created by government and well funded 
with a clear mandate. Politically and structurally there were few problems. 
People may have had to move out of a major centre but the Centre has given 
many people an opportunity to contribute specialized expertise to improving 
learning for students. The work environment is attractive and appears supportive. 
There has been time to establish an organizational culture conducive to learning 
for all. The Centre is costly, however. Moreover, only a small percentage of 
students in the province are served directly and many of those are in or near urban 
areas where regular high schools could be expected to be more flexible in meeting 
their needs. 

The future of the Centre is, however, in doubt. The development of courses and 
materials could be contracted out as the production of video tapes is currently. 
Integration with other distance learning agencies such as Athabasca University or 
a television network is also a possibility. Perhaps costly materials should be 
produced by a consortium of provinces or a series of regional centres across 
Canada. 



4.2.10 Frontier School Division 

4.2.10.1 Introduction 

The Frontier School Division offers education services in 31 northern and remote 
communities spread out over more than one-half of the area of Manitoba. 
Communities rely on fishing and trapping, on forestry, on major hydro-electric 
projects and on being a service or transportation centre for economic support. 
Students in the Division are primarily Indian and Metis although in some centres, 
such as Gillam, the majority of people are non-native. 1 

Frontier school buildings are similar to those in the south being modern and well- 
equipped. School populations range from nine students in a one-room facility at 
Red Sucker Lake to about 1,000 students in three schools in Norway House. 

The Frontier School Division, one of 56 school jurisdictions in the province, is 
governed by provincial legislation. Provincial curricula are used although it has 
been found that considerable adaptation is required to meet student needs. Such 
local adaptations are encouraged by the ministry. Organizational adaptations, such 



ERIC 



' w description is taken from Board reports on priorities for the past two 

school years, comprehensive documents regarding student services for 1992 
and 1994 and numerous other print materials. An interview and a visit to Division 
offices in Winnipeg also provided valuable information. 



74 

C J 



as having five areas within the Division were recently incorporated into provincial 
legislation. 

Frontier Division documents state that the primary goal of the Division, in 
partnership with parents, is to provide the highest quality education program 
possible for all students regardless of their ability. The motto of the Division is 
"Partners in Learning". Parental involvement has been a priority for at least ten 
years and through those processes priorities are reviewed each year. Current 
priorities are categorized under the following headings: Governance, Human 
Resource Development, Business Administration, Capital, Finance, Programs, 
Technology, High Schools, Parental Involvement, Student Leadership, Marketing, 
Adult Education, Student Retention, Freedom from Violence and Student Services. 
It is important to see all priorities as connected and related to the primary goal of 
the Division. The goal refers specifically to "all students regardless of ability", 
however, because delivery of services to students with special needs in isolated 
school-communities is a major challenge, this case is focused on that aspect of 
Frontier School Division operations. 

4.2.10.2 Findings 
Clients 

The clients are students with special needs in a particular family, school and 
community context. The Frontier Division stresses the importance of a holistic, 
integrated approach meaning that teachers, administrators, parents, community 
leaders and other support agencies, including government, are clients ("Partners 
Learning Together") as well as deliverers of service. 

The Frontier Division has approximately 5,400 students in 3 1 communities. About 
45 percent of the students are status, 45 percent are non-status and 10 percent are 
non-Aboriginal. 

Types of Service 

Documents state that student services programs are based upon principles of the 
child's best interests, integration of services, a preventative approach, accessibility, 
cultural sensitivity, partnership and accountability. Application of the principles 
to needs assessments in the Division has resulted in the following programs. 

In- School Team Response Model including training and staff development; 
Community Response Teams to be integrated with school response teams as 
shown in Appendix II.; 

Training Program for Student Service Workers who are a combination of 
school counselor and nutrition/health advisor; 
Training Program for Resource Teachers; 

84 75 

ERIC 



Clarification of Roles and revision of job descriptions; 
Revision of Resource Handbooks; 
• Development of a Program for the Gifted; 
Monitoring of a Crisis Response Plan; 
An H.I.V. Awareness Program; 
A Small School Counselling Program; and 

Monitoring, Support and Evaluation of regular student support programs. 

In addition to regular support, to be outlined in the next section, and to the 
priorities noted above, the Frontier School Division devotes both human and 
financial resources to curriculum development and to the production of resource 
materials including video tapes. Print materials include a curriculum for grade 
eleven entitled Native Stud ies 31G: Manitoba's Aboriginal Peoples, a local history 
of Norway House, an anthology of student writing and a collection of Elders' 
stories complete with original art. There are numerous materials to supplement 
the regular curriculum especially at the primary level. Relevant materials are 
considered to be an important aspect of serving students with special needs. 



Financing and Scope of Service 



The Frontier School Division has a budget of about $46 million. Revenues 
include basic provincial grants of $24 million, federal funds of $10 million and 
$9 million from Indian bands. The largest expenditures are $20 million for regular 
instruction, $9 million for operations and maintenance and $6 million for what is 
called "exceptional services". From the latter the following personnel are 
employed at the school level: 

Resource teachers - one full-time equivalent (F.T.E.)/230 pupils; 
• Native student teachers - 1 F.T.E./9 teachers; 

Teaching assistants - 1 F.T.E. for from 8 to 1 students depending upon level 

of need; 

Special class/Occupational Entrance - as per program design. 

There are 5 areas in the Division. At the area level there is one special services 
consultant, one F.T.E. in psychology for every 1,450 pupils and one speech 
pathologist for every 1575 pupils. At the Division level there is a Superintendent 
of Human Resources and 70 days per year of an occupational or physiotherapist. 
Resource persons from Manitoba Education contribute as well and the Diagnostic 
Support Center is used. Adjustments are made for school size and/or travel 
requirements. 

In addition to personnel, special equipment such as wheelchairs and adapted 
computers are provided to students who need them. Each year over $100,000. is 
allocated to special education teaching materials including enrichment material for 
the gifted. Building modifications have been made and individual transportation 
plans are in place. 



ERIC 



r. • • 
O J 



76 



I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

ERIC 



Processes - Determini ng Priorities. Designing Programs and Being Accountable 

A holistic approach, including attention to a child's life context, is emphasized. 
Context is further highlighted in the stated desire to empower people and 
communities - "to find Frontier solutions to Frontier problems". 

During an interview a Frontier School Division official said "Priorities can come 
from anywhere". Processes by which Division priorities are determined have key 
elements including a Division-wide leadership role for all senior staff, broadly- 
based involvement of all stakeholders, greater and more frequent interaction 
between board members and senior staff, involvement of board members on 
working committees and specific action plans for each priority. These processes 
are part of restructuring which began in 1991 to "flatten", or decentralize, and to 
integrate the Division - apparently over the years each area had become 
increasingly separate from the Division. Processes for developing priorities are 
shown in Appendix I. 

Processes related to serving students with special needs are very specific partly 
because funding regulations require categorization of needs and evidence of 
appropriate responses by the school division. The referral process utilized by the 
Frontier School Division is shown in Appendix 13. If it is decided that a child's 
needs are not being adequately served in a regular classroom the first step is for 
the teacher to design an Exceptional Program Plan. The Plan is reviewed monthly 
by the teacher and the resource teacher and twice annually in case conferences. 
The second step is a School Action Plan for Exceptional Children to be completed 
by the principal by September 30 each year and to include assessment of needs, 
deployment of resources, a professional development plan and a review process. 
The third step is the Annual Division Action Plan reviewed each year by the 
Special Education Planning and Review Committee which also makes 
recommendations for improvements. 

Accountability is built in to the reporting and review processes outlined in this 
section. According to a Division official financial auditing is increasingly detailed 
and internal auditing processes are being implemented. Accountability amongst 
school staff increases as resources shrink and everyone is under scrutiny. Another 
dimension of accountability is in tuition agreements being negotiated with First 
Nations. Chiefs and Councils want to know precisely what basic services are 
provided to students and what additional services could be purchased for certain 
intended outcomes. 



Adaptations 

Having the Division divided into five areas is an adaptation to the large 
geographic area being served. There is an area office, superintendent, and area 
board to provide visibility and service on a day-to-day basis. Division newspapers 
include a page of news from each area. 



It has also been reported that the organization is being flattened - made less 
hierarchical - in order to promote meaningful involvement and horizontal 
communication, for example, among local school committees and among the five 
areas. Area superintendents have also recently been assigned more Division-wide 
responsibilities. 

A third kind of adaptation is the major work done to adapt provincial curricula to 
northern contexts and to produce local resource materials. Student support 
services are also adapted to culture and to context. As a result Aboriginal 
involvement and control is increasing at all levels of the Division. 



Outcomes 



The political and structural changes that took place in the Frontier School Division 
over many years were recently formalized in provincial legislation. Human 
resource development for senior staff, non-teaching personnel and professional 
employees is a specific responsibility of one of the senior administrators. 
Teachers are provided with housing at low cost or a housing allowance, an 
isolation allowance, transportation and moving expenses, various leaves and 
insurance. 

In terms of student learning, it was reported that more students are graduating, 
they speak better and their writing has improved. Some frustration v/as expressed, 
however, because student performance on standardized tests does not seem to 
improve. 



4.2.10.3 Analysis and Discussion 

From a political, structural, human resource and symbolic/cultural perspective the 
Frontier School Division has many indications of strength - of good organizational 
health. It enjoys an excellent reputation from within and across Canada. 

Success is, no doubt, related to many factors. The Division motto "Partners in 
Learning" provides vision - learners of all ages in a community as opposed to only 
kids in school - and a focus. In keeping with the motto there has been an 
emphasis on parental involvement over many years. Eight of the 10 Board 
members are Aboriginal. This involvement is part of the integration of school and 
community - one way to capitalize on smallness. Attention to community culture, 
language, history and resources highlights uniqueness and develops pride. On the 
other hand, disadvantages to isolation have been countered with emphasis on 
communication such as Division newspapers, assemblies and regional events. 

Student services provides a good example of leadership, involvement, high 
expectations, accountability and quality within the Frontier School Division. They 



ERIC 



GV 



78 



I 

I 

1 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 



keep setting new and higher goals in that area and in others such as community 
involvement. 



4.2.11 Appalachia and Mid-Continent Educational 
Laboratories in the United States 

4.2.11.1 Introduction 

There is no equivalent in Canada to the continuing influence of the National Rural 
Education Association in the United States, an advocacy and professional 
organization formed in 1908, nor to a strong national presence in providing 
support services to rural schools. 1 In 1994, the United States Congress passed the 
Goals 2000: Educate America Act which includes national education goals and 
standards, assistance for state and local systemic improvement, parental assistance 
and support for educational research (See Appendix Jl for titles). The Act also 
reauthorized a network of ten regional educational laboratories with a mandate to 
facilitate and support the work of local and state education agencies. More 
specifically, the labs are to: 



develop and disseminate educational research and processes; 

develop a plan for identifying and serving the needs of the region; 

provide technical assistance; 

facilitate restructuring at the school level; 

serve development needs and assist in solving site-specific problems by 
applying research; 
facilitate communication; 

provide training in field research and in new educational methods; and 
collaborate and coordinate services. 

The Appalachia and Mid-Continent laboratories are the subject of this case study. 



Information for this case is based upon one month working at the Mid- 
continent Regional Educational Laboratory in Colorado, a visit to the Appalachia 
Laboratory in West Virginia, interviews with Directors and staff and numerous 
print materials. Some details from the Educate America Act are included in 
Appendix C. 



83 



79 



4.2.11.2 Findings 



Clients 

Educational laboratories are to serve all education partners but rural areas are 
being given special attention. The Appalachia Lab, for example, serves Kentucky, 
Tennessee, Virginia and West Virginia The Director is quick to point out that 
West Virginia is 49th in per capita income and that it is second in the nation with 
63 percent of the population living in rural areas. In 1989 a special Task Force 
on rural school districts in West Virginia, which included state, local and 
laboratory personnel, was called Schools in Crisis: Students at Risk. In the report, 
typical rural students were described as having a long bus ride, a poor family, and 
unemployed parents who did not graduate from high school. Students were found 
less likely to be gifted and more likely to have special needs and to drop out of 
high school. Neither minority groups nor ethnic background was used to describe 
students - the primary clients. Regiona. aboratories are required to devote at least 
25 percent of their budget to improving service to students in rural areas. 

In practice, laboratories serve students indirectly by working with teachers, 
administrators, board members, teacher educators, state policy makers, parents and 
community leaders. 



Types of Services 

The services provided by the labs are based upon surveys of the needs and 
possibilities for education in rural areas which have been outlined, in general 
terms, in the literature review. Specific examples below are drawn from a catalog 
of products and services of the Mid-continent Laboratory: 

• A site-based decision-making and management system, known as A + chieving 
Excellence, an effective schools program and workshops on thinking skills are 
provided to address concerns about the curriculum and overall effectiveness 
of rural schools; 

• A local equity leadership model and related training are available to develop 
school-community partnerships, to strengthen human resources and to examine 
new structures for finance and governance. There are also video tapes and 
print materials related to literacy and community development. 

• Direct services are provided through a Resource Center, face-to-face meetings 
and telephone consultations. 



Financing and Scope of Service 

The Act states that the amount of money allocated to each lab reflects the number 
of local education agencies and number of school age children in the region as 
well as the cost of delivering the services within the geographic area. It is further 



ERIC 

ummmmmim 



stated that the amount appropriated for the ten regional laboratories for fiscal year 
1996 is to exceed the amount for fiscal year 199S but not less than $2 million. 
Provision is also made in the Act for two additional laboratories with each to be 
supported by not less than 2m dollars annually. See Appendix J2 for legislation 
regarding Regional Educational Laboratories. 

Processes - Governance. Organizational Structure and Strategic Planning 

The Act states that Congress is interested in promoting state and local government 
reform efforts in education because it has found that education is fundamental to 
the development of individual citizens and to the progress of the nation. Section 
319 (Appendix J3) says, however, responsibility for education is reserved 
respectively to the States and to local school systems and other instruments of the 
State. The Act reaffirms that the Federal Government is not to impose standards 
or requirements of any kind which would undercut State and local responsibility 
for education. Local control, in fact, is a focus of the Act. 

Local control is supported with structural arrangements, operational practices and 
financial incentives. Laboratories must do needs assessments and include these 
in their proposal to Washington for a contract. Each lab has a board of directors 
drawn from the states it serves - the Appal achia board, for instance, has 28 
members, including teachers and researchers, from four states. The Board is to 
guide and direct the laboratory and to determine its regional agenda. Each state 
has a Council on Rural Development and must have state school improvement 
plans in place in order to access funds under the Act. Such improvement plans 
have elements of strategic planning including the determination of current 
strengths and weaknesses, local input into setting priorities for development and 
plans for implementation, monitoring and evaluation. The Act states explicitly 
that school improvements plans must be community-based or "bottom-up". There 
may be waivers from state rules and regulations if they impede local improvement 
plans. Federal sub grants are also provided for local reform and for professional 
development. Section 401 of the Act provides for parental information and 
resource centers related to child-rearing and to strengthening partnerships with 
professional educators. Emphasis on local control and related questions of 
decision making and accountability require some elaboration for purposes of this 
study. 

Regional educational laboratories are essentially to support and to facilitate local 
control through needs assessments, a board of directors, and an array of products 
and services. They are controlled by terms of their 5-year contract with the 
federal government through the Assistant Secretary to Education, a federal 
position, and on an on-going basis by their board of directors. The detailed duties 
of the laboratories make them accountable for those tasks to the board and to 
Washington through quarterly and annual reports. In addition, the Assistant 
Secretary is required to provide for independent evaluations of each laboratory in 
the third year of the contract and to make results known to relevant committees 

k}\J 81 

ERIC 



of Congress and to the board of the regional laboratory. Within each laboratory 
employees are accountable to a director. 

Program quality is addressed by basing each program on needs assessments, by 
developing it through consultative processes and by applying what is known about 
effective delivery including distance education technology. A common approach 
in laboratories is to pilot test programs and to revise them accordingly. 
Laboratories try to model continuous improvement and renewal through attention 
to quality indicators, monitoring and evaluation. In the final analysis, quality 
programs are in demand by local school communities and less effective ones are 
not. 

Decisions about expenditures, program development, deployment of human 
resources and service delivery are made by the board of the regional laboratory 
on the basis of local needs and priorities and the details of the contract with the 
Office of Education in Washington. 

Adaptations 

It seems fair to say that adaptations in the work of educational laboratories are 
continuous as new needs arise and as results are assessed. Specific and formal 
adaptations to emerging needs and to changes in the national agenda are required 
in proposals for the renewal of 5-year contracts. 

Outcomes 

The role of the regional laboratories is to facilitate, coordinate and support 
initiatives - to work "behind the scenes". The continued existence of the 
laboratories over approximately two decades is a reflection of overall success. 

Tangible recent outcomes of the Mid-continent Laboratory include written resource 
materials, videotapes, research, and reports. Specific activities include: research 
into what makes an effective school; assistance to Pine Ridge Reservation in South 
Dakota in designing its own department of education; development of a Schools 
Without Walls program in collaboration with federal, state and university groups, 
to enhance senior science programs in rural areas; support for the San Luis Valley 
Board of Cooperative Services to integrate school and community development 
and assistance to a state in reviewing its school system. 

There are, as well, some concerns about the operation of regional educational 
laboratories. Not all states and local school systems are open to close working 
relationships with laboratories. The development of local leadership to determine 
needs and priorities - a focus for support systems - is a continuing challenge. 
Unless activities are focused it is not possible to effectively integrate national, 
state and local efforts. Many teachers are reported to believe that rural schools 



82 



should be like urban schools so they feel deprived and isolated. Voices of rural 
people - teachers, students, parents and community - must be united and strong if 
regional laboratories are to be fully effective in serving small school communities. 



4.2.11.3 Analysis and Discussion 

Local control, federal support, knowledge utilization, restructuring, renewal and 
collaborative processes are some of the beliefs which appear basic to the existence 
and operation of regional educational laboratories in the United States. They are 
temporary systems in that they are designed to accomplish specific tasks within 
a five-year period. 

From a political perspective, it is stated explicitly that the laboratories are to 
promote local control of education and that they are in no way to infringe upon 
state or local responsibilities. In practice, the power of local and state elected 
officials and the service role of laboratories appear to be understood and respected. 
Personalities do play a role, however, and there is a tendency for local people to 
either resist outside influence or to consider themselves inferior in comparison to 
external "experts". There is a paradox in that the labs come close to mandating 
local control yet local views seem to be respected if people do not want to have 
anything at all to do with labs. In other words, the labs are highly formal, or 
"tight", in terms of tasks and accountability and yet are unstructured, or "loose", 
in relation to how they will accomplish those tasks and with whom - that depends 
upon changing local circumstances (problems and opportunities) and upon 
professional expertise. 

Regional educational laboratories are a challenge in relation to human resources 
and to symbolic/cultural aspects. Since they are temporary and service oriented, 
there are many uncertainties and complexities with which laboratory personnel 
must cope. First and foremost, they must work within 5-year timelines and be 
highly accountable to clients in schools and communities, to the board and to one 
another-they are interdependent for the success of the lab and the renewal of a 
contract. Their own professional development must keep pace with the demands 
of the job. Experience in a lab reveals that staff find their work very demanding 
yet exciting. They tend to be "on the run" and scattered over large areas. They 
share beliefs and most are highly competent but they do not have much 
opportunity, nor time, to build a strong organizational culture. 

Regional educational laboratories, based upon similar beliefs and with a structure 
adapted to the Canadian context, could make a major contribution to the provision 
of educational services to small schools in this country. They could be a service 
organization for ministries, school boards and any other education agency. As in 
the United States, they could have built-in provisions for responsiveness, quality, 
accountability and renewal. 



ERIC 



n 



81 



SUMMARY 



The eleven case studies are summarized under the general headings of the research 
questions in Table 9. It can be seen that five of the developments were initiated 
by governments primarily in response to political and economic factors, three have 
come about because of school board action to solve problems and improve service 
(technical considerations) and three are the result of groups of communities being 
driven by cultural aspirations. Clients vary depending upon what needs were 
being addressed, and by whom, at the outset. Government-initiated cases serve 
public opinion and the general well being of the electorate. School boards focus 
on their operations and communities tend to be mainly interested in their own 
survival and development. Accordingly, services range from a single function 
such as volume purchasing, Aboriginal education, special education or distance 
delivery to general administration as in the cases of New Brunswick, Clare Argyle, 
Francophone boards. Littoral and Frontier. 



I 
I 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

I 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

I 

I 



9\ 




3 § 



oo 

< 



Illlf 

8- 8 "2 

3 O S 



i¥l rs 



a 



£ 2 
& 8 



18 



\0 ON 



•2 > 



o 
o 

JS 



© 

—I 

(S 



B 

w 



CO 



18 



o 
o 

o 
CO 



T3 
B 

L8 



o 
CO 



S 4 

CQ 

ICQ g, 

I -S 
£ t 

GO | 

o 

t=! U 



s s 

O J3 



I 4 



3 s *° 



o 
o 

TB -I .S 



2 5 

•-1 «i 



Hp £2 

•2 o 

£ g 

8 S 

E u. 



V) 



4_ 

*j> G 03 

2 So 

6 S? s 

c 



a 

o 

« *iJ 

•c s 

rg w 
3 b 
a C 



2 « a S 



T3 
W 

a. 

CO 



3 60 



s § § 

g g co 

od n S 



■a 



o c 

o «> 

o a 

CO M 



o\ 



c 

a s 
o a 

c c 
k£ o 



C 03 

B 2 
S .5 

t§ P 

<£ 

fcS OS - 



§ 8 



> _ 

— P o 



8. 



00 



5 "E 

is | 
- i 

i O 



o 
o 

o 

co 



00 
ON 



c .a 

B Z3 

H3 s 

« a 

< § 

fl o 



US 

>> _ 

^ J 

v 03 

u 

B C 

m 



I » 

E ^ 

w -o 

« o 



a 



8. E 

5 e 

s o 

I 8 

E T3 



O 
< 

6 
a 

T3 



^ w ^ 3 

3 « 5 "5 
S '3 " 
S -5 a. — 

g. 1 § r 
? a. 2 Ji 



w 

-a 

T3 
C 
B 

>' 
O 



w S 

2 •> 

> e 

8 O 



■3 I 
.S o 
> U 

O w 
w 



8 S 

2 E 

S E 

£ 8 



§ » . 

g< .-S o 
oca 

c c ^; 

a c > 

O CL. 

00 O i 



V 

c 

'a 
o « 

m — 

« 

o 

> m 



oo 



r • 

ERIC 



•Organizational change 
•Inclusive 
idministration (not 
Catholic/Protestant- 
FrVAnglo) 


-Organizational/ 
technical change 
-Difficulties re job 
satisfaction 
-General success 


-Organizational change 
-Apparent success 
-Materials produced 
-Increased awareness 
and collaboration 


-Basically up-dating the 
correspondence school 
-More than half of the 
students are within 75 
km of Edmonton. 


-"Healthy" organization 
-Record of service 
-Building information 
base 

-Improved 
involvement(8 of 10 
Board members are 
Aboriginal) 


-Generally successful 
-Built in-responsiveness 
-accountability 


-govt.-appointed 

administrator 

-provincial 

curriculum/S 

-Parent Advisory 

Comm. 




-conditional funding 
•formula for full-time 
equivalents 


-under Student 
Services Dept. 
-$1.5 m budget 
-advocates 
collaboration with F. 
Nations 


-$7 m budget 
-needs assessments 
-sells materials to 
school systems 


-"Partners in Learning" 
-decentralized 
-action plans 
-review processes 
-accountability 


-$2 m/year/lab 
•local control/boards 
-5 year contracts 
-needs assessments 
-external evaluations 


•administration 
•finances 
•facilities 
-personnel, etc. 


-specialists for 
diagnosis, remediation, 
consulting 


-curriculum 
development 
-staff development 
-materials 
-consulting.... 


-courses 
-materials-print 
-electronic 
-tutoring 


-administration 
-finances 
-facilities 
-personnel, etc. 


-support 

-coordinating 

-consulting 

-materials 

-research 


Communities - schools 


-Students with special 
needs 

-4-7 boards share 


72 provincial school 
districts 


Primarily 

correspondence school 
students (19,000) 


3 1 communities and 
students 


State and local 
education partners 
(25% rural) 


16 isolated 
communities 
(10 Anglophone) 
-Prov. Govt. 1967 


Provincial Govt. 1982 


Provincial Govt. 1990 


Provincial Govt. 1984 


</-> 

5 

% 

"o 
o 

JS 

a 

t*i 


Federal U.S. Govt. 
1 970-8 


VI. Littoral School 
Commission (P.Q.) 


m 
u 

o 

s 

1 

1 

00 ^ 

. * 


VIII. Aboriginal 
Education Branch 

(B.C.) 


IX. Distance Learning 
Centre (Alberta) 


X. Frontier School 
Division (Man.) 


XI. Regional Labs 
(U.S.) 



a 

ERIC 



There is clearly an emphasis in virtually all projects on decentralization, collaboration 
and local control. It has been found, however, that this is "easier said than done" as 
collaborative processes are slower than hierarchical ones and often related skills are 
lacking. Typically, political and structural changes have to be made to launch a 
project. Processes for decision making, financing and accountability may be clear "on 
paper" when a change is adopted. Implementation, however, is another matter - 
change inevitably brings anxiety, process skills are learned slowly and it takes years 
before people give up old notions and acquire new beliefs. These cases illustrate that 
people with good intentions are solving some problems and making gradual progress 
but the process is slow and sometimes painful. This outcome is consistent with the 
findings of Brown (1991) who said that in decentralizing decision making for 
schooling there is an exploration stage with emphasis on acquiring information, a trial 
stage where process skills are strengthened and finally a commitment stage with full 
implementation. 

Many findings deserve further consideration in relation to the literature and to the 
conceptual frameworks: 

• The Acadian communities in the Clare-Argyle region of Nova Scotia, the 
primarily Anglophone villages along the Lower North Shore of Quebec and the 
Francophone towns in Saskatchewan have demonstrated some of the advantages 
of "smallness". Contrary to the pessimism of Vidich and Bensman (1968) they 
have shown that small communities can make things happen. They support the 
view of several writers that people in small communities see the school as 
having a central role in preserving local language and culture. It should be 
noted, too, that culture is a unifying force in these communities as it provides 
a focus for their efforts. 

• Case studies have also illustrated some of the problems and challenges faced by 
people in isolated areas. During many interviews specific action was reported 
to enable people to see beyond their own circumstances - examples include 
Acadian links with St. Anne's University and the use of external consultants in 
strategic planning in Littoral. This is in keeping with what Senge (1990) has 
identified as systems thinking - seeing the bigger picture. 

• Many of the initiatives by school boards and governments are responses to 
perceived problems. Amalgamation of school boards in New Brunswick, new 
Francophone boards in Saskatchewan and the provision of business/accounting 
services for northwest Ontario boards lead into questions of governance and 
structure. In New Brunswick it was stated explicitly that middle management 
(school board level) was reduced to maintain support at the classroom and 
school level. If community involvement is effective, making local control 
meaningful, will middle levels of authority such as school boards be necessary? 
The middle level may become a service unit as in the organization of 



87 



Francophone boards in Saskatchewan or it may disappear. There are no school 
boards as we know them in Australia. In addressing some problems others are 
being created or, in some cases, a path is being taken without the destination 
being determined. 

• An elaboration of new problems is in the area of process skills. In one 
interview it was said "Engagement creates tension". While involvement and 
local control are advocated there is little evidence of recognition of skills 
required to make it effective. When people start to share values, beliefs and 
aspirations, diversity surfaces and problems appear because the true complexity 
of issues emerges. Business and industrial organizations are investing significant 
human and material resources in strategic planning, problem solving, decision 
making and conflict resolution processes. There is little evidence of that 
attention in these cases but the need is at least being recognized in some, such 
as the Aboriginal Education Branch and Saskatchewan Shared Services. 
Problem solving is a characteristic of healthy organizations Miles (1965) and 
Senge (1990) stresses the need for team learning - these cases highlight the need 
for attention to both. 

• An overview of the cases reveals that initiative is often confined to one area of 
concern or to one level of the organization for education. Findings indicate, 
however, that distance education requires major adaptations of teachers, 
community involvement demands new skills of principals and having special 
needs students in regular classrooms can upset whole communities. The need 
for integrated leadership and support at all levels - local, system and provincial 
has been demonstrated repeatedly in these cases as it was in the Saskatchewan 
School Improvement Program (Newton, 1990c). The New Brunswick and 
Frontier cases are the best examples of integrated, focused developments. 

• Another important finding is that educational organizations usually lack 
information capital as a basis for accountability and ongoing development. 
Conceptual clarity regarding intended outcomes, quality indicators, regular 
monitoring and systematic evaluation are interrelated yet seldom are all receiving 
attention. 

The eleven case studies illustrate that equity issues can be effectively addressed by 
improving second and third level educational services for school communities in 
isolated regions of Canada. Initiatives may come from local, system or provincial 
levels and if they are focused on a problem or an opportunity by flexible people 
willing to work together results can be realized. In many ways, these cases of 
development stand between two worlds - the traditional, hierarchical structures based 
upon absolute truth and stable conditions and an emerging paradigm centered around 
situated/contextual knowledge, shared leadership and continuous learning for a 
cc nplex, uncertain environment. 



88 



i 



I 

I 
I 

1 

1 

t 

I 
I 

I 
I 

I 
1 
I 
I 



5.0 EDUCATIONAL SERVICES FOR FIRST NATIONS 

The literature and data presented in the first four sections of this report provide a 
broad overview of educational services. The task of this section is to reflect on this 
information and make some recommendations for further developments in First 
Nations educational services. The recommendations grow out of a conceptual 
framework and a consideration of four options for First Nations use of non-First 
Nations educational knowledge. 

Learning from 3S9 Years of Experience 

We have over three hundred years of experience with First Nations education in North 
America. Harvard College was established in 1636 with a stated mission of 
"educating the English and Indian youth of the colonies". This backlog of experience 
has established certain facts that must be considered in developing positive policy 
affecting First Nations educational services. Failed experiments in First Nations 
education such as the residential school experiment have left Canada and First Nations 
with enormous social, economic, and moral costs. There is no disagreement that First 
Nations have the lowest rates of educational attainment, the lowest incomes, the 
lowest employment rates, the highest social assistance rates, the highest incarceration 
rates, the highest youth suicide rates, etc. of any group in Canada. We are on the 
highest cost side of all social indicators. We believe one root of these problems is 
systematic miss-education based on a historically pervasive myth of First Nations 
ignorance. 



5.1 DECONSTRUCTING THE PRIMARY MYTH OF DISCOVERY 

They told me to tell you the time is now. 
They want you to know how they feel. 
So listen carefully, look toward the sun. 
The Elders are watching. 
(Bouchard & Vickers) 

In 1994, we still live with a devastating educational myth created by the colonizers 
who came to our land. This myth of the untutored savages denies that traditional First 
Nations education exists, or at best exists as basic survival skill knowledge of an 
"informal" or "primitive" nature. The colonizers couldn't acknowledge that Fivst 
Nations had complex systems of education which included informal and formal 
educational methodologies and which included basic survival skills; but also 
emphasized so much more than this. This quote by Methodist missionary Thomas 
Crosby exemplifies this mythic thinking and shows the Christianizing goal of 
education for First Nations children: 

The Missionary finds among a people that are so constantly 
moving about that if he is to expect real good work, it must 
be done by gathering a number of the children together in 



ERJC 



a Home or Boarding School or Industrial Institution where 
they can be kept constantly and regularly at school and 
away from the evil influences of the heathen life (1914, p 
84). 

Contrast the Missionary quote with this one by the late George Clutesi, a well 
respected B.C. First Nations teacher, artist, and writer, who described traditional 
"Indian Culture" and higher forms of education within culture this way: 

We must not confuse ourselves with the belief that Indian 
culture is confined within the narrow limits of carving 
totem poles, masks and other like media. The West Cost 
Indian of this continent of North America sought and 
studied in great depth other areas of culture. Not the least 
of them was the belief and the ability to live with one's 
neighbor in a philanthropic and compassionate manner. 

The mastery of public-speaking was essential to reach the 
public in teaching, in storytelling and in frequent reviews of 
existing laws, histories and tenets of each tribe. This 
created men and women philosophers, teachers of high 
repute in many regions who may be likened to professors 
and doctors much like the western society (1990, p. 135). 

More will be said in the following section on values (5.3). 

The myth of "primitive" education has been internalized by many First Nations 
over the years through forced assimilationist attempts to educate our children in 
the missionary schools, the residential schools, the day schools on reserve, public 
schools, and now sometimes at the band controlled schools. The following quotes 
cogently portray how First Nations people felt about their own people and culture 
after experiencing a residential school system and then public schooling: 

Our values were as confused and warped as our skills. The priests 
had taught us to respect them by whipping us until we did what we 
were told. Now we would not move unless we were threatened 
with a whip. We came home to relatives who had never struck a 
child with a whip. We came home to relatives who had never 
struck a child in their lives. These people, our mothers and fathers, 
aunts and uncles and grandparents, failed to represent themselves 
as a threat, when that was the only thing we had been taught to 
understand. Worse than that, they spoke an uncivilized and savage 
language and were filled with superstitions. After a year spent 
learning to see and hear only what the priests and brothers wanted 
you to see and hear, even the people we loved came to look ugly 
(The late George Manuel in Manuel and Posluns, 1974, p. 65). 



Provincial school integration for First Nations meant that our 
children attended the public school and learned the same 
curriculum as everyone else and were treated "the same" as other 
children. This form of integration was really assimilation because 
the culture of the First Nations' child was considered a barrier to 
the child's academic progress and had to be overcome.... I attended 
an "ordinary" public school and I remember the feelings of 
displacement; I remember the awkward feelings of being different 
because I was an Indian. This awkwardness occurred because 
others did not understand or appreciate my cultural difference, and 
I did not know how to tell them. I dreaded the social studies and 
history lessons where we read about Indians (A personal 
experience, Jo-ann Archibald, 1991, p. 190-191). 

Our Elders say that in order to understand where we are now and to know where 
we want to go (in the future) we have to know where we've come from. We have 
to understand the practices and effects of colonization via education. As Vema 
J. Kirkness, a well respected national educational leader said in a talk to educators, 
"we need to cut the shackles". One way is to - let the traditions preserve us. 

Many Elders and cultural teachers have said that our traditions come from the 
Creator, the land, and the Ancestors. Traditions and the values embedded within 
traditional teachings are prevalent in many Aboriginal contexts today. Cultural 
Centres, Friendship Centres, Aboriginal Post-Secondary Institutions, First Nations 
programs and reserve based programs are few examples. The term "traditional" 
should not be thought of as only existing in the past. Our challenge as Aboriginal 
people is to transform the traditional knowledge/values into a contemporary 
context. Today, many First Nations communities are on an emotional, spiritual, 
and physical healing path from the abuses suffered from assimilationist educational 
experiences. The need for these types of healing must be considered in the second 
and third level educational services. Staff such as counselors, Healers, Elders with 
expertise in emotional and Spiritual healing should be hired and 
programs/curricula such as peer support groups, culturally appropriate programs 
on alcohol/drug prevention, HTV/AIDS, Fetal Alcohol Syndrome/Effects should 
be considered core curricula. The positive influence of cultural healing and the 
need for family healing is reinforced in the following experience told by 
Rosa Bell: 

Spending much of my childhood in residential school has 
caused me pain, especially not being able to ask Mom why 
I was sent away from home as a young child for fear of 
hurting her with painful questions. For the past two years 



91 



I have been learning the Sacred Ways. Coming to terms 
with my past has helped me to heal and in sharing my story 
I hope I will be able to help others. 

Recently I went to Mom's for Sunday dinner. I had decided 
that I would ask the question that had always bothered me. 
I gathered up all my courage and said, "I am writing a 
paper and I need to know why I was sent away to 
residential school." 

I am sure she was surprised to hear this question. I waited 
while Mom sat and thought. When she spoke her voice 
was weak. "Your Dad was very sick," she said, "and I 
couldn't take care of all of you. I couldn't support all of 
you. The Indian Agent told me to send some of you kids 
to residential school. The Agent told me they would take 
good care of you. He picked out which of the children 
would go. I didn't have any choice or say in the matter." 

I couldn't ask Mom any more questions. I could hear the 
hurt in her voice, so we talked of other things before I took 
her to her bedroom for the night. Before I left Mom she 
asked when I would be coming back to work on learning 
Haida names. I felt incredibly happy. My mom wanted 
me, she wanted to share tine with me. She wanted to help 
me learn our language and family history. I just felt so 
happy, it's hard to describe. 

I feel that the door between my mom and I was opened 
again. I feel like a weight has been lifted. I also feel sad 
knowing why I was sent away. The child inside me needs 
more. I had prepared myself to accept any answer that she 
would give. Her words are now in a safe place within me. 
they will help me on my journey of healing. 

I have cried and know it is time to let the bitterness and 
resentment go. I have survived and will continue to grow 
from here. I sent the hurt away with the smoke of 
sweetgrass. It is dismissed to go where it will. It will no 
longer stay inside me to grow and fester. Now I can go on 
to a brighter tomorrow (1993, p.8, 15). 

Another method of deconstructing the discovery myth is the Indian Control of 
Indian Education Policy (ICIEP) which was adopted by the Department of Indian 
Affairs in 1973. For just over 20 years, many First Nations Bands across Canada 
have administered and controlled, in varying degrees, their education systems from 
Kindergarten to grade 12 and also post-secondary. This policy advocated a non- 



assimilationist stance and provided philosophical guidelines for education true to 
First Nations values and culture: 

We want education to provide the setting in which our 
children can develop the fundamental attitudes and values 
which have an honored place in Indian tradition and culture. 
The values which we want to pass on to our children, 
values which make our people a great race, are ...found in 
our history, in our legends and in the culture. We believe 
that if an Indian child is fully aware of the important Indian 
values he (she) will have reason to be proud of our race and 
of (herself) himself as an Indian. 

Our aim is to make education relevant to the philosophy 
and needs of Indian people. We want education to give our 
children a strong sense of identity with confidence in their 
personal worth and ability. We believe in education: 

- as a preparation for total living; 

- as a means of free choice of where to live and work; 

- as a means of enabling us to participate fully in our 
own social, economic, political and educational 
advancement (Native Indian Brotherhood, 1972, pp. 2-3). 

We suggest that Department of Indian Affairs educationalists, First Nations 
education authorities and the communities they serve revisit this important 
document which provides principles for curriculum, parental involvement and 
responsibility, First Nations teachers, and cultural sensitization for non-Native 
teachers, facilities, and other support services. We believe that this important 
policy can still serve us well today. The challenge remains of transforming these 
principles to current educational practices. We must continually ask, "What does 
First Nations education mean?" 

Havighurst (1981) distinguishes between two competing goals for education, 
"education for assimilation" and "education for self-determination". The difference 
between the two becomes clearer if we shift from the noun, education, to the verb, 
learning. Learning for assimilation has a different philosophy and a different 
practice as well as a different goal than learning for self-determination. 
I didn't understand my own education until my grandfather helped 
me put it into perspective. In college I took a course in the 
psychology of human motivation that covered concentration camps, 
brainwashing, and prisoners of war. When I talked to Grandpa 
about what we were studying, he said to me: "We are prisoners of 
Peace." When he said that my own educational experience fell into 
place. I suddenly understood the love-hate relationship I have with 
education. (Eber Hampton in Hampton and Wolfson 1994, p. 90- 
91) 



er|c 



10-* 



93 



Education for assimilation is really a form of "re-education" or brain washing. It 
requires the learner to relinquish his or her identity in order to identify with 
another culture, value system, language, and world view. We are living with the 
devastation caused by over a hundred years of this perversion of education. The 
research team have included a few peoples' experiences, in this section of the 
report, so that we do not forget the human social dimension of education. Our 
message to governmental policy-makers is that Aboriginal people will never accept 
assimilationist approaches again and that governments must not shirk their 
responsibility for rectifying the devastating effects of educational assimilation. 
Government policy-makers should recognize that First Nations are trying to 
provide education for self-determination in First Nations schools. 

Education for self-determination is true education, it affirms the student's values 
and identity. It was what First Nations had in mind when treaties were negotiated. 
It is what First Nations still have in mind. 

Part of the research team's conceptual framework of education for self- 
determination, is First Nations control of First Nations education. We take it for 
granted that the essential decisions about educational services will be made by 
First Nations. Other wise, why bother? In essence the 359 years teach us that 
with First Nations design, decision making, and implementation, educational 
services have significant probability of success. With Euro-Canadian control the 
probability of failure and the probability of destructive unintended consequences 
are both close to one. 

First Nations must continually ask, "What does First Nations control of First 
Nations education mean?" It is not just a change of personnel. It is a change 
from education with a control ethic to education with a First Nations traditional 
respect ethic. It is education built on a world view that defines humans in a 
different way. Murray Sinclair (1994) writes, "Differences in Aboriginal and 
Euro-Canadian world views pervade every aspect of life and living. These world 
views are not theoretical constructs that have no application in everyday live. On 
the contrary, they are the basis for what is valued in life, and for beliefs about 
how life goals are attained (p. 25-26)." 

To decolonize the myth of discovery, First Nations must reaffirm and strengthen 
our Aboriginal world views. To do this, First Nations must review and reaffirm 
traditional values which develop and sustain good human beings. Government 
policy-makers must shift from the model of education for assimilation to education 
for self-determination. 



10,, 



94 



FIRST NATIONS PEOPLE LOOK AT 



EDUCATIONAL SERVICES: FOUR OPTIONS 



In taking the journey of reaffirming Aboriginal world views, a story comes to 
mind. In many Aboriginal cultures there is a trickster character who makes us 
think about our actions and behavior. 

Where's The Bone Needle? 

Old Man Coyote had just finished a long hard day of 
hunting. He decided to set up his camp for the night. 
After supper, he sat by the fire, and rubbed his tired feet 
from the long day's walk. He took his favorite moccasins 
out of his bag and noticed that there was a hole in the toe 
of one moccasin. He looked for his special bone needle 
to mend the moccasin, but couldn't feel it in the bag. Old 
Man Coyote started to crawl on his hands and knees 
around the fire to see if he could see or feel the needle. 
Just then Owl came flying by and landed next to Old 
Man Coyote and asked him what he was looking for. 
Old Man Coyote told Owl his problem. Owl said that he 
would help his friend by flying around the fire. After he 
made one swoop around the fire, he told Old Man Coyote 
that he didn't see the needle. Owl said that if it was 
around the fire, then he would have seen it because his 
eyesight was very good. He then asked Old man Coyote 
where he last used the needle. Old Man Coyote said that 
he used it quite far away, over in the bushes, to mend his 
jacket. Then Owl asked him why he was searching for 
the needle around the camp fire. Old Man Coyote 
replied, "Well, it's easier to look for the needle here 
because the fire gives off light, and I can see better here". 

Everyone knows the experience of misplacing something important, looking for 
it, not finding it, and repeatedly looking in the places it should be. As First 
Nations and the federal government take on the goal of finding the bone needle, 
the best educational services, for First Nations students, it will be difficult to avoid 
going over the same ground. This process, a normal human absurdity, has tragic 
consequences in education. An educational process does not work but we 
persevere. The repeated application of Euro-centric educational practices to First 
Nations children in the fact of repeated failure takes on an aura of blind 
compulsion. 

The first four sections of this report review different arrangements and forms of 
educational services in non-First Nations education. Here the research team 
identifies four options for using this information in service of First Nations 
students. These four options are presented as matters of degree rather than 



95 



mutually separate alternatives. We believe that the first three options if done well 
will actually shade into the fourth option. 



5.2. 1 Option 1. Implement current best practices: 

One obvious way for First Nations to deal with knowledge of Euro-Canadian 
educational services is to simply identify, adapt, implement, and evaluate what 
they believe to be best or most appropriate practices. Skimping on the first step 
of identifying best or most appropriate practices seems a fairly sure route to 
disaster. A common extreme is to uncritically apply conventional Euro-Canadian 
educational theory and practice to First Nations students. Conventional 
educational services do not work well with our students. About half of our 
students are in Provincial schools which have access to educational services. In 
spite of (it may be more accurate to say because of) this fact our students do 
better in reserve schools which have less access to services. Our rule of thumb 
is to never assume an educational practice will work with our students, no matter 
how well accepted that practice is elsewhere. 

Identifying best and most appropriate practices as well as evaluation demand the 
application of a value system. Articulating, describing, and exemplifying the 
value system to be used is an important task since values underlying practice are 
often unconscious and in conflict with espoused values (Argyris and Schon, 1958). 
Judgments about what might be appropriate practice to implement also demands 
an assessment of local conditions, resources and needs. 

Other potential pitfalls to this option include a failure to adequately adapt the 
services to local conditions and failure to adequately evaluate service outcomes. 
The "menu" of services in Euro-Canadian contexts may not include some services 
that are appropriate to First Nations schools. 

We recommend that the school community come together in a workshop structure 
over a period of time throughout each school year, to identify cultural values and 
to screen and evaluate the best educational practices and services through this 
cultural lens or "eye" as the following Coyote's Eyes story hints at us. This story 
was told by Terry Tafoya, from Taos New Mexico. 



Coyote's Eyes 

Long time ago, when mountains were the size of salmon 
eggs, Coyote was going along, and saw that Rabbit was 
doing something. Now this Rabbit was a Twati, an 
Indian doctor, and as Coyote watched, Rabbit sang his 
spirit song, and the Rabbit's eyes flew out of his head 
"Whee-num, come here," and his eyes returned to their 
empty sockets. 

ERIC 



This greatly impressed Coyote, who immediately begged 

Rabbit to teach him how to do this. 

Rabbit said no. Coyote Begged. Rabbit said no. 

"Oh, please", cried Coyote. 

"No", replied Rabbit. 

"But it's such a wonderful trick! Teach me". 
"No". 

"But I'll do exactly as you say!" 
"I will teach you," said Rabbit, "but you must never do 
this more than four times in one day, or something 
terrible will happen to you." And so Rabbit taught 
Coyote his spirit song, and soon Coyote's eyes flew up 
and perched on a tree. 

"Whee-num! Come here!" called Coyote, and his eyes 
returned to him. 

Now Rabbit left, and Coyote kept practicing. He sent his 
eyes back and forth to the tree four times. Then he 
thought, "I should show off this new trick to the Human 
people, instead of just doing it for myself." So Coyote 
went to the nearest Indian village, and yelled out for all 
the people to gather around him. With his new audience, 
Coyote sang the Rabbit's song, and the crowd was very 
impressed to see his eyes fly out of his head and perch 
on the branch of a tree. "Whee-num!" Coyote called out. 
His eyes just at on the tree and look down at him. The 
Indian people started to laugh. 

"Come here!" shouted Coyote. His eyes just looked at 
him. "Whee-num!" Just then a crow flew by, and 
spotting the eyes, thought they were berries. The crow 
swooped down and ate them. 

Now Coyote was blind, and staggered out of the village, 
hoping to find new eyes. He heard the sounds of running 
water and felt around, trying to find the stream. Now, 
around flowing water, one finds bubbles, and Coyote 
tried to take these bubbles and use them for eyes. But 
bubbles soon pop, and that's what Coyote discovered. 
Next Coyote felt around and discovered huckleberries, so 
he took those and use them for his eyes. But 
huckleberries are so dark, everything looked black. Now 
Coyote was really feeling sorry for himself. "Eenee 
snawai, I'm just pitiful", Coyote cried. 
"Why are you so sad?" asked a small voice, for little 
mouse heard him. 

"My dear cousin", said Coyote, "I've lost my eyes.... I'm 
blind, and I don't know what to do". 
"Snawai Yunwai," replied Mouse. "You poor thing. I 
have two eyes, so I will share one with you." Having 



lOo 



said this, Mouse removed one of his eyes and handed it 

to Coyote. Now Coyotes are much larger than mice, and 

when Coyote dropped Mouse's eye into his socket, it just 

rolled around in the big empty space. The new eye was 

so small it only let in a tiny amount of light. It was like 

looking at the world through a little hole. 

Coyote walked on, still feeling sorry for himself, just 

barely able to get around with Mouse's eye. "Ennee 

snawai, I'm just pitiful", he sobbed. 

"Why are you crying, Coyote"? asked Buffalo in his deep 

voice. 

"Oh cousin", began Coyote, "all I have to see with is this 
tiny eye of Mouse. It's so small it only lets in a little bit 
of light, so I can barely see." 

"Snawai Yunwai," replied Buffalo, "you poor thing. I 
have two eyes, so I will share one with you." Then 
Buffalo took out one of his eyes and handed it to Coyote. 
Now buffaloes are much larger than Coyotes, and when 
Coyote tried to squeeze Buffalo's eye into his other 
socket, it hung over into the rest of his face. So large 
was Buffalo's eye that it let in so much light, Coyote was 
forced to continue his journey, staggering about with his 
mismatched eyes. 



First Nations stories contain layers of metaphors. In this story, the eyes may 
represent world views and vision. A common traditional teaching is that one 
should appreciate the gifts given to us by the Creator and leam to take care of and 
honor our gifts. The gift of cultural knowledge shared in the story was not 
respected and the Coyote trickster ended up losing his vision. To provide quality 
educational services for First Nations children, clear vision is essential and cultural 
knowledge and values must be treated carefully. For the discussion of the four 
options presented in this section, Coyote's mis-matched eyes may symbolize the 
Aboriginal and the Euro-Canadian world view/educational context. 



5.2.2 Option 2. Reject non-First Nations practices: 

Sinclair (1994) suggests that First Nations have an understanding of the essential 
nature of human beings mat is diametrically opposed to that on which most 
Canadian education is based. Back in the 1960's a First Nations author 
interviewed by CBC suggested the best solution for educational problems was to, 
"burn all the schools down and start over". The sentiment is understandable given 
that the most common products of our children's schools were failure labels. 
Since there are now many reserve schools of which we are quite proud we have 
locked up the matches. However, in speaking of second and third level 
educational services it will make sense in some cases to either "start from scratch" 

ERIC j 



or design a service solely from a First Nations perspective without reference to 
Euro-centric practice. For example a group of First Nations schools may decide 
to work together on an Elders in the schools program that may or may not have 
some parallels in Provincial school systems. In general our history and pervasive 
Euro-centric educational models means that this option has limited application and 
rejecting completely non-First Nations practices may be impossible, and/or 
undesirable. Coyote certainly could live with only one eye; however, the fact 
remains that his vision would be limited. 

Even though this option is the apparent opposite of the first option, the research 
team believes that it too requires the same steps of first articulating a value base, 
or framework in which to choose what not to implement or what to reject. 
Specific non-First Nations practices should be rejected because they clearly do not 
resonate with cultural ways of teaching and learning. For example, in the area of 
First Nations language instruction, teaching methods and curriculum which copy 
a segmented linguistic approach do not teach functional use or fluency of First 
Nations language. In fact, children get bored if this is the only approach used. 

5.2.3 Option 3. Take the best of both worlds; 

This advice to First Nations students is quoted so often that educators sometimes 
forget the underlying complexity and challenge of putting it into practice. If First 
Nations attempt to "take the best of both worlds" in a superficial way we will 
have an incoherent system that generates and perpetuates internal and external 
conflict. To do this well in the area of educational services requires effective use 
of a value system. Without knowing the world views and value systems that 
guide educational choices this option will produce confusion 

Again Coyote the trickster may help us here. In the story, he ends up with two 
mismatched eyes, which could symbolize what would happen if the best of both 
worlds is taken without teaching the learner how to use mem. A First Nations 
traditional teaching also reminds us that we should know very well the 
environment/world in which we live. Culture is dynamic, and since our worlds 
or milieu change over time, the educational environment which is created must 
provide learners with the ability to accommodate change in better ways than 
Coyote has. 

5.2.4 Option 4. Value based choice: 

A fourth option is to take the best pedagogy, policy processes, administrative 
approaches, and educational service from the public school systems and 
incorporate them into a sound First Nations framework: a framework that clearly 
has emerged from collaborative discussions and mutual thinking of 
community/school participants; a framework where traditional values have been 
articulated, scrutinized, and screened through the lens of education. 



Values such as respect for individuals and for knowledge itself, responsibility to 
share knowledge, reciprocity - giving back through service to others and 
community/nation are only a few examples. 

The late Linda Akan, of the Saulteaux Nation, shared her understanding of the talk 
of her Elder, Alfred Manitopeyes, who spoke in Saulteaux in response to the 
question "What do you think Native students and educators ought to know about 
Native Education?" The research team presents her understandings because we 
believe that First Nations should explore First Nations educational concepts first 
through their language then transform these into an educational framework for 
curriculum and teaching. 

The term "education" in Saulteaux understanding is a 
lifelong learning process. Other than formal school training 
it involves both traditionalist and modern cultural knowledge." 
(1992, p. 194) 

The Elder contextualized the concept of education. First he 
identifies at least two kinds: Mooneyowinih kah kirtahmakcat, 
"whiteman's" teachings or schooling, and Anishinabaywin, 
or Saulteaux teachings. He approves of these Elders' 
teachings, which consisted of both kinds of education, 
and presents an ideal character 23 someone who "minds" 
all things, or is thoughtful and discerning and is able to 
balance both kinds of education. (I have chosen to use 
the word traditionalist to refer to an individual who 
incorporates "old" knowledge in a modern context, in 
a balanced manner. Tradition in this context does not 
mean a return to a vestige of the past; it refers to a 
continual cultural resolve of individuals or groups to be 
in the world and with the world.) 

The Elder values perseverance in school and in life and 
encourages us to take the best from the "white" teachings, 
or formal education, and to incorporate this knowledge 
into Saulteaux or First Nations teachings. Because the 
value of being true to ones self is also implicit in traditionalist 
educational discourse. It is desirable for all learners and 
educators to balance the best of school training with the 
best of their own cultural teachings. (Pg 203-204) 



Traditional educational principles are holistic, and bring together the mental, 
emotional, physical, and spiritual aspects. First Nations stories exemplify a 



5.3 



MORE ABOUT TRADITIONAL FIRST NATIONS 
VALUES RELATED TO EDUCATION 



0 




100 



ERIC 



holistic educational approach. A teaching story will make the listener think/use 
the mind and imagination, feel, act/physical, and connect spiritually with one's 
inner being and with the Creator. With the introduction of Western mainstream 
education First Nations cultural knowledge and pedagogies have been banned, 
omitted, ignored, or offered in piecemeal fashion within schooling contexts. For 
example, First Nations stories have been denigrated to moral tales or simply "why" 
myths. They can explain why things happen and they do remind us of morals and 
values. However, they also teach history, science, philosophy, critical thinking 
skills, appreciation of beauty, being respectful to tht relations, geography, and they 
also expand the memory. 

The articulation of a value base for making educational choices is a complex and 
perhaps inherently incomplete process. At the research team's limited level of 
understanding it seems that First Nation value systems may be miss-represented 
by simple lists of values. We believe such lists have value in some situations but 
we also believe there are inherent dangers of misuse and misunderstanding. It is 
as if some things that are really important cannot be made explicit but must 
remain implicit. For example, we have no personal memory of a First Nations 
Elder explicitly drawing "the moral" from a story. Occasionally, we have heard 
a general or specific comment taken from the story to apply to a current issue. 
But, never have we had the sense that there is some definitive summary, specific 
or sole "meaning" of the story. Rather, our sense is that stories, ceremonies, and 
other traditional educational processes offer us as learners a verbal or enacted 
experience from which we may chose to learn. 

Austin Hammond, a Tlingit Elder said, "Raven makes mistakes so we don't have 
to." 



Lists of First Nations values have the apparent virtues of explicitness, simplicity, 
and order. Life is not like that. As authors we keenly feel and share the dilemma 
with you. We advocate the articulation of a First Nations value base for choosing 
educational services. But we have a deep mistrust of articulated value systems 
that are then placed in a column beside another column of non-First Nations 
values. The only path we know is one of respecting our own ignorance. Elders 
have repeatedly cautioned us about saying more than we know. However, they 
have taught us to share what we know when the time is right. Our Euro-centric 
educations have taught us to be confident, clear, and quick in our statements. 
Clearly, we are conflicted. It is not as if nothing can be said. It is simply that we 
have a profound caution against believing that our words can capture the essence 
of our values. 



Hampton (1994) suggests some tentative standards for First Nations education 
drawn from his interviews with First Nations educators. Toye (1994) has 
reviewed curriculum products from different First Nations and different points in 
history. She finds a core set of values more or less explicitly articulated in the 
curriculum. Many First Nations groups and individuals have developed statements 
of values. We could here suggest a few core values to help us think about 



ERIC 



101 



educational services. That would have the virtue of reminding us to test services 
and arrangements for services against what we suppose to be our values. 



We ask the reader to share our caution as we suggest that our recommendations 
for educational ss-vices be tested against the values of: 

• Diversity: Obviously every First Nation is different. Respect and provision 
for diversity in educational services and arrangements is an essential criterion. 
For example, a group of schools may decide that it needs help in development 
of curriculum with a First Nations language of instruction while another group 
of schools may choose English or French as the language of instruction. 

• Responsibility: First Nations education is a First Nations responsibility. 
Treaties commit the Canadian government to education that produces equal 
educational outcomes (Hampton and Wolfson 1994). This commitment 
cannot be met without adequate funding. More importantly, history has 
demonstrated that it cannot be met without First Nations control. 

• Relatedness: Educational services are often delivered in a fragmented fashion. 
We suggest that an awareness of systemic interactions is an essential context 
for educational services. For example, the economic, spiritual, and 
community effects of a particular service or delivery system are important 
factors. 



5 4 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR A FIRST NATIONS PROCESS 
OF DEVELOPING SECOND AND THIRD LEVEL 
EDUCATIONAL SERVICES FOR FIRST NATIONS SCHOOLS 



The process the research team is going to recommend is congruent with the 
educational and organizational development models summarized in the first four 
sections of this report. However, the credibility and utility of the 
recommendations has nothing to do with this literature and everything to do with 
congruency with First Nations values and processes. 



5.4.1 An action/values process 

Regarding the process for developing First Nations second and third level 
educational services the following steps are advocated: 

1. Use the list of services in Table 9 of this report as a preliminary 
list of second and third level educational services. 



ERIC 



■*. j 



102 



2. Use the summary table of options in Table 8 for educational 
service arrangements as a preliminary statement of arrangement 
options. 

3. a Conduct research directed at adding First Nations identified 

services and arrangements to the preliminary services list and 
options list (from steps 2 and 3). Suggested guidelines for the RFP 
for this research include: 

- The research should be contracted to a First Nations 
organization; 

- It should have direct participation of a sample of Band schools 
and educational authorities; 

- It should use an action research/case study methodology; 

- It should suggest some priorities for services and delivery 
arrangements; 

- It should test an implementation strategy similar to the one 
outlined in Step 4 below. 

3. b Sections of the current research study "Organization of Educational 

Services in Sparsely Populated Regions of Canada" may have 
application for planning and implementing research methodology, 
in particular: 

- The "Trends and Issues" section pp. 25-28; 

- Change implications summarized on pp. 39-42 should be 
examined for consideration in implementation strategies and 
research; 

- The findings from the eleven case studies listed on pp. 99-100, 
may have contextual similarities to various First Nations schools. 

4. Based on the results of step 4 modify and implement a strategy 
that: 

• Identifies and describes in a local context First Nation values 
for making educational decisions. 

• Develops concrete examples of values in use for educational 
processes. 

• Develops an inventory of First Nation educational assets at the 
school, community, and educational authority levels. 

• Develops a menu of second and third level services to be 
provided. 

• Sets up a delivery arrangement with associated costs and 
evaluation processes. 

• Implements services and ongoing evaluation of outcomes. 



ERIC 



103 



5. In consultation with INAC establish adequate funding levels 
allocated to schools and central education authorities (e.g. AFN 
Education Department, FSIN Education Department, Mikmaq 
Education Authority, etc.) to purchase or develop educational 
services. 



5.4.2 First Nations university initiatives are necessary to provide the knowledge base , 
professional educators, and research assistance for educational services. There are 
First Nations teacher education programs at universities across Canada. There is 
one graduate studies program for Aboriginal students in education, at the 
University of British Columbia: Ts"kel. Issues related for First Nations schools 
are addressed in the students' course work and thesis/projects. It would be 
advantageous for First Nations schools to partner with appropriate university 
teacher education programs and graduate schools/programs for collaboration on 
various services planning and implementation. 



5.4.3 Governance; 

Working from the data in the first four sections of this report it is clear that a 
variety of governance options are possible. It is outside the scope of this research 
to survey current and possible future options available to First Nations. In some 
cases well established governance systems are already in place. The Education 
Commission of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations for example, has 
already developed a draft statement of Educational Principles that guides its 
provision of (limited by funding) educational services to member bands. Clearly 
in this and other cases the ability to develop a wider range of services and 
delivery mechanisms is primarily limited by available funds. It could be within 
the scope of the research recommended in step 5 above to survey existing and 
possible future options available for First Nations governance of educational 
services. Alternatively, we would recommend a separate survey of First Nations 
educational governance. 

One of the clear findings in this research is that initiatives in educational services 
come from many sources. In the First Nations context it is also clear that 
initiatives come from perhaps an even wider range of sources: national 
organizations, Indian Affairs, school boards, tribal councils, provincial First 
Nations organizations, communities, provincial educational authorities, etc. While 
this diversity of sources adds richness, it also leads to fragmentation, unnecessary 
duplication, and sources of conflict. At this point we can only suggest the 
development of a clearing house for dissemination and the development of clear 
lines of communication and authority in decision making. We expect that in most 
cases the final authority for educational decision making will rest with individual 
band schools and that services will be offered on an optional basis by more 
centralized educational structures. 



a 

ERIC 



104 



X 



As the research team planned and completed this research project Organization of 
Education Services in Sparsely Populated Regions Of Canada, we continually 
asked ourselves "What would our Elders say?" we believe these words should 
begin and end our work. 

They told me to tell you the time is now. 
They want you to know how they feel. 
So listen carefully, look toward the sun. 
The Elders are watching. 
(Bouchard & Vickers, 1990). 



iiU 



105 



REFERENCES 



Ahmed, M. & Coombs, P. (Eds.). (1977). Education for rural development: Case studies 
for planners. New York: Praeger Publishers 

Alcorn, N. (1993). Challenges to school leadership in the new climate of New Zealand 
education. The Canadian Administrator, 32(4), 1-10. 

Barker, B. (1985). Curricular offerings in small and large high schools: How broad is the 
disparity? Research in Rural Education, 3(1), 35-58. 

Barker, B. (1992). The distance education handbook: An administrator's guide for rural 
and remote schools. Charleston, WV: Clearinghouse on Rural Education and 
Small Schools, Appalachia Educational Laboratory. 

Beckner, W. & Barker, B. (1994). Technology in rural education. In Fastback, Donovan, 
Walling (Ed.), #366, Bloomington, IN: Phi Delta Kappan Educational Foundation. 

Berkeley, T. & Ludlow, B. (1991). Meeting the needs of special student populations in 
rural locales. In Alan J. DeYoung (Ed.), Rural education: Issues and practice. 
New York: Garland Publishing Inc. 

Bolman, L. & Deal, T. (1994). Modem approaches to understanding and managing 
organizations. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Boss. 

Bosetti, L. & Gee, T. (1993). Program equity in small rural schools in Alberta. In 
Newton & Knight (Eds.) Understanding change in education: Rural and remote 
regions of Canada. Calgary, AB: Detselig Enterprises Ltd. 

Boyd W. & Immegart, G. (1977). Educational innovation, socio-political culture and 
depressed rural communities. The Journal of Educational Administration, 75(1), 
49-66. 

Boylan, C. (1994). Australian small/rural schools: Policy and practice. Small Schools 
Network, 8(1), 6-10. 

Brown, D. (1991). Decentralization: The administrator's guidebook to school district 
change. Newbury Park, CA: Corwin Press Inc. 

Carlson, R (1990). The costs and benefits of an investment in rural education from a 
psychosocial-political-cultural perspective. A paper presented to the American 
Education Research Association, Boston, MA. 



106 



Carlson, R. (1990b). A rural school/community: A case study of a dramatic turnaround 
and its implications for school improvement. Research in Rural Education, 7(1), 
23-33. 

Carkhuff, R (1988). The age of the new capitalism. Amhurst, MA.. Human Resources 
Development Press. 

Corbett, D. & Rossman, G. (1986). Fanfare and failure: Pathways to implementing 
change. Paper presented at American Educational Research Association Annual 
Meeting, San Francisco. 

Crandall, D., Eisman, J. & Louis, K. (1986). Strategic planning issues that bear on the 
success of school improvement efforts. Education Administration Quarterly, 02(3), 
21-53. 

Dalin, P. (1978). Limits to educational change. London: The MacMillan Press Ltd. 

D'Amico, J. (n.d.). Using strategic planning to improve rural schools. Springhouse, PA: 
Learning Institute. 

Decker, L. (1992). Building learning communities: Realities of educational restructuring. 
In L. Decker & V. Romney, Educational restructuring and the community 
education process. Richmond, VA: The University of Virginia. 

DeWitt, J., Batie, S. , & Norris, K. (1988). A brighter future for rural America? 
Strategies for communities and states. Washington, D.C.: National Governors* 
Association. 

Dibski, D., Sackney, L. & Newton, E. (1990). Integration of theory and practice in rural 
schools through a provincial leadership unit. A paper presented at the annual 
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Boston, MA: April. 

Drucker, P. (1993). Post-capitalist society. New York: Harper Business. 

Etzioni, A. (1961). Complex organizations. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, Inc. 

Foster, C. & Martinez, I. (1985). The effects of school enrollment size in the middle and 
junior high school on teacher and student attitude and student self-concept. 
Research in Rural Education, 3(2), 57-60. 

Fullan, M. (1991). The new meaning of educational change. Toronto: OISE Press. 

Fullan, M., Anderson, S. & Newton, E. (1986). Support systems for implementing 
curriculum in school boards. Toronto: OISE Press. 



1 ■<• ■ 

•4L -L O 



107 



Guba, E. (1981). Criteria for assessing the trustworthiness of naturalistic inquires. 
Educational Communication and Technology, 29(2), 75-91. 

Gulka, W. (1992). Managing multiple changes in rural school divisions: The director's 
role. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon. 

Haas, T & Lambert, R. (1992). Nurturing schools back to life. Educational Horizons, 
70(2), 78-83. 

Hare, D. (1991). Identifying, recruiting, selecting, inducting & supervising rural teachers. 
In Alan J. DeYoung (Ed.), Rural education: Issues and practice. New York & 
London: Garland Publishing Inc. 

Hathaway, W. (1990). Rural education: Challenges and opportunities. Paper presented 
to the Prairie Forum on Rural Education, Brandon, Manitoba, November. 

Hargreaves, A. (1994a). Changing teachers, changing times. Toronto, On: OISE Press. 

Hargreaves, A. (1994b). Development and desire: A postmodern perspective. Paper 
presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research 
Association, New Orleans, April. 

House, E. (1981). Three perspectives on innovation: Technological, political and cultural. 
In R. Lehming & M. Kane (Eds), Improving schools-using what we know. 
London: Sage. 

Howley, C. (1994). The academic effectiveness of small-scale schooling Eric Digest. 
Charleston, W.VA: Appalachia Regional Educational Laboratory. 

Hull, R. (1986). Tradition of sharing: Cooperative programs in rural schools. Journal of 
Rural and Small Schools, 1(1), 22-24. 

Jones, S.H. (Ed.)(1989). Options in developing a new national rural policy: Rural policy 
development workshops. Texas A & M University. 

Kendall, R. (1992). Evaluating the benefits of a computer based telecommunication 
network: Telementoring and teletraining for educators in rural areas. Journal of 
Research in Rural Education, 8(1), 41-46. 

Knapczyk, D., Brush, T., Champion, M, Hubbard, L. & Rodes, P. (1992). Going the 
distance for staff development. Educational Horizons, 70(2), 88-91. 

Langlois, H. & Scharf, M. (1991). School finance and governance review - final report. 
Submitted to Saskatchewan Education, Training and Employment, Regina. 



lib 



108 



Luther, V. & Wall, M. (1986). The entrepreneurial community: A strategic planning 
approach to community survival. Lincoln, NE: and Chicago, IL: Woods Charitable 
Fund Inc. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Heartland Center for Leadership 
Development, Inc. 

Matthes, W. & Carlson, R. (1986). Conditions for practice: Why teachers select rural 
schools. Journal of Rural and Small Schools, 7(1), 25-28. 

McEwen, N. & Chow, H. (1991). Issues in implementing indicator systems. Alberta 
Journal of Educational Research, 37(1), 65-86. 

McGivney, J. & Moynihan, W. (1972). School and community. Teachers College Record, 
74(Dec. 1972), 209-224. 

McLean, D. (1981). Community involved education: A rural experiment. In Frank 
Darnell & Patricia M. Simpson (Eds.), Rural Education: In Pursuit of Excellence. 
Western Australia: National Center for Research in Rural Education. 

Miles, M. (1965). Planned change and organizational health: Figure and ground. In R. 
Carlson, et al. Change Processes in the public school. Eugene, OR: Center for 
Educational Policy and Management, University of Oregon, 11-36. 

Mitchell, C. (1994). Organizational learning and educational reform: Learning to do 
things differently. Canadian Administrator, 33(5), 1-9. 

Nachtigal, P. (1982). Rural education: In search of a better way. Boulder, CO: Westview 
Press. 

Nachtigal, P. & Haas, T. (1988). The new school finance research agenda Resource 
utilization in schools and school districts restructuring rural schools. A paper 
prepared for the National Conference of State Legislatures. McRel, Aurora, CO: 
May. 

Nachtigal, P. & Hobbs, D. (1988). Rural development: The role of the public schools. 
Background paper, National Governors' Association. June. 

Nachtigal, P. (1991). Rural grassroots school organizations: Their agendas for education. 
In Alan J. De Young (Ed.), Rural education: Issues and practices. New York and 
London: Garland Publishing Inc. 

Nachtigal, P. (1992). Toward the construction of a federal policy: Impact code for 
classifying the nation's rural school districts. A response to Stephens, Reeder and 
Elder. Journal of Research in Rural education, 8(3), 69-70. 

Newton, E. & Wright R. (1987). forces affecting change in small rural schools. School 
Organization, 7(3), 357-366. 



109 



Newton, E., Krause, W. & Wilson, K. (1990a). Planning for the 1990 s: A study for the 
Assiniboia School Division U69. Saskatoon. University of Saskatchewan - 
Educational Leadership Unit. 

Newton, E. (1990b). Rural teachers' perceptions of support for program change. Research 
in Rural Education, 7(1), 43-54. 

Newton, E. (1990c). Implementation of a provincial school improvement program: 
Problems and possibilities for 2020. Paper presented at a seminar of International 
Movements Toward Educational Change (IMTEC), Oxford, England, September. 

Newton, E. & Newton, P. (1992). Voices, vision and vitality: Redesigning small schools. 
Calgary. Detselig Enterprises Ltd. 

Newton, E. & Knight, D. (Eds.) (1993). Understanding change in education: Rural and 
remote regions of Canada. Calgary: Detselig Enterprises Ltd. 

Ogawa, R & Bossert, S. (1989). Leadership as an organizational quality. Paper presented 
at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San 
Francisco, March. 

Owens, R. (1982). Methodological perspective: Methodological rigor in naturalistic 
inquiry - some issues and answers. Educational Administration Quarterly, 18(2), 
1-21. 

Patterson, I, Purkey, S. & Parker, J. (1985). Productive school systems for a nonrational 
world. Alexandria, VA: ASCD. 

Philips, M. & Prock, G. (1991). Equality of educational opportunity in rural America. In 
Alan J. DeYoung (Ed.), Rural education: Issues and practices. New York & 
London: Garland Publishing Inc. 

Porter, M. (1991). Canada at the crossroads: The reality of a new competitive 
environment. A study prepared for the Business Council on National Issues and 
the Government of Canada. 

Quaglia, R & Mclntire, W. (1990). Raising student aspirations: The rural schools 
improvement project. A paper presented at the American Educational Research 
Association, Boston, MA: April. 

Reed, D.R. & Busby, D.W. (1985). Teacher incentives in rural schools. Research in Rural 
Education, 3(2), 69-73. 



110 



Sanders, J.R. (1990). Considerations about the costs and benefits of the rural initiative 
program operated by the regional educational laboratories. A paper presented at 
the American Educational Research Association Annual Meeting, Boston, MA: 
April. 

Saskatchewan Government. (1980). Rural education: Options for the 80's a discussion 
paper. Regina: Queen's Printer. 

Saskatchewan Government. (1985a). Strategy for the development of rural Saskatchewan. 
Regina: Queen's Printer. 

Saskatchewan Government. (1985b) School improvement: Building a more effective 
learning environment. Regina: Queen's Printer. 

Selznick, P. (1957). Leadership in Administration. Illinois: Row, Peterson, and Co. 

Senge, P. (1990). The fifth discipline: The art and practice of the learning organization. 
New York: Doubleday/Currency. 

Sher, J. (1977). Education in rural America. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 

Sher J. (ed.) (1981). Rural education in urbanized nations. An OECD/CERI report. 
Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 

Sher, J. (1988). The search for a better way: Empowerment, education and 
entrepreneurship. Education with Production, 6(\), 35-41. 

Stabler, J., Olfert, M. & Fulton, M. (1992). The changing role of rural communities in an 
urbanizing world. Regina: Canadian Plains Research Center, University of Regina. 

Stephens, E.R. (1992). Classifying extraordinary state policy strategies for assisting rural 
school districts. Journal of Research in Rural Education, 8(2), 32-46. 

Talbert, E. et al (1987). Forty rural schools: A study of school effectiveness. Paper 
presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research 
Association, Washington, DC: April. 

Terreberry, S. (1976). The evaluation of organized environments. In Warren G. Bennis 
et al (Eds.), The planning of change. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 

Tichy, N. (1980). Problem cycles in organizations and the management of change. In T. 
Kimberly & R. Miles (Eds.), The organizational life cycle. San Francisco: Jossey- 
Bass. 



V, 



111 



Trentham, L. & Shaer, B. (1985). Rural and urban teachers: Differences in attitudes and 
self-concepts. Research in Rural Education, 5(1), 3-5. 

Vidioh, A. & Bensman, J. (1968). Small town in mass society: Class, power, and religion 
in a rural community. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Wall, M. & Luther, V. (1987). 20 clues to rural community survival: A community case 
study project. Lincoln, NE: Heartland Center for Leadership Development. 

Weisbord, M. (1978). Input versus output focused organizations: Notes on a contingency 
theory of practice. Chapter 2 in W.W. Burke (Ed ), The cutting edge: Current 
theory and practice in organizational development. La Jolla, CA: University 
Associates, Inc. 

Western Australia, Ministry of Education (1989). School development plans: Policy and 
guidelines. Perth, WA. 

Western Australia, Ministry of EducafilflPO). School decision-making: Policy and 

guidelines. Perth WA. 

Whetten, D. (1981). Organizational responses to scarcity. Educational Administration 
Quarterly, 17(3), 80-97. 



9 

ERIC 



112 



APPENDIX A 
SAMPLE STUDENT AND PARENT SURVEY RESULTS 



124 

ERIC 



Table 4.4 

Students' Views - Selected ItP ms from a School Climate Survey (NT = 



Item 



Percentage of responses 
Positive Neutral Negative 



1. I enjoy school 


52.8 


27.6 


19.71 


2 Students get along well 


72.9 


13.7 


13.4 


3. Teachers take a personal interest 






in me 


37.9 


363 


25.6 


4. Teachers are available to give extra 






help 


723 


143 


13.5 


5. Teachers know the subject matter 


863 


7.8 


5.9 


6. Teachers are enthusiastic about 






teaching 


57.7 


30.9 


113 


7. Teachers are in class on time 


42.5 


263 


30.9 


8. Teachers are prepared 


813 


13.5 


52 


9. Teachers expect me to do my best 


94.7 


4.4 


0.8 


10. School rules and regulations are 






fair 


50.4 


21.5 


28.1 


11. There is a good school spirit 


34.2 


23.6 


422 


12 Students take care of school 






property 


36.0 


26.4 


37.6 


13. School is a good place to make 






friends 


71.6 


16.0 


124 


14. I like to do well in school 


80.4 


6.8 


27 


15. My parents are interested in 






how I do 


94.8 


3.6 


1.6 


16. Students willingly participate 


50.1 


25.1 


24.8 


17. Discipline is firm and consistent 


592 


223 


183 


18. There is good teacher-student 






cooperation 


520 


283 


19.7 


19. Our school is well decorated 


422 


25.2 


326 


20. The principal does a good job 


67.0 


9.8 


23.2 


21. We have an adequate say in 






decisions that affect us 


39.0 


23.4 


37.6 


22. Students behave well in class 


30.7 


35.9 


33.5 



1 Percentages may not total 100 because of rounding off. 



9 

ERIC 



Table 42 

Students' Views of School Program (N = 366) 



Program Component Percentage of responses 

Positive Neutral Negative 



1. The number of course options 


426 


162 


412* 


2. Emphasis on basic skills 


77.0 


153 


7.7 


3. Homework - fair, satisfactory 


51.9 


22.8 


252 


4. How much you are learning 


733 


13.6 


13.0 


5. The marks assigned to you 


643 


17.4 


17.8 


6. What is reported to your parents 


61.0 


22.1 


16.8 


7. Extra-curricular activities 


81.0 


9.9 


92 


8. Student representative council 


69.6 


16.6 


13.8 


9. The school facility 


63.5 


262 


113 


10. Chances for success in class 


72.9 


16.0 


11.0 


11. The length of class periods 


58.5 


19.2 


222 


12. Rewards available 


50.4 


226 


27.0 


13. The number of students per class 


72.1 


10.1 


17.9 


14. Resources in the library 


53.0 


220 


25.0 


15. Second language program 


325 


233 


442 


16. Usefulness of courses 


60.1 


221 


17.8 


17. Availability of a counsellor 


215 


222 


55.4 



Percentages may not total 100 because of rounding off. 



Table 5.1 



Parents' Views of School Program in Terms of 
Recommended Emphasis i n the Future (N = 557) 





Program 


Less 


Percentage 
Same 


More 


1. 


Basic skills 


0.4 


435 


561 1 


2. 


For slow learners 


22 


379 


599 


3. 


For the gifted 


153 


61.9 


22.8 


4. 


Music - regular 


13.9 


637 


22.4 


5. 


Music - band 


28.9 


53.8 


172 


6. 


Fine Arts 


10.2 


70.2 


19.6 


7. 


Core French 


36.7 


45.8 


17.5 


a 


French Immersion 


613 


27.9 


10.9 


9. 


Other languages 


46.2 


35.4 


18.4 


10. 


Counselling - career 


4.1 


34.0 


61.9 


11. 


Counselling - personal 


3.1 


36.0 


60.9 


12. 


Native studies 


353 


56.1 


8.7 


13. 


Work experience 


121 


526 


35.2 


14. 


Life skills 


3.0 


35.1 


61.9 


15. 


New programs 


127 


61.1 


262 


16. 


Alternate programs 


32 


48.2 


48.6 


17. 


Computer related 


1.9 


34.9 


63.2 



Percentages may not total 100 because of rounding off. 



Table 1 

Parents' Views of School and System Operations (N a *T7) 
Percentages of positive responses in a rural Saskatchewan system 



School Operations (20 items) System Operations (16 items) 



Over 80% 



70-79% 



69-69% 



School is kept clean, support 
staff friendly, a good school, 
I feel welcome at school 

Homework, attendance, 
standards, reporting, student- 
teacher relations, students 
enjoy school 

Values at home and school, 
home-school communication, 
teachers, the principal, library, 
class size, teachers give extra 
help, discipline 



Buildings are kept in good repair 



Provision of an adequate 
educational program 
Principals 



50-59% 



40-49% 
30-39% 



Support staff, teachers 



Under 30% 



Choice of courses 
Voice in school matters 



Policy implementation, 
aclministrators listening to 
parents, leadership and 
direction, long range planning 

Board members open to new 
ideas, governance, fiscal 
management, board 
response to parents, fair 
treatment of school, public 
voice, two-way communication 
with parents 



128 



APPENDIX B 



PATHWAYS TO IMPLEMENTING CHANGE 

- Corbett and Rossman 



129 



ERIC 



APPENDIX C 



NORTH WEST ONTARIO SCHOOL BOARDS COOPERATIVE 

SERVICES PROGRAM 



Matrix of services to clients 
Agreement 



-•- O iCi 



ERIC 



UMFRBVXLL8 SERVICES TO CLIENTS 



■* * 


BUS 


s/o 


EDUC 


TSP 


CAP 


PD 


RECRUIT 


atikoxan RCSS 


X 


X 


' X 


• 


X 


X 


X 


Caranat 


X . 




X 






X 


X 


Collins 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


















Ponaf ezd 




X 


X 


X 




X 


X 


Xgnaee RC 


x . 




X ' 




X 


i 

'x 


• 


Rashabowie 


X 


X 












Kilkenny 












X ' 




Mine >Ceatre 


'X 


X 


'• X 






X 


X 


Nakina 


X 




X 






X 


X 


Northern 


» 


- X 


X 


X 




X 


X 


Red Lake RC 


X 


X ' 


X 




X 


X 


X 


Slate Falls 


X ' 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


Sturgeon Lake 


X 


X'. 








X 




8uaaer Beaver 


X 


X ' 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


Upsala 


X 


X ■ 


X 


X 


X 


X 


1 



9 

ERIC 



Noithwesteni Ontario 




Agreement For School Boards— 
Education Authorities and Private Schools 



NORTHWESTERN ONTARIO SCHOOL BOARDS' 
COOPERATIVE SERVICES PROGRAM AGREEMENT 
FOR SCHOOL BOARDS, EDUCATION AUTHORITIES 
AND PRIVATE SCHOOLS 



THIS AGREEMENT dated the 3rd day of December, 1993 
BETWEEN: 

The Boards that participate in the arrangements provided for in this agreement by 
executing a copy of the Form of Membership attached hereto as Appendix "A", subject to 
and in accordance with the terms of this Agreement. 

(hereinafter referred to collectively as "Members ' and individually as a "Member") 

Being the parties to this agreement 

This agreement witnessed! that, in consideration of the mutual covenants hereinafter contained and 
for other and valuable consideration, the Members covenant and agree as follows: 

1. Interpretation 

In this agreement; 

(a) "Act" means the Education Act of the revised stances of the Province of Ontario; 

(b) "Agreement" means this agreement and all appendices attached to this agreement as they may 
be amended or supplemented from time to time; 

(c) "Board'* means any Board ©f Education, Roman Catholic Separate School Board, District 
School Area Board or any other board engaged in the provision of publicly funded education 
and defined as a board within the Act having under its care a jurisdiction rot nwre than 1000 
students: and/or anv Education Authority engaged in the provision of education on an Indian 
Reserve ffld&r. any private school engaged in the provision cfelementaryoi secondary 
education: 

(d) *3cari of Directro" means the 
members of the Board of Directors hereunder, 

(e) "Osopennve Services" means the tervices provided to a member or to members within the 
terms of this agreement; 

(0 "Member" means a "Board" as defined in this agreement which has executed this agreement. 

(g) "Participant" means a board, whether member or non-member, which, with the ipproval of the 
Board of Directors, agrees to purchase one or moce of the cervices provided through the School 
Boards' Cooperative Program. 

(h) "year" means the twelve month period from September 1st in each year to August 31st in the 
following calendar year; 

CO "northwestern Ontario" means the geographical districts oft District of Thunder Bay, District 
of Fort-Frances-Rainy Fiver, and District of Kenoia. 

2. Purpose of this Agreement 

This agreement is made for the purpose of enabling the Members, or the Participants, through the program 
formed hereunder, to purchase by election one or more of the services made available through the program 
established through this Agreement, or any other services as may become available hereafter through this 



3. Name of the Program 

The name of the Program established under mis Agreement shall be the "Northwestern Ontario School 
Boards' Cooperative Services Program" (heteinatter referred to as the "School Boards' Cooperative 
Program"). 

4. Members' Qualification- 

Membership in the School Boards* Cooperative Program shall be open to any Board, as defined herein, 
whose jurisdiction lies in northwestern Ontario, subject to compliance with the terms of this agreement, 
and shall be restricted to Boards in this region. 

5. Effective Date of Membership 

(a) A Board wishing to become a member in the School Boards' Cooperative Program and one of the 
Parties to this Agreement, shall complete and execute a form of membership, annexed to this 
agreement as Appendix "A," in duplicate under the seal of the Board and send or deliver the 
executed forms to the School Boards' Cooperative Program in accordance with this Agreement.. The 
Form of Membership shall be kept with and appended to the copy of this Agreement held by the 
School Boards' Cooperative Program , or maintained in a register of members in accordance with 
the by-laws of the program. 

(b) A Board complying with this agreement to become a member before May 1st, 1994 shall be a 
founding Member, and shall have their membership effective and be a Member as of May 1st, 
1994. A founding Member shall have the same rights and privileges as a Member and also any 
additional rights and privileges as enumerated in this agreement. 

(c) A Board complying with this agreement to become a Member after May 1st, 1994 shall have its 
membership effective and be a Member as of September 1st following the receipt of their 
application (the "effective date of membership") by the School Boards' Cooperative Program. 
During the period from the receipt of the application for membership and prior to the membership 
becoming effective, the Board can be a Participant in the programs of the School Boards' 
Cooperative Program with status as a Partidpant and mx as a Member until such date as the 
membership is effective. 

6. Length of Membership 

(a) Any Board that becomes a founding Member of the School Boards* Cooperative Program in 
accordance with this agreement ithall be a Member until August 31st, 1997. The membership shall 
continue aatomatkadly for a further three years unless the written notice of intention to tenninaic, 
given prior to January 31st in accordance with subclause 8(a), is delivered to the School Boards' 
Cooperative Program Board Directors. 

(b) Any Board that becomes t Member, other than a founding Member, of the School Boards' 
Cooperative Program in accordance with this agreement shall be a Member for a period of three (3) 
years from the effective dale of memb ership and the membership shall continue automatically for a 
further three (3) year period unless the written notice of intention to terminate, given prior to 
January 31st in accordance with subclause 8(a), is delivered to the School Boards' Cooperative 
Program Board of Directors. 

7 . Members 

The member* of the School Boards' Cooperative Program shall be those Boards who become parties to this 
Agreement by executing the Form of Membership, annexed as Appendix "A" to this agreement, and by 
complying fully as members in accordance with the terms of this Agreement. 



a 

ERIC 



■i <J U 



Termination of Membership 

(a) A Member may terminate its membership in the School Boards' Cooperative Program by giving 
written notice of its intention to terminate such membership in the fonn annexed as Appendix B 
and delivered in accordance with this agieenienu provide nodce of ittmtention to 
membership at the end of the minimum period of membership set out in clause cU (6) above has 
been served prior to January 3 1st in the year in which the minimum membership period ends. 

(b) Unless such notice is given, the Member's participation in the School Boards' Cooperative 
Program shall continue for a further period of membership unless teimuuued in accordance with the 
terms of this agreement. 

(c) A notice of intention to terminate membership given contrary to the terms of this Agreement is of 
no effect The board of directors may waive this requirement if in their discretion they feel it 
advisable. 

Termination of Membership other than by a Member 

(a) A Member who contravenes the terms of this Agreement may be terminated by a two-thirds 
majority of the complement of Members, at a meeting held for this purpose. Such meeting may be 
called by any two (2) Members by seven (7) day's written notice to each Member. The place of 
meeting shall be the principal office of the School Boards' Cooperative Program. 

(b) If a member is to be terminated, a written Notice of Termination, in the form annexed to this 
Agreement as Appendix "G," shall be delivered to that member and the date of termination shall be 
indicated on the Notice. 

No Further Rights and Obligations 

(a) Any Member that terminates its membership, or whose membership in the School Boards' 
Cooperative Program is terminated for any reason, shall as of the date of termination have no 
further rights or be under any further obligations under this Agreement. Where the Member has 
initiated the termination in aoMrdance with the terms of this Agreement, me date of serraination 
shaU be August 3 1st m the year m which the N(>tia 

membership has been otherwise termirnued m accordance wim the ternu of tJtis Agreement, the 
date of termination shall be specified in the Notice of TermiitationdeUvered to tte 
times, the Member shaU awtmueu) be Uablefw 
contracts for services of theSdtc^ 

(be) Any Membw that terminates its r«^ reason, 
in the School Boards' Coopeararive Program, shall as of the date of taminatioo have relinquished 
all control of, or rights to. any or all assets of the School Boards' Cooperative Program. 

dissolution or Merger of Boards 

(1) If a Member is dissolved in accordance with the Act. its membership in the School Boards' 
Cooperative Program shall cease, subject to the fulfillment of any outstanding obligations under 
this Agreement, and this cessation shall be deemed a terrnihation for the purpose of clause 10. 

(2) If a Member merges with another Board (which may or may not be a Member), that merged Board 
shall be deemed to be a member, and should the merged Board rwVmger qualify as a Board as 
defined within this agreement, membership shall cease on August 31st in the year in which the 
merger of the Boards takes place, and this cessation shall be deemed a lamination for the purpose 
of clause 10. 



13* 



11. Participation In the School Boards 9 Cooperative Program and Purchase of Services 

(a) Each service offered by the School Boards' Cooperative Program shall be available to Members and 
Participants of the School Boards' Cooperative Program upon, completion and execution of one or 
mote Forms of Participation (Appendix "C") in duplicate under the seal of the Board and delivery of 
the executed forms to the School Boards' Cooperative Program on or before the deadline for notice 
as determined by the Board of Directors. For greater certainty, a Member or a Participant may 
complete and execute additional Forms of Participation to elect additional services or types of 
service provided that: 

0) such additional Forms of Participation are executed and delivered to the School Boards' 
Cooperative Program on or before the deadline established by the Board of Directors 
preceding the September 1 on which the servicers) are to commence; 

(ii) the provision of such service or services to Members and Participants has been approved 
by the Board of Directors; and 

(Hi) the September 1 on which a new service or services commence shall be the new effective 
date of the Member's participation in the School Boards' Cooperative Program. 

(b) Any of the services purchased by a Member may be terminated by delivering a written Notice of 
Termination in the form annexed to this Agreement as Appendix "D." and the date of termination 
shall be as indicated on the Notice. 



ERIC 



13. Term of Agreement 

This Agreement shall be binding upon Members and shall remain in force until terminated in accordance 
with this Agreement and all obligations of Members have been met. 

14. Power and Authority of the Board of Directors and the Attorney-in-Fact 

Each Member hereby grants to the Board of Directors and the attorney-in-fact appointed hereunder, as the 
case may be, the power, responsibility and authority to implement and operate the School Boards' 
Cooperative Program and without limiting the foregoing: 

(a) The Board of Directors shall appoint annually, at its first meeting after December 1st, a 
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson and three other persons from among its members who 
shall be designated as the Executive of the Board of Dire<aors, and shaUnieet as necessary 
to carry out such responsft>ilities as shall be delegated to the Executive by the Board of 
Directors through its by-laws; 

(b) The initial Board of Directors appointed by the founding Members of the School Boards' 
Cooperative Program shall, at its first meeting after May 1st, 1994, appoint a Chairperson 
and Vice-Chairperson, and three other persons from among its mmbets who shall be 
destgruted as the Executive of the Board of Directors and shall hold offfce until the date of 
the appointment referred to in subclause 14(a); 

(c) The Members hereby appoint the individual holding office as the Chief Executive Off icer 
of the School Boards' Cooperative Program, from time to time, attorney-in-fact for and on 
behalf of such Members to do such things and to sign such agreements as are necessary or 
desirable to implement the terms of this Agreement. This appointment as attorney-in-fact 
can be revoked by m rruyority vote of the members held at a meeting for thai specific 
purpose, after giving the individual appointed attorney-in-fact an opportunity to reply to 
any questions or concerns of the Mcmben; 

(d) Except as otherwise provided in this Agreement, the Board of Directors is hereby directed 
by the Members to give approvals and to make decisions and determinations required or 
permitted to be given or made by the Members with respect to the School Boards' 
Cooperative Program and any matters arising from or by virtue of this Agreement 
Without limiting the generality of die foregoing, the Members acknowledge and agree that 

O the Board of Directors is authorized on behalf of and without further authority from the 



Members: f 



(i) to demand, collect and receive til moneys which may become due from the 
Members and/or Non-Member Participants under this Agreement or under any 
contract for services; 

00 to retain an auditor, legal counsel and such other professional advisors as it 
considers advisable in order to perform its duties hereunder. 

Cm) to retain an insurance agent, broker or adjuster as it considers advisable in order to 
perform its duties hereunder; 

Civ) to open and operate in the name of the School Boards' Cooperative Program a 
separate account or accounts in a bank in order to deposit and distribute funds with 
respect to the operation of the School Boards' Cooperative Program; 

(v) to request the attorney-in-fact to execute and to carry out all other Agreements 
which require execution with respect to this Agreement; 

(vi) to invest funds not immediately required for the operation of the School Boards' 
Cooperative Program in interest bearing certificates issued by the chartered bank 
in which the account or accounts of the School Boards' Cooperative Program are 
held; 

(vii) to pay all taxes, fees and other expenses relating to the orderly maintenance and 
management of the School Boards' Cooperative Program; 

(viii) to approve annual budgets, to set fees and to monitor progress against objectives; 

Cue) to hire a chief executive officer and other suff to conduct the aftairs of the School 
Boards' Cooperative Program and handle the day-to-day operations of the School 
Boards' Cooperative Program; 

(x) to appoint such committees in addition to the Executive Committee as may be 
deemed by rlie Board of Directors to be necessary or desirable for the operation of 
the School Boards' Cooperative Program, and to delegate to such committee such 
powers and duties as may be Determined by the terms of reference establishing the 
committee; 

(xf) to designate at its sole discretion any Education Authority or Private School that 
is engaged in the provision of services relared to elementary or secondary 
education to be a*Tioarir for the purpose of this Agreement and the activities 
contemplated hereby. 

(xii) to do and perform every other act and thing necessary or desirable to be done in 
order to fully carry out and perform the terms hereof, including the drawings of 
such additional rules or by-laws as the Board of Directora may consider necessary 
for the conduct of its meetings and the operation of the School Boards' 
Cooperative Program ro cany out the intent and spirit of this Agreement. 

15. Structure of the Board of Directors 

(a) Each Member shall appoint to serve on the Board of Directors a member of its Board of Trustees or 
other governing body (who shall not be an employee of the Member) as may be deemed desirable 
by the Board of Trustees. 

(b) If a Director resigns, the appropriate Member shall appoint forthwith a replacement 



13J 



16. Decisions of the Board of Directors and Quorum 



All decisions of the Board of Directors shall require the approval of a majority of the members of the Board 
of Directors present and voting at a meeting, providing that a quorum is present at such meeting. In the case 
of a tie vote, the matter shall be defeated. A quorum shall consist of one more than fifty percent of the 
appointed members. 

17. Limitation of Liability and Indemnity of Board of Directors Members 

(a) No Director shall be liable for the acts, receipts, neglects or defaults of any other Director in any 
respect, or for any loss, damage or expense incurred by the School Boards' Cooperative Program or 
for the insufficiency or deficiency of any security in or upon which the moneys of the School 
Boards' Cooperative Program shall be invested, or for any loss or damage arising from the 
bankruptcy, insolvency or tortious acts of any person with whom any of the moneys, securities or 
effects of the School Boards' Cooperative Program or any member thereof may be deposited, or for 
any other loss, damage or misfortune whatever which shall happen in the execution of the duties of 
the office of the Director or in relation thereto unless the same is occasioned by the Director's own 
willful neglect or default; provided that nothing shall relieve the Director from the duty to act in 
accordance with this Agreement or from liability for any breach hereof. 

(b) Every Director and every former Director, their heir? and legal representatives shall be indemnified 
and saved harmless by the Members from and against all costs, charges and expenses, including an 
amount paid to settle an action or satisfy a judgment reasonably inclined by the members in 
respect of any civil, aintinal or administrative action or proceeding to which the Director is made a 
party by reason of being or having been a member of the Board of Directors if. 

(i) the member acted honestly and in good faith with a view to dte best interests of the 
School Boards' Cooperative Program; and 



(ii) in the case of a aiminal or administrative action or proceeding that is enforced by a 

monetary penalty, the Director had reasonable rounds for believing that the conduct was 
lawful 

Any Member required to pay any amounts under this clause shall have the right to require all other 
Members to make a pro rata contribution to any amount paid or payable hereunder based on the aggregate 
fees for service paid by such Members in the most recent fiscal year. 

lg. Indemnity of the Attorney-in-Fact and of the Chief Executive Officer 

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Agreement, die Members shall hereby jointly and severally 
indemnity and save harmless: 

(a) the attorney-in-fact, and his or her heirs and legal representatives', 

0) against ail costs, charges and expenses, including any amount paid to settle an action or 
satisfy a judgment reasonably incurred by him or her in respect of any civil, criminal or 
administrative action or rroceeding to which he or she is made a party by virtue of being 
or having been the artocney-in-tact; and 

(ii) against all costs, charges and expenses reasonably incurred by him or her in respect of any 
action by or on behalf of any Member or Members to procure a judgment in their favour 
to which he or she is made a party by virtue of being or having been the attorney-in-fact; 

(b) the chief executive officer or any other senior executive officer, his respective heirs and legal 
representatives: 

CO against all costs, charges and expenses, including any amount paid to settle an action or 
satisfy a judgment reasonably incurred by him or her in respect of any civil, criminal or 
administrative action or proceeding to which he or she is made a party by virtue of being 
q or having been the chief executive officer or other senior executive officer, and 

ERIC 



(ii) against all costs, charges and expenses reasonably incurred by him or her in respect of any 
action by or on behalf of any Member or Members to procure a judgment in their favour 
to which he or she is made a party by virtue of being or having been the chief executive 
officer or other senior executive officer. 

unless in either case, the same ate occasioned by fraudulent, dishonest or criminal acts or 
omissions. 

Any Member required to pay any amounts under this section shall have the right to require all other 
Members to make a pro rata contribution to any amount paid or payable hereunder based on the aggregate 
fees for service (proration) paid by such Members in the most recent fiscal year. 

19. Liability Insurance 

the School Boards' Cooperative Program may purchase and maintain insurance (i) for the benefit of any 
person referred to in Sections 17 and 18 against any liability incurred by the person in the capacity as a 
member of the Board of Directors, as attorney-in-fact or as chief executive officer or other senior executive 
officer, except where the liability relates to such person's failure to act honestly and in good faith, with a 
view to the best interests of the School Boards' Cooperative Program and (ii) for any other liability or 
potential liability as the Board of Directors deerrts to be necessary or desir^ 

20. Meetings Generally 

(a) The Board of Directors shall hold regular meetings at such times as it shall decide from time to 
time. 

(b) The executive of the Board of Directors shall hold regular meetings at such times as the Board of 
Directors shall decide from time to time, 

21. Notice 

The Chairman of the Board of Directors, or other person designated by the Board of Directors, shall give 
each person notice, either orally or in writing, of » e time and place of each meeting held under clause 20 
not less than 72 hours before the meeting. 

22. Location of Meetings 

Meetings of the Board of Directors sliall be held at such place as may be agreed upon by tiw Board of 
Directors from time to time. 

23. Fiscal Period 

Accounts for the School Boards' Cooperative Program shall be prepared and settled as of December 3 1st in 
each year. 

24. Books and Records 

Proper and complete books, records, reports and accounts of the School Boards' Cooperative Program shall 
be kept at the principal office of the School Boards' Cooperative Program. The said books and records shall 
reflect fully and accurately all transactions of the School Boards' Cooperative Program, and shall be 
maintained in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 

25. Variation of Accounting Method 

The Board of Directors may vary the provisions for accounting under this Agreement in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles. 



14 x 



26. 



Bank Accounts 



(a) The bank(s) of the School Boards' Cooperative Program shall be such Canadian cluutcred bank or 
banks as the Board of Directors may from time io time determine. All moneys from time to time 
received on account of the School Boards' Cooperative Program shall be paid immediately into the 
bank mow same drafts, checks, bills or cash in which they arc received. 

(b) The Board of Directors may establish an imprest accounts) for the payment of expenses incwred in 
connection with the operation of the School Boards' Cooperative Program, which account shall be 
funded by transfers of funds from the general account as required. The amount of such account and 
the person or persons authorized to draw thereon shall be determined by the Board of Directors from 
time to time. 

27. Signing Officers 

(a) In addition to the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, the Board of Directors may appoint other 
signing officers and designate such responsibilities to such signing officers as the Board of 
Directors shall determine from time to time. 

(b) Except where die Board of Directors has otherwise authorized the execution of documents on behalf 
of the Board of Directors , the execution of all documents on behalf of the Board of Directors shall 
be by any two (2) persons of the following five (5) persons: the Chiirperson, the Vice- 
Chairperson, the aaomey-in-fact and two (2) other persons appointed by the Board of Directors 
from time to time. 

28. Obligation to Pay 

Each Member covenants and agrees to pay forthwith when due any fees or other amounts required pursuant 
to the terms of this Agreement. 

29. Termination of the School Boards' Cooperative Program 

(a) the Sdhooi Boards* Cooperative Program shall terminate upon the termination of the contracts for 
services (without any replacement thereof) by all Members. 

(b) the School Boards' Cooperative Program shall be empowered to continue in operation for the 
limited purpose of winding up the affairs of die School Boards' Cooperative Program and, for such 
purpose, this Agreement shall remain in force and effect until all obligations of the School Boards' 
Cooperative Program have been fulfilled. 

(c) The process of winding up the affairs of the School Boards' Cooperative shall include the sale of 
all its assets and the use of the proceeds of such sale to settle all its accounts payable or other 
pecuniary obligations. 

(d) All moneys surplus to the needs of the School Boards' Cooperative under subclause 29(c) shall be 
transferred to the Northwestern Ontario Regional Office of the Ministry of Education and Training 
or its successor ministry. 

GENERAL PROVISIONS 

30. ' Notice 

All notices, requests, demands or other communications by the terms hereof required or permitted to be 
given shall be given in writing and served personally, or sent by letter, postage prepaid, or shall be 
delivered, telephoned, telegraphed, sent by facsimile or other electronic means, or in such other manner as 
may be deemed appropriate, addressed: 



ERIC 



(a) to each Member at the address noted on its Form of Membership; and 

(b) to the School Boards' Cooperative Program at its principal office; 

Northwestern Ontario School Boards' Cooperative Services Program 
405 Isabella Street West 
Thunder Bay, Ontario 
P7E5E5 

or at such other address as may be given by any Member to the School Boards' Cooperative Program in 
writing from time to time, or as given by the Board of Directors to the Members as the address for notice to 
the School Boards' Cooperative Program. 

3 1 . Amendments 

Subject to applicable law. this Agreement may be amended by written acknowledgement of not less than 
two thirds of the Members in the form of a duly executed Form of Amendment appended to this Agreement 
as Appendix 

32. Arbitration 

If any dispute occurs among the parties hereto with respect to any matter arising out of this Agreement, the 
matter in dispute shall be settled by arbitration as follows: 

(a) any Member may notify the Board of Directors in writing that a dispute has arisen; 

(b) the Board of Directors is unable to resolve the dispute within forty five (45) days from 
receipt of notice of the dispute, the disputing Member and die Board of Directors shall 
within a further twenty (20) days, the "Period of Appointment," appoint an arbitrator, if 
they can agree on one; or 

(c) failing such appointment within die Period of Appointment, each of the disputing 
Member and the Board of Directors shall within a further twenty (20) days each appoint an 
arbitrator; and 

(d) within a further ten (10) days the two (2) arbitrators so appointed shall appoint a third 
arbitrator; and 

(e) the arbitration shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of the Arbitrations Act 
(Ontario) and the decision of the arbitrator or arbitrators in any matter shall be final and 
binding on the parties in the dispute. 

33. General Provisions 

Reference to the male gender will include the female gender, and vice versa, unless the context otherwise 
requires. Words importing the singular number may be construed to extend to and to include the plural 
number, and words importing the plural number may be construed to extend to and include the singular. 



IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have subscribed to this Agreement by execution of two 
copies of the Form of Membership appended to this agreement as fully as they would have by executing a 
copy of this Agreement 



1 • " 



APPENDIX "B" 
FORM OF TERMINATION OF MEMBERSHIP 
IN THE NORTHWESTERN ONTARIO SCHOOL BOARDS' 
COOPERATIVE SERVICES PROGRAM 



Pursuant to the Agreement dated the 3rd day of December, 1993, entitled "Northwestern Or tario School 
Boards' Cooperative Services Program Agreement for School Boards, Education Authorities and Private 
Schools in Northwestern Ontario" (hereinafter referred to as the"Agreement") and amendments thereto. 



(Name of Board) 



(Address of Board) 

(hereinafter referred to as the "Board"), hereby serves notice of its intention to withdraw from membership in 
the Northwestern Ontario School Boards' Cooperative Services Program. It is understood that in 
withdrawing from membership, the Board relinquishes all control of, or rights to, any or all assets of the 
Northwestern Ontario School Boards' Cooperative Services Program 

In witness whereof the Board has caused to be affixed its corporate seal duly attested to by the hands of its 
proper officers duly authorized on that behalf. 



Date: 



(Nam* of Board) 



(Cbatrpcnon) 



(Secretary) 



I '1 i 



ERIC 

UMMmsiMiM 



APPENDIX "D" 
MEMBERS' FORM OF TERMINATION OF PARTICIPATION 
IN RECEIPT OF SERVICES PROVIDED BY 
THE NORTHWESTERN ONTARIO SCHOOL BOARDS' 
COOPERATIVE SERVICES PROGRAM 



Pursuant to the Agreement dated the 3rd day of December, 1993, entided "Northwestern Ontario School 
Boards* Cooperative Services Program Agreement for School Boards, Education Authorities and Private 
Schools in Northwestern Ontario" (hereinafter referred to as the" Agreement") and amendments thereto, 



(Member) 

hereby provides notice of its intention to terminate the purchase of services indicated below: 

1. Business and Accounting Services □ 

2. Educational Consulting Services □ 

3. Professional Development and Conference Services □ 

4. Supervisory Officer Support Services □ 

5. Territorial Student Program Services □ 

6. Joint Projects Services □ 

under the Agreement dated December 3, 1993, entitled "Cooperative Services Program Agreement for 
School Boards in the Northwestern Region of the Province of Ontario" pursuant to Section 12, clause (c) 
thereof effective on the August 31 following the date below. 



Date 



M«nb*r 



Authorized Signing Officer 



APPENDIX W E" 
NON-MEMBERS' FORM OF 
REQUEST FOR PARTICIPATION 

Pursuant to the Agreement dated the 3rd day of December, 1993, entitled "Northwestern Ontario School 
Boards' Cooperative Services Program Agreement for School Boards, Education Authorities and Private 
Schools in Northwestern Ontario" (hereinafter referred to as the n Agreemenf) and amendments thereto. 



— (Name of Board) 



(Address of Board) 

(hereinafter referred to as the "Board"), hereby requests participation as a non-member in th: Northwestern 
Ontario School Boards' Cooperative Services Program as follows: (Please complete all sections below:) 



1. 


Business and Accounting Services □ 


2. 


Educational Consulting Services □ 


3. 


Professional Development and Conference Services □ 


4. 


Supervisory Officer Support Services □ 


5. 


Territorial Student Program Services □ 


6. 


Joint Projects Services □ 



The Board's execution of this Form of Request for Participation constitutes acknowledgement of and 
agreement to the details of service and cost annexed hereto. 

In witness whereof the Board has caused » be affixed its coipouue seal duly attested to by the hands of its 
proper officers duly authorized on that behalf. 

Date: 



(Name of Board) 



(dtairpersoa) 



(Secretary) 



Participation authorized by the Program's Board of Directors on: 

Program's Chalrperaoa 



APPENDIX "P» 
FORM OF AMENDMENT OF THE AGREEMENT ENTITLED 
"NORTHWESTERN ONTARIO SCHOOL BOARDS' 
COOPERATIVE SERVICES PROGRAM AGREEMENT 
FOR SCHOOL BOARDS, EDUCATION AUTHORITIES 
AND PRIVATE SCHOOLS" 



Pursuant to Section 31 of the Agreement dated the 3rd day of December, 1993, entitled "Northwestern 
Ontario School Boards' Cooperative Services Program Agreement for School Boards, Education Authorities 
and Private Schools" (hereinafter referred to as the n AgreemenO and amendments thereto. 



I 

(Nam* of Member) 



(Addnu of Member) 



hereby agrees that the Agreement shall be amended as provided in the amending agreement dated 
annexed hereto. 

r 

In witness whereof the Member has caused to be affixed its corporate seal duly attested to by the hands of its 
proper officers duly authorized in that behalf. 



(Dat«) 



(Nam* of Motor) 



(Qunpcnoa) 



(Sacnteiy) 



147 



APPENDIX D 



EDUCATIONAL REFORM IN NEW BRUNSWICK 

Ministerial Statement - Schools, Orderly Places of Learning 
Ministerial Statement - Community Involvement in Schools 



148 



1 



New jSl Brunswick 



I 
I 
I 
I 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

I 

| SCHOOLS - ORDERLY PLACES OF LEARNING 

I 
I 
I 

| September 1993 

I 
I 

I 
I 



Education 2000 

ERIC 



14- 



Schools - Orderly Places of Learning 



Schools we places of learning where the primary role of the student is to 
learn and that of the teacher is to foster the learning process 

S?JTl-^ aj0r r01 ? ? ****** student ^viour and must accept 
their responsibilities in relation to school discipline. 

ut^^^^ d J evel °P mental and must be the 

ultimate goal of discipline policy and practice. 



I 



The Minister of Education is committed to ensuring that schools a «H I 

orderly places of learning dedicated to the developmerM th. nnT^"! 1 
individual students and to the pursuit of ^^^^.^^ 

discipline must be addressed through a collaborative SSSTtt^tSE? 1 

teachers, administrators, parents and th* communitv tk. Ciw* 8 s r dents ' 9 
responsibility of school boards in this « ofZ^anJwuT SSSS ? 

review and implementation of policies and procedures to SI Bl . the I 

school and classroom behaviours. * procedures to ensure appropriate I 

• The nature and quality of relationships within classrooms and throughout th* 1 
school are critical factors in achieving New Brunswick's educational eoak & S a ^ 
has closely linked positive school and classroom enviror^^ftr^o^ I 

fiTou^^r^ *? right ° f a teacher to ^ wa^wsys ■ 

right of a student to learn in a classroom environment that is not onlv i^f^l w 

also safe and secure, must be sacrosanct. A commitment to honoX? d£L " " I 

^eMtoto', expectations for school and classroom behaviours are based on ' 

I 

I 

I 
I 

^ V r Pli ^ azy ,' es P° nsib i"'y for their own behaviour, although 
school disapime is a collective responsibiHty to be shared amone students ■ 
commun^y ' COUnseUore ' »<^trato», the school boTXfnTftT I 

Every student has the right to be taught without disruption and has a I 
correspondmg responsibility not to deny this right to other ttu de!£ 

Teacher behaviours have direct and significant influences on student I 

B 

I 




1 



Discipline must be positive, fair, equitable and consistent and clearly stated 
standards, expectations and consequences of behavior are necessary for 
students, teachers, parents, and administrators. 



The Minister anticipates that school boards will consider the following four basic 
| principles in the process of policy development or review: 

1. policies should promote responsible relationships among students, school staff 

I families and the community in a positive and encouraging learning 
environment; 6 

12. students and teachers should be involved in the development of poliaes and 
procedures which affect them; 

§3. policies should assure opportunities to develop acceptable social interaction 
skills; and 

| 4. corrective interventions should be chosen primarily for their educational value. 

1 

■ Given these beliefs and principles the Minister of Education expects: 

| • that school boards will review their current policies and practices on 

school discipline to insure they are in keeping with these beliefs and 
principles; 



I 
I 



that school boards will insure that periodic reviews of school discipline 
and classroom management policies and practices are conducted; 



• that school districts will provide appropriate in-service activities 
| related to school and classroom behaviours as required; 

• that, for a student whose behaviour is persistently and substantially 

■ disruptive, school districts - in consultation with the student's family - 
may provide alternative arrangements whereby such students will be 
assisted in continuing their education and modifying their behaviour 

■ with the expectation that they will be returned to a regular classroom 
setting as soon as practicable. 

I 
I 



ERIC 



Education 2000 — 



New jfii Brunswick 



COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT IN SCHOOLS 



I 

I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
1 
1 
I 
I 
I 
1 



Education 2000 

ERIC 



September 1993 | 

I 
I 

152 I 
I 



COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT IN SCHOOLS 



The involvement of parents and other community members in the public school 
education of children is an essential ingredient in quality education. Such a concept 
is not new as educators have, for many years, encouraged parents, both individually 
and through Home and School Associations, to take a strong and active interest in 
their child's school career. More recently, other community members, such as 
seniors, volunteer groups and the business sector, have demonstrated interest in 
and involvement with public education. Indeed, the objectives of many 
educational associations contain reference to encouraging the participation of all 
citizens in the education of children. 



The educational partners in New Brunswick- parents, teachers, administrators, 
trustees, and government- support and commend the spirit of the initiative to 
have greater parental and community involvement in our school system We 
believe that this initiative must: 

a) recognize and respect the community involvement which has already been 
developed, and is operating successfully, throughout the province; 

b) consider the diverse character of individual communities, recognizing that 
the level and nature of public involvement in the school system need not be the 
same in all areas; 

c) provide the flexibility for the educational partners to foster and enhance 
community involvement within the framework of their individual roles and 
responsibilities. 



Currently, school districts have established relationships with parents through an 
active network of Home and School Associations. Schools and districts have also 
developed other partnerships with community organizations, including the 
volunteer and business sectors. Many such partnerships have reciprocal benefit, 
such that the concept of Community Involvement in School is often reversed to 
include School Involvement in the Community. Clearly, the needs and priorities 
vary from district to district, and from school to school, as does the structure to meet 
local needs. 



Recognizing the current contribution of Home and School Associations and other 
organizations, Jhe Partners in Education are desirous of enhancing and increasing 
the level of community involvement in schools. This objective can bes* be 
accomplished through the cooperative efforts of students, parents, teachers 
administrators, trustees, and other interested parties at the local level. School 
boards and district administrators are committed to develop, in each district 
policies which encourage and promote community involvement in schools. Thev 
are further committed to work with parents, teachers, and others to desien 
initiatives if not currently in place which connect the school to the community- 
promote understanding of and support for school programs; and focus on the 
quality of life and learning in schools. 



154 



APPENDIX E 

* 

COMMISSION SCOLAIRE DU LITTORAL, QUEBEC 
Organizational Structure 



155 

ERIC 



APPENDIX F 

SHARED SERVICES IN SASKATCHEWAN 
Documentation 



158 



APPENDIX G 



ABORIGINAL EDUCATION BRANCH 
Contract for Curriculum Development 



161 



I 
I 
1 
I 
1 
1 
1 
1 

I 

t 

E 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 



Province of 
British Columbia 



Ministry of Education 



CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR SCHOOL DISTRICTS AND 
OTHER QUALIFYING AGENCIES 



ABORIGINAL EDUCATION: 
LANGUAGE AND CULTURE 
CURRICULUM DEVELOPMEST 



Ministry Branch Initiating Contract: 
Contract Name: 

Contract Description: 
Eligibility Requirements: 



Aboriginal Education Branch 

Aboriginal Language and Culture Curriculum 
Development 

Contracts are for the development of relevant, locally- 
developed, Aboriginal language and culture 
curriculum 

Aboriginal/School District partnership should be 
clearly indicated throughout the duration of project, 
which must include the development of the 
workplan 

Completion of previous contract with final report, 
statement of expenditures, and materials submitted 
to the Ministry of Education (if applicable) 
0*6 Between $25,000 and $50,000 



Available Contract Amounts: 
Deadline for Application: 4:00 p.m., November 15, 1994 

The total amount available for this opportunity for 1994 -1995 isf|fla*ifc» 

For further information, please see the detailed Contract Opportunity explanation on the 
following page(s). 

Incomplete applications will not be considered. 

The following items MUST be enclosed: fP , nur ,p 

. detailed project description (including quantity, format, and descnption of each resource 

. ' wo b rkpUn d md^ding definitive timeline (completion date must be indicated) 
. itemized project budget (including dfifcilai breakdown of -g^^SJL. 
. final report with statement of expenditures & matenals developed with prev l0 us 

contribution(s) (unless submitted previously) 
. resolution(s) or letters of support of sponsoring Aboriginal organizations 
• Accountability Agreement signed by all sponsoring organizations 

Specific questions may be directed to Jeff Smith, Coordinator. Phone 387 .1544 at the Minist ry 
of Education. . : 



9 

ERIC 



1G. 



Aboriginal Language and Culture Curriculum Development Contracts 



clearlv articulated partnership between Aboriginal organization(s) and school Histricts( 
for the duration of the project. Both parties must demonstrate an ability to enter into a 
contract with each other; 



s) 



6. 



8. indication that the financial support of the Aboriginal Education Branch of Ministry 
of Education will be acknowledged on all written matenals relating to the pto]ect. 



ERIC if- 



a 



Proposals for the 1994-95 school vear are invited for the development of Aboriginal language 
and culture curriculum for use in the public schools of British Columbia. Proposals must 
reflect collaboration between one or more Aboriginal organizations and school districts. 1 
Projects should have maximum benefit to the school district /Aboriginal community as a m 
whole Proposals which reflect current Ministry of Education direction, including the K - 12 ft 
Education Plan the Skills Now initiative and the intended outcomes in the First Nations ■ 
Studies Curriculum Assessment Framework will be given preference. This initiative is tor the 
development of locally relevant language and culture curriculum. j 

Two ranges of contributions are available: 

• !£5ffi — ■ * ■ 

(Contract and reporting requirements for both ranges will be the same. The major difference 

between the two contribution ranges is the scope of the project.) g 

Proposals will be adjudicated according to the following criteria: 



I 

I 
1 



2. clearly defined workplan including timelines and detailed budget; 

3. potential benefit to the pubUc school system (i.e. clear commitment to implement 
resources, targeted audience, etc.); J 

4. degree to which the curriculum reflects current directions in British Columbia education; 

5 . proven record with previous contribution(s) (if applicable); 
equitable regional distribution; } 
inclusion of all required information; 



I 



i 
i 
i 
l 



Note: 



• This initiative does not support the acquisition of capital equipment such as computers, 
video cameras, office space, or provide funding to attend coherences. 

• The Ministry will provide support to print materials to the "camera-ready stage" and 
print runs of sufficient quantity to support local implementation (plus 100 copies 
Drovided to the Aboriginal Education Branch upon request). Funding tor commercial 
duolication and distribution of materials will not be supported. Support for material 
printed will be based on projected costs and potential benefit to students atfected. 

^ ■ | utMm\ I Mill I ii MM ■ ^ ' "* * * ^ " 1 f 1)11111111 *l ■ Sponsors are 
encouraged to use existing infrastructure of school systems and Aboriginal 
organizations. 

The contract will be awarded to either the Aboriginal organization OR school district as 
spscified in the attached Accountability Agreement. 

ADDlicahons mav include more information; however the attached original application,^ 
S3 Included with submission. Proposals which do not have the attached 
application forms completed wiU not be considered. The application forms may be 
photocopied. 

After the adjudication process, the Aboriginal Education Branch will prepare contracts for the 
successful proposals. The "contractor" will be the organization indicated in the Accountably 
Agreement and the contract will be forwarded to that organization for signature. 

RETURN THE ATTACHED APPLICATION BY MAIL OR BY COURIER WITH ANY ENCLOSURES TO: 

Jeff Smith 
Coordinator 
Aboriginal Education Branch 

Ministry of Education 
2nd Floor, 634 Humboldt Street 

Victoria, BC VSV1X4 
Ttle: (604) 387-1544 

NOTE: FAXED OR COURIER COLLECT APPLICATIONS WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED. 

Deadline for receipt ot proposal.: Fall Call: 4:0 0 pun., November ^ 1994__ 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



10, 



ABORIGINAL 

LANGUAGE AND CULTURE CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT CONTRACT 
Application Form 



Project Title: . , 


Total Project Budget: 


For Office Use Only 


Contribution Requested: 





Other Funding Source(s): „ 



Previous Funding Received [include year of funding & contract 
number (if applicable)]: 



Previous Source<s): 



Outline in detail the materials to be completed and provide a specific description of each 
resource to be developed (i.e. number and type of material). This will provide necessary 
information for preparation of the contract 



The following items MUST bt enclosed: 



detailed project description (including quantity, format, and 
description of each resource to be developed); 
workplan, including timeline; 

itemized project budget (including detailed breakdown of each 
expenditure); 

final report with statement of expenditures tc materials developed 
with previous contribution(s); 

resolution(s) of sponsoring Aboriginal organixation(s); and 
Accountability Agreement, signed by all sponsoring organizations. 



a 

ERIC 



165 



o 

ERIC 



TO BE COMPLETED BY THE SPONSORING ABORIGINAL ORGANIZATION: 
(Photocopy this page if more than one Aboriginal organization is involved) 



Sponsoring Organization (Tribal Council. Band. Cultural Centre. Friendship Centre, etc.): 



Contact Person and /or Project Manager: 



Title: 



Mailing Address: 



Telephone: 



Postal Code 
Fax: 



Describe the role of the Aboriginal Organization in the development of this proposal: 



Describe the role of the Aboriginal Organization in this curriculum development project: 



Is the Aboriginal Organization involved in any other projects under this initiative? 
Yes **"" No Describe: 



TO BE COMPLETED BY THE SPONSORING ABORIGINAL ORGANIZATION; 



ON BEHALF OF THE BAND/TRIBAL COUNCIL OR ABORIGINAL ORGANIZATION: 



(Signature) 



NaiM/Tttlt (pita** pniwi 



Dm 



• Must have signing authority for Aboriginal organization, i.e. (Chief. President, Director. etO 



1Gb 



TO BE COMPLETED BY THE SPONSORING SCHOOL DISTRICT: 
(Photocopy this p*gt if mort thin one School District is involved) 



Sponsoring School District 



Contact Person and /or Project Manager 
Title: 




Describe the role of the School District in this curriculum development project. 



How will the School District implement the resources developed by this project: 



ts the School District involved in any other projects under this initiative? 
Yes. ~ No ~Z Describe: 



TO BE COMPLETED BY THE SPONSORING SCHOOL DISTRICT(S): 



ON BEHALF OF THE SCHOOL DISTRICT: 



Suptnnttndtnt of School* (Stftuturt) 



D«t 



School Dutnct N»mt/ Numbtf 



o 

ERIC 



167 



I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 

i 
i 
I 
l 
I 
i 
I 
I 
i 
I 
i 



Aboriginal Language and Culture Curriculum Development Contract 
Accountability Agreement 1994/95 



o 

ERIC 



Agreement between: 

'Please list all sponsoring Aboriginal Organizations) 



and: 

i Please list ail ipmwnng ichool districts) 



The above parties agree to the following: 
THAT the above-noted parties have designated 



•name )t jpfanuaccti 



of : — ■ 

immung tum$> 

to be the Contractor * indicated in the 1994/95 Aboriginal Language and Culture Curriculum 
Development Contribution Agreement (the "Contractor *) with the Ministry of Education and all 
payments made under the Contract will be payable to the Contractor. 

THAT the Contractor will be accountable for provision of contracted services, agreed to under the 
Contract and will ensure that the performance standards, policies, procedures and terms outlined in 
the Contract are adhered to and maintained. 

AND THAT 

(Please indicate (\) either option 1 or 2 below) 



I — the account for deposit of payments made under the Contract will have joint signing 
~~ authority between the School Districts) and the Aboriginal Organization(s) 



OR 



2 ~~ the account for deposit of payments made under the Contract will not have joint signing 
' ~ authority between the School Districts) and the Aboriginal Organization(s). Instead, the 
designated signing authority shall be: 



(mm efttgnmf affiar) 



ijrjamation/ 



The parties hereto have duly executed this Agreement and agree with the above-mentioned terms 
and conditions. tPleese ensure that the appropriate ifrmnf fltftftcrity ft- Superintendent. Secretary- 
Treasurer, Chief. Director, etc.) /breach party involved signs this agreement - copies of this page may be made 
to accommodate extra signatures if necessary! 



iifnature 



Titlt 



Abonftml Oyaiuatioi 



Same • P!ta*t pnnti 



Dttt 



siyna»u'» 



Title 



School Dtitnct 



Vjm* ■ P'.iHt V'lft < 



Dttt 



1G 



APPENDIX H 



ALBERTA DISTANCE LEARNING CENTRE 
ADLC Learning System - Course Components 



169 



ADLC LEARNING SYSTEM 



Components and Instructional Strategies 

The Alberta Distance Learning Centre (ADLC) has developed a learning system that includes many 
components. Such a system offers students an opportunity to construct a meaningful learning 
environment suited to their personal needs. 

The linear approach has been replaced with a multi-pathway approach. These pathways provide 
different routes through materials to suit different learners. The materials are student-centred rather than 
teacher-centred. 

Students need to have options to promote different learning outcomes. Students have choices. They are 
required to actively interact with the instructional materials rather than to passively read the materials. 
Students work from the simple to the complex. They are guided to levels of critical and creative 
thinking. Students can structure their learning materials to their own situations. They can work 
independently at a distance or within a conventional classroom. 



COURSE COMPONENTS 



Textbooks Audiocassettes 



Learning 
Facilitator's 
Manual 



Assignment 
Booklets v 



Student 
Resource 
Manual 



SSG/CIB 




Lab Kits/ 
Manipulatives 



Audiographlcs 
for Teleconferencing 



QuickTime 
Video 



CML fc Question 
Banka 



Laser 
Disks 



LMS 



Technology 



CD 



CAI 



Software 



The following section provides the specifics. 



ERIC 



c 1 bIVu 



APPENDIX I 



FRONTIER SCHOOL DIVISION 

Bridging School and Community Response Teams 
Board Priorities Development Process 
Student Needs Referral Process 



171 



Linking the School and Community 



Bridging between the School Team and the Community Response Team is 
depicted in Figure 6. A school team representative(s), when invited, will sit on 
the community response team and communicate issues adversely affecting 
development of children while respecting the privacy of the individual child 
and his/her family. 



Bridging the School and Community Response Teams 



Community 



X 



External 
Agency 



z 



Parent/ 




Area/ 


Guardian 




Division 



School Team 




School Team 




Parents/ 


(ChSd) 




Representative 




Guardians 




\ 


V 


/ 



Community 
Response Team 
(Issues; 



>VAI WX 



Community Representatives* 



(Figure 6) 



BOARD PRIORITIES DEVELOPMENT PROCESS 




Senior Staff 
Review 



Proposed Policy 
or Program 




\ 

Board Revision 
or Approval 



Stakeholders 
Working 
Group 





Implementation 




Board Decision 
as Priority 



Board and Senior 
Staff Review 




Identified 
Need 




Stakeholders 



173 



FRONTIER SCHOOL DIVISION NO. 48 



REGULATION IXA-R 



Student having needs 
met in the classroom 



REFERRAL PROCESS 



Teacher observes 
problem 



Occasional 

alternative 

placement 




needs met- 



needs met 



needs met 



Program Design 

Heed for further 
assessment 



Program Design 



Conference on results 
Admin., Resource teacher, 
C-T., Parents, Clinician 



Teacher attempts a 
"* number of strategies 



need 
persi sts 



Teacher makes referral 
to Resource Teacher or, 
if none, principal 



i 



Principal/Resource 
Teacher conference 
with teacher 



l 



need 
persists 



J 



School conference re 
clinician or specialist 
referral Admin., 
Resource Teacher, C-T. 




Referral Parent 

completed * * involvement 



Clinician does 
assessment • 



APRIL, 1991 



ERIC 



POLICIES (White) 



REGULATIONS (Blue) 

174 



EXHIBITS (Groea) 



APPENDIX J 



UNITED STATES' REGIONAL EDUCATIONAL 
LABORATORIES 

Goals 2000: Educate America Act - Titles 
Section 319 - State and Local Government Control 
Regional Educational Laboratories - Legislation 



175 



LEGI-SLATE Report for the 103rd Congress 



Thu. April 14, 1994 3:43pm (EDT) 



H.R. 1804 QUICK BILL 

H.R. 1804, As finally approved by the House and Senate (Enrolled) 



H. R. 1804 
One Hundred Third Congress 

of the 

United States of America 
AT THE SECOND SESSION 
Begun and held at the City of Washington on Tuesday, the twenty-fifth day of 
January, one thousand nine hundred and ninety-four 

An Act 

To improve learning and teaching by providing a national framework for 
education reform; to promote the research, consensus building, and systemic 
changes needed to ensure equitable educational opportunities and high levels 
of educational achievement for all students; to provide a framework for 
reauthorization of all Federal education programs; to promote the development 
and adoption of a voluntary national system of skill standards and 
certifications; and for other purposes. 



Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United 
States of America in Congress assembled, 

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS. 

(a) Short Thte.»This Act (other than titles V and IX) may be cited as 
the "Goals 2000: Educate America Act". 

(b) Table of Contents.-The table of contents is as follows: 

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents. 
Sec. 2. Purpose. 
Sec. 3. Definitions. 

TITLE I- NATIONAL EDUCATION GOALS 
Sec 101. Purpose. 
Sec. 102. National education goals. 

TITLE II-NATIONAL EDUCATION REFORM LEADERSHIP, STANDARDS, AND 
ASSESSMENTS 

Part A--N3tiORbl Education Goals Panel 
Sec. 201. Purpose. 

Sec. 202. National Education Goals Panel. 
Sec. 203. Duties. 

Sec. 204. Powers of the Goals Panel. 
Sec. 205. Administrative provisions. 
Sec. 206. Director and staff; experts and consultants. 



1 



Sec. 207. Early childhood assessment. 

Part B-National Education Standards and Improvement Council 
Sec. 211. Purpose. 

Sec. 212. National .Education Standards and Improvement Council. 

Sec. 213. Duties. 

Sec. 214. Annual reports. 

Sec. 215. Powers of the Council. 

Sec. 216. Publication for public comment. 

Sec. 217. Administrative provisions. 

Sec. 218. Director and staff; experts and consultants. 

Sec. 219. Opportunity-To-Learn Development Grant. 

Sec. 220. Assessment development and evaluation grants. 

Sec. 221. Evaluation. 

Part C-Leadership in Educational Technology 
Sec. 231. Purposes. 
Sec. 232. Federal leadership. 
Sec. 233. Office of educational technology. 
Sec. 234. Uses of funds. 
Sec. 235. Non-Federal share. 
Sec. 236. Office of training technology transfer. 

Part D-- Authorization of Appropriations 
Sec. 241. Authorization of appropriations. 

TITLE 1II-STATE AND LOCAL EDUCATION SYSTEMIC IMPROVEMENT 
Sec. 301. Findings. 
Sec. 302. Purpose. 

. Sec. 303. Authorization of appropriations. 
Sec. 304. Allotment of funds. 
Sec. 305. State applications. 
Sec. 306. State improvement plans. 
Sec. 307. Secretary's review of applications; payments. 
Sec. 308. State use of funds. 

Sec. 309. Subgrants for local reform and professional development. 
Sec. 310. Availability of information and training. 
Sec. 311. Waivers of statutory and regulatory requirements. 
Sec. 312. Progress reports. 

Sec. 313. Technical and other assistance regarding school finance equity. 
Sec. 314. National leadership. 

Sec. 315. Assistance to the outlying areas and to the Secretary of the 
Interior. 

Sec. 316. Clarification regarding State standards and assessments. 
Sec. 317. State planning for improving student achievement through 

integration of technology into the curriculum. 
Sec. 318. Prohibition on Federal mandates, direction, and control. 
Sec. 319. Sute and local government control of education. 

TITLE IV-PARENTAL ASSISTANCE 
Sec. 401 . Parental information and resource centers. 
Sec. 402. Applications. 
Sec. 403. Uses of funds. 
Sec. 404. Technical assistance. 
Sec. 40S. Definitions. 
Sec. 406. Reports. 
Sec. 407. General provision. 
Sec. 408. Authorization of appropriations. 



177 



ERIC 



*" - — ~ 1T n.E V-NATIONAL SKILL STANDARDS BOARD 
Sec. 501. Short tit'e. 
Sec. 502. Purpose. 

Sec. 503. Establishment of National Board. 

Sec. 504. Functions of the National Board. 

Sec. 505. Deadlines. 

Sec. 506. Reports. , , 

Sec. 507. Authorization of appropriations. 

Sec, 508. Definitions. 

Sec. 509. Sunset provision. 

TITLE VI--INTERNATIONAL EDUCATION PROGRAM 
Sec. 601. International Education Program. 

TITLE VII-SAFE SCHOOLS 
Sec. 701. Short title; statement of purpose. 
Sec. 702. Safe schools program authorized. 
Sec. 703. Eligible applicants. 
Sec. 704. Applications and plans. 
Sec. 705. Use of funds. 
Sec. 706. National activities. 

Sec. 707. National cooperative education statistics system. 
Sec. 708. Reports. 

Sec. 709. Coordination of Federal assistance. 

TITLE VHI-MINORITY-FOCUSED CIVICS EDUCATION 
Sec. 801. Short title. 

Sec. 802. Purposes. ... . 

Sec. 803. Grants authorized; authorization of appropriations. 

Sec. 804. Definitions. 

Sec. 805. Applications. 

TITLE IX-EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH AND IMPROVEMENT 
Sec. 901. Short title. 
Sec. 902. Findings. 

Part A-GeneraJ Provisions Regarding the Office of Educational Research and 
Improvement 

Sec. 911, Repeal. , ... 

Sec 912. Office of Educational Research and Improvement. 

Sec] 913^ Assistant Secretary for Educational Research and Improvement. 

Sec! 914. Savings provision. 

Sec. 915. Existing grams and contracts. 

Part B-National Educational Research Policy and Priorities Board 
Sec. 921. Establishment within Office of Educational Research and 
Improvement. 

Part C--National Research Institutes 
Sec. 931. Establishment within the Office of Educational Research and 
Improvement. 

Part D— National Education Dissemination System 
Sec. 'stablishment within Office of Educational Research and 
Improvement. 

Part E-National Library of Education 

17d 



Sec. 951. Establishment within Office of Educational Research and 
Improvement. 

Part F-Stax Schools 
Sec. 961. Star schools. 

Part G-- Office of Comprehensive School Health Education 
Sec. 971. Office of Comprehensive School Health Education. 

Part H-Field Readers 
Sec. 981. Field readers. 

Part I-Amendments to the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology 
Education Act 

Sec. 991. National Occupational Information Coordinating Committee. 

TITLE X--MISCELLANEOUS 

Part A— Miscellaneous Provisions 
Sec. 1011. School prayer. 

Sec. 1012. Funding for the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. 

Sec. 1013. National Board for professional teaching standards. 

Sec. 1014. Forgiveness of certain overpayments. 

Sec. 1015. Study of goals 2000 and students with disabilities. 

Sec. 1016. Amendments to summer youth employment and training program. 

Sec. 1017. Protection of pupils. 

Sec. 1018. Contraceptive devices. 

Sec. 1019. Assessments. 

Sec. 1020. Public schools. 

Sec. 1021. Assessment of educational progress activities. 
Sec. 1022. Sense of the Congress. 

Part B~Gun«free Schools 
Sec. 1031. Short title. 

Sec. 1032. Gun-free requirements in elementary and secondary schools. 

Part C~Environmental Tobacco Smoke 
Sec. 1041. Short title. 
Sec. 1042. Definitions. 

Sec. 1043. Nonsmoking policy for children's services. 
Sec. 1044. Preemption. 

Part D-Midnight Basketball League Training and Partnership 
Sec. 1051. Short title. 

Sec. 1052. Grants for midnight basketball league training and partnership 
programs. 

Sec. 1053. Public housing midnight basketball league programs. 

SEC. 2. PURPOSE. 

The purpose of this Act is to provide a framework for meeting the 
National Education Goals established by title I of this Act by- 

(1) promoting coherent, nationwide, systemic education reform; 

(2) improving the quality of learning and teaching in the classroom 
and in the workplace; 

(3) defining appropriate and coherent Federal. State, and local roles 
and responsibilities for education reform and lifelong learning; 

(4) establishing valid and reliable mechanisms for-- 

(A) building a broad national consensus on American education 



er|c 179 



allocation of State or local resources or mandate a State or any subdivision 
thereof to spend any funds or incur any costs not paid for under this Act. 

SEC. 319. STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT CONTROL OF EDUCATION. 

(a) Findings,*-The Congress finds as follows: 

(1) Congress 4s interested in promoting State and local government 
reform efforts in education. 

(2) In Public Law 96-88 the Congress found that education is 
fundamental to the development of individual citizens and the progress of 
the Nation. 

(3) In Public Law 96-88 the Congress found that in our Federal system 
the responsibility for education is reserved respectively to the States 

and the local school systems and other instrumentalities of the States. 

(4) In Public Law 96-88 the Congress declared the purpose of the 
Department of Education was to supplement and complement the efforts of 
States, the local school systems, and other instrumentalities of the 

States, the private sector, public and private educational institutions, 
public and private nonprofit educational research institutions, community 
based organizations, parents and schools to improve the quality of 
education. 

(5) With the establishment of the Department of Education, Congress 
intended to protect the rights of State and local governments and public 
and private educational institutions in the areas of educational policies 
and administration of programs and to strengthen and improve the control 
of such governments and institutions over their own educational programs 
and policies. 

(6) Public Law 96-88 specified that the establishment of the 
Department of Education shall not increase the authority of the Federal 
Government over education or diminish the responsibility for education 
which is reserved to the States and local school systems and other 
instrumentalities of the States. 

(7) Public Law 96-88 specified that no provision of a program 
administered by the Secretary or by any other officer of the Department 
of Health, Education, and Welfare shall be construed to authorize the 
Secretary or any such officer to exercise any direction, supervision, or 
control over the curriculum, program of instruction, administration, or 
personnel of any educational Institution, school, or school system, over 
any accrediting agency or association or over the selection or content of 
library resources, textbooks, or other instructional materials by any 
educational institution or school system. 

(b) Reaffirmation.-The Congress agrees and reaffirms that the 
responsibility for control of education is reserved to the States and local 
school systems and other instrumentalities of the States and that no action 
shall be taken under the provisions of this Act by the Federal Government 
which would, directly or indirectly, impose standards or requirements of any 
kind through the promulgation of rules, regulations, provision of financial 
assistance and otherwise, which would reduce, modify, or undercut State and 
local responsibility for control of education. 

TITLE IV-PARENTAL ASSISTANCE 

SEC. 401. PARENTAL INFORMATION AND RESOURCE CENTERS, 
(a) Purpose.-The purpose of this titfe is~ 

(1) to increase parents' knowledge of and confidence in child-rearing 
activities, such as teaching and nurturing their young children; 

(2) to strengthen partnerships between parents and professionals in 
meeting the educational needs of children aged birth through 5 and the 
working relationship between home and school; 



ERIC 



1GU 



(x) a listing of instructional materials available through 
telecommunications to local education agencies through the Public 
Broadcasting Service and State educational television networks; 

ant \xi) such other information and resources the Assistant 
Secretary considers useful and appropriate. 

(D) Evaluations regarding other functions of network. -The 
Assistant Secretary shall also undertake projects to test and 
evaluate the feasibility of using the network described in 
subparagraph (A) for- 

(i) the submission of applications for assistance to the 
Department of Education: and ^ 

(ii) the collection of data and other statistics through the 
National Center for Education Statistics. 

(E) Training and technical assistance.-The Assistant Secretary, 
acting through the Office of Reform Assistance and Dissemination. 

shall- . . . 

(i) provide such training and technical assistance as may be 
necessary to enable the contractors and grantees described in : 
clause (v) of subparagraph (A) to participate in the electronic 
network described in such subparagraph; and 

(it) work with the National Science Foundation to provide, 
upon request, assistance to State and local educational agencies, 
the Department of the Interior's Office of Indian Education 
Programs, tribal departments of education. State library 
agencies. libraries, museums, and other educational institutions 
in obtaining access to the Internet and the National Research and 
Education Network. 
f M RegiflflaJ Educational Laboratories for Research, Development, 
Dissemination, and Technical Assistance.- 

(1) Regional educational laboratones.~The Assistant Secretary shall 
enter into contracts with public or private nonprofit entities to 
establish a networked system of not less than 10 and not more than 12 
regional educational laboratories which serve the needs of each region of 
the United States in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. 
The amount of assistance allocated to each laboratory by the Assistant 
Secretary shall reflect the number of local educational agencies and the 
number of school-age children within the region served by such 
laboratory, as well as the cost of providing services within the 
geographic area encompassed by the region. 

(2) Regions.-The regions served by the regional educational 
laboratories shall be the 10 geographic regions in existence on the day 
preceding the date of the enactment of this title, except that in fiscal 

year 1996, the Assistant Secretary may support not more than 2 additional 
regional educational laboratories serving regions not in existence on the 
day preceding the date of enactment of this Act, provided that** 

(A) the amount appropriated for the regional educational 
laboratories in fiscal year 1996 exceeds the amount appropriated for 
the regional educational laboratories in fiscal year 1995 by not less 
than S2.000.0O0; 

(B) each such additional regional laboratory shall be supported 
by not less than S2.000.000 annually; 

(C) the creation of any such additional laboratory region is 
announced at the time of the announcement of the competition for 
contracts for all regional educational laboratories: 

(D) the creation of a regional educational laboratory that 
involves the combination or subdivision of a region or regions in 
existence on the day preceding the date of enactment of this Act in 



ERIC 



81 



which States in I such region are combined with States in another 
such region does not result in any region in existence on such date 
permanently becoming part of a larger region, nor result in any such 
reaion permanently subsuming another region, nor creates within the 
continental United States a region that is smaller than 4 contiguous 
States nor partitions a region in existence on the day preceding the 
date of the enactment of this Act to include less than 4 contiguous 
States included in the region on the day preceding the date of 
enactment of this Act; ..... . . . c . , 

(E) the Assistant Secretary has published a notice tn the Federal 
Register inviting the public, for a period of not less than 60 days, 
to make recommendations with respect to the creation of I or 2 
additional regional educational laboratories; 

(F) the Assistant Secretary has solicited and received letters of 
support for the creation of any new region from the Chief State 
School Officers and State boards of education in each of the 
contiguous States that would be included in such new region. 
(3) Duties.-Each regional educational laboratory receiving 

assistance under this section shall promote the implementation of broad- 
based systemic school improvement strategies and shall have as such 
laboratory's central mission and primary function to~ 

(A) develop and disseminate educational research products and 
processes to schools, teachers. local educational agencies, State 
educational agencies, librarians, and schools funded by the Bureau, 
as appropriate, and through such development and dissemination, and 
provide technical assistance, to help all students meet standards; 

(B) develop a plan for identifying and serving the needs of the 
region by conducting a continuing survey of the educational needs, 
strengths, and weaknesses within the region, including a process of 
open hearings to solicit the views of schools, teachers, 
administrators, parents, local educational agencies, librarians, and 
State educational agencies within the region; 

(C) provide technical assistance to State and local educational 
agencies, school boards, schools funded by the Bureau, as 
appropriate. State boards of education, schools, and librarians; 

(D) facilitate school restructuring at the individual school 
level, including technical assistance for adapting model 
demonstration grant programs to each school; 

(E) serve the educational development needs of the region by 
providing education research in usable forms in order to promote 
school improvement and academic achievement and to correct 
educational deficiencies; 

(F) facilitate communication between educational experts, school 
officials, anrf 'eachers, parents, and librarians, to enable such 
individuals to assist schools to develop a plan to meet the National 
Education Goals; 

(G) provide training in-- 

(i) the field of education research and related areas; 
(it) the use of new educational methods; and 
(iit) the use of information-finding methods, practices, 
techniques, and products developed in connection with such 
training for which the regional educational laboratory may 
support internships and fellowships and provide stipends; 

(H) use applied educational research t.i assist in solving site- 
specific problems and to assist in development activities; 

(I) conduct applied research projects designed to serve the 
particular needs of the region only hi the event that such quality 
applied research does not exist as determined by the regional 



.education laboratory or the Department of Education; 

(J) collaborate and coordinate services with other technical 
assistance providers funded by the Department of Education; 

(K) provide support and technical assistance in— 

(!) replicating and adapting exemplary and promising 

practices.^ devc j 0 p mcn , 0 f high-quality, challenging curriculum 

frameworks: . . . 

(iii) the development of valid, reliable assessments which 
are linked to State, local, or Bureau-funded content and student 
performance standards and reflect recent advances in the field of 
educational assessment; 

(iv) the improvement of professional development strategies 
to assure that all teachers are prepared to teach a challenging 
curriculum; 

(v) expanding and improving the use of technology in 
education to improve teaching and learning; 

(vi) the development of alternatives for restructuring school 
finance systems to promote greater equity in the distribution of 

resources: and ... 

(vii) the development of alternative administrative 
structures which are more conducive to planning, implementing, 
and sustaining school reform and improved educational outcomes; 

and 

(L) bring teams of experts together to develop and implement 
school improvement plans and strategies. 

(4) Networking.-In order to improve the efficiency and effectiveness 
of the regional laboratories, the governing boards of the regional 
laboratories shall establish and maintain a network to- 

(A) share information about the activities each laboratory is 
carrying out; 

(B) plan joint activities that would meet the needs of multiple 

regions: . . , L . , .... 

(C) create a strategic plan for the development of activities 
undertaken by the laboratories to reduce redundancy and increase 
collaboration and resource-sharing in such activities; and 

(D) otherwise devise means by which the work of the individual 
laboratories could serve national, as well as regional, needs. 

(5) Additional duties.— Each regional education laboratory receiving 
assistance under this subsection shall carry out the following 

activities: , ... 

(A) Collaborate with the Institutes established under section 931 

in order to- , 

(i) maximize the use of research conducted through the 
Institutes in the work of such laboratory; 

(ii) keep the Institutes apprised of the work of the regional 
educational laboratory in the field; and 

(iii) inform the Institutes about additional research needs 
identified in the field. 

(B) Consult with the State educational agencies and library 
agencies in the region in developing the plan for serving the region. 

(C) Develop strategies to utilize schools as critical components 
in reforming education and revitalizing rural communities in the 
United States. 

(D) Report and disseminate information on overcoming the 
obstacles faced by rural educators and rural schools. 

(E) Identify successful educational programs that have either 
been developed by such laboratory in carrying out such laboratory's 



183 



functions or that have been developed or used by others within the 
region served by the laboratory and make such information available 
to the Secretary and the network of regional laboratories so that 
such programs may be considered for inclusion in the national 
education dissemination system. 

(6) Certain requirements.--In carrying out its responsibilities, each 
regional educational laboratory shall— 
(A) establish a governing board that-- 

(i) reflects a balanced representation of the States in the 
region, as well as the interests and concerns of regional 
constituencies, and that includes teachers and education 
researchers; 

(ii) is the sole entity that-- 

(I) guides and directs the laboratory in carrying out the 
provisions of this subsection and satisfying the terms and 
conditions of the contract award; 

(II) determines the regional agenda of the laboratory; 

(III) engages in an ongoing dialogue with she Assistant 
Secretary concerning the laboratory's goals, activities, and 
priorities; and . 

(IV) determines at the start of the contract period, 
subject to the requirements of this section and in 
consultation with the Assistant Secretary, the mission of the 

regional educational laboratory for the duration of the 
contract period: .... 

(iii) ensures that the regional educational laboratory 
attains and maintains a high level of quality in the laboratory's 
work and products; 

(iv) establishes standards to ensure that the regional 
educational laboratory has strong and effective governance, 
organization, management, and administration, and employs 
qualified staff; 

(v) directs the regional educational laboratory to carry out 
the laboratory's duties in a manner as will make progress toward 
achieving the National Education Goals and reforming schools and 
educational systems; and 

(vi) conducts a continuing survey of the educational needs, 
strengths, and weaknesses within the region, including a process 
of open hearings to solicit the views of schools and teachers. 

(B) Comply with the standards developed by the Assistant 
Secretary and approved by the Board under section 912. 

(C) Coordinate its activities, collaborate, and regularly 
exchange information with the Institutes established under section 
941, the National Diffusion Network, and its Developer-Demonstrator 
and State Facilitator projects, learning grant institutions and 

district education agents assisted under subsection (i), the 
' Educational Resources Information Center Clearinghouses, and other 
entities engaged in technical assistance and dissemination activities 
which are supported by other offices of the Department of Education. 

(D) Allocate the regional educational laboratory's resources to 
and within each State in a manner which reflects the need for 
assistance, taking into account such factors as the proportion of 
economically disadvantaged students, the increased cost burden of 
service delivery in areas of sparse populations, and any special 
initiatives being undertaken by State, intermediate, local 
educational agencies, or Bureau-funded schools, as appropriate, which 
may require special assistance from the laboratory. 
(7) Evaluations.-The Assistant Secretary shall provide for 



ERIC 



independent evaluations of each of the regional educational laboratories 
in carrying out the duties described in paragraph (I) in the third year 
that such laboratory receives assistance under this subsection in 
accordance with the standards developed by the Assistant Secretary and 
approved by the Board and shall transmit the results of such evaluations 
to the relevant committees of the Congress, the Board, and the 
appropriate regional educational laboratory board. 

(8) Invitation regarding competition for awards of assistance. --Prior 
to awarding a grant or entering into a contract under this section, the 
Secretary shall invite applicants, including the regional educational 
laboratories in existence on the day preceding the date of enactment of 
this Act, to compete for such award through notice in the Federal 
Register and in the publication of the Department of Commerce known as 
the Commerce Business Daily. 

(9) Application for assistance-Each application for assistance 
under this subsection shall— 

(A) cover not less than a 5-year period; 

(B) describe how the applicant would carry out the activities 
required by this subsection; and 

(C) contain such additional information as the Secretary may 
reasonably require. 

(10) Rule of constructicn.-No regional educational laboratory 
receiving assistance under this subsection shall, by reason of the 
receipt of that assistance, be ineligible to receive any other assistance 
from the Department of Education as authorized by law or be prohibited 
from engaging in activities involving international projects or 

CnC *(U) Advance payment system.-Eaeh regional educational laboratory 
shall participate in the advance payment system at the Department of 

Education. , ij . . . . . . . L . 

(12) Additional projects.-In addition to activities described in 
paragraph (3). the Assistant Secretary, from amounts appropriated 
pursuant to subsection (h), is authorized to enter into agreements with a 
regional educational laboratory for the purpose of carrying out 
additional projects to enable such regional educational laboratory to 
assist in efforts to achieve the National Education Goals and for other 
purposes. 

(13) Plan. --Not later than July I of each year, each regional 
educational laboratory shall submit to the Assistant Secretary a plan 
covering the succeeding fiscal year, in which such laboratory's mission, 
activities, and scope of work are described, including a general 
description of-- . . 

(A) the plans such laboratory expects to submit in the remaining 
years of such laboratory's contract; and 

(B) an assessment of how well such laboratory is meeting the 
"needs of the region. 

(14) Construction.— Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to 
require any modifications in the regional educational laboratory 
contracts in effect on the day preceding the date of enactment of ihis 
title. 

(i) Goals 2000 Community Partnerships Program.- 

' (1) Purpose.-The purpose of the Goals 2000 Community Partnerships 
program is to improve the quality of learning and teaching in the most 
impoverished urban and rural communities of the United States by 
supporting sustained collaborations between universities, schools, 
businesses, and communities which apply and utilize the results of 
educational research and development. 

(2) Grants for goals 2000 community partnerships.-The Assistant 



ERIC 185 



Secretary is authorized to make grants to eligible entities to support 
The establishment of Learning Grant Institutions and District Education 
Agents and i XT activities authorized under this subsection within 

^'^iUfSn^eligiblc entity and eligible community-For the 
purposes oHhi^ any jnstit t j of nigher 

education, regional educational laboratory. National Diffusion 
Network project, national research and development center, public or 
nrivate nonprofit corporation, or any consortium thereof, that- 
P (i) has demonstrated experience, expertise and commitment m 

servina the educational needs of at-risk students: and 
Im is by virtue of its previous activities, knowledgeable 

about the unique needs and characteristics of the community to be 

S (Bi C The term "eligible community" means a unit of general purpose 
local government (such as a city, township, or village), a 
wnmetropolitan county, tribal village, or a geographically distinct 
area (such as a school district, school attendance area, ward = '■ 
orecinct or neighborhood), or any group of such entities that- 
P "i) has^opulation of not less than 200.000 and not more 

'^"ii^whichnot less than one-half of the school-age 
children have family incomes which are below the poverty line, as 
determined by the 1990 United States Census, participation in the 
National School Lunch program, or other current, reliable data 
concerning family income. 
(4) Goals 2000 community partnerships.-Each learning grant 
institution receiving assistance under this subsection shall establish a 
Goals 2000 community partnership to carry out the activities authorized 
under this subsection. Such partnership- 

f A) shall include the participation of one or more local 
educational agencies, institutions of higher education, community- 
based organizations, parents, teachers, and the business community; 

m may include the participation of human, social service and 
health care agencies. Head Start and child care agencies, libraries, 
museums, employment and training agencies, and the State educational 
• a8 ency or tribal department of education; and 

(C) shall be broadly representative of all segments of the 
community in which the activities will be carried out. 
^Comprehensive goals 2000 plan.~Each Goals 2000 Community 
Partnership shall develop a comprehensive plan for assuring educational 
TuTcess and high achievement for all students in the community. Each ;.uch 

plan shaH ^ ^ National Education Goals; 

(B) identify additional needs and goals for educational 
improvement within the community; 

(C) focus on helping ail students reach challenging content and 
student performance standards; 

(D) be consistent with the State and local improvement plans tor 
system-wide education improvement developed pursuant to title III; 

(E) establish a comprehensive community-wide plan for achieving 
such goals: and 

(F) develop a means for measuring the progress of the commumty 
in meeting such goals for improvement. 

(6) Implementation of community-wide plan.-Each Goals 2000 Community 
Partnership shall, utilizing the District Education Agent, provide 
assistance in implementing ihe community-wide plan for educational 



ERIC 18 b 



improvement by- jnnovation , restructuring, and continuous 

imnrovement in educational practice by-- 

P (i) disseminating information throughout the community about 
exemplary and promising educational programs, practices. 

pr °S C eCafuifnt^ $ effectiveness of federally funded . 
educational programs within the community and identifying changes 
in such programs which are likely to improve student achievement; 

(iii) identifying, selecting and replicating exemplary and 
oromising educational programs, practices, products, and policies 
in both in- and out-of-school settings; 

rtJ i MolySg educational research to solve specific problems 
in the classroom, home and community which impede learning and 

^S5S?^ -d development by teachers, school 
administrators, and other practitioners which promise to improve 
wEJsnd learning and the organization of schools; 
B) improving the capacity of educators, school administrators., 
child care providers and other practitioners to prepare all Mudents 
To reach challenging standards and to attain the goals set out in the 
coShSScomnrnntty-wide plan through such means as- 
m the training of prospective and novice teachers 
(inc uding preschool and early childhood educators) in a school 
setting under the guidance of master teachers and teacher 



(ii) training and other activities to promote the continued 
leamina and professional development of experienced teachers, 
related [services personnel, school administrators to assure that 
such teachers develop the subject matter and pedagogical 
expertise needed to prepare all students to reach challenging 

standards, _ ^ activities to increase the ability 

of prospective, novice, and experienced teachers to teach 

effectively at-risk students, students with disabilities. 

students with limited-English proficiency, and students from 

diverse cultural backgrounds: and 

(iv) programs to enhance teaching and classroom management 

skills, including school-based management skills, of novice. 

nrosoective. and experienced teachers; 

(C) promoting the development of an integrated system of service 
delivery to children from birth through age 18 and their families by 
facilitating linkages and cooperation among- 

(i) local educational agencies; 

(ii) health and social services agencies and providers; 

(iii) juvenile justice and criminal justice agencies; 

(iv) providers of employment training; and 

(v) child care, Head Start, and other early childhood 

agencies; and . 
CD) mobilizing the resources of the community in support of 
student learning and high achievement by facilitating effective 
partnerships and collaboration among- 

(i) local educational agencies; 

(ii) postsecondary educational institutions; 

(iii) public libraries; 

*7v) P community-based organizations, neighborhood associations, 
and other civic and community organizations; 



ERIC 1 r.V 



(vi) child care. Head Start, and other early childhood 
agencies; 

(vii) churches, synagogues and other religious institutions: 

(viii) labor organizations; and 

(ix) business and industry. 

(7) Additionarrequirements.-In carrying out its responsibilities 
under this subsection, each partnership receiving assistance under this 

subsection shall- . 

(A) appoint a District Education Agent who shall be responsible, 
on a full-time basis, for directing the implementation of the 
community-wide plan, who shall have significant experience and 
expertise in the field of education in- 

(i) addressing the needs of at-risk students; and 

(ii) conducting educational research and promoting the 
application of the results of such research to educational 
practice; , . 

(B) provide for such other professional and support personnel as 
mav be necessary to implement the community-wide plan under the 
dire'ction of the District Education Agent; and 

(C) coordinate the partnership's activities and work 
cooperatively with the National Diffusion Network State facilitators, 
regional educational laboratories, and other components of the Office 
to utilize most effectively Federal research, development, and 
dissemination resources in implementing the community-wide plan. 

(8) Application for grants.-Any eligible entity desiring a grant 
under this subsection shall submit an application to the Assistant 
Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such 
information as the Assistant Secretary may reasonably require. Each such 
application shall-- , , 

(A) include a comprehensive plan for meeting the objectives and 
requirements of this subsection; and 

(B) provide evidence of support for the application from local 
elected officials, the State educational agency, the local 
educational agency, parents, local community leaders, businesses, and 
other appropriate organizations. 

(9) priority in making grants; duration and amount of grant.-Each 
grant made under this subsection shall be- 

(A) awarded on a competitive basis, with first priority given to 
thos*. applications from communities with the greatest percentage of 
school-age children in families with poverty-level incomes; 

(B) made for a 5-year period, with funding for the second and 
each succeeding year in such period conditioned upon a determination 
by the Assistant Secretary that the grant recipient has complied with 
the conditions of the grants during the previous yean and 

(C) an amount equal to not less than SI. 000.000 per year. 

(10) Limitation of one grant per congressional district.-Not more 
* than one grant under this subsection shall be awarded within a single 

congressional district. 

(1 1) Technical assistance; evaluations.-In administering the program 
authorized under this subsection, the Assistant Secretary shall, either 
directly or through grant or contract with an eligible nonprofit agency- 

(A) upon request, provide technical assistance to eligible 
entities to assist in the development of a comprehensive community- 
wide plan to meet the requirements of this subsection and in the 
preparation of applications for assistance; 

(B) regularly provide technical assistance to learning grant 
institutions receiving assistance under this subsection to assist 
with the development and implementation of the comprehensive 



18^ 



community-wide plan for educational improvement; 

(C) provide for an independent evaluation of the activities 
assisted under this subsection, including- 

(\) the impact of the Goals 2000 Community Partnerships 
oroeram on children and families within each community, including 
effects on the extent of educational achievement, rates of school 
retention and completion, and enrollment in postsecondary 
educational programs; and 

(ii) whether an intensified effort to apply and utilize 
educational research within a limited geographic area 
significantly improves student learning andachievemenu and 
i&\ 0 j an for the expansion of the Goals 2000 Community 
Partnerships program throughout the remainder of the United Slates 
beginning in fiscal year 1999. 
(i) Teacher Research Dissemination Demonstration Program.- 
( H Findinas.-Tbe Congress finds that- 

(A i education research, including research funded by the Office, 
is not having the impact on the schools of the United States that 
such research should; 

(B) relevant education research and resulting solutions are not 
being adequately disseminated to and used by the teachers that need 
such research and solutions; 

(C) there are insufficient linkages between the research and 
development centers assisted under this section, the regional . 
educational laboratories described in subsection (h). the National 
Diffusion Network State facilitators, the Educational Resources 
Information Center Clearinghouses, the comprehensive technical 
assistance centers assisted under the Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act of 1965. and the public schools to ensure th* research 
on effective practice is disseminated and technical assistant 
provided to all teachers; .... 

(D) the average teacher has little time to plan or engage in a 
professional dialogue with peers about strategies for improved 

'"ce" teachers do not have direct access to information systems or 

""(Preachers naV e little control over what inservice education 
teachers will be offered; and . . 

(G) individual teachers are not encouraged to move beyond tne 
walls of their school buildings to identify and use outside 
resources. 

(2) Establishment.- 

(A) In general.-The Secretary is authorized to make grants to. 
and enter into contracts or cooperative agreements with, public and 
private agencies and organizations, including institutions of higher 
education, the regional education laboratories, and the research and 
development centers, or consortia thereof- 

(!) to develop and carry out projects that demonstrate 

effective strategies for helping elementary and secondary 

education teachers, in both urban and rural areas, become 

knowledgeable about, assist in the design and use of. and use. 

education research, including education research carried out 

under this section; and 

(ii) to develop, implement, and evaluate models for creation 

of teacher research dissemination networks. 

(B) Priority.-In awarding grants and entering into contracts and 
cooperative agreements under subparagraph (A) the Secretary shall 
give priority to entities that have received Federal funds for 



I 
I 
I 
I 



research and dissemination. 

(3) Applications.- , . 

(A) In general.«An entity desiring to receive assistance under 
this subsection shall submit an application to the Secretary in such 
form, at such time, and containing such information and assurances as 
the Secretary may-reouire. — 

(B) Contents.-Eacn such application shall describe how the 
project described in the application- 

(i) was developed with the active participation of elementary 
and secondary school teachers; 

(ii) will include the continuing participation of elementary 
and secondary school teachers in the management of the project; 

(iii) is organized around one or more significant research 
topics; 

(iv) will involve collaboration with entities that have 
received Federal funds for research and dissemination; and 

(v) will sustain over time teacher research dissemination 
networks after Federal funding for such networks terminates. 

(4) Use of funds.-Funds provided under (his subsection may be used- 

(A) to train elementary and secondary education teachers 
(particularly new teachers) about the sources of education research 
findings, including research findings available through activities 
supported by the Office, and how to access and use such findings to 
improve the quality of instruction; 

(B) to develop simple formats, both administrative and 
technological, that allow elementary and secondary education teachers 
easy access to and use of education research findings; 

(C) to share strategies and materials; 

(D) to support professional networks; 

(E) to survey teacher needs in the areas of research and 
development; and ... 

(F) for other activities designed to support elementary and 
secondary education teachers in becoming knowledgeable about, 
assisting tn the design of. and using, educational research. 

(5) Stipends.-The Secretary may provide for the payment of such 
stipends (including allowances for subsistence and other expenses for 
elementary and secondary teachers), as the Secretary determines to be 
appropriate, to teachers participating in the projects aphorized under 
this subsection. 

(6) Coordination.-Reciptenu of funds under this subsection shall, 
to the greatest extent possible, coordinate their activities with related 
activities under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965. 

(7) Report.-The Secretary shall, within 5 years of the date of 
enactment of this Act. submit to the Congress a report on the 
effectiveness of activities assisted under this subsection. 

PART E-NATIONAL LIBRARY OF EDUCATION 

SEC 951. ESTABLISHMENT WITHIN OFFICE OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH AND 
IMPROVEMENT. 

(a) In General .-There is established within the Department of Education 
a National Library of Education (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
"Library"), which shall be maintained by the Department of Education as a 
governmental activity. 

(b) Functions of Library .-The functions of the Library are- 

(1) to provide a central location within the Federal Government for 
information about education; 

(2) to provide comprehensive reference services on matters related to 



ERIC 13vJ 



I 
I 
1 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 



