DOCUMENT RESUME 

) 



ED 474 955 



PS 031 150 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 



INSTITUTION 



SPONS AGENCY 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 
CONTRACT 
AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Lamb-Parker, Faith, Ed. ; Hagen, John, Ed. ; Robinson, Ruth, 

Ed.; Rhee, Hezie, Ed. 

The First Eight Years Pathways to the Future: Implications 
for Research, Policy, and Practice. Proceedings of the Head 
Start National Research Conference (6th, Washington, DC, June 
26-29, 2002). 

Administration for Children, Youth, and Families (DHHS), 
Washington, DC. Head Start Bureau.; Columbia Univ. , New York, 
NY. School of Public Health.; Society for Research in Child 
Development . 

Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, DC. 

2003-00-00 

1041p. 

DHHS-105-99-1520 

Head Start Information & Publication Center, Order 
Fulfillment Department, P.O. Box 26417, Alexandria, VA 22313- 
0417. Tel: 703-683-2878; Fax: 703-683-5769; e-mail: 
puborderO heads tart inf o . org; Web site : 
http: // WWW. heads tart info. org. 

Books (010) — Collected Works - Proceedings (021) — 
Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 

EDRS Price MF07/PC42 Plus Postage. 

Child Care; Child Development; Child Health; *Early 
Intervention; ^Educational Practices; Educational Quality; 
Emergent Literacy; ^Infants; Longitudinal Studies; Mental 
Health; Parent Participation; *Preschool Children; Preschool 
Curriculum; *Preschool E^ducation; Program Effectiveness; 
Special Needs Students; Student Evaluation; Welfare Reform 
*Early Head Start; ^Project Head Start 



ABSTRACT 



o 

ERIC 



This document summarizes the proceedings of Head Start’s 
Sixth National' Research Conference on early childhood and family research. 

The first part of these proceedings compiles presentations from special 
sessions, including plenary sessions on promoting young children's eagerness 
to learn in educational settings, self-regulation, and policies and programs 
that support families with children from birth to three. Presentations at the 
conference consisted of reports of research, literature reviews, and 
commentaries on research and practice in Head Start and Early Head Start. The 
next section of the proceedings recounts symposia roundtables, and 
conversation hours, which addressed topics relating to: (1) research funded 

by the Administration on Children and Families, including the Family and 
Child Experiences Survey, Head Start Quality Research Centers, the Head Start 
Mental Health Research Consortium, and the National Evaluation of Early Head 
Start; (2) child development; (3) children with special needs and 
disabilities; (4) consequences of welfare reform; (5) early childhood 
assessment and outcomes; (6) language, literacy, and early learning; (7) 
parenting/families; (8) quality early education and child care; (9) quality 
health care; and (10) student programming. The third section of the 
proceedings summarizes the poster sessions. Topics included 
assessment/diagnosis , behavioral issues, child care, community resources, 
disabilities, bilingual issues, family functioning, fatherhood, 
inf ant /toddler programs, language develo pment and early literacy, mental 

Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



health intervention and services, instrument development, Native American 
issues, normal child development, parent involvement in children's education 
parenting styles, school achievement, and professional development. 
Appendices include lists of cooperating organizations, the program committee 
and peer reviewers, as well as a directory' of presenters and a subiect index 
(KB) 




Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



ED 474 955 



SUMMARY OF CONFERENCE PROCEEDINGS 




SUMMARY OF CONFERENCE 



Head Start's Sixth National Research Conference 

The First Eight Years 
Pathways to the Future 

Implicdtions for R©s©3rch, Policy, dnd Pr 3 ctic© 



June 26-29, 2002 

Washington, D.C. 



Presented by 
The Head Start Bureau 

Administration on Children, Youth and Families 
Administration on Children and Families 

In collaboration with 

Columbia University, Mailman School of Public Health 

and 

Society for Research in Child Development 




3 



Acknowledgements 



This document was prepared by 
Columbia University, Mailman School of Public Health 
Heilbrunn Department of Population and Family Health 
60 Haven Avenue, B2 
New York, NY 10032 

under Contract No. 

DHHS 105-99-1520 

in collaboration with 

Society for Research in Child Development 
University of Michigan 
3131 South State Street 
Suite 301 

Ann Arbor, MI 48108-1623 
for the 

Administration on Children, Youth and Families 
Administration for Children and Families 
Department of Health and Human Services 



Project Officers: 

Mary Bruce Webb 
Esther Kresh 

Administration on Children, Youth and Families 
Head Start Bureau 

Editors: 

Faith Lamb-Parker 
John Hagen 
Ruth Robinson 
Hezie Rhee 

Editorial Associates: 

Nicole Ives 
Lisa McArthur 
S. Gwenne Rippon 
Hulya Sakarya 
Lydie Lebrun 
Megan Grant 
Aaron Lones 
Katherine Rogers 
I Cynthia Prevost 



2003 



Contents 



Special Sessions 

Opening Session — James J. Heckman, Ann Crittenden 3 

Plenary I 

Promoting Young Children's Eagerness to Learn in Educational Settings 21 

Plenary II 

Self-Regulation: The Interplay of Cognitive, Biologic, and Emotional Domains 35 

Plenary III 

Polices and Programs That Support Families With Children From Birth to Three 47 

Luncheon I— Windy M. Hill 63 

Student-Mentor Luncheon 

Mentor Awards 67 

Luncheon III— Mona Lee Locke 76 



Symposia/ Roundtables/ Conversation Hours 



Administration for Children and Families 

Improving the Performance of the Head Start Program: Findings From FACES 2000 83 

A Tapestry of Head Start Families: Challenges They Face and Strengths They Possess 

Findings From the Family and Child Experiences Survey (FACES) 100 

Poster Symposium — Head Start Quality Research Centers: 

Interventions to Promote School Readiness for Head Start Children 115 

Findings From the Head Start Mental Health Research Consortium 124 

Early Head Start: National Evaluation 

Early Head Start: Program Impacts on 3-Year-Old Children and Their Families 140 

Early Head Start: Local Research 

The Early Head Start Research Consortium's Poster Symposium on 

Mediators and Moderators of Local Early Head Start Outcomes / 150 

Does Head Start Work? Overview and Update on the New Head Start Impact Study 172 



Other Federal Presentations 

New Research-Based Federal Initiatives 187 

Children's Early Learning and Educational Experiences: 

The Early Childhood Longitudinal Studies 199 





in 



child Development 

The First Three Years of Life: What Is Known and Where Is Research Needed? 211 

Innovations in the Study of Self-Regulation: 

New Methods, Ecologically Valid Contexts, and Diverse Populations 226 

Bringing the Study of Emotion to the Head Start Classroom: 

Methodological Approaches, Clinical Applications, and Research Partnerships 230 

The Beginnings of Prosocial Behavior 234 

Children With Special Needs and Disabilities 

Master Lecture — Early Assessment and Treatment for Young Children 

With Autistic Spectrum Disorders 250 

The Multimodal Treatment of ADHD: An Overview of the NIMH Study 264 

Ethnic Psychopharmacology: Focus on Young Children 278 

What's Happening With Children With Disabilities and Their Families in Early Head Start? 289 

Including Children With Special Needs and Their Families: 

Research, Practice, and Challenges ^®2 

Consequences of Welfare Reform 

Welfare Reform and Its Impact on Families ^21 

The Use of Head Start for Families in Experimental Welfare 

and Antipoverty Policies and Effects on Child Well-Being 333 

Conversations With the Masters 

Master Lecture — History of Research and Practice in Head Start 344 

Conversation With Ann Bardwell, Barbara Bowman, Ross Thompson, Susan H. Landry, 

and Ron Herndon— Facilitating Young Children's Enthusiasm for Learning 354 

Conversation With Julius B. Richmond, Edward Zigler, Judith Palfrey, and John Pascoe 368 

Conversation With John W. Hagen, Claire B. Kopp, and Sybil Carr^re— 

The Emergence of Self-Regulation 378 

Early Childhood Assessment and Outcomes 

Cross-Cultural Issues in Assessment and Accountability 391 

Policy Issues Concerning Child Outcomes in Head Start 406 

Language, Literacy, and Early Learning 

Literacy, Language, and Cognition 407 

Teaching Mathematics to Head Start Children: Developmental Approaches 422 

Impacting Policy Through Research-Based Emerging Language and Literacy Practices: 

A Model Program Leads to Policy Changes on State and National Levels 425 

Starting Strong: Understanding and Promoting Math Development in Young Children 436 

Literacy for Preschoolers When Learning to Read Is Vital 446 



Parenting/Families 

The Important Role of Fathers in Young Children's Development 

Fathers and Early Head Start; Methodological Issues in Research 
and Implications for Program Involvement 

Promoting Family Relations 

Children of Incarcerated Parents 

Perspectives From Providers of Services to Families and 
Their Children Experiencing Domestic Violence 

Assessment of Parental Emotional Availability; Ramifications for Children 

Depression in Mothers in Low-Income Families; Implications for Children 



Quality Early Education and Child Care 

The Real Question About Home Visiting; What Happens? 



Perspectives on Quality Child Care— Does It Matter Who You Ask? 

What Choices Are Available to Parents for Child Care and Education Services? 

The Chicago Child-Parent Centers; Prevention and Cost-Effectiveness 
in Early Adulthood From the Chicago Longitudinal Study 



Quality Health Care 

Providing High Quality Healthcare for Children; Patient Service and Policy Issues 
Child Health Advice; Past and Present 

Providing Quality Healthcare for Indigent Children; 

A Comparison of the (J.K. and (J.S 



Student Programming 

Challenges and Commitments; The Role of the 
in Developing Junior Scholars 



Mentoring Relationship 



Workshop— Statistics and Common Sense; A Quantitative 
tor Researchers and Practitioners 



"Head Start 



Miscellaneous 

Creating Integrated Early Childhood Learning Programs 

nf Dramatically Increase the Success 

of Former Head Start Children in Kindergarten Through Third Grade 

Poster Symposium-Issues in Partnering With Communities 

to Improve the Lives of Young Children and Their Families 

Improving the Quality of the Workforce Through Professional Development 

Meeting the Challenge and Qpportunity of Diversity 

Effective and Strategic Communication of Research to the Media 



450 

468 

474 

491 

503 

516 

530 



534 

540 

554 

569 

575 

590 

606 



.... 622 
.... 640 



641 

657 

664 

673 

687 

703 







V 



Posters 

Head Start Graduate Student Research Grantees 

Action Research 

Assessment/Diagnosis 

Behavioral Issues of Early Childhood 

Child Care 

Community Resources 

Disabilities 

Early Education/Family Support 

ESL/Bilingual Issues 

Family Functioning/Systems 

Fatherhood 

Home Visiting 

Infant/Toddler 

Language Development/Early Literacy 

Maternal Mental Health 

Mental Health: Interventions and Services 

Methods/Measures/Instrument Development 

Native American 

Normal Child Development 

Parent Involvement in Children's Education 

Parenting Styles/Values/Attitudes/Behaviors 

Partnerships 

Physical Health and Development 

School Achievement/Academic Success 

Social/Emotional Development 

Staff Beliefs/Attitudes and Professional Training & Development 



721 

740 

745 

756 

766 

779 

784 

792 

797 

805 

812 

821 

826 

835 

854 

863 

869 

884 

889 

899 

907 

920 

923 

930 

954 

966 



Appendices 

Appendix A: Cooperating Organizations and Program Committee 

Appendix B: Peer Reviewers 

Appendix C: Subject Index 

Appendix D: Directory of Participants 



983 

984 

985 
987 




VI 



8 



Special Sessions 



Opening Session 



Human Capital — Investing in Parents to 
Facilitate Positive Outcomes in Young Children 

GREETINGS: John W. Hagen, Joan E. OhI, Faith Lamb-Parker 

INTRODUCTION OF KEYNOTE SPEAKER: John W. Hagen 

MODERATOR: 

Ann Crittenden 

Ann Crittenden is an award-winning journalist and author. She was a reporter for The New York Times /rom 
1975 to 1983, where she wrote on a broad range of economic issues, initiated numerous investigative reports, 
and authored a series on world hunger that was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize. She was also a financial writer 
and foreign correspondent for Newsweek, a reporter for Fortune, a visiting lecturer at MIT and Yale, a regular 
economics commentator for CBS News, and executive director of the Fund for Investigative journalism in 
Washington, D.C. 

Ms. Criuenden has a BA from Southern Methodist University; a Masters degree from Columbia University 
School of International Affairs; and an "all-but-dissertation" in modem European history from Columbia. She 
has moderated a lecture series on economics at the 92nd Street Y in New York City, and directed a seminar on 
the global economy for the Aspen Institute. She has spoken before a wide range of groups, including the New 
York Venture Capital Association and the World Affairs Council of San Francisco. She is a member of the 
Council on Foreign Relations and is on the board of the International Center for Research on Women. 



KEYNOTE SPEAKER: 

James J. Heckman 

James J. Heckman is the Henry Schultz Distinguished Service Professor of Economics at the University of 
Chicago where he has served since 1973. He holds a parallel appointment as Director of Center for Social 
Program Evaluation at the Harris School of Public Policy at the University of Chicago, and is also a Senior 
Research Fellow at the American Bar Foundation. 

Heckmans research combines both methodological and empirical interests in evaluating the impact of a 
variety of social programs on the economy and on the society at large. He has written on the impact of civil 
rights and affirmative action programs in the U.S., on the impact of taxes on labor supply and human capital 
accumulation, on the impact of public and private job training on earnings and employment, on the impact of 
unionism on labor markets in developing countries, and on the impact of skill certification programs. 

Heckman has also contributed substantially on the literature both in applied and theoretical econometrics. 
His methodological work on selection bias and on the evaluation of social programs is widely used, as is his 
research on the analysis of heterogeneity in consumer preferences and in the analysis of longitudinal data. He 
has a series of influential papers on the identifiability of broad classes of econometric models. 



O 

ERIC 



10 



3 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



Heckman has a B.A. from Colorado College, a masters degree and doctorate in economics from Princeton 
University, and an honorary masters from Yale University. He has received numerous honors for his research. 
He is a fellow of the Econometric Society, a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and of the 
National Academy of Sciences. He received the John Bates Clark Award of the American Economic Association 
in 1983. Most recently, he shared the 2000 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences with Daniel 
McFadden. 



John Hagen: I want to welcome everyone to Head Start's Sixth National Research Conference. 
Windy Hill is not with us this morning, but she will be at a later session, so you will meet her 
then. First, 1 want to introduce you to Joan E. Ohl who is the Commissioner for the Administra- 
tion on Children, Youth and Families (ACYF). Previous to this position, which Joan Ohl has had 
now for the last several months, she was Secretary of Health and Human Services in the State of 
West Virginia. She has had many positions in health care and prior to that she worked in higher 
education at five different universities. We are pleased that she is here and will make some 
opening remarks. 

Joan E. Ohl: 1 am delighted to be here and to welcome you to Head Start's Sixth National 
Research Conference: The First Eight Years: Pathways to the Future. We at Head Start are pleased 
to have funded these conferences devoted to the latest early child and family research, practice, 
and policy. 

Wade Horn, when he was the Commissioner at ACYF, initiated these research conferences. 
These conferences have grown over the years to become a major forum for presenting new 
research in early childhood development and programming. We continue to emphasize the 
implications of research for practice, which makes this conference most unique in terms of the 
potential immediate impact on children and families. 

1 want to recognize Esther Kresh, the Federal Project Officer for this research conference. 

When 1 came to the ACYF in the fall and met her, Esther Kresh first talked to me about this 
conference because it has been her pride and joy, her baby as one would say. Many of you may 
know that over the past few months she has had numerous health problems and, therefore, 
will not be able to attend the conference. 1 would ask you to remember her in your thoughts 
and prayers. 

I would also like to thank Faith Lamb-Parker from Columbia University and John Hagen 
from the Society for Research in Child Development, along with the other members of the 
Program Committee for putting together what looks to be a stimulating and exciting program. 
The program looks to be excellent. It brings together nationally known professionals froni the 
field to address you in plenary sessions, luncheons, symposia, roundtables, and conversation 
hours. I also want to thank the cooperating organizations that have worked with the Program 
Committee and the Head Start Bureau in making this event happen. 

As the largest national child development program for children from birth to 5 and their 
families, a major part of Head Start's mission is to serve as a national laboratory, to test new 
ideas and to contribute new knowledge about how to serve low-income families and their 
children. With its diverse population and local responsiveness to programming that best serves 
the need of each community. Head Start provides a unique opportunity for partnerships among 
researchers and Head Start staff and parents. 

The goals for this conference are to (a) bring the most recent and the best research in early 
childhood development, child care, and family issues to the early childhood intervention 
community; (b) provide a fomm where practitioners can share their experience on issues that 
they are facing in the field with the research community, to help them form the most relevant 
research questions; and (c) build strong, enduring partnerships among researchers, practitioners, 
and policy makers concerning low-income children and their families. 





4 



OPENING SESSION 



In looking at some of the evaluations of past conferences, it is clear that this conference has 
become increasingly proactive, dynamic, and responsive to the needs of both practitioners and 
researchers. Partnerships and collaborations have developed where previously there had been 
none. Examples cited are where Head Start directors, trainers, and staff increasingly embrace 
researchers efforts and work wholeheartedly together toward common goals where before there 
was suspicion of researchers' intentions. Furthermore, researchers have engaged in partnerships 
in developing measures for Head Start programs. Additionally, we are designing research 
questions, analyzing data, interpreting results, and enriching and validating the outcomes of the 
research efforts resulting from those partnerships. 

In the past, researchers might have kept at arms' distance to remain "objective" while design- 
ing their study and collecting and analyzing data. These conferences have helped us achieve the 
diversity of perspectives that is needed to provide answers to important questions about chil- 
dren and families. The Bureau recognizes the importance of partnerships in research exemplified 
by our recent initiatives. In addition to this conference, the Head Start University Partnerships, 
the Early Head Start Local Research, the Quality Research Centers, and the Impact Study exem- 
plify the process of partnership growing and developing. 

Finally, I would like to leave you with a charge for this conference. For researchers — continue 
to do the best research possible because there are many questions that we need to have an- 
swered in our field. Practitioners — continue to feed research your most pressing problems and 
tell researchers what it is like in the field. Most importantly, to both practitioners and research- 
ers— continue to create and build new partnerships, learn each other's language, formulate 
mutual goals, and most of all, listen to each other as we move forward increasing our knowledge 
base about young children and their families. I am glad to be with you this morning. I hope that 
the conference will be very productive for each and every one of you. 

Faith Lamb-Parker: Good morning and welcome. Esther Kresh, lohn Hagen, and I have been 
partners in conducting these research conferences since the first conference in 1991. We are 
saddened that Esther could not be with us. loan Ohl talked about how Esther had worked with 
Wade Horn on developing the framework for the first conference, thinking about how it would 
look and how it would work, and it has truly been her baby. We will be delivering cards and 
food to her periodically throughout the conference. Some of you know that she handpicked 
everything you will be eating at the conference, and, of course, she wants a taste of it all. 

We work with a Program Committee whose members have given freely of their time and 
expertise and I have grown to love them all. I want to thank each of you for helping make this 
program as good as it can possibly be. lohn Hagen and I keep saying that the conference we are 
doing has to be the best one, but then ask, "How can we top this?" Then we always say of the 
next one, "Well, this one looks even better." We both agree that this is the best one so far. The 
members of the Program Committee are Esther Kresh; lohn Hagen; Mary Bruce Webb, the 
Acting Federal Project Officer in Esther Kresh's absence; and myself; along with Ann Bardwell 
from Child Development Council of Franklin County, Ohio; Kathr 3 m Barnard, University 
of Washington; Cynthia Garcia Coll, Brown University, who is unable to attend; Gloria lohnson- 
Powell, University of Wisconsin; lohn Pascoe, Wright State University; Gregg Powell, National 
Head Start Association; Suzanne Randolph, University of Maryland; Lonnie Sherrod, Fordham 
University; Jerry Sroufe, American Educational Research Association; Ruby Takinishi, Foundation 
for Child Development; Harry Wright, University of South Carolina; and Edward Zigler, Yale 
University. 

I would like to give a special welcome to Leslie Davidson, who is the Chair of my department 
at the Mailman School of Public Health, the Department of Population and Family Health. I am 
excited that Leslie is coming not only to the conference but to Columbia, because until now no 
one from my department has been interested in attending these conferences, and that is sad. A 
pediatrician, she will bring her expertise, knowledge, and interest in child issues to both. I would 





5 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



also like to give a special welcome to a person who has been coming to all the conferences and 
is a Head Start pioneer. We do not applaud enough the people from our past that are no longer 
with us every day, but who have been very influential in helping us get where we are today. That 
person is Saul Rosoff, who was Ed Zigler's first Deputy when ACYF was called the Office of Child 
Development (OCD). Ed acknowledges that without Saul he could not have accomplished what 
he did while Director of OCD. 

The number of cooperating organizations for the conference has grown considerably since 
the first conference where there were only 20 national research organizations. Since that time 
we have grown and have joined with many more practitioner organizations. We now have 48 
organizations representing research and practice and covering a wide range of disciplines. We 
would like to thank them for their continued support and thank their representatives who are 
here. 

1 would also like to thank the program staff from Columbia University, Ruth Robinson and 
Hezie Rhee; and the staff from Xtria, Bethany Chirico and Melissa Paasch, for their hard work 
and good humor throughout the planning of this conference. 1 want to add that Bethany is as 
close to a perfect partner as anyone could ever want to work with. 

John Hagen: 1 represent the Society for Research in Child Development (SRCD). The Society 
has three tenets that have been in place sirice its founding. One is to provide a fomm for the 
best research across disciplines. The second is to translate research findings from the basic arena 
to policy and practice. The third, which we have only recognized more in recent years, is to train 
the new generation of researchers and those who will be involved in the translation of research 
to practice and policy. Each of these tenets is well represented in the program and especially in 
the opening session, which is on the subject of "Human Capital: Investing in Parents to Facili- 
tate Positive Outcomes in Young Children." 

In the last decade the theme of crossdisciplinary and interdisciplinary research and a focus on 
translating research to policy and practice has been emphasized in colleges across the country. 
Our opening session reflects that. 1 am pleased to introduce our speaker, James Heckman. 
Heckman received his Bachelor's degree from Colorado College and did his Master's and 
Doctorate in Economics at Princeton University. He is currently the Henry Schultz Distinguished 
Service Professor of Economics at the University of Chicago where he has been since 1973. He is 
also the Director of the Center for Social Program Evaluation at the Harris School of Public 
Policy at the University of Chicago, a university that fosters and takes pride in interdisciplinary 
cooperation. 

Heckman was the corecipient of the 2000 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics with Daniel 
McFadden. 1 think it is especially fitting that we have Heckman and Ann Crittenden today 
because this represents a new direction for this research conference. When these conferences 
began 11 years ago we just glimpsed the beginnings of an opportunity to bring different disci- 
plines together. However, in the last decade we are seeing some of the different disciplines in the 
behavioral sciences, education, and human services start to come together in important ways. 

James J. Heckman: 1 am extremely pleased to be invited here, not only to speak but also to 
learn. The subject that you study is actually fundamental but unappreciated in the general policy 
arena. My talk will cover research that 1, along with some of my colleagues, have done to try to 
integrate the work you do into the larger framework of skill formation in a modem economy. 1 
begin with some background, partly to motivate why it is that 1 believe that more people should 
support the case for early intervention. Then 1 will discuss what the evidence is and try to fit this 
into a bigger picture. Many people will consider the arguments for or against early childhood 
interventions as arguments made on their own merit about a particular stage in a life cycle. 
However, 1 believe what we need to understand is the evolution of life cycle skills, and that 
proper understanding will cause us to rethink not only the topic of early childhood, but to 




6 



13 



OPENING SESSION 



possibly reformulate our policy approaches. We need to think about this in a more inclusive, 
integrative way, and to think of sldll formation as not being a segmented activity in one part of a 
life cycle or another. We need to incorporate all aspects in one common framework. 

First let me give you some background facts. A substantial body of empirical evidence 
documents a shift in the demand toward more skilled labor that began in the late 1970s. This 
shift has been found in many countries around the world. In the United States, this shift in 
demand caused the wages of high school dropouts to decline in real terms over most of the past 
2 decades. Similar phenomena are found in other economies with open labor markets. 

In response to these economic incentives, recent cohorts of youth have increased their college 
attendance, but the increase has not been uniform across racial, ethnic, and family income 
groups. Latinos and African Americans have only recently begun to increase their college 
enrollment rates. For minority males, college enrollment has been remarkably stable. These 
weak responses are surprising in light of the increase in the return to education that has been 
shared across all ethnic groups. Among all groups, the college enrollment response to the rise in 
the demand for college-educated labor has been greatest for children from high-income fami- 
lies. Only after sustained increases in the premium for education did enrollment increase for 
children from lower income families. These responses have increased intergenerational inequal- 
ity. Higher income parents have educated their children to earn more than the children of lower 
income parents (see Figure 1). 

Figure 1. College Participation by 18 to 24 Year Old High School Graduates and Equivalency 
Degree Holders 




Family Income Quartile: Top Half Third Quartile 

Bottom Quartile 



Note: These numbers were computed from 1971 to 1989 CPS P-20 School Reports and the 1990-1993 
October CPS data files. Racial-ethnic categories are mutually exclusive. 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



Second, and even more troubling, the high school dropout rate has actually been increasing 
over the last 20 years, not decreasing. The graduation rate that you might read in The New York 
Times seems to show that high school graduation rates have been increasing over time. However, 
the reality is that all of the growth in high school certification in the last 20 years has been 
through GED certification, not through completion of high school. We know from many studies 
in economics, sociology, and education that a GED degree does not trade equally well in the 
labor market, in the military, and in a number of other tasks as a high school diploma. If the 
GEDs are removed, we find that the high school graduation rate has actually been decreasing 
over time (see Figure 2). 

Figure 2. High School Graduates of Regular Day School Programs, Public and Private, as a 
Percent of 17 Years Old Population USA, 1971-1999 

78.0 1 




While we have an economy where skill has become more important, at the same time the 
high school dropout rate has increased and the rate of college attendance also has essentially 
decreased. Even adjusting for migration and for compositional effects, we still find that the 
American economy has not responded. As one might expect, it should respond to a market that 
now places a greater emphasis on skills in the form of higher-wages and opportunities in social 
life. In the face of an increased demand for skill throughout our economic and social life, we 
find that the American system is not producing potential workers with a high level of skill and, 
in fact, this threatens our prosperity in the next 20 years. 

While it is possible through trial and error to stumble onto an effective policy without 
understanding the problems that motivate it, a more promising approach to policy formation is 
to understand the mechanisms and institutions that produce skill, to understand how they are 
related, and where they have gone wrong. 

These considerations are especially important in the study of skill formation. Human capital 
accumulation is a dynamic process. The skills acquired in one stage of the life cycle affect both 
the initial conditions and the technology of learning at the next stage. Human capital is pro- 
duced over the life cycle by families, schools, and firms. A major determinant of successful 
schools is successful families. Schools work with what parents bring them. They operate more 
effectively if parents reinforce them by encouraging and motivating children. Job training 




8 



15 



OPENING SESSION 



programs, whether public or private, work with what families and schools give to them, and 
cannot remedy 20 years of neglect. 

Recent studies in child development emphasize that different stages of the life cycle are 
critical to the formation of different types of abilities. When the opportunities for formation of 
these abilities are missed, remediation is costly and full remediation is prohibitively costly. 
These findings highlight the need to take a comprehensive view of skill formation over the life 
cycle that is grounded in the best science and economics in order to produce effective policies. 

A study of human capital policy grounded in economic and scientific fundamentals can 
improve upon a purely empirical approach to policy that relies on evaluations of programs and 
policies in place or previously experienced. While any trustworthy study of economic policy 
must be grounded in data, it is also important to recognize that the policies that can be evalu- 
ated empirically are only a small subset of the policies that might be tried. If we base specula- 
tion about economic policies on economic fundamentals, rather than solely on estimated 
treatment effects that are only weakly related to economic fundamentals, we are in a better 
position to think beyond what has been tried to propose more innovative solutions to human 
capital policy problems. 

Accordingly, this presentation will investigate the study of human capital policy by placing it 
in the context of economic models of life cycle learning and skill accumulation, and in the 
context of economic models of competition, rather than focusing exclusively on which policies 
have "worked" in the past although we certainly pay attention to what has been tried. 

What are the important issues that might account for the results we see? Over time we find 
pronounced differences in college participation rates depending on family income. Looking at 
18- to 24-year-old males, we find that about the time the market for skills increased making 
college attendance a premium in terms of increased wages, the college attendance rates of 
people from the top half of the family-income distribution also increased, and increased rather 
strongly. However, in the bottom quartile of the family-income distribution, little response has 
occurred and college attendance rates did not substantially increase (see Figure 3). 

Figure 3. College Participation by 18 to 24 Year Old Male High School Completers by 
Parental Family Income Quartile 



90 

85 

80 

75 

70 

65 

60 

55 

50 

45 

40 



Income Quartile: Top Half Third Quartile 

Bottom Quartile 

Source: Authors' calculations from October CPS files. 





-- 16 



9 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



There are two basic interpretations of the finding that parental income is important. The first 
and probably the most commonly accepted one that guides most economic and social policy is 
that individual children at the age for attending college face serious credit market constraints so 
it is difficult to borrow money needed for college. Family income resources really prevent 
individuals from attending sdiool. This argument was popular in the Clinton Administration 
and motivated the Hope Scholarship program. This has become the most common discussion 
in terms of educational policy. 

There is, however, a second interpretation, which I believe actually receives much better 
support. The second interpretation is the following: Family income is really just a crude surro- 
gate for the family and is something that has to do with long-term family influences. As impor- 
tant as the family-income level at the age when the child is ready for college is the income of the 
parents when the child is 4 years old. 

These two interpretations are essentially not at odds with each other. They both can be at 
work. Recent research suggests that the overwhelming, dominant explanation can be attributed 
to early factors, not the factors that arise in family income and tuition policies implemented 
when children are 14 or 15 or 16. These differentials are evident at an early age and they give 
rise to the educational differentials. Similar phenomena occur for participation in job training 
programs and participation in a number of dimensions of economic and social life, but the 
factors that give rise to these differentials by income/ class actually start early. I believe that this is 
why early intervention is so important. 

We should recognize that in the American context when we classify people by income, we are 
essentially classifying them by race and ethnicity. Looking at college attendance rates by African 
American, Whites, and Latinos, we find that the Whites' rate increases while the rates for Latinos 
and African Americans have increased much more slowly and fitfully (see Figures 4 and 5). 
Evidence shows that inequality in college attendance is increasing across ethnic groups, income 
groups, and generations at the same time that there is a demand for greater skill in the labor 
market. 



Pigui ‘0 4 . College Participation, High School Graduates and GEO Holders, Males, Ages 18 24 




Year 



White Black Hispanic 

Note: Three-year moving averages are shown. 




10 



OPENING SESSION 



Participation, High School Graduates and GED Holders, Females, 




Note: Three-year moving averages are shown. 



What IS the best mdence that we can bring to bear on how to solve this question? From 
research that I have done along with research findings from others, I would argue that the 
wing basic diagram (see Figure 6) summarizes two critical ideas that are important to 

first idea is what economists like to call the 

rate of return to investment— basically the dollar rate of return. Here we can look not only at 
earnings, but we can monetize various other social and socioeconomic benefits. This first 

M where we argue the following: It is more profitable to invest in the young than 
Ae old on the sheer basis of when the investment occurs. If one makes an investoent^and the 
investment does not ftilly depreaate, say it does not depredate at all, one is going to have a long 

Sr, . '“"damental, something 4at economlts have oX * 

recently fully understood but has been around in the literature for quite awhile is a more basic 
idea-the notion that skill begets skill. dwniie, is a more basic 

Econornists call it complementary— so the early interventions, the early investments thev nav 
off noton^y in the form of direct yield and direct payments and in terms of direcUnclT buUn 
terns of allowing people to learn, facilitating and motivating the learning process. If we were to 

ateTlT high Jt'dollar return, Twol 

^e, based on looking over the enUre life cyde, that it is in post-school training, schooling, 

in to programs. Moreover, when we compute the cost-benefit analysis and converfit 

lowefietnm^^^^ of economics, we find a high return for preschool children and a somewhat 
lower return for regular schooling and job training. 





11 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



Figure 6. Rates of Return to $1 of Investment Initially Setting Investment to Be Equal Across 
All Ages 



Rate of 
Return to 
Investment 
in Human 
Capital 




Preschool 



School 



Post School 



0 



Age 



If I have to spend a dollar, where would I spend most of that dollar? Theoretically, based on 
evidence that we have about the complementarity of skills and how early skills and early 
motivations foster later learning and how that in turn fosters further learning and is valued in 
the labor market and in other activities in social life, then investing in early intervention offers 
the greatest return for dollars spent. 

The next question is how much do we allocate to these various activities? We find that there is 
a large allocation for ordinary public schooling, K-12, and the postsecondary schools, as well as 
a large amount of allocation of resources to both public and private job training. Relatively 
speaking, we invest little in the early years of the life cycle, partly because only recently have we 
established a solid case that we should put early childhood investments on the same basis as 
other kinds of investments. One problem is that the government and policy makers frequently 
specialize in one part of the life cycle or another and fail to recognize that the process of human 
skill formation is a life cycle. There should not be a single Department of Labor or Sub-Depart- 
ment of Education but, in fact, there should be a Department of Human Capital Formation. As 
an empirical statement I would argue, if you look at the budgets and if you look at the interven- 
tion, there is ample evidence that there are very high rates of return from intervention at this 
early level. 

There is a large gap between African Americans and Latinos in terms of college participation 
rates at age 24-12 percentage points between African Americans and Whites and 14 percentage 
points between Whites and Latinos. The thrust of a large body of evidence that has been 
gathered over 20-25 years has shown that once we control for early family factors and adjust the 
figures, this gap jumps from a 12 to 14% deficit to an 18 to 19% deficit. However, we know that 
when we control for early family factors, it makes a tremendous difference. Recently there has 
been a great deal of discussion in educational policy about family income being very important 
and explaining much of the gap between different income groups. 



O 

ERIC 



12 



19 



OPENING SESSION 



Let me neutralize the issue of race for a moment and simply look at income quartiles and 
ability quartiles for White males. These data come from the National Longitudinal Survey of 
Youth. The data show that if family income is high and individuals are at the highest ability 
level they are the most likely to enroll in college. Among very bright children, we find essentially 
that if we classify individuals by current family income status, these individuals are much less 
likely to go to school. 

How does this hold up if we essentially say, yes, it looks like family income matters? What 
kinds of policy are indicated by this? I believe it is very useful to do an adjustment controlling 
for early family factors — control for the importance of the family. If one does that there will still 
be a gap although the gap will shrink considerably. This suggests that early family factors play a 
large role in discussions of college participation. Therefore, when we think about education 
policy, we might want to think about early childhood policy. 

But let me give you an even more dramatic demonstration. Instead of just asking, "Do you go 
to school? let us look at the question, "Do you complete 4 years of school ?^^ It is completion of 
schooling that has the highest economic return. Here we see something interesting. We still find 
a gap, but the gap between children from the lowest income and the highest income families is 
not so substantial. I believe any evidence of the short-term factors at work in explaining the gap 
in college attendance is eliminated, at least in college enrollment, which is best addressed by 
tuition policy and transfers to families in the college going years. 

What do we know? As I have already indicated, ability and early factors make a difference. Let 
me show you how powerful these differences are. From a study of Whites only looking at the 
differences in math scores between ages 6 and 12, established ability factors play a large role. 
Background factors play a large role in explaining participation, not only in college, but also in 
job training and many other aspects of the economy, even the military. If we examine the gaps 
we see a substantial test score gap between those from the highest income families and those 
from low-income families. These gaps begin early and, if anything, widen. Again, if we control 
for early family factors the gaps are not eliminated, but are substantially reduced. 

The same can be true of the much more controversial African American/Latino/White gap 
where there is a substantial gap in math scores. When we adjust for early background factors, 
early family income, and family structure we find that the gaps, while not completely elimi- 
nated, are more than two-thirds reduced (see Table 1). This again indicates the importance of 
family and early family interventions. As those abilities are the exact drivers of the gap in 
education and participation in the larger society, this research leads one to think that it is very 
important to focus on the early years. 

Let me make a couple of other observations. When we talk about ability we frequendy talk 
about mental ability, cognitive ability. But recent research and a lot of intuidon suggest that 
ability is multidimensional, not only in an obvious way, but in an important distinction 
between cognitive and noncognitive abilities. Let me give you some evidence of this. You are all 
familiar with the GED testing program. The GED program is very widespread and is now 
producing somewhere between 15-20% of all new high school graduates. It is now beginning to 
be well studied. The goals of the GED program are basically to certify that individuals have 
achieved a certain level of test competence. 

Does the GED achieve this? If we look at a measure of achievement, the AFQT for GED 
recipients and high school graduates, whether they are White, African American, or Latino or 
whether they are male or female^ we find that the GED and high school graduates who do not 
go on to college and earn approximately the same amount of money have essentially the same 
test scores. In some sense, therefore, the test works, but it is precisely because the test works in 
this sense that it is a valuable insight into the importance of noncognitive skills. 

How well do GED recipients actually perform in the labor market? There we find something 
dramatic, which is that GEDs, once you adjust for their ability and their years of schooling, are 
typically earning about what high school dropouts earn. They are not earning anywhere near the 
amount earned by high school graduates. 







20 



13 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



Table 1. The Change in the White-Minority Schooling Gap when Minority Explanatory 
Variables are Equated to White Levels (see notes at end of table) Standard Errors in Paren- 
theses (the Relevant White-Minority Schooling Gap is given in the last row of each panel) 



A. Change in minority probability of being in grade 9 or higher at age 15 




Without AFQT Score 


With AFQT Score 




Blacks (1) 


Hispanics (2) 


Blacks (3) 


Hispanics (4) 


( 1 ) Equating All Family 


.07 (.021)t 


.08 (.022)t 


.03(.022) 


.02 (.021) 


Background Components 










Individual Components: 










(la) Number of Siblings 


.03 (.009)t 


.03 (.012)t 


.02 (.010)t 


.01 (.013) 


(Ib)Highest Grade of Father 


.04 0021 )t 


-.01 (.028) 


.01 (.022) 


-.03 (.029) 


(Ic) Highest Grade of Mother 


.01 (.005)t 


.06 (.021)t 


.00 (.007) 


.04 (.023)t 


(Id) Broken Home 


-.02 (.010) 


-.003 (.006) 


.001 (.010) 


.003 (.007) 


(2) Equating Family Income 


.09 (.021)t 


.12 (.021)t 


.08 (.027)t 


.04 (.020)t 


(3) Equating Local Average Wages 


-.001 (.002) 


.01 (.005)t 


-.002 (.002) 


.008 (.004)t 


(4) Equating Tuition and 


-.01 (.005)t 


-.02 (.008)t 


-.02 (.006)t 


-.02 (.009)t 


College Proximity 










(5) Equating AFQT Scores 


na 


na 


.16 (.034)t 


.17 (.027)t 


(6) Equating 1 and 2 


.14 (.023)t 


.18 (.030)t 


.10 (.025)t 


.06 (.028)t 


(7) Equating 1,2,3/ and 4 


.13 (.021)t 


.17 (.021)t 


.08 (.023)t 


.05 (.027)t 


(8) Equating 1,2,3,4, and 5 


na 


na 


.21 (.027)t 


.20 (.026)t 


(9) Gap between Whites 


.16 


.21 


.16 


•21 


and Minorities 










B. Change in minority probability of high school completion at age 24 




(high school graduation and GED attainment combined) 






Without AFQT Score 


With AFQT Score 




Blacks (1) 


Hispanics (2) 


Blacks (3) 


Hispanics (4) 


( 1 ) Equating All Family 


.06 (.014)t 


.05 (.021)t 


.03 (.015)t 


-.01 (.024) 


Background Components 










Individual Components: 










(la) Number of Siblings 


.02 (.007)t 


.03 (.010)t 


.01 (.007)t 


.01 (.010) 


(lb) Highest Grade of Father 


.03 (.015)t 


-.01 (.032) 


.02 (.016) 


-.04 (.029)t 


(Ic) Highest Grade of Mother 


.01 (.005) 


.03 (.020) 


-.002 (.005) 


.02 (.022) 


(Id) Broken Home 


.01 0008) 


-.005 (.006)) 


.007 (.007) 


-.001 (.005) 


(2) Equating Family Income 


.07 (.016)t 


.08 (.018)t 


.05 (.018)t 


.01 (.019) 


(3) Equating Local Average Wages 


.01 (.004)t 


.01 (.010) 


.008 (.004)t 


.01 (.010) 


(4) Equating Tuition and 


-.004 (.003) 


.006 (.009) 


-.007 (.002)t 


.007 (.008) 


College Proximity 










(5) Equating AFQT Scores 


na 


na 


.11 (.019)t 


.16 (.019)t 


(6) Equating 1 and 2 


.12 (.013) 


.12 (.021)t 


.06 (.016)t 


.002 (.026) 


(7) Equating 1,2,3, and 4 


.12 (.013) 


.13 (.023)t 


.06 (.017)t 


.008 (.030) 


(8) Equating 1, 2,3,4, and 5 


na 


na 


.15 (.014)t 


.16 (.026)t 


(9) Gap between Whites 


.08 


.14 


.08 


.14 


and Minorities 











tSignificant at the 10 percent level. 



o 

ERIC 



14 



OPENING SESSION 



What accounts for this? Is the answer that other fartors matter? Who are these GEDs? What 
do we know about them? I am talking about averages, not about individuals. What we find is 
that, looking at participation in various activities such as shoplifting, use of drugs, petty crimes, 
and so forth, GED recipients are actually more likely to participate in these than high school 
dropouts. Certainly more than high school graduates. 

Why am I going on about this? Because this provides some indirect evidence that something 
other than just straight cognitive skill matters, and it also suggests that when we start evaluating 
early childhood programs, we want to think more broadly about skills that make a tangible 
manifestation. 

Let me talk about the evidence — like bringing coal to Newcastle — but I will nonetheless talk 
about it. What we have seen from a large number of studies of early education is the following: 
If you look at early intervention programs — the Abecedarian Project, the Milwaukee Project, 
the Harlem Study, the Perry Preschool Project, and a number of other studies — the central 
return on these programs with some exceptions and certainly with evidence of fadeout is that 
basic abilities of individuals such as IQ scores are not fundamentally altered. We do find, 
however, that these programs have substantial impact on crime, motivation, and school attain- 
ment. We find substantial reduction in antisocial participation. We find more integration, so 
while cognitive ability may be difficult to change, achievement is not. 

A provocative study by Donahue and Siegelman suggests that even though the Perry Pre- 
school costs a great deal in terms of direct amounts of money spent compared to the crime 
reduction rates, what you find is that the return, just in terms of savings on incarceration costs, 
more than pays for the cost of Perry Preschool. In other words, if we carefully target the program 
towards disadvantaged individuals at risk, we can get cost-benefit ratios that are extraordinarily 
high, certainly higher than anything we see in terms of return for schooling and job training. 

The general thrust of the evidence shows that if we start trying to address problems of skill 
formation, motivation, and achievement in the late teenage years and the early 20s, we can have 
some success with some people, but it is much too late. This is why I have come to believe that 
preschool activity is so important; I certainly do not want to write anybody off, but the cost- 
benefit ratios and the rates-of-retum calculations suggest low rates of return for these later 
interventions. All the available evidence suggests that preschool programs have an extremely 
high rate of return and should be supported. 

In summary, what we need is a much more inclusive understanding of how skills are formed 
and a much more rigorous knowledge base. I would argue that the preschool intervention area 
has been neglected in policy agendas precisely because people are not looking at the integrated 
aspect of life cycle learning. Part of the strongest case that can be made for early intervention is 
precisely that these later interventions are not all that effective. 

What has a high rate of return? Early intervention does. This does not mean that people who 
are 20 or 25 years old should be written off. It does suggest, from a social planning perspective 
and a social policy perspective, that if we think about new generations of individuals, the return 
on a purely economic and social base are extraordinarily high in the early years. The more 
evidence we show on this, the more work will be funded in this area and the more basic 
knowledge and social policy will be directed towards the real problem in our society. 

Hagen: You can see why we were thrilled when James Heckman agreed to speak at the confer- 
ence. He certainly gave us a different perspective and also makes the charge to put our resources, 
as much as possible, into issues around young children and family. 

We are now going to hear from Ann Crittenden. She received her Bachelor's degree from 
Southern Methodist University. She went on to Columbia University School of International 
Affairs for her Masters degree and also pursued a Doctorate in European History. She has been a 
lecturer on a wide variety of topics over the years and worked for The New York Times for 10 
years. In recent years she has been especially committed to issues of investing in children. Her 



O 

ERIC 



22 



15 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



most recent book. The Price of Motherhood'. Why The Most ImportuTit Job in the Wbr/d Is Still the 
Least Valued, was published in 2001. 

Ann Crittenden: I am thrilled to be here and am especially flattered to be on the same podium 
with a Nobel Prize-winning economist because I have been waiting for you people to get into 
this issue. It is very exciting because I believe with your research and reinforcement from the 
field of economics there is a better chance for change. Heckman explained that he became • 
interested in early education by understanding that the rate of return was far greater than in later 
education and job training programs. I wanted to mention how I got into this field. I was 
basically an economics journalist for about 15 to 20 years. Then I had a child, which changed 
my life overnight. I put two and two together. I was aware at that time that the economists were 
becoming increasingly convinced that human capital — by which is meant all the combination 
of human skills, training and motivation, curiosity, the spirit of entrepreneurship — is the most 
important component of national wealth. It is our greatest national resource. 

In 1995 the World Bank, for the first time, began to quantify the sources of wealth and 
national riches, and they put human capital at 59% of national wealth. This makes it more 
important than everything else added together: land, water, oil, all other resources, physical 
infrastructure, you name it, all of it together is not as important as educated, prepared human 
beings. 

A few years ago the president of the Information Technology Association of America said that 
running out of IT workers today is like running out of iron-ore during the industrial revolution. 

If this is our source of national wealth, I knew that as a new mother I had to learn more 
about the child development literature. I read everything I could find and began assigning 
myself stories and writing articles about child development. I interviewed Irving Harris, Berry 
Brazelton, Daniel Stem, and other researchers and tried to find out all the latest information. 
Finally one friend asked me, "Is your child all right?" He thought that maybe I had a serious 
problem. I said, "Yes, he is very normal. I am just trying to learn about this field." 

This was 20 years ago and we were just beginning to accumulate early childhood research. I 
wrote the first story appearing in the popular press for the Wall Street Journal on the initial 
results of the Perry Preschool Project. I thought, "Well, here we are, 0 to 3, the critical years. If 
these are truly the years where human capabilities are developed or stunted, then who are the 
greatest producers of human capital?" Two and two make four. Mothers and early childhood 
caregivers, early educators, nannies, grandmothers, hands-on fathers, family care providers, day- 
care teachers — all of these people are our most important producers in the country. This has to 
be true. They are more important than the farmers who will receive $118 billion in subsidies 
over the next 6 years, more important than accountants and their multibillion-dollar move- 
ments of capital. They are, without question, our most valuable economic players. 

I wondered if I could write about this when no one else was talking about it. No one had put 
together the discipline of economics and the field of child development. They were two totally 
separate worlds and to this day, almost 20 years later, they remain far too separate. I have one 
message for all of you — that what you are doing is wealth creation and you are the most 
important people in the country doing that work. 

Heckman's brilliant presentation gave us the numbers. However, the truth of what I am 
talking about is not entirely in the numbers. We need the numbers and we are going to need the 
research as well. I believe, however, that the truth lies elsewhere, which is illustrated by an 
anecdote from an interview that I had when I was writing the book. 

The interview was with a female postal worker, whose husband was also a postal worker. She 
was pregnant and also had a 4-year-old. A fellow worker had just adopted a 2-year-old foster 
child whom he clearly loved. One day he came in and said that he and his wife had decided to 
institutionalize the child because he was tested and appeared to be retarded. The postal worker 
was appalled and she went home and talked to her husband, saying that she thought there was 




16 



23 



OPENING SESSION 



nothing wrong with the child, but that he had been abused. She decided she wanted to take him 
home rather than have him institutionalized. Her husband was not happy because it would be a 
financial burden, but she said she would earn the extra money to pay for the legal bills and to 
take care of this child. They took the child and eventually formally adopted him. She was 
convinced he had been abused after the following incident: The boy had been with them about 
2 weeks and was playing with the 4-year-old when the phone rang. The mother went to answer 
it, telling the children not to move and she would be back in a minute. She kept talking, 
forgetting about the children waiting. About 45 minutes later she went back to check on them. 
Her son had become tired of waiting and had mn off to play. The foster child, on the other 
hand, was standing motionless waiting. He had not moved the whole time she had been gone. 
She told me that was when she knew he had been mistreated. She reassured him that this house 
was safe and that he was loved. The end of the story is that the "retarded" child went to Harvard 
and Yale Graduate School and on the day I interviewed this woman he was elected the Mayor of 
Washington, DC. Think about it. What is this in economic terms? A million dollars at least 
saved to the public taxpayer. A human life saved. An enormous asset created. 

Classical economics casts economic man as the chief actor in the drama of wealth creation. 
Theoretically the individual's pursuit of personal gain adds to the sum total of riches. No matter 
how self-interested one may be, economic man's strivings to gamer wealth for himself will be 
guided as if by an invisible hand to produce more resources than can ever be generated by the 
well-meaning plans of government or the community. 

This is what is called the magic of the marketplace. " The beauty of the free market according 
to Charles Schultz, Economic Advisor to President Lyndon Johnson, is that it reduces "the need 
for compassion, patriotism, brotherly love and cultural solidarity as motivating forces behind 
social improvement, harnessing the base motive of material self-interest to promote the com- 
mon good as perhaps the most important social invention mankind has achieved." 

This satisfying scenario assures us that we can all be as selfish as we like and still be doing 
good. This is tme, but it is only half of the story. The second half is that in the beginning we are 
all helpless babies and another economic actor, the conscientious mother, or let us call this 
group "conscientious caregivers," holds center stage. Without conscientious caregivers there 
would be no economic man. Here is another way the story of wealth creation might begin. 
Conscientious mothers and caregivers motivated by feelings of compassion and love nurture, 
protect, and train children for adulthood. Fathers, other female caregivers, and relatives may 
play a part in this process, but mothers have the primary role. Their altruism and willingness to 
do all they can for their offspring will be guided as if by an invisible hand to produce healthy 
children who will become the productive enterprising economic men and women of the future. 

What we are actually talking about is finding a way of incorporating this other profound 
truth into our way of thinking, into our economic policy, and into our investment policy 
because there is increasing evidence that an investment in the young gives us by far the highest 
rate of return. That, of course, includes investment in mothers and other caregivers. 

I discovered another body of data from the field of economic development while doing my 
research. These data show that without any question, on every continent in every culture, 
resources in the hands of mothers and other hands-on caregivers is far more likely to be invested 
in children's health and education than resources in any other hands. 

That is profound and has led people like Larry Summers, when he was at The World Bank, to 
lecture groups in Pakistan, telling them that investing in women was the surest path to eco- 
nomic development. The women are going to invest in the children and that is going to ensure 
economic development for the future. We need to take seriously the insights that Heckman 
shared with us today about how other researchers are producing brilliant results from early 
intervention projects and that we have the capacity to change our own national strength as well 
as impact the lives of children. 




24 



17 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



Question: I am from Houston, Texas. Dr. Heckman, what role do our large number of immi- 
grants in the United States play in some of your graphs in terms of achievement and increasing 
economic capacity? 

Heckman: Many of the graphs 1 showed are adjusted for the immigrant question. There is no 
question that this is an important area. If we look at GED certification, in particular, we find that 
immigrants are more likely to receive GEDs, especially Mexicans coming to the U.S. to try to 
increase their skills. The general problem in the area of skill formation is not solely or mainly a 
problem of immigrants. It is much more pervasive in the society, but certainly immigrant groups 
are at a major disadvantage. Nonetheless, that concerned me a great deal when 1 asked the 
question about different cohorts of individuals going on to college. It is a stunning finding that 
people born up to 1950 are not going to school at a lower rate than those who follow them 
the 1960 birth cohorts are going to college at the same rate. That is not strictly due to immi- 
grants. It is a much more pervasive phenomenon. 

Question: Dr. Heckman, you are talking about investments in early childhood bringing a much 
higher rate of return than investing in post-secondary education. Head Start is a program that 
invests in both. It invests in mothers and fathers, as well as children. Are you suggesting first that 
we concentrate more of our available funds on our children? 

Heckman: That is a good point. We know that the studies of programs like Perry Preschool and 
other interventions have suggested that part of the reason why they have been successful, even 
though the intervention ends after 2 or 3 years, is precisely because parents have been included 
and have also been educated. When 1 was talking about investments in the young, 1 certainly did 
not mean to exclude the investments in the parents. We know there have been separate effects 
on the parents, but by teaching parenting skills, they also have changed the family environment 
for the better. 

Question: How would you relate the data that you presented to the large increase in the service 
sector of the economy, the choices people are making, and their beliefs about how they can 
make a living. Maybe people are not going to college, in other words, but developing businesses 
in the service sector imagining that this perhaps is a better way? 

Heckman: All around the world there has been a shift in demand for education, whether or not 
it is in the service sector. The service sector includes financial services in addition to McDonald s, 
so all over the world there has been a shift in demand towards a more educated labor force. 

Skills are needed in a number of areas, even in the service sector, so 1 do not see the service 
sector growth providing an alternative that makes it equally profitable or more profitable for 
individuals to drop out of school. In fact, all the evidence suggests that the real wages of 
unskilled individuals, especially high school dropouts, have declined as a group; those wages 
have gone down 15-20% between 1980 and 2000. Even though there is a service sector that 
accommodates people with unskilled jobs, this may actually perpetuate inequality across 
generations. 1 do not see the service sector as a remedy for the need for skill. It is not an alterna- 
tive. If anything, it is less of an alternative now than it was before. 

Question: What can researchers do to bridge the gap that you described? 

Crittenden: We can look in the area of policy, especially toward universal preschool education. 
We need to consider the justifications being made for it and that justification can be overwhelm- 
ingly an investment in our national economy, more than any other rationale that might be put 
forward for it. We need to talk about the ramifications of the inequality. For instance, something 



Q 

ERIC 



18 



25 



OPENING SESSION 



like 36% of children from families with incomes under $15,000 go to preschool and almost 
80% of children from families with incomes over $75,000 go to preschool. These are enormous 
income inequality gaps, with the very children who may need preschool not getting it. 

I noticed recently the Committee for Economic Development, a business-supported think 
tank funded by major corporations, has come out in support of massive new financing for 
almost universal preschool. They have proposed a $25 to $35 billion preschool education 
program. This is the first time business has come out in support of something like this. 

Hagen: I would like to address a question to either of our panelists. It seems to me that just 
from a pragmatic and political standpoint, it is difficult to convince the politicians to invest 
when the payoff is going to be 20-25 years later, versus when the payoff is going to be 1-2 years 
later. Doesn't that pose a problem in convincing people who control the budgets that they 
should spend money where the return will not be seen for quite awhile? 

Heckman: On top of that, children do not vote. 

Crittenden: Yes. That is a problem. 

Heckman: It makes this all the more imperative. In these types of discussions, one frequently 
hears the phrase "touchy-feely," meaning the case is not solid. Several years ago the book The 
Bell Curve was published. The thesis of this book was that there is a genetic basis for intelligence 
and that individual skills cannot be affected. Some say that in the Perry Preschool research, there 
are only 110 observations, which does not make the evidence all that strong. I do not think there 
is anything to fear here in understanding and looking at the data, making these data available, 
and collecting more data. 

The reason the case is not as strong as it should be is precisely because there are not that 
many empirical studies of early childhood development as there are studies of job training 
programs. It is important that early childhood development connect with the larger economic 
community to make this case, to see that these investment returns are as high as they should be. 
The point that Crittenden is making is correct, and on an intuitive level nobody denies the 
importance of good mothers. We do not need cost-benefit calculations to prove that. Yet that is 
not the way that policy is made; one looks at rates of return, at numbers. 

The early childhood community has not made the case that it could make and should make, 
based on the results of these interventions, on what is going on in the family. It should tackle 
the hard problem that many shy away from. We need to recognize that mothers play a huge role 
and that investments in failed families have a huge return. We understand that at some level. It 
needs to be documented better. 

Crittenden: Just as an anecdote — a child in prison, the ultimate failure of parenting and 
caregiving, costs $35,000 to $40,000 a year for expenditure and a wasted life. Governor King of 
Maine gave a speech a few years ago describing a halfway house for juvenile delinquents, first- 
time offenders, and teenagers whom the studies show intervention is not going to help as 
systemically as younger children. These halfWay houses had live-in surrogate parents trying to 
teach these young teenagers how to brush their teeth, how to get up in the morning, get properly 
dressed, get to their assignments on time, and so forth. The Governor went to visit and he said. 
My God, all these people are trying to do is be good parents to these youngsters who never had 
any." That was costing the State of Maine about $30,000 a year per child. On the other hand, the 
Perry Preschool, as a top preschool program, costs $14,000 a year. Some preschool programs are 
about $6,000 a year. A home-visiting program might be about $2,000 a year per family. In 
Europe, child allowances to everybody are in the range of $2,000 a year. The younger the child is 
at the time of the intervention, the cheaper it is to the public purse and the more effective it is to 
the society. 



er|c 



26 



19 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



I would add that I have been briefing legislators in Massachusetts, California, and in other 
parts of the country, and every time 1 go to a state legislature talking about these issues 1 ask 
them how many letters does it take to make you think about a piece of legislation? The answer, 
in large states like Massachusetts, is 15 letters. If this community were attuned politically and 
wanted to make their case, it could be made in a powerful way and it is not being made at the 
moment. 





20 



Plenary I 



Promoting Young Children's Eagerness 
to Learn in Educational Settings 

CHAIR: Ann Bardwell 
DISCUSSANT: Ron Herndon 

PRESENTERS: Barbara T. Bowman, Ross A. Thompson, Susan H. Landry 



■ The Cultural Context of Children's Learning Environment 

Barbara I Bowman 

■ Social and Emotional Origins of Readiness to Learn 

Ross A. Thompson 

■ How Caregivers and Teachers Can Support 
Young Children's Eagerness to Learn 

Susan H. Landry 



Ann Bardwell: Three researchers will share different contexts for what makes children eager to 
learn. What we heard from James Heckman was exciting, including the key elements that stay 
with children and promote their finishing of high school or going to college. Clearly, an 
important foundation is their cognitive learning in early childhood. Furthermore, he made it 
clear that to put them in good stead, their social and motivational experiences in preschool were 
even more important than cognitive learning, with parents as a base for those experiences. We 
understand the importance of children s early experiences in determining whether they ap- 
proach learning with confidence, skill, and a sense of self-efficacy; or if they are instead appre- 
hensive and unsure in the face of challenges they encounter. It is important that we look at and 
hear the research on children's early preschool experiences. 

Our first speaker is Barbara Bowman, a faculty member, founder, and the former President of 
the Erickson Institute for Advanced Study in Child Development in Chicago. She is an authority 
on early education, and a national advocate for improved and expanded practitioner training. 
She is a pioneer in building knowledge and understanding of the issues of access and equity for 
minority children. She has served on numerous professional boards, including the National 
Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC), the Great Books Foundation, and 
the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards. She was on the committee of the 
National Research Council for Eager to Learn and Neurons to Neighborhoods. 




z 



8 



21 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



Barbara T. Bowman: Child development research is predicated on the notion that there are 
similarities in the patterns of child growth and development. The search for these patterns has 
occupied researchers over much of the past century, and the current model is one in which the 
individual is shaped and molded through interactions of genetic potential within particular 
environmental contexts. Culture or group norms for behavior are therefore iihportant influences 
on children's development. 

It is abundantly dear from studies, both in the United States and around the world, that 
there is a baseline of human and material resources necessary to promote the developmental 
potential of children. Not all child-rearing environments provide these resources. When there are 
too few resources, and when children experience overwhelming doses of hunger, disease, danger, 
abuse, and neglect, their development may be severely stunted and learning made more difficult. 

A number of projects, Head Start for instance, have demonstrated that young children who 
are at risk can maintain their typical developmental trajectory if given the basic resources of 
physical and emotional support. Thus, the first step in helping children reach their developmen- 
tal potential is to put in place the support systems all children need. 

Often, an environment may support development, but may not be attuned to the demands 
of a particular challenge. An individual may be within normal limits for a particular characteris- 
tic, but not able to meet the demands of a particular society. For instance, a myopic child may 
see within the range of normal, but may not see well enough to become a great hunter in a 
hunting society. 

Similarly, a culture and language, which work well in one context may not prepare children 
well for another environment. A child may learn the culture and language of their home and 
community, but what they learn may not Ije what is needed in a particular environment, like 
school. Against this backdrop, in 1998, the National Research Council organized a committee of 
researchers to review the research on early education, draw conclusions, and make recommen- 
dations about how to best prepare young children for the challenges of school. The results of 
this investigation are contained in the report Eager to Learn. In the study, the committee drew on 
a broad range of scholarship in child development, education, anthropology, linguistics, 
psychology, cognitive science, neuroscience, and sociology. They also gave special consideration 
to children from diverse cultural and linguistic backgrounds. 

I will briefly summarize the results of this report as it applies to culture and language. The 
report points out some principles of development that are relevant to the acquisition of cultural 
norms. Among these are that all normally developing children have a latent capacity to learn. 
Given the basic resources, children show a prodigious enthusiasm and competence for learning. 
This predisposition to learn frames much of early development. Rather than having to force 
children to learn, the research shows quite clearly that children come into the world ready to 
learn, as part of their genetic equipment. What this means is that at birth, the average child has 
the latent capacity to walk, talk, explore the world using their senses, make categories, use 
symbols, love, and be loved. Not only do they have the capacity to learn these things; they want 
to. Or, in the words of our report, they are eager to. 

The evidence for children's predisposition to learn is quite robust. Babies learn their mother's 
voice and smell in the womb. In a few months, they learn to recognize the faces of their primary 
caregivers, and they use these faces as clues to emotion. At 3-months-old, they begin to make 
speech sounds used in language, and by the time they are 9-months-old, they are well on their 
way to eliminating the sounds they do not need in their own language community. This means 
that children eagerly embrace the culture and language of their caregivers. 

Individual differences also matter. The various body systems— neurological, biochemical, 
physical— are shaped by genes, which affect, and are affected by, experiences. Hence develop- 
ment and learning, in many ways, is quite individual. For instance, an individual infant highly 
tuned to sounds may learn to talk easily and early on. Early talkers and late talkers have different 
resources with which to explore the world. They get different responses from others and thus 
have different opportunities to learn. 




ERIC 



22 



PLENARY I 



The interaction of genetic predispositions and experiences makes each individual unique in 
ow an wheri they acquire knowledge and achieve developmental milestones. Many examples 
exist of normal differences in individual development. For instance, temperament, the arousal 
pattern for an individual, is fairly stable across time. Children approach learning language in 
somewhat different ways, some adding one word at a time and others starting off with groups of 

phrases. Within the patterns of development, there are individual variations in style, timing, and 
methods of learning. ^ ^ 

Culture and language also affect children s learning. For instance, children come into the 
world primed to learn a language. Given a chance to hear and participate in verbal communica- 
tions, rnost children will quickly learn to talk; some will learn to speak Hmong while others 
learn Black English or Spanish. Each child will learn the unique characteristics of his or her own 
language and begin to process experiences through that language's potential. 

. categories, but some may learn to tell trees apart while others 

learn the difference between letters and numbers. Those who focus on the trees will become 
good at identifying them, and those who focus on letters and numbers will become experts at 
disunguishing them. They will all learn to love and be loved, but some will learn to kiss every- 
one in the family whenever they meet, and others will learn to shake hands or to bow, while still 
others may learn that it is all right to hurt the ones you love. 

Children have similar capacities to learn, but what they learn depends on what their environ- 
ment offers them to be learned. Children who live in culturally and socioeconomically diverse 
communiues face different realities, learn different behaviors, have different traditions, and 
learn different values. They all learn, but what they learn is somewhat different. 

I want to talk about low-income children who may be developmental^ competent in 
their homes and communities, but who often fail when they come to school. Who are these 
children? They mosdy live in low-income communities, and they often belong to minority 
groups that occupy a tenuous place in mainstream society; African American, Latino, Native 
American, and some Asian groups. Research points to differences in the socialization of children 
and school expectations from these groups, and those differences may account for some 
children s school difficulty. 

In school, children are expected to have mastered a standard grammar, to have good-sized 
vocabulanes, and to enunciate clearly in the standard accent of the school language. They must 
learn skills like reading, writing, and arithmetic, so they must have considerable background in 
understanding symbols. They are expected to sit at chairs and desks, not to talk whenever they 
wis , to line up to go to the bathroom, so they must have certain kinds of body control. They 
are expected to interact with peers without hitting or pushing and to do what the teacher tells 
them to. Therefore, particular social skills are needed, and there is a long list of specific linguis- 
tic, cognitive, social, emotional, and physical skills that underlie school achievement 

The knowle^e and skills necessary for success are not natural in all environments Some 
children come from families and communities whose child rearing does not promote school 
skills, although their families have taught them to be competent in their own communities For 
example children who speak Black English have a language that is suitable for expressing ideas 
among their own family and ffiends, and it represents the same developmental accomplishment 
as speaking any lan^age^ However, in the mainstream world of school, only Standard English is 
appreciated. The child who speaks Black English is a likely candidate for school failure 

Similarly children whose home language is not English are disadvantaged in school when all 
the instmction takes place in English. Children whose cultures have different ways of explaining 
concepts, of valuing academic achievement, or defining self-control may be disadvantaged in the 
school environment. Following are some examples that show some of the differences among 
low-income children in relation to the factors that are relevant to school success. Many examples 
make particular note of the differences between welfare and nonwelfare recipients' children. For 
one, there are differences among different social classes for the attributes that are perceived of as 



ERIC 



30 



23 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



necessary for school success. These include the percentage of kindergartners who have print 
familiarity by family characteristics. 

Another example is first-time kindergartners passing math proficiency tests, and the percent- 
age distribution of first-time kindergartners by frequency with which parents say they persist at 
tasks, and then the teacher s judgments about the persistence of children. One of the interesting 
things is that the parents see their children as much more persistent than the teachers, which 
tells us something about children s behavior and how it is appreciated in one context as op- 
posed to another. 

What are the conclusions that come from this? First, avoid stereotyping. Teachers need to 
know about children's culture and language, not because they expect every child to be like the 
norm for the group, but because it gives a starting point for understanding children s past 
experience, values, and beliefs. It is the teacher's job to mediate between the demands of home 
and school so that school is not foreign and uncomfortable for children and their families. 

Respect cultural differences. Throughout the world, people have found different ways to be 
human. While some of these ways may conflict with new realities, challenges, and environ- 
ments, they nevertheless make sense to the participants in that culture, and are important and 
deeply embedded in their sense of self. Helping families adapt in a healthy way to new chal- 
lenges is accomplished best by teachers who are sensitive, respectful, and who form relation- 
ships with families. 

Differences do not need to compromise achievement. There is considerable evidence that 
quality, early intervention can ameliorate, if not completely compensate for, social class differ- 
ences in school performance. Research on model programs from the Perry Preschool Project to 
the North Carolina Abecedarian Project show that when provided with a high-quality preschool 
program, young children can at least improve their later academic achievement, and at best gain 
parity with their more advantaged peers. As an aside, let me point out that this does not mean 
preschool is a vaccination. Schools must build on what is begun in preschool, when children are 
in kindergarten and the primary grades, if they are to continue to be successful. 

Children need an opportunity to learn school-related skills and knowledge. This is the heart 
of the report Eager to Learn. In order to learn well in school, children must be developmenully 
competent; that is to say healthy in mind and body. But they must also have the opportunity to 
learn the knowledge and skills that underlie school success. Many children do not regularly have 
access to the experiences and expectations that are the social and cognitive foundation for 
school learning. Although they have learned in families and neighborhoods, they also need an 
opportunity to learn for school. 

Prior learning is important. Recent findings in learning theory — and I recommend to you the 
National Academy report How People Learn — presents strong evidence for the importance of 
prior learning for later learning. In order for a child to take in new knowledge and skills for use 
in solving problems, the new knowledge and skill must be integrated into the child s old 
thinking and actions. Even simple concepts that children acquire early are the base for early 
learning, but these concepts must be broadened, and new frameworks or schemes must be 
created for information and meaning. 

Good teaching provides the bridge and builds on what children already know. If new 
opportunities to learn are too narrow or meager, children may not be able to use their past 
experience to make sense of them. This leads to distorting the new learning or building too 
narrow a platform for understanding. Presumably, this helps explain why children who have 
limited experience with language, books, and symbols have greater difficulty learning to read. 

Assess accurately. Assessment of young children poses a particular challenge as we try to 
ensure that learning is occurring. The first 5 years of life are a time of incredible growth and 
learning, but the course of development is uneven and sporadic. Additionally, how children 
express what they know may look different on the surface, but represent similar levels of 
achievement. There is a story about an anthropologist who makes the analogy that Muslims 



ERIC 



24 



31 



PLENARY I 



show their respect for God by taking off their shoes and putting on their hats, while Christians 
do just the opposite. 

Consequently assessment, particularly standardized tests, must be carefully used and 
interpreted. Teachers need to become expert at observing, documenting, learning, and diagnos- 
ing problems, rather than depending on formal tests. Teachers who do not have the time and 
knowledge to assess their children, to plan, to reassess and replan, are not likely to provide the 
optimum learning environment for the young children they teach. 

Finally, work with families. There is ample evidence of the influence of the family on 
children s school learning. When families are involved with school, children learn better. 

Further, the relationship children form with their teachers are critical to their learning, and 
mirror the patterns of the primary caregivers. Families need to understand their own importance 
to their children s education and learn what they can do to foster school learning. Eager to Learn 
summarizes a considerable amount of research on preschool learners, and I only had time to 
give you a small taste. I hope you will read the entire report. I believe if we implement its 
recommendations, we will ensure that all children come to school not ready to learn — they are 
already great learners— but ready to learn school-related skills and knowledge. 

Bardwell: Ross Thompson is the Karl A. Happold Distinguished Professor of Psychology at the 
University of Nebraska. His research concerns sociopersonality development, early emotional 
growth in developmental science, and public policy. He is Associate Editor of Child Development, 
he edits a series of specialized volumes in developmental psychology for McGraw-Hill, and has 
served on several National Institutes of Health review committees. 

Ross A. Thompson: Bowman has already given a reading assignment for today. The National 
Academy of Sciences has been unusually productive in the creation of materials that are useful 
to us, so let me tell you how to find them. They are available at the National Academy Press 
website, at www.nap.edu. There you will find information about Eager to Learn as well as 
another report that I have been associated with, entitled From Neurons to Neighborhoods. What 
is wonderful about both reports is that they converge in their conclusions about the nature of 
early development, about the kinds of catalysts that provoke intellectual growth in children, 
and about the importance of a social and emotional world as it relates to children's readiness 
for school. 

I love the theme and title of this symposium because whenever we talk about young 
childrens eagerness to learn in educational settings, we are recognizing the importance of a 
social and emotional side of children s intellectual growth. This is because when we adopt a 
developmental orientation to school readiness, we realize that young children's social and 
emotional lives are connected. We cannot disconnect them, because they are connected in so 
many ways. 

As all of you know, they are connected motivationally. The children who are likely to benefit 
most from school are curious. They are excited about learning. They are confident of their own 
success, and they are convinced of the importance of school and its value to them. Children's 
social and scholastic lives are also connected socioemotionally, and this is because learning is 
not fundamentally an isolated activity. It is something that occurs in partnership with the 
teacher, and usually with a group of peers. 

Therefore, young children's capacities to cooperate with their friends and with teachers, to 
follow instructions, to ask for guidance when they do not understand, and to be able to respond 
appropriately to differences with another individual in thinking and intention, are important 
ingredients contributing to their capacities to benefit from an educational setting. Children's 
social and scholastic lives are linked as well in the growth of self-regulation, because one of the 
most important challenges for young children is acquiring self-control in all the various areas 
that are relevant to their learning. 



EKLC 




25 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



There is cognitive self-control with respect to the ability to focus one's attention and one s 
mind on the task at hand. There is behavioral self-control with respect to acting appropriately 
and cooperatively. Finally, there is emotional self-control with respect to being able to respond 
appropriately to the interpersonal demands of the classroom. 

The fact that children's social and scholastic lives are connected is not news to those people 
who work with them. Research shows that teachers view children's motivational and emotional 
unreadiness as a source of great concern. This is because it is more difficult to assist childreri 
who are not interested in learning, who lack confidence in their success, or who seem incapable 
of cooperation or self-control, than it is to tutor letter or number skills. Thus, attention to 
intellectual preparation has to be accompanied by attention to the motivational and 
socioemotional qualities of early learning, and this has been recommended in both Eager to 
Learn and From Neurons to Neighborhoods. 

There is a good deal of scientific evidence behind this. Motivational, emotional, and self- 
regulatory qualities mature significantly in early childhood, and here is the other side of our 
understanding. Although we regard the preschool years as a period of great intellectual prepara- 
tion for the school years, it is equally true that during the preschool years, children are acquiring 
the social and emotional skills that are necessary for school success. When we think about 
children's readiness for school, complementing the intellectual variability that is apparent to all 
of us, there is also variability in children's emotional and motivational readiness. Some children 
arrive at school well prepared. Others are more challenged. For many of them, it arises from 
intellectual differences in their preparation, but for many others, the intellectual capabilities are 
in place. 

What makes them more challenged in a school setting, as Barbara Bowman mentioned, are 
their social and self-regulatory lack of preparedness. Thus, when we think about the preschool 
years, we recognize that these are years that prepare children; that, in a sense, provide the 
motivational and emotional foundations for school success. This is true in so many areas. With 
respect to social cognition, we now know how significant the preschool years are for developing 
understanding of other people, particularly that inner psychological world of thoughts, beliefs, 
feelings, and intentions. All of this is studied by researchers under the rubric theory of mind, 
making us aware of how much children inquire into what is going on within others hearts 
and. minds. 

We recognize that social cognition and its development contributes to advances in children s 
capacities to cooperate. We also recognize that it contributes to capacities for social deception, 
since children understand that the contents of others' minds can be misled. But it also contrib- 
utes to shared understanding, and the ability to take into account another's feelings and 
thoughts in social interaction. 

Self-understanding is another accomplishment of the preschool years. Just as children are 
becoming aware of the psychological qualities of others, they are doing so with respect to 
themselves, far and away from earlier bodies of research suggesting that young children are 
primarily concrete in their self-perception. We now recognize that they see themselves along the 
lines of personality. The evaluations of others that children perceive about themselves have a lot 
to do with shaping their self-perceptions. Thus the praise or criticism of parents, caregivers, and 
others outside and inside the home are significant catalysts to shaping early self-understanding 
and motivation for children's eagerness to learn. 

Emotional competence is another domain of growth in the preschool years related to skill 
readiness, defined as a capacity to feel the way one wants to feel in social situations. Research in 
our laboratory and others has shown that preschoolers make enormous strides in both emo- 
tional understanding and in learning to manage their own feelings. Parental guidance and the 
emotional climate of the home are important constituents of those developing abilities; so are 
the emotional demands of child care outside the home. These findings are especially important 
in concert with recent research indicating that early risks for emotionally-related psychopathol- 




26 



33 



PLENARY I 



ogy are also much more apparent in the early years than one ever thought true before. Children 
are now showing capacities for depression, conduct problems, even phenomena that look 
disturbingly similar to post-traumatic stress syndrome, at younger ages than earlier generations 
of psychologists would ever have thought possible. 

Self-control is also a major accomplishment relating to the preparation for school, because 
we know that with advances in brain functioning, particularly in the prefrontal cortex during the 
preschool years, children are developing capacities to regulate their attention, behavior, and 
emotions. Here again, the support of caregivers in-home and out-of-home, particularly in 
providing incentives for self-control within the context of manageable demands, are important 
constituents of whether or not children enter the schoolyard door capable of the kinds of social 
cooperation and emotional self-control necessary for school readiness. 

Related to this growth in cooperation is conscience. Research by Grazyna Kochanska in our 
own lab shows that the roots of conscience development are established in the preschool years 
and are formed not on the basis of firm expectations, but on the basis of relational incentives. 
That is what motivates children to get along, particularly in the context of the warm and trusting 
emotional bond to an adult. In a sense, therefore, a humanistic basis for getting along with 
others is something that children pick up as preschoolers. 

Finally, peer social competence is another important constituent of school readiness that is 
formed in preschool, particularly as children learn the skills and capacities for cooperation with 
others. There are many catalysts that I mentioned to children's growth in these areas. I have 
talked about neural-cortical maturation. I have talked about the growth of children's conceptual 
skills, and many others. 

The most important contribution revealed in research to these emerging forms of psychologi- 
cal readiness for learning has to do with the quality of relationships that young children share 
with the people who matter to them, both in-home and out-of-home. Indeed, when we turn 
to research literature on the social and emotional determinants of children's readiness to learn 
in educational settings, we find that relationships are critical for children's readiness to learn 
in school. 

I want to talk, in particular, about four kinds of significant relationships. First, a small but 
important body of research indicates that the warmth and support of the mother-child relation- 
ship predicts young children's later academic and social functioning in school. This conclusion 
is derived from several longitudinal studies, and others on the way. In one example, Estrada and 
colleagues found that a measure of the emotional quality of the mother-child relationship at 4 
years of age was associated with children's cognitive competence at that age. However, it was also 
predictive of school readiness measures at 5 and 6 years of age, IQ at age 6 years, and school 
achievement at 12 years of age. These findings are consistent with a large body of research 
showing how the parent-child relationship influences intellectual growth, but is now extending 
it further to the beginning of school success. 

A second important relationship is with the child-care provider. The quality of child care and 
the quality of the child-caregiver relationship also predict later school success and classroom 
behavior. Findings from The Children of the Cost, Quality, and Outcome Study Go to School study 
indicate, for example, that the quality of the child care classroom predicted language and math 
skills through second grade, and also predicted the quality of children's peer relationships and 
behavioral problems several years later. 

Classroom practices that are most predictive of children's academic success are the kind that 
are familiar to all of us. They include assessments of whether procedures are developmentally 
appropriate for young children. They include the use of child-centered teaching methods, the 
teacher's sensitive responsiveness to children, and the creation of a language-rich environment. 
These conclusions, again, are consistent with broader bodies of research suggesting how impor- 
tant the quality of child care is to the growth of the capacities relevant to school success. Consis- 
tent with this, the child-caregiver relationship is also important. 





27 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



Longitudinal studies such as those of Bob Pianta show that the warmth and sensitivity of the 
child care provider enhances social competence and reduces proneness to behavior problems in 
kindergarten and the early primary grades. But, it is not just the early child-caregiver relation- 
ships that are related to behavior problems; they also predict children s subsequent classroom 
thinking, attention skills, and concept development. Thus, relationships both at home and in 
child care are important. 

That is not all. As children enter school, the quality of the child-teacher relationship is also 
an important contribution to school adaptation. As Gary Ladd's research has shown, young 
children who enjoy warm, positive relationships with their kindergarten teachers are more 
excited about learning, are more positive about coming to school, are more self-confident, and 
achieve more in the classroom than do children who experience more troubled or conflicted 
relationships with their teachers. 

Indeed, one study by Hamre and Pianta, Conflict In The Relationship Between Kindergarten 
Teachers and Children, predicted children s academic performance and behavior problems 
through eighth grade. The relationship alone is not formatively significant, but it launches 
children on a trajectory of self-expectations and approaches to school that can have an enduring 
effect upon them. Additionally, relationships with peers in school are also important. Again, in 
Ladd's research, children who experience greater peer acceptance and friendship tend to feel 
more positively about coming to school, and they also perform better in the classroom. 

When we talk about relationships, we are talking about a broad concept, and it is important 
to recognize that relationships encompass many different influences. What happens, therefore, 
when we try to unpack what is going on in these relationships? To borrow a phrase from 
Neurons to Neighborhoods, we are trying to understand the idea that relationships are the active 
ingredients of healthy psychological growth. 

Many aspects of relationships that are revealed in relationship theory suggest what is impor- 
tant, including shared activity and understanding. I should say activity and understanding in the 
context of a warm and trusting relationship. Everyday activity with adults provides so many 
catalysts to skill development and concept understanding, through activities as innocuous as 
reading a story together, conversing about the day's events, explaining about insects, and/or 
walking through the day's routine tasks. These activities, consistent with the ideas of Vygotskyan 
theory, are what children are doing together with a skilled mentor with whom they are con- 
nected. They provide so many catalysts, not just for intellectual growth, but for the growth of 
social and emotional maturity. 

We have found in our own research that everyday conversations between parents and young 
children about events in the child's life incorporate powerful lessons about emotion, morality, 
conflict, cooperation, and many other aspects of the psychological world that help to objectify 
experience that is sometimes difficult to comprehend. It gives children a forum for understand- 
ing as they converse about these experiences with people whom they trust. In this respect, 
therefore, it is not just shared activity and understanding, but it is activity in the context of the 
relationship with a trusted person, in which the security and warmth of that relationship makes 
the communication and the activity doubly important. 

The scaffolding of cognitive skills is another Vygotskyan concept suggesting that much of 
what is done together is structured by the adult, again not just to foster intellectual growth, but 
also to contribute to the growth of social and emotional development and the capacities for self- 
regulation. Importantly, this kind of activity not only contributes to the growth of these skills in 
children, but also contributes to children's growing self-confidence and their excitement about 
becoming further competent in the future. Indeed, it is through these relationships and the 
scaffolding of skills for children that they come to value learning and becoming competent for 
its own sake. 

Recent research in developmental relationships also suggests that the relationships provide a 
prism for self-understanding, social understanding, and acquisition of values. Young children 



er|c 



28 



35 



PLENARY I 



achieve self-confidence and a sense of self-efficacy in part through the expressed and implied 
evaluations of themselves by others. 

In everyday social interaction and conversations about events, young children clarify their 
understanding of the motives or the intentions, feelings, and thoughts that underlie the behav- 
ior of other people. They also learn about themselves through how their actions are evaluated 
and described by others. This means that the quality of relationships that young children share 
with adults at home and outside of the home — in particular, the responsiveness, support, -and 
opportunities for unhurried interaction they share with those adults — are important lenses 
through which children learn about themselves, as well as about other people. 

Finally, I conclude with the double-meaning phrase that relationships make people matter. In 
a sense, relationships instill certain people in a child's world with special significance, and we 
know that this makes children far more receptive motivationally to the influences and catalysts 
for growth that these people provide. This is why caregivers outside of the home and in the 
home are so important. In another sense, relationships make people matter because they cause 
young children to care about other people by establishing a human connection between 
themselves and others. 

In a sense, relationships make people in general matter to children by underlining their 
interest in how other people feel, in what other people think, and in other people's motives and 
intentions. The most general conclusion, therefore, is that young children's eagerness to learn in 
educational settings develops in the context of these relationships that children share with 
parents at home, with child care providers, with teachers in school, and with peers. 

There are several implications for our thinking about children's readiness. One implication is 
that this provides a challenge to decontextualized assessments of learning readiness. It suggests 
as the empirical evidence also confirms, that assessments of learning readiness taken outside the 
context of the setting in which children are learning in relationship with others, may provide 
limited predictive value of how well children will do in school. This is because, as we have seen, 
many motivational and self-regulatory qualities of school adaptation are related to the settings 
and the relationships that young children experience. 

Another implication is that our attention is drawn to the need for special support for at-risk 
children, although a great deal of popular attention is given to the disadvantaged backgrounds 
and intellectual shortcomings that they bring to the school door. It is also important to recog- 
nize that many of these children are also encumbered by difficulties in self-management and 
social emotional understanding, and in the self-confidence that diminishes their enthusiasm for 
learning. These may rise also from lack of relational supports that they experience in their 
preschool years. 

Thus, one of the reasons that children from at-risk settings benefit more significandy from 
higher quality child care than do children from more advantaged settings is that, in a sense, 
higher quality care not only provides more beneficial intellectual challenges, but also the 
relational supports that underlie excitement about learning. This leads, finally, to my most 
speculative implication, and this is simply the idea that because beginning school presents so 
many challenges to young children, we should be considering how relationships could aid in 
the kind of institutional transition that beginning school provides. 

There is so much that children have to learn to do when they enter a school setting, from 
learning directed by a teacher and the challenges of the peer environment, to mastering new 
daily routines and classroom expectations. It is not just a matter of children becoming ready for 
school, but it is also a matter of schools becoming better prepared for the young children who 
enter kindergarten. Part of that readiness on both parts may be based in the enlistment of 
relationships that children have drawn upon in the past as a way of helping them negotiate the 
institutional transition they face when entering school. There are many ways that this can be 
done. However, the broad idea is that when children can be supported by the relationships that 
have encouraged their learning in the past, they may have a more effective bridge to the new 




38 



29 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



relationships that will help to shape their learning enthusiasm in the months and years to come 
in school. 

Bardwell: Next, Susan Landry will share research about how caregivers and teachers support 
young children's eagerness to learn. Landry is a development psychologist and the Michael 
Matthew Knight Professor in the Department of Pediatrics at the University of Texas, Houston 
Health Sciences Center. She is also Chief of the Division of Developmental Pediatrics and 
Director of the Center for Improving the Readiness of Children for Learning and Education 
(CIRCLE). The Center is currendy involved in using the knowledge gained from years of study- 
ing young children to help promote the national goals of early childhood literacy initiatives. 

We have been one of the pilot dissemination sites for the CIRCLE project, located in seven 
classrooms in Columbus, Ohio. 

Susan H. Landry: I will talk about how caregivers and teachers can support the cognitive 
development of young children in ways that facilitate and actually enhance their eagerness to 
learn. There has been a lot of attention recently paid to thinking about the best way to do this, 
due in part to our understanding of how many children are entering school not prepared to 
learn and succeed. We have already heard today that this problem is most pressing for children 
who come from families with physical disabilities or those with social and economic risk 
factors, such as poverty. 

What does the research tell us is important to focus on in order to get children prepared and 
excited to succeed in school? One thing it tells us is it is critically important to have consistendy 
high levels of interaction between caregivers and teachers at this early age. Thompson has 
already talked a great deal about how important this is. 

Research tells us that an important way that this occurs is through teachers and caregivers 
providing specialized support for children's learning in the form of scaffolding. This may be 
particularly important in early childhood because of children's immature attention skills and 
cognitive abilities. The caregiver and/or the teacher, if they are doing this sensitively, are able to 
scaffold or support those immature attention skills in ways that allow the child to integrate 
information more effectively and to learn new concepts, such as vocabulary and language skills. 

The research also tells us that there are specific ways caregivers and teachers can scaffold. 

There are at least six important areas that need to be attended to in these early interactions. The 
first, and maybe the most important, is a rich language input by families and teachers giving 
children information about what things are called, why they work a certain way, asking ques- 
tions about what the child thinks, and asking children to make predictions. This might occur 
through book reading, through conversations at the breakfast table, sitting on the front porch, 
or in the car. These are ways that the caregivers and the teachers point things out to children and 
engage them in conversation about what things are called, but also about letters, sounds, and 
other early literacy activities. This interaction allows the child, in a natural progression, to 
become comfortable with the concepts by the time they enter kindergarten. 

Second, this cognitive input becomes integrated more effectively for the child if it is done in a 
way that prompdy, contingently, and sensitively responds to the child's signals of what they are 
interested in. The third point relates to maintaining and building on interests rather than 
redirecting or ignoring them. Fourth is fewer restrictions. It is much more effective if high levels 
of restrictiveness are avoided, particularly those that are harsh and punitive. As we have seen, 
this shuts children down. They become passive, less likely to take initiative and, therefore, less 
likely to be eager to learn. Fifth, we also need to become much more aware of children's capacity 
for making choices and decisions, and we need to give them opportunities for doing that. Lastly, 
we do this best if we are all monitoring their behavior sensitively and consistendy. 

Is this form of scaffolding particularly important across early childhood, or could we wait 
and do it later on? What if we do not see it happening? Is there a chance to catch up? Many 



O 

ERIC 



30 



37 



PLENARY I 



people predict that this group of behaviors is particularly important in early childhood because 
of the active growth that is occurring in the brain. The organization of associations and the 
capacity for this form of support from others allows that young brain to integrate information 
and develop stronger associations more effectively. Therefore, the thought is that because of the 
flexibility of the developing brain, this needs to occur at high levels across early childhood. 

One way we have tested this out in our laboratories, which are basically families' homes or 
early childhood classrooms, is by studying 360 children and families from birth. The children 
are now turning 10 years of age. We have studied them in their homes every year to look at how 
families are supporting children. These are low-income families, and we are looking at how this 
naturally occurs. We subgrouped these families according to the six key essentials that we found 
were most important in predicting how well children did, and we found that of this large group, 
we had four subgroups of caregivers. We had multiple measures of parents' interaction styles 
across the first year of life to 2 years of age. The first group used scaffolding techniques at high 
levels, relative to the rest of the sample, and they continued to do that until entry into kindergar- 
ten. Additionally, they were consistent across that period. 

The next group was inconsistent in their pattern of behaviors, using these techniques at high 
levels, equally high as the first group, but dropping off dramatically as the child developed 
independence and autonomy. For some mothers and fathers, this was a particularly challenging 
period and they were not able, for many reasons, to keep that support available to the child. The 
third group was very low in infancy and got a little bit better as the child approached 2 years of 
age. The fourth group was, unfortunately, consistently low in providing this type of support. 

We measured the children's skills with assessments of cognitive and language development 
and put those together into a construct. We included infants of very low birth weight with 
significant medical complications at birth who were at biological risk, and full-term healthy 
children who were at environmental risk. Some children in this sample were at double jeopardy 
because they had both types of risk factors, and some were at single jeopardy because they lived 
in homes that were from poverty backgrounds only. 

We found that the two inconsistent groups did not differ from each other, so they were put 
together. The children, and this again was a poverty sample, with the mothers and fathers who 
did this at consistently high levels were at normal, average cognitive language skill levels when 
they entered kindergarten. The other two groups were lower and tapered off. 

To determine if this form of scaffolding was especially important in early childhood, we 
studied these families when the children were 6 and 8 years of age. Statistically, we entered those 
parenting behaviors into the equation and found that they did not provide explanatory power 
above and beyond the early clustering of scaffolding in the youngest period. Actually, the 
numbers leveled off and then down. They were not at average levels at 8 years of age in any of 
the groups. Again, this points to the importance of high-quality early childhood programs. This 
research clearly shows us that the parent is a critical source of stimulation for the child and that 
they do this for language, social, and cognitive development, as well as a broad range of sub- 
areas within each of these areas. 

They do this in many ways. They model good language. They model this in terms of activities 
that they do at high frequency that are focused on the types of skills children need to develop. 
This may be in play activities, book reading, engagement around everyday activities, and in 
conversation. We are finding that this is particularly effective in homes where parents appreciate 
and understand their role as a teacher of their child and do not expect that it is going to happen 
by other people providing the input. 

We also find in the research that it is relevant across cultures and economic levels. Recently, 
we wanted to test whether families that were taught to use these scaffolding techniques would 
develop these skills at higher levels. Would the children show stronger learning and responsive- 
ness in joint attention or shared activities? We first worked with these families when the chil- 
dren were infants. This was the Playing and Learning Strategies (PALS) group. 



O 

ERIC 



38 



31 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



Now we are working with their toddlers and preschoolers, looking at children's signals, 
interests, what they need, and what they would like the parent to get involved in with them. We 
coached the parents on responding contingently, promptly, warmly, and with sensitive behav- 
iors, including tone of voice and pacing, in ways that maintained interest. We helped them to 
provide lots of information through labeling, engagement in conversation, toy demonstrations, 
and avoidance of restrictions. 

We did this in home settings where families watch short, focused videotapes of other mothers 
doing things with their children in each of the six areas of scaffolding. The mother stopped and 
started the tape and talked about what she saw and what she thought. Then she was coached to 
try different things with her child that she chose, whether it was a feeding activity, toy play, 
going to the bathroom, or taking a bath. Then she was videotaped, and she looked at 
videotape with her coach and criticjued herself. Mothers loved this procedure. They said, Ooh, 
that was good. 1 like that. Look at the way she responded when 1 did that." Or, "Uh oh, 1 have 
got to stop doing that. That is not working." It was a very powerful technique for families to 
decide for themselves what they think is working with their children and what they think is not 
working. 

Then we measured, through videotape, mothers' interactions in toy play, everyday activity, 
and reading short books many times across this coaching period. We systematically coded the 
different scaffolding techniques and the child's response. This is the group we are working with. 
We have finished and are now working in the toddler-preschool period. 

A second group got developmental screenings and the same number of home visits, with a 
person that came and talked with them about their child s development but not the coaching 
program. The group that got the coaching made significantly greater increases across time than 
the other group that did not get this kind of input. The coaciied PALS group used richer lan- 
guage, scaffolding techniques, and explanations. Maintaining attention, redirecting, and ignor- 
ing signals increased exploratory play and questioning. The PALS group significantly increased 
and grew in these skills across time. 

There was a decrease in the coached group of noncompliance or lack of responsiveness in 
shared interactions with caregivers, an increased and greater degree of responsiveness to verbal 
requests, independence of the mother when the examiner did a social interaction around toys, 
and a greater degree of responsiveness to that examiner. 

What happens when we combine those six scaffolding techniques with school readiness 
behaviors, with the teacher as the target? Do we see a similar phenomenon in children's growth 
when teachers learn how to scaffold language, use open-ended questions, help children learn 
about letters, creatively engage children in learning, explore letter knowledge activities and 
sounds, and move up the phonological awareness continuum to segment words, syllables, and 
writing techniques? When teachers combine the six key essentials and the research-based literacy 
activities through coaching and mentoring, we see significantly greater growth in language than 
what occurred in the control classrooms. These are receptive and expressive language increases 
across eight months. 

In the expressive category, the group that got this type of engagement around literacy tnade 
14 months on average gain in language skills and vocabulary. Phonological awareness, print 
concepts, and letter knowledge also increased dramatically. We asked 500 teachers to rate how 
the group fared on social-emotional behaviors. The teachers said it was an indescribable feeling 
to see children who entered their classroom initially with low self-esteem become confident, 
take initiative, and tell them what they were interested in. They also saw this for children with 
disabilities such as speech disorders, as well as children whose home language was not English. 

In conclusion, these approaches are challenging both for our families in poverty and for our 
classroom teachers who have children in poverty. However, it is possible to support teachers and 
parents in supporting their children to be eager to learn, and to do this in ways that enhance 
social-emotional development and school achievement. 



ERIC 



32 



39 



PLENARY I 



“TS Dteo^ Chair of the Board of the National Head Start Association. He is 

OreRon. Herndon r association and long-time Executive Director of Albina Head Start in 

vou the Dolirv d to the stage as 1 do, as a Head Start administrator. He will share with 
Lbber hks thl road^*^^ implications of what we have heard from research. That is where the 

i^?t? been in other positions where the mbber met the road I guess I would 

o^elT panelists, a coupTSouTht 

w?Z,^dd r^' certainly for those of us involved in research 

h^v^corlt h^ maintain a certain amount of humility. I say that because there are those who 

found oTth^fth believed just as passionately in it, and then we 

SJ for thot T'"- of something called phrenology. Phrenol- 

sh^oeTo^thplt'^ 'T been around long enough, is to tell what people could d^^by the 
p their heads. A great deal of research said that was possible. People made careers of that 
Coming up a htde bit further, when I was a litde boy in grade school back in the 1 0'^fic 

CPh "f f *■ “ "““‘f books that they gave me h, ^oS lt 

man th Strange to me when I was reading this and looking at my friends I said "Look 

maa they say „e are supposed to be like this, drat we cannot do ihat, and the othe Aiid^L ' 

nse^o tata aTlJSo? White boys and girls, it is a shame to say, but we 

Ui^ng about Ighting but .^^Tarki^^arfwrr^^^^^^^^ ' ^ - 

Zan ha e“' b“bT '>'= 'O do that, accorZg to X rl'iS 

sZo X rr^ofm^lr “‘'‘““■’S b-om*en wereTot 

3;ta'^ Srtrn^rm^J.”'" ” biapoleon who said drat, 

ate mmt K"** oome to conclusions about those who 

n one way or another, or to not being as successful as we would like them to be. In high 



O 

ERIC 



33 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



school, when the hormones are really raging, African American teenagers are less likely to 
smoke, drink, or become binge drinkers. 

African American boys are also less likely to carry a gun to school and less likely to be 
involved with drugs. If I were getting ready to go into a community, especially an African 
American community with all the risk factors, one of the first things that I would say to those 
who are going to intervene is, "Yes, like all societies and all cultures, this particular community 
has strengths and weaknesses; but let me share some of the strengths. ” What is it about a group 
of people who supposedly are surrounded by pathology, that somehow the children who are at 
risk get to this crucial age and are able to avoid the destructive, negative behavior when their 
peers who come from “across the tracks," who have had many more advantages, have not been 
able to cope as successfully? Then we begin to talk about strengths in a community. 

What can we learn from this community? What is it? What are the lessons that we can share 
with parents who have had their hearts broken because their children are acting out in socially 
unacceptable ways? I will never be able to do that as long as I see this community as a commu- 
nity that is filled with only problems. I will not ask the questions about strengths and how to 
build upon those strengths in the community. That is a ftmdamental difference in the way we 
approach research. 

I have been with Head Start since 1975. 1 have seen thousands of children and families, and 
99.9% of these families wanted what was best for their children. "Show me how to do it. Help 
me. Like most of us, there are times when I have stumbled. Give me a helping hand and if I run 
into problems later on, would you please be there to give me assistance? 

Unfortunately, the majority of these low-income families send their children to the lowest 
performing schools in the community. They send their children to schools where there are the 
least experienced teachers. They send their children to schools without a so-called ' robust 
curriculum," with the highest dropout rates. The children will never see a second language or a 
physics class. Then we turn around and say that all of our predictors of failure are true. Well, I 
guess so. It is like we take a big barrel of misery, throw the children in it, and then say guess 
what, they came up miserably. 

Let me conclude that we need to exercise a great deal of humility when we begin to make 
hard and fast decisions about other people's lives, and especially the people who may not look 
like us, come from a different community, or are of a different cultural background. We are 
treading on social quicksand. We should give positive reinforcement that outweighs the nega- 
tive, for both children and parents. Before we make assessments about a culture or a group of 
people, our positives should outweigh our negatives. If we cannot do that, then I would suggest 
that we go back and examine our own research. 

Finally, in all that we do, someone will have to be there for parents who are vulnerable, with 
the hand of friendship, the heart of love, and the assistance, which is what all of us need at some 
point in our lives. Somehow, somewhere, we will have to make sure that it is stretched out to 
parents when they need it. 




Plenary II 



Self-Regulation: The Interplay of Cognitive, 
Biologic, and Emotional Domains 

CHAIR: John W. Hagen 

PRESENTERS: Sybil Carr^re, Claire B. Kopp 



■ Self-Regulation in Young Children: Does it Really Matter? 

Claire B. Kopp 

■ The Child, the Family, and Emotional Development 

Sybil Carrere 

■ Quality of Care and Stress System Activity in Young Children 

Claire B. Kopp for Megan R. Gunnar 



John Hagen: We have three presentations on the topic of self-regulation. Megan Gunnar, is 
unable to attend due to travel difficulties. However, she sent her presentation electronically and 
Claire Kopp has agreed to present her talk. 

Claire B. Kopp received her Ph.D. from Claremont Graduate School. She was on the faculty at 
UCLA for many years. Her research interests have broadened, but she has worked in social, 
emotional, and cognitive development in infants and young children. She has been interested in 
infants and children at risk for a long time. Her training has been in developmental psychology, 
but she has also moved into the areas of clinical psychology and neuroscience. Kopp is the 
author of Baby Steps: The "WHYS" of Your Child's Behavior in the First Two Years. She has been a 
member of SRCD for a long time and has served as the editor of the newsletter. She has been 
President of Division 7 of the American Psychological Association, and has served as editor of 
the Guilford Publications series on emotional and social development. 

Claire B. Kopp: lohn Bowlby once said that when one has a baby, one has 5 years of hard labor 
ahead. For those of you who are parents, you know that well. For those of you who are not 
parents, you just have to tmst us that it is so. There are tmly relentless demands on parents of 
young Aildren ranging from basic physical nurturing, to emotional nurturing, to socialization, 
to creating an environment for learning. 

There are rewards for parenting as well. I have learned much about the demands and rewards 
of parenting from parents whom I have counseled over the past 30 years. They have shared their 
trials, tribulations, and rewards. Friends, grandparents, and other relatives have also come to me 



42 



35 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



with stories about young children. I have a wonderful corpus of tales of toddlers, particularly 
around the issue of learning to be social and learning to follow norms. Learning to follow 
norms is in fact fundamental to self-regulation. I would like to share one of these tales. 

My husband and I were in the mountains in a national park. The national park has a famous 
hotel, and in the hotel is a very famous gift shop. The gift shop, though, is extremely small. 

When we walked in, I saw a child of about 2, reaching for a shelf filled with colorful sand in 
bottles. As she reached for this shelf, I saw a woman with an infant in her arms reach out to the 
toddler and try to grab her. It was a case for disaster. The mother must have realized this so she 
called to another child who was about 8 or 9, and she told the child to take the toddler out. My 
husband and I finished whatever we had to do in the gift shop and left. As we exited the gift 
shop, there standing to the left of the doorway was the 9 year old calmly reading a book. At her 
feet was the toddler. The toddler was crouched with her head in her arms sobbing as if she had 
been abandoned. 

It was a riveting scene for me, because the toddler had not gone back into the gift shop. She 
was there, following the rule that says, "If mom says you are not to go back into the gift shop, 
you don't." It is true there was a monitor there in the eyes of her sister, but she did not run 
away from her sister. She was there outside bawling, but she was showing the beginnings of 
self-regulation. It was a little victory. 

I want to talk to you about some of those little victories that make them the path to self- 
regulation. We will talk about what I consider the definition of self-regulation. There are 
children who seem to have a great deal of difficulty in learning everyday norms. We have learned 
in the past decade that there is stability for some of these children. Some, however, go on to 
have major problems. 

Why does this matter? We know that children who do not follow rules tend to have conflict 
with their parents and others in the family. Sometimes we do not know if the child is at fault or 
the parent is at fault, or both. Clearly, family relationships suffer when children do not follow 
the rules. We also know that children who do not follow rules do not do well in school, and 
they do not do well with their peers. I also would like to add that children who do not follow 
rules tend to be unhappy children. 

First, let us make sure that we have a common understanding of the term self-regulation. 
Many people are using the term self-regulation, but since the early 1980s, my definition of self- 
regulation has been the following: recognition and acceptance of norms, particularly the do's 
and don'ts. Primarily, don'ts are for young children. The don'ts are prescribed by others who 
"matter" in the child's life, and that is an important point. Self-regulation also means that 
eventually the child does not require external monitors to follow norms. Compliance to norms 
is not slavish or mindless. There is a role for the child in following norms. The role can be, 

"Hey Mom, I can't do this now. Give me a little bit more time," or question, "Why do I have to 
do this?" 

In terms of respecting the child's needs, the child should not lose self-worth when socialized 
to norms. Self-regulation also means that the self is absolutely essential to follow these norms. 
The Aild begins to realize that norms relate to him or her as the person. This often occurs 
somewhere between 18 and 24 months of age in terms of our data. Another point to remember 
is that one's needs are not always in sync with others; we think that understanding occurs 
around the age of 3. Thinking, "I am responsible for my actions and the conflicts I create when I 
do not follow the norms" probably comes somewhere around the age of 4. 

How do we measure self-regulation? Initially we do not measure self-regulation per se. We 
measure compliance, the everyday do's and don'ts, the delay in waiting for something, and 
modulation in terms of not shouting or not having a temper tantrum. We have data that 
suggests that at about 18 months of age, children can follow everyday family rules fairly well. We 
have data that suggests that at 18 months of age, on average, a toddler can wait 7 seconds. That 
is not so good. At 24 months, many toddlers are able to wait about 2 minutes. We also have data 





PLENARY II 



that show that if a mother says to a child, "Please wait until I get off the telephone " even 
^^Siefll I problems with this. One might want to speculate why this Luld'be. 
ago ^t Ohio I "" 18-month-old and her two mles. I was giving a lecture years 

saTd "I hte ‘"twists and social workers. A mother approached me and 

aid, I have an 18-month-old daughter. Would you like for me to bring her in next week to the 

w^k^rike? her^ fre conducting? I said, "Great." When the mother came in the following 
week I asked her Do you have any everyday mles for your child?" She said, "I have two First 
she IS not allowed to go into her brother's room, and she respects that. Second, she is not 
allowed to stand on tables." We were in an informal seminar room that had a little table I do 
h.f iSr but I stood on the table. The litde girl went over to her mother 

hfnnpn^ 7 " tI following week the mother came back to the seminar and I said, "What 

taWe'^' Sn daughter said on the way home was Table, table, 

table. So there are messages that they understand. 

I want to talk to you about some of the contributors from culture, parents, and children I 
;l':nrpThLlr^^^^^^^ --- — «n development. 

firs^nSnt fr regarding this presentation. The 

;,hn,u th ^1 most of our data come from middle-class. White families. We know so litde 
about other cultures within the United States. We actually know more about Japanese families 

^o^md ^ American, African American, or Ladno back- 

SuTfttors Tr'f'^ rth ^ K essendal parental contributors and 

Add factors. The fourdi point is that self-regulation for young Aildren is not an easy process 

foss of socio-cultural norms should not lead to a 

tharrllnlf ° r social-cultural norms? We know from Ae scant data Aat we have 

^utVhivh n Even Ae most unsophisticated cultural groups 

put a high pnority on keeping young Aildren from harm. We also know Aat most culture? have 
a norm fm what Aey consider a "good Add." This "good Aild" norm may differ across 
cultures, but Aere is someAing about a good Aild. We have a sense Aat this "good Aild" norm 

Skurall^X?^^^^^^^^ d differences might be expected in terms of 

cultural vanations? There is a difference m mle emphasis. Some mles will be more emphasized 

Aan oAers, wiA Ae exception of safety mles. The ages expected for a young Add's comphance 
will vary. Lastly, Aere will be differences in Ae degree of autonomy provided for Aildren^ By 

UnirjsmesXmaa cultural groups in the 

important aspects of parenting. We have enough 

m to be emotionally happy, Ae style of parenting Aat works best for most parents is being 

be aSoXantS" 

lutX‘SSntia?'T^eTl",‘i,°"' ' ““““ P^ccnla that are abso- 

lutely essential. The first Aing is stmcture m Ae household. For young Aildren stmcture often 

implemented very early in life Schedules 

create boundanes for Aildren Aat help Aem to become secure. Schedules are an essenU. 
prerecjuisite for teaching Aildren about norms because sAedules allow Ae child be alert and 

S y “nXfnSl r-;^ initiate safer; r^les 

y m me 2nd year of life. They emphasize safety mles so Ae Aild gets Ae message 

nouSlTA v« The ^ 'hT"® not going into a brother's roonr, or 

ot touching Ae VCR. They could also include being polite, saying, "please " or "Aank von " 

WuTellTnr ^Sl clwmior- 

what one wears when one goes outside or how early one can go to a neighbor's house. 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



Parents' emotion control expectations are harder for the child to meet. Parents may hope for 
it, but it takes a while for the child to get there. Parents also train children in independent 
functions, such as dressing oneself, personal hygiene, and so forth. Research findings have 
included cross-cultural norms. For example, a mother in Okinawa getting ready to nurse her 
2-year-old child withheld her breast until the child said, "Please." 

What about children? What is it that they need to bring to learning norms? First, there is the 
emotional social bond. Why should a child even bother to follow the norm if he does not like 
the person or feel close to the person who is waiting for the child to say, "Please" or "Thank 
you?" Cognition comes initially in terms of comprehension, and we published a study where we 
found that the increase in comprehension during the toddler period is associated with an 
increase in performance. Additionally, children have to remember what they hear in weighing 
out the norms, so memory is important. If one is not paying attention to the parent, one cannot 
get the message about the norms. 

The fourth point is temperament relating to individual differences. There is a growing body 
of data that show that children who are very difficult to deal with early in life and who have 
parents who are not responsive to this difficulty have a long course of behavior problems that 
start in the toddler period, continue into preschool years, and, for some, continue into adoles- 
cence. Temperament is something to consider. 

Katherine Nelson's work is particularly informative in terms of thinking about language and 
self-regulation. In her book in the mid-1990s, she makes three points on the use of language for 
children. First, language provides a way for children to have an internalized dialog with them- 
selves. They think about ideas. The second point is that language affords the young child the 
opportunity to describe the self and also to evaluate the self. The last point is that language 
provides communication to others. Self-appraisal is important in self-regulation. 

Here are some of the ways that a young child uses language. All of these are important. 1 have 
learned in the last few years that when children start to say, "If. . .then. . . ", then one can make a 
sentence that they are going to understand when behavior has been difficult for them. The "l"s 
are widely used in language at this age: "1 can," "1 won't," "It's mine," and so forth. 

Here are language examples from our laboratory from a child who is 4 years of age, where the 
child is playing with an assortment of toys, while the mother is sitting nearby: (a) "This is the 
newspaper for the morning," (b) "My school has a playground," (c) "No, right now! We're going 
to play this now," (d) "1 want a snack now," (e) "She's going to be the cooker," and (f) "Well, 1 
want a booster chair for her." Those six examples are of communication. The next example 
comes from the child telling one of the toys around the toy stove, "You can't touch this when the 
water is boiling." It's just after dinner now, so they can't eat anything. This is a type of reasoning 
that we hope children get to, and this is why language is so important here. 

Self-talk is helpful for adults as well as children. This is strictly about when self-talk might 
come in and the types of self-talk that exist. For those interested in self-talk, Patrick Estin edited 
a book called Crib Talk which is an excellent example of how young toddlers talk to themselves 
at night and in the morning. One gets a sense of what it takes from the culture, from parents, 
and from the child, to follow norms. 

Let us turn to data primarily related to compliance. 1 published this data with Heidi 
Freidinski in the early 1990s of children aged 13 to 36 months. The highest score is "4," which 
represents the child following the rule usually on his or her own. A score of "3" means that the 
child is more or less following the rule, but not regularly. We looked at safety, interpersonal 
compliance, delay, and self-care. Much of these data were collected from a sample that was 
primarily middle class and White, and the mothers were highly educated. Therefore, we were 
concerned about the representation of the sample. 

In a later study with Coulson and Neufeld, we recruited other participants from child care 
centers and created a more ethnically diverse sample. We added a social-emotional variable, 
which represented behaviors such as not getting into fights with children, not screaming, or 



er|c 



38 



45 



PLENARY II 



being nice in the family. The older sample is composed of, on average, 5-year-olds and the 
younger sample is composed of 2V2-year-olds. 

The range of scores for safety is wider for the 2‘/2-year-olds than for the 5-year-olds. The 
average score for each group is significantly different. The range is so much narrower for the 
5-year-olds meaning that most children are following safety norms by that age. 

We have some data from Japanese colleagues looking at children between 18 and 24 months. 
Findings included more compliance in terms of safety in American homes. In explanation of 
this finding, we know that there could be more expectations on the part of American parents 
about safety norms, probably because there are far more safety hazards in the United States. We 
also have data that indicate that there are fewer expectations from the mothers in the Japanese 
culture. These data are consistent with other findings from other studies from Japan. There is a 
great deal of indulgence from Japanese parents towards their toddler children. 

These data also are consistent with recent publications showing that "don'ts" are harder for 
children to follow — it is easier for them to follow the ”do*s”, and we believe it is because of the 
emotional climate. 

Language data shows that in disputes children tend to justify why there is a dispute, and the 
justifications are primarily around the child's own feelings. The child feels hurt. There is far less 
concern about other's feelings. Immaterial consequences do not get as much attention as the 
child's own feelings. 

One of my doctoral students, Bonnie Klimes-Dougan, did her dissertation on child negotia- 
tion. An example of child negotiation is in a clean-up situation. A child has been told to put 
away toys, and a child tries to distract the mother from the task. There is a lot of negotiation at 
age 3 to get the mother not to think about the task. What is the negotiation? I have to go to the 
bathroom (or potty). Read me a story. Can we read now? Can I play with something else? 
Examples of that type of negotiation decrease because by 4 years old children are compliant. 

This type of negotiation is when a toddler says to the mother, "I hear you. Mom. I'm going to 
put the toys away, but I'm going to do it my way." The self is emerging, reflecting self-needs. I am 
going to put old toys away. I am going to put dolls away first. I am going to do something. I am 
listening to you. I am realizing that the toys have to go away, but I am a person, and I will tell 
you how I will do it. 

I want to turn to biosocial risk factors. We have increasing data that show that children who 
are bom very early (premature infants, children whose mother's have used illicit drugs) tend to 
have problems with physiological regulation early on. It is my belief that children who have 
difficulty with physiological regulation (they do not sleep well, they do not eat well, they do not 
handle schedules well) are candidates for poor self-regulation. 

Genetic disorders can cause children to have difficulty with rules. If there are central nervous 
system disturbances or brain damage, particularly early brain damage related to the frontal lobe, 
there is much data that indicates that these children will have long-term difficulty with rules. 

Children who have development delays and delayed use of language tend to have difficulty 
with rules. We have to understand that children with moderate forms of cognitive impairment 
do not reason well or follow rules well. For further discussion, I recommend Sissy Pampel's 
1995 paper in the Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry where she has looked at the data for 
children who have difficulty with rules, complex problems, and so forth. 

I would not want to end on a sad note, so I am going to end with a very brief story. Six 
months ago, a colleague said to me, "My granddaughter has started biting. This is a big problem. 

I do not understand this, because she has incredible language. She has hundreds of words. She 
speaks in sentences that are sbc, seven, and eight words long. Why is this child having so much 
trouble with biting? I said, I don t know, but why don't you go home and talk to her about it, 
and get your daughter or someone to talk to her." They started doing this, and there was not much 
change. One child, in particular, was the recipient of the biting. About 2 months ago, the little girl 
came to her grandfather after a biting episode and said, "I bit Annie, but I didn't bite Betty." 




39 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



I was thrilled when I heard this and I said to my colleague, "She's reasoning now about the 
people who mean soniething to her and those who don't." I said, "I think that very soon you are 
going to see a decrease in biting." I was right. It took another 6 weeks or so, when she began to 
say to her mom when she went to the play group, "I will not bite. What she did was to start 
biting herself when she got angry. That did not last very long, because it hurt. Then she started to 
yell at the little girl who was taking her toys, but she did not bite her. I promised the grandfather 
that, eventually, she would stop screaming at the little girl and talk instead. It took 6 months, 
but it was success. It was a little victory on the path to self-regulation. 

John Hagen: We are now going to hear from Sybil Carrere. She obtained her Ph.D. at the 
University of California at Irvine. She is currendy a Research Assistant Professor in Family and 
Child Nursing at the University of Washington. You have probably heard of some of the research 
that she has done with Dr. John Gottman at the University of Washington. That work has gotten 
much national acclaim. The work I am alluding to predicts from interviews with newlywed 
couples whether they will ultimately divorce or not. Her presentation is entitled "The Child, The 
Family, and Emotional Involvement." 

Sybil Carrere: I am going to talk about children and their parents and what parenting has to do 
with children's emotional development. First, I would like to talk briefly about the relationship 
between parenting and children's emotional development. This will build off the work that 
Claire Kopp was just presenting in terms of self-regulation. Next, I will discuss emotion regula- 
tion. I am referring to children's ability to soothe themselves emotionally. Then, we will review 
some biology and discuss the physiology of emotion regulation and how parents can help their 
children physiologically self-soothe. Finally, I will talk about what this all has to do with 
children's readiness for school environments. 

As Claire alluded to, it is well established that parenting styles influence children's emotional 
and social development. Much of the research is focused on disciplinary styles using parenting 
and the kinds of predominant affect parents use when interacting with their children. In general, 
we know that when parents use inconsistent restrictive discipline techniques in combination 
with cold or hostile affect, these children have displayed more negative kinds of affect. They 
have more problems in how they interact with other children, and they are more easily stressed 
than children whose parents use more warmth in combination with either a restrictive disciplin- 
ary style or permissive, however, consistent disciplinary style. 

The work that we have been doing at the University of Washington suggests that this main- 
stream work on the link between parental disciplinary style and child outcomes also can be 
extended by a more general consideration of how children's outcomes are related to the parents 
and the child's interactions. This is related particularly in emotional moments, whether it is the 
emotion of the child or whether it is the emotion of the parent. Gottman, Katz, and Hooven 
found that there are such links between those parent-child interactions around emotion and 
things like social competence, prosocial behaviors, and the psychological health of the child, as 
well as how well they will do in school settings. 

We are not the only laboratory that has conducted this type of research and found these 
kinds of results. For example, Denham and her associates have found that emotional compe- 
tence in preschoolers was predicated upon how parents teach their children about emotions 
through modeling and positive coaching behaviors. Work by other people, such as Eisenberg, 
has extended our understanding of this relationship between parenting and emotional compe- 
tence into middle childhood and adolescence. 

I would like to briefly discuss what we mean about emotion regulation. This construct has 
emerged as central to this research on parenting and emotion. One of the presenters yesterday, 
Ross Thompson, had a good definition of emotion regulation that I would like to borrow. When 
he talks about the child, he says that emotion regulation is whether we can find extrinsic and 





40 



PLENARY II 



intrinsic processes responsible for being able to monitor, evaluate, and modify emotional 
reactions, especially the intensive and temporal features in order for that child to accomplish 
their goal. Some signs of successful emotion regulation have been outlined by Katz and 
Gottman. They suggest that the child that can successfully modulate their emotions is a child 
who can inhibit inappropriate behaviors associated with extremely strong negative affects, such 
as temper tantnims or extremely "over the top" kinds of positive affect. 

Emotion regulation also concerns the ability to self-soothe the physiological arousal that the 
strong affect has induced. It has to do with the child's ability to focus attention, and this is very 
important in terms of their readiness for school. It also has to do with the ability of children to 
be able to organize themselves for coordinated action in the service of an external goal. Many 
researchers believe that this broader context of emotional parent-child interaction is an impor- 
tant link between parenting techniques and child outcomes. This link is emotion regulation. 

I want to talk briefly about how the physiology of emotion regulation has to do with the 
child's ability to physiologically self-soothe. The ability to physiologically self-regulate is 
recognized as a very important developmental landmark, and it has been linked to important 
childhood outcomes beginning with infancy. Let us do a brief biology lesson. We think that 
neural regulation is a very integral part of emotion regulation. You may remember studying the 
autonomic nervous system. The autonomic nervous system has two parts: One is the sympa- 
thetic nervous system that activates the heart and gets it pumping faster, and increases your heart 
rate and blood pressure. It can be thought of as a gas pedal for the heart. The other is the 
parasympathetic nervous system. This is like the brake pedal for the heart. It slows the body 
down and it brings the body back into homeostasis, primarily through the vagus nerves. 

Within the very first months of birth, the major task that an infant has is to learn how to 
achieve that physiological homeostasis. The infant does this by being able to self-regulate its 
physiological responses. This is done primarily through reactions to the environmental situation 
that they are in and self-soothing constant behaviors (turning away, sucking their thumb, and so 
forth). Infants who achieve physiological homeostasis can then shift their attention from 
distress that is happening inside their body and begin to focus outwards. When they focus 
outwards, it provides an optimal state to be able to receive sensory and social information. That 
is why it is so important. 

Parents are critical in helping their children develop the physiologically homeostatic mecha- 
nisms that are integral to emotion regulation. Parents can help their infants achieve physiologi- 
cal homeostasis before the infants are even able to do it for themselves. This ability of die 
parents begins with the parent's faculty for responding to an infant's distress with affection and 
comfort (this work comes from Judy Dunn), and it continues with face-to-face play with the 
infant during the first years of life. 

The ways in which caregivers interacts with their infants can influence the children's basic 
regulatory abilities, and it lays the ground work for later abilities that the children will develop 
in self-soothing, in repair interactions, and in their ability to focus attention. Researchers have 
argued that these emotion regulation abilities in infancy are fundamental to the development of 
cognitive abilities and social competence later in the child's life. 

The parasympathetic nervous system's activity can be indexed by the vagal tone, which is 
related to what I was telling you earlier about the nerve's control. Research by Stephen Porges 
and others indicates that the vagal tone is associated with a child's ability to self-regulate and to 
react to the environment, and the ability to suppress the vagal tone has an important role in 
helping that child sustain and focus attention. 

The capacity to emotionally self-regulate also has implications for the child's ability to 
appropriately manage the often emotionally provocative and stressful challenges that take place 
within the school environment, both inside the classroom and in terms of the social dynamics 
that are taking place with other children. 

Now I want to introduce the poly-vagal theory that Stephen Porges has developed. It is a 
phylogenetic developmental model of neural regulation of the heart and it allows for three 





41 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



emotional subsystems. These systems are hierarchical in organization, and the most phyloge- 
netically recent system or the most recently evolved system control responses to stressors. This is 
called the ventral vagal complex. The ventral vagal complex not only controls the heart rate but 
is also involved with communication and with prosocial behaviors through the enervation of 
the nervous system. That is, the ventral vagal complex is not only modulating the heart, but it 
also ties directly into those parts of the brain that are associated with a child s ability to use 
words and communicate. 

The second emotional response subsystem is the sympathetic nervous system to which I 
referred earlier. In terms of a fight-or- flight response, it is the subsystem that increases heart rate 
in the face of stressors, having blood go through the muscles so that they are either ready to 
fight with their muscles or use those muscles to run away. It is less connected to children s 
ability to communicate. 

The third and most primitive of these subsystems is the dorsal vagal complex. The dorsal 
vagal complex, when it is activated, generates a massive decrease in heart rate that is typically 
seen in an organism when it is behaviorally freezing. For example, baby animals, when there is a 
predator nearby, go into this freeze mode. That is what we are talking about with this most 
primitive of systems. 

The more successful adaptive emotion regulation responses, such as the prosocial behaviors, 
the ability to communicate with others, and flexibility in the face of stressful situations, utilize 
the ventral vagal complex subsystem. When the ventral vagal complex and the behavior strate- 
gies that are associated with it foil, the sympathetic nervous system comes in to play. If this 
secondary system is not effective, then the most primitive of these neural subsystems, the dorsal 
vagal complex, is utilized to respond to social challenges. We suggest that maladaptive emotion 
regulation represents a utilization of these more primitive neural control mechanisms. 

Stephen Forges poly- vagal theory suggests that what happens with children is that they may 
revert to a more primitive response when the ventral vagal complex system is compromised. 
Again, I want to remind you that the vagal tone is a way to measure the ventral vagal complex 
system's ability to regulate the body's responses to stressors. 

There is much support for Stephen Forges' theory of emotion regulation both in terms of the 
work that Forges and his colleagues have done, as well as research at the University of Washing- 
ton. For example, Gottman, Katz and Hooven found in their studies of middle childhood that 
the ability to adaptively regulate emotion was associated with vagal tone. When they looked at 
children at age 4, high vagal tone predicted those children's emotion regulation ability, their 
peer social competence, their academic achievement, and their physical health at age 8. 

One more concept that I want to introduce is the construct of meta-emotion that my col- 
league John Gottman introduced to describe parent's feelings about their children's emotions. 
Meta-emotions also encompass the parent's styles of communicating with their children about 
emotions. When we talk about the meta-emotion structure of the family, we mean the parents' 
awareness of their own emotions and the emotions of their children, and how they coach their 
children about emotions. The most active dimension in this meta-emotion structure of the 
family is the parental attitude and activity that we call emotion coaching versus an attitude of 
emotion dismissing. 

Emotion coaching refers to ways in which parents interact with their children when their 
children display negative affect, particularly anger and sadness. It also includes how parents deal 
with positive emotions like pride and affection. Because this meta-emotion dimension is 
orthogonal to parental warmth, it adds to the research that is focused on parental discipline 
techniques and the predominant affects that parents display towards their children. 

What does emotion coaching mean? We are talking about parents who emotion-coach their 
children to do a number of different kinds of things. First, what they do is detect negative 
emotion in their children at a much lower level before that negative emotion has a tendency to 
escalate and it gets too hard for the parents to get the child to self-soothe. Therefore, they detect 



er|c 



42 



49 



PLENARY II 



this at lower thresholds. Then, they empathized with the child about their emotion. Even if 
there is some misbehavior involved, they still empathize with the fact by sa}dng, "I know that 
you're feeling angry. You should not be throwing those things on the floor, but I do understand 
that this situation might make you feel upset." Parents use those moments as a way to build 
their relationship with their child, and they use those moments as a way to teach their children 
about their emotions. It is like doing emotion homework with one's children. The other thing 
they do is set limits on the children's behaviors. They help the children find ways to problem 
solve and know what to do with their strong emotion the next time it occurs. 

In contrast, emotion-dismissing parents do not tend to notice negative emotions until they 
have really escalated. These parents, when we have talked to them about emotions, do not feel 
that talking with their children about emotions is very helpful to their children, or they try to 
avoid talking to their children about emotions. Finally, when their child is feeling angry or 
upset, parents will try to distract the child. For example, "Oh, look at your dolly ! Look at what 
dolly is doing!" They will tell the child that the emotion that they are experiencing is not okay, 
that is, it is not okay to feel angry or sad in a particular situation. 

There is research conducted at the University of Washington that pulls this all together. We 
have looked at parents in teaching situations. Parents who were emotion-coached and used 
praising methods of teaching had children with higher vagal tone when they were engaging in 
tasks that demanded impulse control and effort. This regulatory physiology was a strong index 
of the ability of these children to self-soothe when upset and inhibit impulsive behavior. In 
addition, the parent's meta-emotion system also predicted a wide variety of outcomes at age 8. 
These include better social competence with peers, lower reports of teachers talking about 
behavior problems in the classroom, greater modulation and dampening of negative affect in 
the child, and higher levels of academic achievement in both reading and mathematics. Last, 
there was better physical health in the child in terms of infectious illness. 

John Gottman and I have been following a cohort of families since 1990, the 1st year of their 
marriage, before the pregnancies were even a twinkle in their eyes. We have continued to follow 
these families as they became parents, and have studied that transition to parenthood. One of 
the graduate students in our laboratory, Alyson Shapiro, is looking at the triadic interactions 
between the two parents and their infant. When an infant sits in an infant seat for a long time, 
there will be a point when the infant starts fussing and crying. Shapiro looked at those moments 
of fussing and crying and the physiology that is associated with them. She found that there are 
some parents that use emotion-coaching strategies. They will say to their infant, "Oh don't be 
sad" or "Does this place make you scared?" Then there are parents who use emotion-dismissing 
strategies such as "Oh baby, smile" or "Oh baby, be happy and don't cry." Shapiro looked at the 
physiology of the infants right after those moments. When parents used emotion-coaching 
behavior, their infants had a lower heart rate and higher vagal tones, indicating that they are 
tapping into the ventral vagal complex. The parents who had used the emotion-dismissing 
behavior had infants with higher heart rates and lower vagal tones. 

We are following these families, along with a larger cohort of families, for the next 4 years. 

We will try to gain a better understanding of how emotion coaching and dismissing at this early 
stage of life (these infants were 3 months old) will influence children's abilities to emotion 
regulate and succeed in school. 

What does meta-emotion, emotion regulation and readiness have to do with school? We 
believe, and what some of the evidence tends to show, that children's emotional development is 
associated with that child's ability to succeed in school. During infancy, preschool, and middle 
childhood, the meta-emotion structure of the family is associated with how the parents socialize 
their children around emotions. This includes modeling appropriate emotional responses in 
stressful and conflict situations. It also includes coaching their children about the meaning of 
emotions, how they can manage their emotions successfully, and teaching children about the 
social rules of emotional expression. 




5 



0 



43 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



Our laboratory has found that the ability of parents to model successful emotional responses 
to situations and their ability to coach their children about emotions shapes the capacity of 
those children to emotionally and physiologically self-regulate. Because these children are able 
to utilize the ventral vagal complex neurosubsystem to physiologically soothe themselves, these 
children are better able to focus attention. They are able to access the communication centers of 
the brain so they do better in terms of their social interactions with other children and their 
teachers. These children are able to behave appropriately within the classroom setting and they 
are less likely to use physical aggression when they get into emotionally provocative and 
stressful situations. Finally, they are also less likely to be depressed or socially withdrawn in 
those types of stressful situations. 

I hope 1 have given you some information as to why we think that emotions are so important 
in terms of children's development. In addition, when we are thinking about our child s 
readiness for school and ability to manage it, it is important for us to look at emotions. 

John Hagen: Megan Gunnar has focused on stress systems and has done work that has received 
much acclaim, looking at both the sympathetic hormonal and brain systems. She received her 
Ph.D. in Developmental Psychology from Stanford University and is currently the McKnight 
University Professor at the Institute of Child Development at the University of Minnesota. 

Claire B. Kopp for Megan R. Gunnar: We will be talking about stress as researchers who are 
interested in the relationship between behavior and biology. Ponce Celley is often credited with 
creating the field of stress research over half a century ago when he discovered the host of 
physical changes in the body that seemed to occur when people or animals were exposed for 
long periods to overwhelming challenges. These bodily changes included the breaking down of 
muscle, increased blood sugar, slowing of wound healing, impairments in immune functioning, 
gastric ulceration, and so forth. Celley called the overwhelming challenges "stressors" and the 
body's reaction to them "stress." Celley later learned that the activity of an endocrine system that 
produces a hormone called cortisol was responsible for many of these bodily changes. 

Cells in the hypothalamus of the brain produce a chemical called cortocotropin releasing 
hormone or CRH. CRH stimulates the pituitary gland to produce another chemical called 
ACTH, which goes into the bloodstream and stimulates the outer shell or cortex of the adrenal 
glands to manufacture and release cortisol into the bloodstream. Once in the bloodstream, this 
hormone has effects on both body and brain that help organize the body and mind to manage 
stressful experiences. 

The hypothalamus, pituitary, adrenal gland (HPA) system is related to the brain for several 
important reasons: (a) Stress researchers learned that activity of the HPA system was regulated 
by regions in the brain that are involved in emotion and self-regulation; (b) The brain is a major 
target organ for cortisol. In the brain, cortisol levels affect learning and memory, and over time, 
the threshold at which we experience negative emotions when things are potentially distressing; 
and (c) CRH, which is the releasing hormone for the HPA system, acts in many areas of the 
brain, helping to orchestrate behavior, brain, and body reactions to stressors and challenges. 

We know that some individuals easily become tense, anxious, sleepless, and so forth when 
faced with even minor challenges. Others seem to manage major life events with relative ease. 
They roll with the punches. Genetics certainly have something to do with these individual 
differences. Animal studies have shown that experiences, especially in infancy and childhood, 
also matter. Over half a century of research on rats and monkey babies has shown that the 
neurobiology of stress, that is, the interactions between the brain emotion systems and the HPA 
stress hormone system develop over the rat and monkey equivalence of infancy and childhood. 
Furthermore, while the emotion stress system is developing, it is plastic or open to being 
changed by experiences. Animal studies have shown that the mother or primary caregiver serves 
as a powerful buffer for the stress system early in life. When mother is available and responsive. 



ERIC 



44 



51 



PLENARY II 



the baby does not produce elevation in cortisol levels, even when things happen that upset it 
and cause the baby to emit distress cries. Furthermore, these studies have shown that stimula- 
tion received by the baby during caregiving interactions is critical in shaping the development of 
the emotion stress system. When the young animal receives what in humans can be described as 
sensitive, responsive, and stimulating care, the animal develops into one that is better able to 
roll with the punches. When the young animal receives what in humans might be described as 
disorganized, neglectful, deprived care, it develops into an animal that is more skittish, reactive, 
and vulnerable to life's challenges. 

Is there a human chapter to this story? Do parents and other caregivers provide a protective 
buffer to this stress system, because they are available? Do experiences in infancy and childhood 
help to shape the neurobiology of our emotion stress system? We are a long way from knowing 
the answer to the second question, however we are quite sure that the answer to the first 
questions is a resounding "yes." 

There are increases in cortisol measured while human infants are undergoing their well-baby 
physicals and receiving their shots for childhood immunization. Over the 1st year of life infants 
produce less and less of a cortisol stress response to the exam shots. In fact, by the 2nd year of 
life, infants seem to tolerate the physical exam and the two shots that they receive— one in each 
thigh— without producing any increase in stress hormone. This is amazing, but these data look a 
lot like what one would see in studies in baby rats and monkeys. In human infants, crying 
decreases a bit over the first 6 months of life, but by the 2nd year, infants are upset, and they let 
you know it. The difference between crjdng and cortisol that is seen after 12 months of age is a 
classic type of dissociation often seen in stress research. It is this dissociation that lets us ask 
whether the parents, who are of course with the infant during the exam shots, are providing a 
stress buffer. 

One way of examining this question is by considering the security of the infant-parent 
attachment relationship. Bowlby argued that the behavior attachment system serves as a homeo- 
static mechanism that constitutes an external or outer ring of life support. If the outer ring is 
equal to the task, then the demands on physiological systems are minimal and survival is 
increased. In secure attachment relationships, we hypothesize that the outer ring would be up to 
the task, while in insecure relationships the infant might need to activate his or her stress 
hormone system to manage potentially stressful situations. To test this, we had toddlers engage 
in a series of challenging, potentially stressful tasks. They met a clown, encountered some 
puppets that popped out of the wall and asked them to play, and were shown a mechanical 
clown robot that moved around and made a loud noise. These are all things that some toddlers 
find frm and others find scary. After watching how the toddler reacted, we had the mother do 
whatever she normally would do to help the child feel comfortable. We took samples of cortisol 
before and after this test session. 

A week later, we brought the children back to the laboratory and tested them in the 
Ainsworth Strange Situation Paradigm to determine whether they were in a secure or insecure 
attachment relationship. As we expected, children who were not frightened of our challenges — 
the bold ones— had no reason to produce a cortisol stress response, and they did not. Children 
who were frightened did produce a cortisol stress response, but only if they were insecurely 
attached to the parent who had been with them. If they were securely attaAed to the person 
who was there to protect and support them, they did not produce a cortisol stress reaction. 
Remember that this was true although they were acting frightened of our challenging tasks. In a 
secure attachment relationship, the presence of the parent provides a powerful stress buffer. 

Many children spend much of their awake time being cared for by people other than their 
parents. Indeed, they spend much time in out-of-home child care where they are cared for along 
with a group of other children. When the child is in child care, there is every reason to think that 
the adults caring for the child can provide the same kind of powerful stress buffer as good 
parents. However, whether this happens is related to the quality of the child care. 




5 



2 



45 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



The data shows increases in cortisol levels for preschoolers in two child care centers that 
differed in measures of child care quality. The lower quality center scored in the acceptable range 
while the higher quality center was quite exceptional. There was a small increase in the stress 
hormone, on average, even at a higher quality center. A full day negotiating relationships with 
many other children is hard work, but at the lower quality center the increase was significantly 
larger. A similar type of result is seen in family-based child care. From data on 21 preschool 
children who were each in 21 different family child care homes, we used observational ratings of 
the caregiver environment developed by the NICHD child care study to rate the caregivers on the 
amount of focused attention and stimulation they provided the target child. Quality of care was 
directly related to the child's stress hormone activity over the day. 

Early in life, our stress physiology is regulated powerfully by the quality of care we receive 
from parents and other caregivers. Parent-child attachment relationships that are secure provide 
the child with a way of buffering activation of the HPA stress hormone system while the children 
go about exploring the world. High quality child care helps buffer the children's stress hormone 
system while they go about learning and socializing with peers. These findings suggest that, as 
with other mammals, our social relationships in infancy and childhood may play a role in 
shaping our stress neurobiology. Of course, they do not prove that these experiences have long- 
term effects. Work examining this critical question is currently underway. 




46 



53 



Plenary III 



Polices and Programs That Support Families 
With Children From Birth to Three 

CHAIR: Ruby Takanishi 

PRESENTERS: Deborah A. Phillips, Marcia K. Meyers, Steve A. Freedman 



■ Lessons From Neurons to Neighborhoods 

Deborah A. Phillips 

■ The Dual Earner/Dual Carer Society: What Government Can 
Do to Support Motherhood, Fatherhood, and Employment 

Marcia K. Meyers 

■ Child Health Insurance: A Modern American Fiction 

Steve A. Freedman 



Ruby Takanishi: While the focus will be on birth to 3 years of age because that is an important 
part of the life span, we all agreed that it would be difficult to make that arbitrary cut off. 
Therefore, we decided that while the focus would be on the early years, that will not be the 
exclusive focus. 

Deborah Phillips is Associate Professor and Chair of the Department of Psychology at 
Georgetown University. Deborah is a developmental psychologist and she is Study Director for 
the Committee on Integrating the Science of Early Childhood Development, which led to the 
report that she is going to be talking about. From Neurons to Neighborhoods. She is also part of the 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) Study of Early Child Care. 

Deborah A. Phillips: My presentation is based on the Neurons to Neighborhoods report from the 
National Academy of Sciences Committee on Integrating the Science of Early Childhood 
Development. The members of this committee represent a wide range of disciplines including 
developmental psychology, medicine, psychiatry, economics, neuroscience, and education and 
include those who study children with special needs. There also were practitioners on the panel. 
This report is a true consensus, agreed to in full by all committee members. 

The conclusion from the report that made headlines was that focusing on ages 0-3 really 
begins too late and ends too soon. Our way of balancing the debate at the time was to say that 
on the one hand 0-3 is the critical period in brain development, but on the other hand 0-3 is 
important but does not produce an indelible blueprint that one is stuck with for the rest of one's 




54 



47 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



life. In addition; in this session we are trying to think about how we support families and 
children from birth to 3. 

We had an interesting conference call in which we were all bemoaning the boundaries that 
we had to put around what we said. However I took the boundaries seriously and tried to think 
through what in this report is relevant to 0—3 or what issues it raises for the 0—3 period. In fact, 
the origins of Neuvons to Neighbovhoods was derived from the national fascination with early 
brain development, which was focused on the 0-3 years. 

When there is controversy around an issue that has a scientific base or where scientific 
evidence is being used in the service of action, people start getting worried about it. In this case, 
the neuroscience community was getting worried about what was being said about neuroscience 
research. The tendency when this happens is for people to run to the National Academy of 
Sciences (NAS) and look to them to provide "a cover." They rely on NAS to come up with an 
objective report that deals with the controversy. We work behind closed doors literally and then 
come out and say, "Here is what we think the science says and, just as importantly, here is what 
it does not say." We also try to define where there is a shift from the scientific evidence and a 
move into advocacy. 

People asked us to make sense of the brain science and tell them what it says and what it 
does not say. In particular, we were asked to focus on the assumption that the first 3 years of life 
represents a critical period for all of development and the use of this science to support every- 
thing from Early Head Start and home visiting to Mozart tapes. What the scientific community 
was objecting to were statements that there was new research on brain development to support 
the assertion for critical periods. In particular, the issue was that there was evidence about the 
proliferation and pruning back of the synapses, that if we did the right kind of interventions 
from 0-3 we would have the right kind of pruning going on. In a way, we were turning policy 
makers into neuroscientists, which they loved of course, because what they did was going to 
shape the structure of the human brain. That was very exciting to them and a lot of useful 
outcomes occurred a result of this flurry of activity, including Early Head Start. 

I also want to put the study in context because I am going to return to this context to explain 
how I think 0-3 might be special within the early childhood years. First of all, there has been an 
explosion of knowledge in neurobiology as well as in the behavioral and social sciences. Much 
of it has to do with the neurochemistry of early brain development, the "software less than the 
"hardware." Part of our concern at the Academy was that, because of all the attention to early 
brain development, a great deal fascinating research on social and behavioral development was 
being ignored by the media. Secondly, marked transformations were occurring in the social and 
economic circumstances under which families with young children were living. Putting the two 
together we concluded, at a time when scientific advances could be used to strengthen early 
childhood policies and practices, that knowledge was frequently being dismissed or ignored and 
children were paying the price. 

Because of the origins of the report, there were a couple of fundamental issues that develop- 
mental psychologists have been studying forever and probably will study forever that guided our 
review of the literature. They are the basic questions about the role of early experience in 
shaping development. The first has to do with the timing of early experience. Does it matter 
when a child is exposed to beneficial or harmful experiences? That was the focus of the 0-3 part 
of the report. The second has to do with the nature of early experiences. Are we providing 
children with the right kinds of experiences and protecting them from harmful experiences? 
That, if you will, is the pruning piece. Are there critical periods? We had to confront that one 
head on— how do you know a critical period when you see one? 

Many people apparently did not even understand the meaning of this controversial concept. 
It derives from the animal research literature. In fact, critical periods are seen in occurrences like 
bird songs, maternal rat licking, and cat eyes, and these findings were being transferred over 
onto human development. 




48 



55 



PLENARY III 



psychology, we prefer to use the term sensitive periods, which 

even cToS T gradually dose and they may not 

rlrt^in ! 1 ^ ^ ^ determining a critical period. One is that 

establishing certain 

foie if rSiild L.T is most plastic and responsive to stimulation. Tliere- 

tore. It a child has the same experiences either before this critical period or after it there will be 
eiAer a dampened or "no influence at all" effect on the domains of development 
interested m. Secondly, Ae young child is particularly vulnerable to the absence of these 

rttTnt entdT. of dysfUncdon. A kind of "use it or lose 

tPriIJ'tn concluded that there are few critical periods, in the technical sense of the 

term m human development. However, there are a number of sensitive periods during which 
development IS optimized by exposure to well-timed experiences. An example of this is in the 

fascinating research on deaf children bom to both deaf and 
hearing parents who are introduced to sign language at different times. This research has really 
yance our^understanding of what is happening with language development— which aspects 
of It seem to be vulnerable to particular environmental inputs or lack thereof and whSi aspects 
are not. Another area is in the development of vision. Some very interesting research has been 

^0 ^0^ ^ st^^bismus. As human creatures, we need exposure to patterned light and 

to binocular vision for our eyes to work properly. These examples provide evidence that in some 
of those basic aspects of development there are sensitive periods. 

mat about attachment? T^is is a huge question. Is there a sensitive period for attachment? 

tooltn T t interesting researA on the topicTe 

“end orphanages. There is dre old\r literature and there i™ a 

»Whaf? ff O'phanage literature. The question this literature is asking has to do with, 

re ^ effects of the variation in the extent and nature of deprivation that children 

experience and what about the timing of adoption? Does it make a difference? What about the 

literature, is remarkable growth failure and severe developmental delays in 
adoDt on orphanages, but on the other hand, incredibly dramatic catch-up upo^ 

adoption for many of these orphanage-reared children. In fact, one could think of adopdon as a 

adn"^!H ^ ^Vt ^ If one wants evidence that early intervention works, look at the 

adoption literature. It is breathtaking. This also is evidence for our plasticity. 

However, diere are a sizeable number of children who show persistent emotional and 

HtnTr when they are deprived of stable relationships early in life which 

/r orphanage-reared children. They tend to show problems with relahon 

diffir Itv^ h ^ friend, their friendships are more superficial, and they have 

difficulty reading social cues. ^ 

At the end of this review we concluded that in some behavioral systems there is remarkable 
plashcity throughout the life span. It is true of learning and memo^^and "fTome 

induL°/r°^°" firncuonmg. Some aspects of language development are remarkably plastic 
indudmg earning a second language and remediation of some language disorders. ^ ^ 

nftho °P*og our conclusions we asked, 'When should we really worry about the beginning 
^the early childhood period?" We conduded that healthy prenatal devdopmentress?nda 
We jammed the prenatal alcohol exposure literature; we looked at exposure to oAer terai^^ 
and the effects of poor nutrition, prematurity, and sensory deprivation. We ended up calling for 
the same old, same old": a good public health system, good prenatal care, good matem^^ 

n early screening for all children. By early we meant right after birth because sensory prob 
lems need to be caught very early on. sensory proD- 

Nm we go to the question about the nature of early experiences. Are the effects of earlv 
experiences somehow greater for *e 0-3 age group? We concluded, as a commtet°teL^^ 



o 

ERIC 



56 



49 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



is changing and the needs of young children are not being addressed. I will briefly talk about 
work, child care, and poverty, which are the three areas we highlighted, although they are not 
the only ones. 

The Neurons to Neighborhoods report concluded that changing work patterns are transforming 
family life in the following ways: (a) parents of young children are working more hours; 

(b) they are working more nonstandard hours, which is probably even more critical than the 
sheer number of hours; (c) they are returning to work earlier after giving birth, (d) more are 
mandated to work as a result of welfare reform; and (e) there are more working poor. 

One of the most dramatic trends influencing families is that a full-time job no longer 
guarantees an adecjuate standard of living, and there are more conflicting demands on parents. 
There is a new report from the Foundation for Child Development by Margaret Chin and 
Katherine Newman that talks about how parents are caught at the crossroads of education and 
welfare reform and the demands of work. We are now expected to do more , and more with our 
children vis-a-vis their schooling and yet we also are expected to work harder and longer. We 
cannot do it all and that affects all of us, but it affects low-income families even more. The care 
of young children is being fundamentally reapportioned from mothers and fathers to others. In 
the NICHD study over a decade ago, the average age of entry into child care was 11 weeks of age. 
My hunch is that it is even younger now. An element of this that has not been thought through 
carefully is the effect of earlier and extensive exposure to peer groups. One issue is that they are 
going into child care at earlier ages before they are really socially ready to interact with unfamil- 
iar peers, make friends, and negotiate with the peer group. 

Access to quality care is beyond the reach of many working families and the burden of poor 
quality and limited choice rests most heavily on low-income working families. In many studies, 
we also find that the younger the child, the poorer the quality of child care. We did not find that 
in the NICHD study, however. 

Finally, young children are the poorest members of society. Despite the sustained war on 
poverty and despite 5 years of welfere reform, young children are just as likely to be poor today 
as they were 25 years ago. Poverty may be more damaging during the early childhood period 
than at later ages. From the work of economists looking at the timing of poverty and its effects 
on educational attainments, we understand that poverty during ages 0-5 does seem to be 
particularly detrimental for graduating from high school and other similar educational 
outcomes. 

The double burden of family poverty and an impoverished neighborhood is a particularly 
significant threat affecting minority children. The fastest growing population is minority 
children and in many ways we can look at the 0-3 age group as the harbinger of demographic 
trends that are affecting our entire society. 

Some concluding thoughts: Do we need to argue critical periods for people to care about 
infants and toddlers? Why do we feel a need to say that 0-3 is not just an important stage of 
development like all stages of development, but that it is somehow more important than any 
other stage of development? What about the goal of simply nurturing, protecting, and ensuring 
the health and well-being of young children as an important objective in its own right, apart 
from the investment mentality that drives so much of public policy ? Most importantly, what 
about time for parenting? 

Takanishi: Deborah has given us a terrific context for the presentations by the other panelists. 
Developmental opportunities, as Phillips has put forward, are shaped by settings. Contexts and 
environments are shaped by national, state, and local policies and programs. One exciting 
aspect of Marcia Meyers' work is the connections she makes between policies across states and 
nations and their linkages to child well-being outcomes. 

Marcia Meyers is Associate Professor of Social Work and Public Affairs at the University of 
Washington and she is affiliated with the Social Indicators Survey Center at Columbia Univer- 
sity. She has a Masters in Public Administration from Harvard and an MSW and Ph.D. from the 



ERIC 



50 



57 



PLENARY III 



University of California at Berkeley. She and Janet Gomick from City College in New York are 
completing a book that looks at policies across countries and how they affect some of the factors 
that Phillips talked about. 

Marda K. Meyers: 1 do not usually put this in my C.V., but it is relevant here— my first job out 
of college was in a Head Start program. 1 am pleased when 1 can go full circle and be back in a 
Head Start crowd. 1 am going to speak from the research that 1 am conducting with Janet 
Gornick. This is part of an ongoing project and a book that is going to be completed this 
summer. It is part of an ongoing research agenda in which we are examining family policies 
across 14 industrialized countries including the United States, trying to draw lessons about 
family policy, mostly from Europe. 

What is the problem and what is a way of thinking about the solution? There is value in 
thinking big when we think about some of the issues that come out of what we know about 
early development and family dynamics. One way to think big is to look at Europe because they 
do much more than we do. There is a problem in all of the industrialized countries and a 
problem that is particularly acute in the United States. Families with young children are living in 
a "half-changed world" in which social norms and economic opportunities and necessities are 
pulling all parents into market work. However, social norms about parenting have not changed 
or they have not changed nearly as much, so as a society we still leave the care of dependents to 
families and in families, we leave the care of dependents primarily to mothers. 

This means that we are creating a problem. Everybody is in the workplace, mothers are all in 
the workplace, yet mothers are supposed to be taking care of the children. The short version of 
the problem is "If everybody is at the workplace, who is going to take care of the children?" This 
problem of who is going to take care of the children if everybody is at work is not unique to the 
United States. Our study of European countries suggests that the problems are more acute in this 
country, and we are much more likely to define these problems as private problems in this 
country. We provide much less government support. We leave the solution to the problems of 
balancing work and family demands largely to parents and largely to their private resources. 

The dilemma arises largely out of the tension existing in the fact that most mothers and 
fathers in the industrialized countries are now combining work in the market with work in the 
home. This is particularly acute in the U.S. because more people are working and we work more 
hours here. We looked at the ratio of women's to men's employment because in nearly every 
country all men are in the workforce and so the relevant question is how many women are in 
the workforce. In comparison to the other countries, we have a higher rate of female employ- 
ment — the ratio is about 85% — lagging behind only the Nordic countries, which have the 
highest rates of participation of women in the worlrforce. 

Where we stand out is in how many hours we work in the average workweek. This shows the 
combined number of hours worked for dual-earner couples with children. In the U.S. this is 
about 80 hours between the two parents — the highest across the 14 comparison countries. 
Families in the European countries are closer to a one and a half jobs — about 60 hours a week 
between the two parents. 

The U.S. also has a higher rate of parents working nonstandard hours. To a far greater extent, 
all of our workers, and particularly families with young children, work nights, weekends, swing 
shifts, and odd shifts, which in Europe are referred to as nonsocial hours. Not surprisingly, 
families in all of these countries feel a time squeeze. They are really combining two jobs. 

When asked, "Would you like a little or a lot more time with your family?" the great majority 
of respondents, across these same countries, preferred to have a lot more time with their 
families. Families feel "time squeezed" everywhere, but again, families feel more "time 
squeezed" in the U.S. Ninety-five percent of fathers and 90% of mothers in the United States 
report that they would like more time with their family. 

Ironically, despite the movement of women into the labor force, we are not doing well on 
gender equality, either in the marketplace or in the home. Gender inequalities persist in the 





51 



I 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



home because women (mothers) continue to do a longer double shift than men (fathers). This 
is comparing the daily hours of unpaid work in the home between men and women across the 
countries we studied. 

Aaoss all of the countries, the double shift for women is about the same. Where the U.S. 
differs is in the length of the double shift for fathers, where we lag behind the other comparison 
countries, except Italy where the fathers apparently do not do much of anything at home. In the 
U.S., fathers are doing less than their counterparts in the European countries, and women are 
doing about the same. Of course, the big story is that everywhere women are doing much more 
work. They are not equal at home; they are not equal in the marketplace either. 

We do a comparison of what we call child penalties. The way this is calculated is by looking 
at the reduction in employment or the percentage point difference in employment between two 
kinds of families in the same country — those with young children between the ages of 3 and 5 
and those with children ages 14 to 17. The assumption is that reduction in employment has a 
lot to do with children in the home. Again, the big story is that men's hours do not change 
much when they have young children while women's hours change a lot. Families cope with die 
demands of work and home responsibility by mothers withdrawing from employment. That is 
what we call the child penalty or the employment penalty related to having young children. 

Comparatively, the U.S. does not do too well in terms of the "child penalty." Women in the 
United States are very likely to be employed, but they are also very likely to withdraw entirely 
from employment when their children are young. In fact, in 8 of our 13 comparison countries, it 
is women who are accommodating to family responsibilities by withdrawing from work. Why is 
that important? It is important because those interruptions in employment lead to lifelong 
reductions in wages, career opportunities, and career advances for women. This is sometimes 
referred to as the "mommy tax", the lifelong gap in wages that women assume because of 
intermittent labor force attachments, largely due to their withdrawal from work when their 
children are young. 

We measure the wage penalty or the mommy tax by looking at the share of all earnings 
earned by mothers and fathers together, women s take home, and women s command of their 
share of that total pile of earnings. If it were completely equal between mothers and fathers, that 
would be 50-50. Mothers would take home 50% of mothers' and fathers' earnings and fathers 
would take home 50%. None of the countries studied are near 50%, but again the U.S. is quite a 
bit behind many of the comparison countries at 27%. 

The United States also does poorly in several other dimensions that we care about, such as 
family poverty, child well-being, child health, child school achievement, and adolescent preg- 
nancy. Our research also indicates that we are at the same time doing much less in terms of 
policy than many of the comparison countries. 

Ours is the richest of all of the countries in this comparison group and we certainly say we 
care about children and we care about family values. However, we are doing little to help 
families cope with and resolve these tensions, with the resulting problems of income and 
security, poor child outcomes, and family stresses and strains. Why are we doing so little? Why 
are we doing so badly for such a rich and well-intentioned country? 

I believe that part of the reason is that we do not agree on a big vision. We do not have a big 
enough vision of what we could be doing for families or what government could be doing for 
families or what families should have. That is in part because those of us in this country who 
care about these issues have been talking past one another. This has led to at least three 
nonoverlapping conversations or perspectives that lead to three different visions for what 
government should be doing. 

The first of these perspectives comes out of the work-family balance, or work-family conflict 
field, where scholars, researchers, and advocates have focused on what is happening for 
women — particularly on the issue of double shift and the stresses and discontent among women 
in the workforce. That conversation usually leads to the suggestion that we should make 



O 

ERIC 



52 




PLENARY III 



worlplaces friendlier for women. Furthermore, we should make it easier for women to combine 

wor an caregiving responsibility, give them more flex time, have more part-time work options, 
and so forth. 

The second perspective, which 1 believe represents many of us in this room, is the child well- 
being perspective. It was formed by research about the needs of children, particularly about the 
nee s o very young children, and about the benefits for those children of sustained time with 
good caregivers and, most especially, with their parents. That conversation leads us to think 
about policy recommendations that give children more time with their parents and, in this case 
real mothers, since it is still overwhelmingly mothers who spend time with the children The 
policy recoinmendations that come out of that conversation have a lot to do with answering the 

quesuon of how mothers may be able to spend more time in the home, for example, on family 
or maternity leave. ^ 

At the same time there is a third group— feminists— who are still thinking about the fact that 
womeri earn only 75 cents on the dollar compared to men. We have not solved the problem of 
inequality m the home and in the workplace between women and men. That conversation 
usually leads to thmidng about policies that affect job opportunities and inequality in compen- 
sation, and about policies of replacing mothers in the home. Giving women opportunities in 
the market place means freeing them from their responsibilities in the home, for example 
through more child care, or the expansion of child-care benefits. 

These three groups of smart and well-intended people are talking past each other. This 
reinforces the idea that this is a private family dilemma to be solved by private means and that 
we are going to have to make some tradeoffs. These tradeoffs are between what families want 
and what the market needs, between either economic security or time for families, between 
children having time with their parents or parents having their careers, or between women 
getung what they want and men getting what they want. The result is that we may end up at 
loggerheads instead of working and pulling in the same direction. 

I believe ±at we can resolve some of these contradictions if we reconceptualize the problem 
If we bring the pieces together and we recognize that this is an issue of money and time for ' 
ami les, not one or the other. It has to do with men and women— women's opportunities in the 
ma^et, men s time at home and opportunities to spend time with their children. It is an issue 
for both and it is not going to be solved by private solutions alone. We also have to look to 
public solutions. We must look to government policies to help resolve the tensions and strains 
on families while under the pressure of competing demands. 

Our "big Aink" solution is the idea of a dual-earner, dual-care society-a solution in which 
we have dual-earner, dual-care families. In this solution, men and women both engage equallv 
fiv caring for children in the home and working in the market place and we 

think of parents as the primary caregivers for children in their earliest months. This would be a 
^ange froin what we usually talk about; in other words parents as the primary caregivers for the 
u children get older and enter primary school, a continuum of options There 

should be a sj^tem that does not impoverish parents. They should not have to bear the financial 
ur en o having to leave work or bear the financial burden of buying high-cost quality child 
care, it they can even afford it. 

The idea of a dual-earner dual-care society comes out of the European welfare state Fieure 1 
shows a continuum of gendered divisions of labor. It is the way one can organize working and 
care giving, ranging from the more traditional male breadwinner and female caregiver to the 
dual-earner/dual-carer model. We know that the traditional model is increasingly untenable and 
presumably unacceptable m terms of gender equality. The second model is a dual-earner model 
where the female caregiver works part-time— men are working and women are working part 
hme and spending the rest of the time caring for children. We see this model often in tiie United 
Kingdom. The next opUon, which we find most often in the U.S., is the dual-earner/other-care 
model. Both parents work full-time— which is how we get those 80 hour+ weeks in American 
families— and someone else is caring for the children. The two options for "other" care are the 



ERIC 



60 



53 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



State, found in Eastern European countries and some of the socialized European states, or the 
market (private child-care arrangements) most prevalent in the United States. We buy child care. 

Figure 1. What is a Dual-Earner/Dual-Carer Society? 



A continuum of gendered divisions of labor: 



male 


dual-earner/ 


dual-earner/ 


dual-earner/ 


breadwinner/ 


female part-time 


state carer 


dual-carer 


female carer 


carer 


— or — 








dual-earner/ 
marketized carer 





I suggest that there is one more option along this continuum the dual-earner/dual-carer 
family. This model allows both men and women to have careers and the society supports men 
and women. In this model, mothers and fathers are the primary caregivers in the first year or the 
earliest months and throughout childhood, for their own children. The dual-eamer/dual-carer 
solution would depend on changes in gender relations, such that both men and women would 
share the full range of options and responsibilities for work in the family and the home. 

We sometimes talk about men with young children reducing their work hours and women 
increasing their hours of work until they look more symmetrical in their hours of work in the 
home and work in the market. For this to happen there would need to be changes in workplace 
practices and culture such that all parents would have options for reduced-hours and flexible 
work schedules while children are young, without sacrificing economic security or career 
advancement. In addition, we would need changes in both social policies and something we 
don't often talk about — labor market regulations — in order to give families the options to 
pursue that kind of an arrangement. 

It is ambitious to change society like this. I will not talk today about how we change men or 
how we change markets. What I am going to discuss is the easier problem, formidable as it is, of 
changing government and thinking about social policies that would help give parents this 
option of choosing a dual-earner/dual-carer solution. Part of what we can do is based on the 
lessons that we have drawn from the European welfare states. None of the European welfare 
states we looked at are a paradise. None of them have a dual-eamer/dual-carer society in which 
all of these qualities have been realized and families have all the supports they need and no 
longer feel conflicts and work-family dilemmas. But they do feel less conflict and stress, and 
repeatedly on cross-national surveys we find that the European parents get more from govern- 
ment. Thus, they express less tensions and tradeoffs than American parents do. 

Some of the lessons drawn from the European policy packages that we understand can help 
move the family, and maybe society, towards this kind of a dual-eamer/dual-carer solution have 
to do with parental and family leave, early childhood care and education, and work-time 
regulation. In support of this option, nearly European countries all provide job protections for 
jxiothers at the time of childbirth, along with 3 to 6 months of extended leave with wage 
replacement, usually at a relatively high rate or a flat benefit. Parental leaves increasingly are 
being extended for both the mothers and the fathers; again with wage replacement in some 
countries, and with a flat benefit in others. In Sweden right now, parental leave and maternity 
leave have been combined. The family now has 15 months of leave at about 82% of their prior 
earnings. That is for mothers and fathers to share. Not only do they have a lot of leave, but they 
actually parcel it out. Parents can stretch it out up to their child's 8th birthday, combining part- 
time leave with part-time work. India has a similar policy, with 5 months for mothers at 80% of 
earnings followed by 43 weeks for mothers and fathers together at 30% of earnings. Even in 
Canada, which is often more like the U.S. than Sweden, mothers are entitled to 15 weeks of 



O 

ERIC 



54 



61 



PLENARY III 



leave at 55% of their prior earnings, which is supplemented for lower earners, so it brings it 
closer to 80% of their earnings. After that, families, both mothers and fathers, can share 35 
weeks of parental leave at that same wage-replacement rate. 

The European countries are putting in place generous leaves, not only during the first weeks, 
but also during the child's first year and stretching out, in many cases, to the first 8 years. By 
comparison, the paid leave policy in the United States is zero. We are still one of the five 
countries in the world that does not have paid maternity leave. We only have unpaid parental 
leave through the Family Medical Leave Act. 

Arguably a child's first year is the most important, but children's needs do not end after the 
first year. Parents' need to be with their children does not end after the first year, so European 
welfare states have put together policies that give parents more flexibility throughout their 
children's earliest years. As I have already said, many of these European countries allow parents 
to stretch out their leave, sometimes up to 8 years. 'That is supplemented in most countries by 
something called Leave for Family Reasons, which is guaranteed paid leave for child illness. One 
of the most generous is Sweden, which grants up to 120 days per year of sick-child care at 80% 
of wages. Fortunately for employers, the average parents take is closer to 7 days per year, so 
parents do not bankmpt the economy and bring it to a screeching halt every year by taking 3 
months off to care for sick children. However, they do have the right, if they need it, to take 
those kinds of breaks from work to care for family emergencies. 

"rhe good side of the leaves is that they give parents time with their children, "rhe cost, 
however, is on the dimension of gender equality. The majority of leave days in Europe are still 
taken by women. That potentially creates Ae same interruption in careers — those same wage 
penalties or "mommy ttixes" for women. This is nowhere near solved yet in the European 
welfare states, but they are moving in the direction of trying to create policies that are gender 
neutral or actually create incentives for men to participate along with women in taking advan- 
tage of these leave policies. 

Critical and absolutely fundamental are wage-replacement rates. If there are low wage- 
replacement rates, or zero like in the United States, families keep the highest wage earner in the 
market, which is most often fathers. 

Many of the policies in European countries also designate leave specifically for men. In 
Sweden, for example, men can take 2 weeks of paternity leave at the time of a child's birth that is 
separate from maternity leave. In addition to the 15 months of leave that can be divided 
between mothers and fathers, there is an extra month available solely for the father's use. If he 
does not take it, it is lost to the family, presumably creating an incentive for him because 
otherwise the family loses this leave altogether. Also, parental leave is financed through the use 
of social insurance funds, which minimizes the burden on individual employers. 

European social insurance funds operate like our Social Security Fund where everybody 
contributes throughout their working lives and collects at the point that they need assistance. It 
does not resemble our unemployment insurance system, which puts the burden mostly on 
employers. What the Europeans have done, which is for us to think about in developing policies 
in this country, is to take the burden off individual employers and finance social insurance 
through general tax revenues. 

In regard to early childhood care and education, as families return to the market to work at 
higher rates after the first year of childrearing, their needs change; they have greater need for 
substitute care. At the same time children's needs change. As they get older, they are more able to 
benefit from high-quality group care. In Europe, publicly supported care serves a large propor- 
tion of infants and toddlers while parents are at the workplace. Full-day preprimary programs 
enroll nearly all children between about age 3 and the start of public school. 

'The Nordic countries integrate systems of early childhood care and preschool so the children 
move through a single system from about age 1 to the start of school. About half of the children 
under age 3 are in these systems. If parents are working or in school, they have a right to a place 
in these systems. About 80% of school-age children are in these programs. 




6 



o 



55 



i 






The continental European countries, like France and Belgium, enroll fewer children and have 
fewer public provisions for children under age 3, which usually is targeted for those families 
most in need. But by the time children are age 2V2-3, nearly all of them are in full-day and folly- 
public high-quality early education, preprimary programs that are free to the parent. The 
government makes these programs affordable by heavily subsidizing them, providing for them 
directly, or adjusting co-payments to family incomes. 

In Finland, Sweden, Belgium, and France the government pays 75 to 85% of the cost of the 
subsidized child care and the foil cost of preprimary programs, leaving parents with either no 
fees for the pre-primary programs or somewhere in the range of 15 to 25% of the cost of care for 
younger children. In the U.S., the ratio is reversed. In this country the bulk of the burden of 
paying for care is on parents; the minority share is paid for by government. The need here is to 
shift the cost of care to government and off families. 

We also need to learn from the European model of using both highly trained and well- 
compensated workers in these early childhood education and care programs as the most 
important ingredient for quality. This is also quite consistent with a concern about gender 
equality as one of the often under appreciated aspects of our country's market-oriented system, 
and the extent to which it creates a hugely feminized, extraordinarily low-paid workforce. We 
introduce another kind of gender inequality when we move care out of the home, but we move 
it into child-care settings in which we pay women at rates that used to be about the same as 
parking lot attendants. 

Figure 2 shows the comparisons of the level of educational requirements for child-care 
workers in some of the European systems. I have arranged them parallel to our systems of family 
child care, center care and preschool or preprimary care. In general, just as in the United States, 
education requirements are lowest for those that would correspond to our family child care, 
higher for center care, and higher yet for preprimary programs. Quite striking, high levels of 
education are required in center-based and preschool care, which are the dominant form of care 
in the European systems. These are workers who have advanced education, specialized training, 
and university degrees. It is difficult to summarize training requirements in the U.S. because we 
regulate at the state level. We impose few educational requirements on workers in center care. As 
we move towards preprimary or pre K programs, there are still enormous variations. Only 39 
states now require either a college degree or some substantial amount of specialized early 
childhood training. High skills, education, and the fact that many of these jobs are in the public 
sector in the European welfare states, bring with them another benefit — higher compensation. It 
is difficult to make direct comparisons of the salaries across these countries. 



Figure 2. Education and Training, Early Childhood Education and Care Workers 





Child Minders 
(Family CC) 


Center 

Care 


Pre-Primary 

(Preschool) 


Sweden 


72% have childminder 
certificate 


3 year university 
degree required 


3 year university 
degree required 


Belgium 


None required 


3 year technical training 
degree required 


3 year post secondary 
degree required 


Finland 


varies; most supervisors 
have 4 year 
university degree 


3-3.5 years vocational 
training required 


3-4.5 year university 
training required 


us 


varies; none in most states 


varies; fewer than 
1/2 states have any 
standards 


varies; 39 states require 
either college degree or 
specialized training 



ERIC 



63 



56 



PLENARY III 



countnes the rates of pay for early childhood education and care workers 
to pay for teachers in the primary school system. That combination of training, 
^o e and public sector jobs brings their wages up, therefore, to be much closer to 

p mary school teachers. Again, m this area the U.S. is lagging way behind (see Figure 3). 

Childhood EducaBon and Ca« Workars RalaBva to 

Primary School Teachers 



Sweden 


84% 


Belgium 


100% 


Finland 


81% 


US 


420/0 



arp Hn?na we Studied was time and working regulations. What the European states 

Td sThn?.^ X- T 7 ^^gtilating work to weekly employment hours of between 35 
work so^tharn Jrt f labor-market measures that improve the quality of part-time 

work so that part-ume work has the same wages and benefits, although usually prorated, as ftill- 

tn nart?^' workers do not pay an extra penalty for reducing their hours of work 

to part time. Labor-market measures also limit and/or compensate nonstandard work schedules 
without gendered protectionism. Those with nonstandard schedules make up an enormous part 

of our work force, and families with children often work the midnight to 6 a m. shift frequendy 
because they do not have child care. nequenuy 

Another lesson from abroad, the one that makes the U.S. audiences the most envious is the 
degree to which vacation time is regulated in the European welfare states. Workers ^Tese 
countries receive a minimum of 4 weeks, 6 weeks in many cases, of vacation-which I believe 
dieir Sr ' implications for families, giving them uninterrupted time with 

This is obviously an ambitious agenda for policy makers-the idea of changing society, 

and changing markets. It may be entirely 

WP ^ ^ ^ there IS value m trying. Even if we do not get there in my lifetime, even if 

e do not get there m our children's lifetime, there is value in thinking big and looking beyond 
our own borders. We should "think big" about what government can do now to help dual 

n‘ K ■ imagine a society in which we actually support each of 

goa s. ami y well-being, children' healthy development, and equity for women and men. 

tost^Al*'thlt^ thinking big. Another aspect of the value of her crossnational 
research is that it puts a mirror m front of the U.S. on how we are doing. It also tells us that it is 
possible to approximate some of the policies found in other countries. 

heafth’^care So^sTnn.^h^''^ Freedman. I thought it was interesting that Marcia did not talk about 
rh-M / because I have never have been able to understand why in the U S every 

child does not have a right to health care. Freedman is an expert in this area. He can tell yoT 
what some of the shoclong statistics are in terms of large numbers of children. Lack of health 
care for immigrant children is probably 40 or 50o/o. Recent changes in welfare may change this 
of the'sta^M? founder and Executive Director of the Institute for Child Health Policy 
^ System of Florida. He is a professor of Pediatrics and Political Science a7 

Horida He h\VtS University of South 

in thfAi^encan^r.H ^ of nonphysicians elected to fellowship 

in toe Amencan Academy of Pediatrics. Prior to his academic career, Freedman served in senior 

staff positions in Florida's Departments of Education and Health. Freedman has testified before 




64 



57 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



Congress and legislatures on child-health financing and delivery systems. He serves as Chair of 
the Health and Human Services Commission of the Southern Regional Education Board and 
served on a committee on comprehensive school health programs of the National Academy of 
Sciences Institute of Medicine. 



Steve A. Freedman: My background and experience is in turning dreams into political reality 
and that is the context in which I want to share with you an idea that I have not yet presented to 
any audience in the U.S. 

At the Institute for Child Health Policy we have been told that many of our ideas and dreams 
cannot be achieved. What we attempted to do in the mid-1980s was develop pediatric chronic 
disease generalist nurses for children in rural areas. We were told that the subspecialists for those 
chronically ill children would not allow them to be seen by somebody whom they did not 
know. However, that dream actually turned into reality when the state legislature created a new 
class of nurse to do this work. Part of the message that I want to give you is that your ideas do 
not have to be privately held. You can make a huge difference by articulating them in public. 

We knew that in many families who had children with serious medical needs, particularly in 
the early years, at least one parent had to give up employment to stay home with the child. We 
asked, "Why not have a medically and developmentally appropriate facility for dual-earner 
families where they can take their children in the morning and pick them up in the afternoon?" 
There was no such place available. We went to the legislature because that is the place to get 
action in policy matters — whether it is the U.S. Congress or state legislature. 

We called this program "prescribed pediatric extended care." The name itself is important. If 
we had called it medical day care, it would have gone in the day care statutes and nobody would 
have been paid anything— right? Calling it prescribed pediatric extended care enabled it to 
become part of the health-care facility statutes. Initially people said the insurance companies 
would never pay you for day care, but because it went into the health facility statute, the insur- 
ance company said, "Sure, you are just like a hospital or any other similar facility." 

Another problem was that of uninsured children. Because health insurance for children is too 
expensive for employers, we asked, "Why not use the school systems, where the children are 
located, as grouping mechanisms to act like the large groups that employers have?" Then we 
could go to the market on behalf of the children alone and see if we could get benefits. 

The result is that there are now 250,000 children in Florida insured under school grouping 
mechanisms. What we are proud of is that when Congress passed the Children s Health Insur- 
ance Program Legislation in 1997, which put a new layer of insurance in place for children, our 
state was one of those cited in the statute as a model. 

I love it when people tell me that my ideas are crazy because the critics of an idea turn out to 
be one's best allies. They help refine your message and they help find flaws with your ideas. They 
are spectacularly useful in that way, so if you become defensive, all that education is lost. Those 
critics also tend to become your champions. 

The Institutes Vision Statement is as follows: All preschool children will have access to 
appropriate health care that is financed through a mix of parental, public, and private funds. By 
stating financed as opposed to insured what I am basically saying is that insurance as a model is 
completely inappropriate for children, and particularly for young children. The Statement 
continues: Routine health care for preschool children will be recognized and funded as a 
developmental, social entitlement program. The reason for this is that before most children 
enter formal schooling they are in a kind of unexposed black box of ages 0-3, 0-4, or 0-5. The 
Statement concludes: Access to health care for preschool children will provide early and regular 
contact with an objective third party and assure assistance to parents. 

It would be nice if every child and every parent knew that they had somebody else involved 
in the developmental period that could take an objective look at what is happening within the 




58 



65 



PLENARY III 



' family and for that child. That is why I say that financing health care for children, particularly 
preschool children, creates the opportunity for a consistent third party in the relationship. 

I tend to see education as an industry. Literally, education is the only industry that does not 
go back and deal with the vendors of our raw materials. There is no other successful industry 
that I know of that does not go back and say, "Look, the raw material you are sending me is not 
adequate because no matter what I do to it, it winds up flawed because of the flaws in the raw 
material. How about me only contracting with you if you improve the quality of your material?" 
There are many good reasons for seeing the early developmental period as one in which some 
other social institutions, health care being one, begin to take a look at the child on a regular 
basis to see whether the raw material is getting appropriate care. 

The goal is to develop a new type of layered actuarial approach to financing children's health 
care, which would replace the insurance model for preschool children with care that is based on 
a schedule of services. Whether it is through Medicaid where the early periodic screening, 
diagnosis, and treatment program has a periodicity schedule that is advocated by the American 
Academy of Pediatrics, or a variety of other programs, there should be something in place that 
mandates a schedule of visits that children must have. 

In addition, I advocate financing service pay for home visits as an alternative to office visits to 
physicians. How does one get a holistic picture of a child within the context of their family 
unless you visit their home? With the exception of immunizations, children probably do not 
need to be in a physician's office except when they are sick. The truth is that parents need a 
dependable source of information and need an objective advocate, and the children need an 
objective advocate during this developmental period. There needs to be that kind of supervision. 
Based on some of my experiences in social services, children need an objective advocate just to 
see what is going on besides the developmental progress. 

About 85% of children under age 6 have insurance benefits because they are dependents of 
employees or they are poor. The term dependent is an interesting one and I tend to bridle when 
I hear children called dependents. It is like children being called chattel. It is as if they are not as 
valuable as 'the wage earner. About 30% of these children are covered by public funds, or their 
parents buy insurance separately. That is usually in cases where there is no group through which 
the parents can purchase health care and their child is regularly ill. That insurance comes at a 
high, pardon the expression, premium. 

Alternatively about 15-16% of children are uninsured for the following reasons: (a) small 
employers do not offer any kind of coverage; (b) some employers offer coverage, but employees 
must pay for family coverage — they will cover the worker, but not the family; (c) single parents 
cannot afford family coverage even when it is offered; (d) some children are ineligible for 
government subsidized insurance; and (e) some parents choose not to insure for other reasons. 

Some children are ineligible for government-subsidized insurance and that group is growing. 
Those are typically the children who are undocumented. Even if they are legal aliens, for some 
programs they still cannot get health insurance under public programs. I live in Florida and, of 
course, we have many undocumented people there. I cannot see how the family's choice should 
affect that child's insurance eligibility. I do not understand this as a practicaL matter from the 
public policy standpoint. Of course, I am also one of those people who believe that if the 
parents on a religious basis refuse to have their child treated, their child ought to be treated 
anyway. I try not to judge parents who just choose not to insure their children because I know 
that that is so because some parents simply say, "Look, my child is healthy. Why should I spend 
the extra money to insure the child?" 

What we have found is that as one goes up from the federal poverty level, from 100% to 
150% or to 200% of the federal poverty level, the lower the rate of Medicaid use. Part of that of 
course, is regulatory, but it is not until you are above 200% of the federal poverty level that 
families make the decision to buy health insurance. To me that means that a family has to have 
a certain level of income to consider buying health insurance. As the economy slumps and the 




66 



59 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



cost of insurance rises, the percentage above the poverty line will have to be even higher, 250% 
to 300%, before families can afford healthcare. 

1 read a study a year ago that really woke me up. The first question was how many employ- 
ment-based plans are government financed. When you think about public and private insur- 
ance, what about if one works for a public agency and tax money pays for one's salary and 
insurance coverage, that is tax money. Yet in every categorization in the literature, that is consid- 
ered private insurance. It is not. It is public insurance because it is paid for out of tax revenues. 

If one begins to redefine what is private, some interesting facts emerge. Private employer-paid 
means that a private company actually pays for the insurance. Public employer-paid, that is if 
one is a public employee, is paid for by taxpayer dollars. If one is in a public program like 
Medicaid, that is paid by taxpayer dollars. As a point of fact, if one is a parent and pays for 
insurance or health care out of their own pocket, that parent is also a taxpayer. The argument that 
this country rests on an employment-based insurance program is one that we need to question. 

One other issue that needs to be raised is the cost incurred to the individual or family 
through deductibles and copayments. My family has $ 1,000 per person deductible so the first 
$3,000, for those of us who are still in that plan, comes out-of-pocket. It raises the question 
about who pays. Think about it this way. Medicaid picks up about 29-30% of the cases while 
the Child Health Insurance Program, picks up yet another 10-15% of children. Therefore, in 
most states a combination of Federal, state, county, school district, and local employees tax- 
payer money pays for more than half of the children's health insurance. If that taxpayer money 
was consolidated, what could one get in the marketplace from the providers? 

One of the questions that was raised, that always gets raised, is why should children be 
insured separately? Why should there be different systems of care for children? Part of the 
answer is that adults do not come down with cleft lip and palate, cystic fibrosis, sudden infant 
death syndrome, spina bifida, tay sachs disease, or birth trauma. Adults have many lifestyle 
problems like heart disease, emphysema, stroke, and cancer. Again, why would you need a 
different system of care for children? Most people do not think about what would happen if 
infants were taken to an emergency room designed for adults. If they do not have tiny little 
needles, what do they do? Also, most adults are their own decision makers, while children come 
to the emergency room with a decision maker. There are good reasons for children to get the 
right practitioner at the right time. For adults almost any provider in the community can handle 
most of their problems. Adults do not have to worry about blood pressure cuff size, IV needle 
size, intubation device size, constant change in organ size, or parental influences on care choices. 

The Adult Insurance Model is as follows: 

• Casualty model based on unpredictability. 

• Hospitalization is the big-ticket item. 

• Rehabilitation assumes restoration of function. 

• Most any licensed provider is qualified. 

• Assumes stable physiology; change is a symptom. 

The Children's Insurance Model is as follows: 

• There are 10 visits prescribed in the first 48 months, and there are occasional ear infec- 
tions, but most childhood health needs are predictable. Therefore, the idea of insurance 
for young children makes no sense because insurance is for the unpredictable health 
events. 

• Hospital stays for children are rare events. It is rare that a family without a chronically ill 
child experiences hospitalization. Pediatrics is primarily carried out on an outpatient 
basis. 

• Providers require specialized training and equipment. 

• Physiological change is the norm. If a physician examines an adult and finds a large 
change in the size of the heart or liver, or any other vital organ, they assume it is patho- 
logical. If a child goes to a pediatrician and the size of those organs change, the physician 




60 



67 



PLENARY III 



Wnd^f mo£ f insurance must support the right 

Habilitation is the initiation of a hinction. Remember rehabilitation is to reestablish a 

be™ say that they do not cover speech therapy for children 

thrnnl 1 Considered rehabilitation. The children did not have the ftmction and lose it 
^rough 1 Iness, so therefore it is not rehabilitation. There are many examples like this when 
appjnng the tradiuonal adult insurance model to the case of children. It is not news to you that 
Aildren ages 0-3 have different health care needs than those who are 10-13, or 20-23- there- 
fore, benefits should vary with age. ^ uieie 

and whir^t' children, a first layer of regular planned services that all children receive 

tax dofia^ public and private fimds, that is, private employers and public 

tax dollars. It would be inexpensive because there is no hospitalization included, and there are 

services. That is where insurance should come in. That is where parents and employers and, to 

for"^hS^^”^' ^-th funds should be subsidizing an insurance program. The third level would be 
for children with special health care needs. I would argue here that the Federal definition of 
special health care needs is much too broad. For children who have serious health care needs, 
public responsibility, because only the wealthy can afford the types of services 
a these children usually need. The public responsibility in this case would include a parental 
resources component, where their time put into care would be credited as a contribution to the 
financing. If we were to remove the high-end children with special needs and finance that 

IZT fV mandated, everyday routine services, the cost to parents of insurance 

goes way down. 

Our recommendations are listed here: 

• Consolidate the purchasing power of government-paid child health care 

• Restructure the manner in which child health care is financed. 

• Make routine health care mandatory in the same way that we make immunizations 
inandatoiy. Che^ to see if all the visits were made and look at the developmental results 
of those visits. T^his provides much more information to the school so they have a better 
idea of how to deal with the child. 

• Identify child health provider networks from which government buys care. 

• er nontax purchasers the opportunity to buy services from the children's networks. 

If npont f ^ paraphrase Margaret Meade who said, "It always takes a small group 

of people to make major social change," and I think of us as that small group of people, 
n c osing IS conference, I would like to have the organizers come to the podium for the 

Faith Lamb-Parker: We are pleased with the incredibly warm and positive response that we 
todavTT^t^^ ^ojif^rence. I am a bit shocked as well as pleased at how many of you came 

who pLled 

Thank you also to those who have returned for several conferences. Many of you have 
aS greaJy conference, or this is my fifth." This pleases us 



y°^ H^^d Start Bureau and the Adminis- 

alL on behalf 1 ? Families and the Administration for Children and Families and 

also on behalf of Esther Kresh who could not be here. Finally, let me thank our staff, our 

partners, the Program Committee, and all of you for your participation. I have not seen this 




68 



61 



SPECIAL SESSIUNS 



much audience participation at a conference, at least not lately, so I want to thank all of you 
who created that interactive atmosphere that we have had over the past 3 V 2 days. 

John W. Hagen: Over the last few days I have made a case for putting the issues in a context. I 
realize the tremendous changes that have occurred over the last 11 or 12 years that we have been 
putting on these conferences. One that we might not think about is the electronic revolution. 
When I think back to when we held the first conference in 1991, few of us were spending most 
of our days on e-mail or looking at websites. That has changed our way of obtaining inforrria- 
tion. As with everything, there are good and bad aspects to that, but for the most part, if we use 
it appropriately, the good far outweighs the bad. 

Another large change over the last decade or so is the extent to which we are now either 
drawing from or being told we should draw from research and findings regarding brain develop- 
ment. This knowledge needs to be used, and it will become even clearer over the next decade as 
to how it can be used. However, we are also seeing some uses of the findings that are probably 
premature. 

In all of these conferences, translating research to policy and practice is important but also 
fragile. Overall there have been tremendous strides in the last decade on how we do that. We are 
doing it, but we must have patience and remember that research findings cannot all be applied 
immediately. Some of it works and some does not, and with the test of time we start to learn 
what seems to work the best. My final observation is that in our field, from both the research 
and the practitioner standpoints, we have come to the realization that early learning and 
academics is not just related to cognition or literacy, but is made up of all of the parts— the 
socio-emotional, the family, and so forth. We learned from some of the research at this confer- 
ence that many of the physiological measures are showing us ways to relate to social-emotional 
development as the child gains different types of control. I believe that we are getting a much 
better understanding of the interrelatedness of domains of development, but we still have a way 
to go before we know how to fully use the information to benefit children and families. On that 
note, I certainly hope that we will be convening again in 2 years and we much appreciate your 
participation. 




62 



69 



Luncheon I 



INTRODUCTION OF KEYNOTE SPEAKER: Faith Lamb-Parker 
KEYNOTE SPEAKER: 

Windy M. Hill 

Windy M. Hill was named Associate Commissioner for Head Start Bureau, on January 7, 2002. The program 
is responsible for overseeing a budget of more than $6.5 billion in fiscal year 2002, and serves more than 
900,000 low income, preschool children and families each year. Prior to joining the Department, since 1993, 
Windy served as Executive Director ofCen-Tex Family Services, Inc., which administers nine Head Start 
centers in a four-county region of central Texas. 

Windy brings a lifetime of involvement and commitment to the principles of the Head Start Program. As a 
child, she was enrolled in Head Start in Bastrop, Texas, and as a parent, her child also enrolled in the 
program. She has served as a parent representative on the center's policy council and later was part of the 
community group that developed and received a Head Start grant. Associate Commissioner Hill has one 
daughter, Kaley. 



The Children's choir from the Edward Mazique Parent Child Center opened the luncheon and 
delighted the audience with an exuberant selection of songs. 



Faith Lamb-Parker: Wade Horn, Assistant Secretary for Children and Families in the Adminis- 
tration for Children and Families, Department of Health and Human Services, was unable to 
join us today due to pressing issues on the Hill. Wade has asked Windy M. Hill, Associate 
Commissioner of the Head Start Bureau, to speak to you. The third Program Committee 
meeting for this conference was in December 2001, so we missed having Windy as part of our 
committee as we have had in the past, with Helen Taylor and Clennie Murphy. However, we 
know that she is a champion of Head Start, and a strong advocate for improving the lives of 
Head Start children and their families. 

Windy M. Hill: I want to thank Faith for that introduction. I just met her, as she had said, earlier 
today. She, along with the Program Committee, is responsible for this wonderful gathering of 
practitioners, researchers, and policy makers. I already know that I like her, because she does 
things with such style. Congratulations on pulling this great program together. I am also grateful 
that Faith made plans for the children to come on the day that I was going to be here. It is good 
to see, and be reminded of why we do the things that we do, and why we work so hard. Seeing 
children, and seeing children who are obviously doing very well in a Head Start setting, is not 
only encouraging, but it keeps us moving forward. 

I am here today because Dr. Wade Horn could not be here due to a scheduling conflict. I am 
quite honored that he asked that I fill in for him, given his responsibility for initiating this 




70 



63 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



conference during his tenure as Commissioner of the Administration on Child, Youth and 
Families. Also, I am honored by the opportunity to be here on a day when we have Dr. Edward 
Zigler and Mr. Saul Rosoff, who were early leaders of Head Start and set the course for all of us. I 
could not help but wonder, as I was meeting them, that had they not been such visionaries, 
would I have had the opportunity to be here with you today? Unfortunately, I think not. I am 
grateful to have met them, but also to have been honored by their presence during my luncheon 
keynote. 

Head Start and I have a great deal in common. We both have Texas roots. We were both bom 
in the 1960's from humble beginnings, and we both have gone on to accomplish important 
things against great odds. I began my lifelong connection with Head Start as a 5-year-old child 
in Bastrop, Texas. I continued that connection as a Head Start mother, then as a Head Start 
Director, and now as the Associate Commissioner for the Head Start Bureau. 

I am truly a product of Head Start, and now it is my turn to give back to a program that made 
such a difference in my life and the lives of so many others. Head Start has often been called the 
"National Laboratory for Learning" in early childhood methods. This conference reflects a wide 
range of topics, disciplines, and professionals in attendance. So many developmental and early 
childhood researchers engage in projects, partner with Head Start agencies, and learn about 
Head Start programs. 

In his State of the Union address in January, President Bush outlined critical steps in educa- 
tion reform. There is a need to prepare children to read and succeed in school. Head Start, and 
other early child development programs. The President believes that all children must begin 
school with an equal chance to succeed, to ensure that no child is left behind. To this end, the 
Administration proposed "Good Start, Grow Smart," and I will comment on three key areas of 
this initiative. 

First, to strengthen Head Start, a new accountability system must be developed to ensure that 
every Head Start program assesses standards of learning in early literacy, language, and 
numeracy skills for every child. 

Second, a national program to train Head Start teachers in early literacy techniques will 
ensure that all programs are given a baseline or a starting point. By partnering with states in 
early childhood education, we know that a stronger state and federal connection will aid in the 
delivery of quality early childhood programs, allowing states more flexibility in federal child 
care funds. 

The last area is providing information to teachers, caregivers, and parents. We want to close 
the gap between the best research in current practice in early childhood education, and practitio- 
ners and parents. A range of partnerships will be established to ensure that parents, early 
childhood educators, and child-care providers are informed. 

Why are these initiatives important? Simply, because research such as your own has shown 
that early childhood, the period in a child's life between from birth to age 5, is a critical time for 
children to develop the physical, emotional, social, and cognitive skills they will need for the 
rest of their lives. When children are provided with environments rich in language, literacy, and 
interactions, they begin to acquire essential building blocks for learning. A child who enters 
school without these skills runs a significant risk of starting behind and staying behind. 

As the FACES study has revealed, we are doing well in Head Start, but we can do better. This is 
what the White House initiative is about; raising the bar and using research as one more 
resource for creating better learning environments and improved outcomes for children. 

The Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) is improving efforts to keep track of 
what children are learning and to use child outcomes to guide program improvement and 
accountability. Under this initiative, each local Head Start agency is required to assess preschool 
children's progress at the beginning, middle, and at the end of each school year. 

This is specific to the congressionally mandated indicators of early literacy and numeracy 
skills. Programs are to use this assessment information to plan improvements in their curricula. 




64 




LUNCHEON I 



Federal on-site program monitoring teams will review program implementation of these and 
other requirements. 

In addition, the President called for the creation of a national reporting system to collect 
child outcome data from every local program. The information will be used to target new 
training and program improvement efforts in Department of Health and Human Services' 
(DHHS) evaluation of local programs. The new accountability system will begin field-testing in 
the fall of 2002 and be in operation by 2003. 

During the first week of May 2002, more than 20 practitioners, advocates, and researchers 
gathered in Washington, DC to share their best guidance and thoughts on the practical imple- 
mentation of outcome systems. Last week, more than fifty researchers and educators met in 
Washington, DC to exchange ideas about how best to accomplish this charge. In July, a smaller 
group of researchers will reconvene to discuss more strategies. 

The DHHS efforts to develop the reporting system will take into account the comprehensive 
nature of Head Start. Both the First Lady and the President recognize the importance of compre- 
hensive services to children and families. 

In Head Start, we focus on the whole child and the family. It is important that we address not 
just the educational needs in the areas of literacy and language, but also the nutritional, social, 
emotional and mental health needs, while we partner with parents to facilitate parent involve- 
ment activities that are supportive of children's learning and participation in the program. 

While we are in the process of developing the outcome system, we continue to focus on Head 
Start encompassing the whole child. It is the cornerstone of the program, and we are committed 
not to lose that. 

This summer, we have provided teacher training called "Project Step." The summer teacher 
education program was launched in June 2002. The project was designed to provide nationwide 
early literacy professional development training that is based on literacy research. This will build 
on existing improvements and professional development efforts and create a consistent founda- 
tion of staff competency, including knowledge and skills in early literacy, to ensure that we can 
enhance the locally designed curricula and staff development efforts. 

During 15 4-day training conferences around the country, approximately 3000 Head Start 
staff, including education coordinators and some lead teachers, will receive 32 hours of re- 
search-based training to support professional development, and become grantee-designated 
early literacy specialists. Their training will not only include approaches to teach early literacy, 
optimum classroom arrangements for learning, but also use and type of materials to provoke 
children's literacy and language development. 

The trained Head Start staff will return to local programs to then provide training to local 
teachers. By the end of this summer, our goal is to ensure that every teacher has received basic 
literacy training. I should, however, provide one caution. Thirty-two hours of training will not 
create early literacy specialists. 

We know from the research and the experts that it will take a long time for us to reach the 
plateau that we now strive for. What we do know is that we can begin to create an environment 
that is consistent across the country, where every program recognizes some of the basic concepts 
and values of early literacy. This includes an awareness and demonstration that programs know 
that early literacy involves letters, numbers, books, materials, and language throughout the 
entire classroom. So, 'Project Step' is not going to achieve everything in a summer, but 'Project 
Step' will get us to a good place to launch successful programming. 

In keeping with the Secretary's one-department priority for the DHHS, Step training will also 
provide more than 100 state child care administrators and staff, at least two per state, the 
opportunity to participate in early literacy training. 

The Step approach will continue with additional phases to expand and extend the skills and 
techniques that are used by Head Start teachers. New components will include in-classroom 
coaching and mentoring, evidence-based strategies to support children's social and emotional 




72 



65 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



development, managing challenging behavior, and improving child outcomes. It will include an 
excellence in teaching summit, as well as distance learning technology that supports the intro- 
duction of early literacy into Head Start programs. 

Research shows that a child's success in school and in life depends on parents, teachers, and 
others around them. Parents in preschool programs can use specific experiences and strategies to 
help children prepare for school. This research makes partnerships between the Department of 
Education and other departments within DHHS important for our success in ensuring that all 
children are given the same foundation for learning. 

Along with our shared goal of generating the highest quality, up-to-date research, we must 
ensure that the findings are made available to and usable by the people that will most directly 
benefit from them: the parents, staff, and other caretakers of Head Start children in their local 
programs. 

1 want you to know how much 1 value the work that you do. 1 want you to know how much 1 
and those more than 857,000 families a year who receive Head Start support have benefited 
from your efforts to provide them with quality Head Start programs. 

When my daughter was about 9 years old, 1 was working as the Executive Director for a small 
agency in Texas. Like most Head Start folks, we do not recognize weekends. We tend to work a 
little bit on evenings, Saturdays, and heavens forbid, after church on Sundays; whatever it takes 
to get the job done. 

1 had gone in to finish a couple of projects, and of course, 1 took her with me. 1 finished my 
work, we went home, and had a restful night. 1 went back to work the next morning to find that 
my business cards seemed to be kind of crooked and out of place. As 1 was reaching to shift 
them so that they looked more like, "Oh, there is the Executive Director," 1 noticed that my 
daughter had well spent her time in the office. She had taken some Liquid Paper, whited out my 
name and written in hers. Well now, this was a Head Start child. She did not get any Liquid 
Paper on the words "Executive Director." She did a perfect line and printed her name so that it 
was nice, bold, and blocked which read, "Kaley Hill, Executive Director." 

1 saved that card, because that was so symbolic of what Head Start can and will do for 
children and families. It allows them to go beyond ordinary dreams and to dream big. Texas big. 

When 1 went home that day, 1 said to her, "You know, 1 noticed that you changed one of my 
business cards." And she said, "Well don't worry, Mom. 1 am going to put you up in a nice 
nursing home, and I'll come see you often, and you know that I'm going to take care of the 
kids." Now what more could 1 have asked of her? She recognized, even at that age, how 
important it is that we take care of our children, that we value our programs, that we value our 
families, and that we continue to fight this fight that Dr. Zigler and Mr. Rossoff started so long 
ago. 1 think that we are more than up to the challenge. 1 think that the field is expanding, and 
more people are recognizing what we can do: make changes in the lives of children. 

1 thank you, again, for your work. 1 thank you for this opportunity to be with you today. 1 
know that you are going to have an enjoyable conference, and 1 look forward to seeing you over 
the course of the coming years. 



i 



O 

ERIC 



66 



73 



Student-Mentor Award Luncheon 



COCHAIRS: Michael L. Lopez, Carole Kuhns 



AWARD PRESENTER: 

Judith Palfrey 

Judith Palfrey, M.D., is Chief of the Division of General Pediatrics at Children's Hospital, Boston, and T. 

Berry Brazelton Professor of Pediatrics at Harvard Medical School and Children's Hospital. She is also 
Professor of Maternal and Child Health at Harvard School of Public Health. She received her B.A. degree 
from Radcliffe College and a M.D. degree from Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons. 

Dr. Palfrey has developed approaches for helping families and children achieve greater functional capacity, 
and has worked to solve problems based on a clear understanding of changing social and health conditions 
faced by families in our communities. She has served on many child health committees, including the 
Congressional Select Committee for Promotion of Child Health and the U.S. Office of Minority Health 
Resource Center. Dr. Palfrey is a past president of the Ambulatory Pediatric Association and chaired Building 
Bright Futures, the implementation phase of the nationally sponsored project to disseminate health promotion! 
disease prevention guidelines. She is currently the director of the national program office for the Anne E. Dyson 
community pediatrics training initiative. 



AWARD RECIPIENT: 

Julius B. Richmond 

Julius B. Richmond is currently John D. MacArthur Professor of Health Policy, Emeritus at Harvard University. 
From 1983 to 1988 he was Director of the Division of Health Policy Research and Education at Harvard 
University. From 1987 to 1993 he served as Chairperson of the steering committee of the Forum on the Future of 
Children and Families of the National Academy of Sciences and served on its Board on Children and Families. 

From 1977 to 1981 Dr. Richmond served as Surgeon-General and Assistant Secretary of the Department of 
Health and Human Services. During this time he had responsibility for administering all of the agencies of the 
US Public Health Service. In 1979 he issued the report. Healthy People: The Surgeon-General's Report on 
Health Promotion and Disease Prevention. This report for the first time established quantitative health 
goals for the nation for the next decade— a process which has been institutionalized by the US Public Health 
Service through its recent report. Healthy People 2010: National Health Promotion and Disease Preven- 
tion Objeaives. 

Dr. Richmond was trained in pediatrics and child development and pioneered in introducing psychosocial 
development into pediatric education, research and services. His collaborative work with Dr. Bettye Caldwell 
on the development of young children growing up in poverty led to his appointment in 1965 as the first director 
of the national Head Start program. He also served as assistant director for health affairs of the OEO and 
directed the Community Health Centers program. 

Dr. Richmond has received the C. Anderson Aldrich Award of the American Academy of Pediatrics, the 
Gustav O. Lienhard Award and the Walsh McDermott Medal of the Institute of Medicine of the National 




74 



67 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



Academy of Sciences, the John Howland Award of the American Pediatric Society, the Ronald McDonald 
Award of the Ronald McDonald Children's Charities, the Sedgwick Medal and the Martha May Eliot Award 
from the American Public Health Association, the David E. Rogers Award of the AAMC, the John Steams 
Award for Lifetime Achievement in Medicine from the New York Academy of Medicine and a number of 
honorary degrees. 

His current interests are in the area of shaping health policies with a particular emphasis on health 
promotion and disease prevention, with special emphasis on children and families. He is especially interested in 
the developmental antecedents of habituation from conceptual, methodological, and public policy approaches. 



Michael L. Lopez: I want to welcome everyone to the second Student Mentor Luncheon, now a 
permanent feature of Head Start^s National Research Conferences. The focus of the luncheon is 
on mentoring. Mentoring is a very critical part of what this conference is all about. All the 
mentors here were carefully selected and not based on random chances. Sonie of you may 
speculate, but you were selected because we wanted to have a host of mentors and make a much 
more strategic effort to partner mentors with students based on the areas of the student s 
interests. We wanted mentors to interact and help facilitate some networking because it is our 
collective responsibility to ensure that we have a vibrant, thriving, and well-prepared research 
workforce to carry on the important child development work that we are all doing and all hope 
to continue to do. We see this as a great opportunity, within the Head Start Research Conference 
context, to help facilitate those relationships and partnerships through mentoring. Carole Kuhns 
has been my partner on brainstorming about the luncheon and graduate student programming 
in general. As with Carole, Faith Lamb-Parker was essential. Also thanks to Esther Kresh, who 
originally launched the graduate student funding that began several years ago. 

Within the graduate student program, we have had many examples of what good mentor- 
student relationships should be about. A number of these, John Fantuzzo and Julia Mendez, 
Patton Tabor and Lisa Lopez, Catherine Tamis-LeMonda and her students, and other mentor- 
student pairs illustrate how and why mentoring is such an important function, especially for 
some of us who did not have the best mentoring in graduate school. 

Mentoring is not just about signing a piece of paper or meeting with a student every 6 
months. It is about developing a relationship. We talk about relationships in the context of all 
the Head Start research. Mentoring is about relationship building. The most fundamental and 
common aspect of good mentoring relationships is relationship building, because it is a selfless 
giving of the mentor to the student in the broader interest of the field. 

There is a group of students from the University of Pennsylvania and New York University 
under the support and tutelage of John Fantuzzo and Catherine Tamis-Lamonda who have 
created a cohort of graduate students that work across universities. They have developed a 
creative roundtable called "Challenges and Commitments: The Role of Mentoring Relationships 
and Developing Junior Scholars," which they will be presenting at this conference. 

That group also has been part of an innovative cross-university meeting. The second year they 
added a number of other universities: University of Miami, Fordham University, and Columbia 
University. I am sure it is going to expand even further, but it is mentor supported and encour- 
aged, student initiated, student organized, and student mn. It was under the guidance of their 
mentors, but the students were the ones who put it together. 

For those of you who do not know about the Head Start Graduate Program, I think it is 
important to briefly touch on its four main goals. Obviously, the easiest one is just providing 
direct support for students who are interested in Head Start-related research. A more difficult 
goal is the focus on promoting mentor/ mentee relationships to help support graduate students' 
training and overall career development. Mentoring does not stop with graduation. That is 
another important aspect of this goal — promoting relationships that will be enduring. 




68 



75 



STUDENT-MENTOR AWARD LUNCHEON 



The third goal of the program is to emphasize the importance of developing working paitner- 
ships. Those of you who have done Head Start-related research know it is different than doing 
typical university-based research. These partnerships are tough. Having a supportive mentoring 
relationship is critical to developing relationships with the community and conducting the 
research. 

The final goal of the Head Start research grant program is to support the active communica- 
tion, networking, and collaboration among graduate students, their mentors, and other re- 
searchers. This luncheon is a great example; not just the mentors are here, but also other highly 
regarded researchers who were generous enough with their time to come and talk to smdents 
about their research and collaborative research opportunities. 

Carole Kuhns, is a Society for Research in Child Development (SRCD) fellow at the Adminis- 
tration for Children and Families. She has been helping with the graduate student research 
program, among many other projects 

Carole Kuhns: It has been my pleasure to work with Mike Lopez and the graduate students in 
the Child Outcomes and Research and Evaluation Office (CORE) last year and this year on this 
project. This has been outstanding group of students. I am going to mention the student's name 
and advisor. Helena Duch is at NYU and LaRue Allen is her advisor. Her study looks at parents' 
participation in education and training and how that relates to outcomes for children. 

Mary Ann Fenske is at Wichita State and her advisor is Carol Westby. Fenske is doing an 
ethno^aphic study looking at caregiver behaviors to create a responsive environment. Paige 
Fisher is working with David Arnold at the University of Massachusetts. She is studying the 
relationship between children's early interest in math to their later math skills. Mario Perry is 
one of several students working with John Fantuzzo at University of Pennsylvania. She is 
studying the impact of welfare reform on parents' involvement in Head Start and looking at 
children s outcomes as well. Beth Phillips is studying with Chris Lonigan at Florida State 
University. Her research looks at assessment and intervention strategies for children with 
problem behavior. Cathy Qi is at Vanderbilt University with Ann Kaiser. She is looking at the 
relationship of language and behavior disorders. Lina Robinson is at University of Virginia with 
Bob Marvin. She is looking at caregiver working models and attachment issues. Carol Stock is at 
the University of Oregon with Karen Rush. She is looking at the effects of the responsive 
interactive language intervention for children in Head Start. Jennifer Tschantz is also a year 2000 
scholar, and she is working with Joan Lieber at the University of Maryland. 

Those students are now in their second year of funding (most of the grants are for 2 years) 
and will be completing their dissertations in September 2002. 

Another group of students was just ftmded in October 2001. They are halfway through their 
program. Rebecca Bulotsky is at University of Pennsylvania, also with John Fantuzzo. She is 
looking at the relationship of children's social adjustment in Head Start and their social and 
academic adjustment as they enter the primary grades. Rebecca Cortes, with Mark Greenberg at 
Penn State, is looking at parents' functional-emotional awareness and their childrearing prac- 
tices. Jason Downer is studying with Julia Mendez at the University of South Carolina. He is 
looking at fathers' roles in promoting Head Start children's school readiness. Abbie Raikes is at 
the University of Nebraska at Lincoln with Ross Thompson. She is looking at mothers' self- 
efficacy and children's attachment. Ann Stacks is at Michigan State, with Marsha Carolan. She is 
looking at the relationship between maternal factors and children's aggressive behavior and 
attachment. Stacey Storch is studying with Janet Fischel at the State University of New York at 
Stony Brook. She is looking at assessment of curriculum practices in Head Start. 

We have some former Head Start scholars in the room. Let us also acknowledge their contri- 
butions. 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



John Pascoe: I am pleased to be able to introduce Judith Palfrey. I jumped at the chance. I have 
known her for over 20 years. We met for the first time when 1 was a fellow in child development 
at Boston Children's Hospital in 1981. Then again, for 5 years, in the 1990's, we spent many 
hours together serving on the Board of Directors of the Ambulatory Pediatrics Association, and 

we were both elected president of that organization in the mid-1990s. 

Judy's academic credentials are very impressive. She is chief of a large division of General 
Pediatrics at Boston Children's Hospital and is aT. Berry Brazelton Professor of Pediatrics at, 
Harvard Medical School. 

However, among the characteristics that I find most remarkable and inspiring about Judy are 
her personal values, including her strong sense of social justice. She has devoted a large portion 
of her career to activities that improve the lives of children and their families. In fact, a mutual 
friend of ours is fond of calling her a bulldog to describe her effective and relendess efforts in 
this arena. 

In summary, Judy is an outstanding physician for children, an exemplary role model and 
mentor herself. She will now introduce this year's Mentor Award recipient, Julius Richmond. 

Judith Palfrey: I have the honor of presenting this Mentor Award to Julius Richmond. In 
thinking about coming here and talking to you, a few images popped into my mind. I am going 
to tell you about three of these. One is real because it happened to me. The other two are ones 
that I imagined. 

The first image is this. I am young. It is 1975. 1 have just completed the first year of a fellow- 
ship at Children's Hospital, and I have been invited to come to Washington to my first academic 
meeting. I cannot remember whether I was going to present anything or not, but it was a big 
deal to me. I decided to wear, for the first time in my life, a pantsuit. I was extremely nervous 
about the idea. I was a little bit worried about who was actually going to see me wearing this 
pantsuit. You probably can figure out the next part of the story, which is I get on the airplane. I 
am in the middle seat. I look over to my right, and who is there but the former Surgeon General. 
Julius Richmond is fond of talking about incidents of coincidence. That was the first time I met 
him. I am a shy person, and I do not like to talk to the person next to me in an airplane. 
However, this wonderful man, who knows how to draw out anybody, calmed me down. I forgot 
about the pantsuit and we began to talk. 

I remember that hour like it was yesterday. I remember him talking about the incredible 
shame that it was that at a Harvard graduation in the 1960s, Lyndon B. Johnson had been 
invited to give the commencement speech, and that because of the activities in Viet Nam, he 
had had to scrap the speech that he was going to give on education and talk about the war. 
Richmond was in the middle of all that, starting Head Start and being a part of the Office of 
Economic Opportunity (OEO). To be able, as a young person, to sit next to this man and to 
have him tell me these stories was incredible. That is an image that I will never forget. 

The second image is Julius Richmond and Bettye Caldwell sitting out in the back of a trailer. I 
imagine it as a trailer at the University of Syracuse. I see them sitting there, and they are looking 
at data. The data are telling them that children in poverty have never been studied before. 
Richmond and Caldwell were the first people to speculate on poverty's effects on children's 
development. Every once in a while, his brow furrows as he watches the developmental trajec- 
tory drop at 18 months. Why are the children in poverty not developing the way the other 
children are and it can already be seen is at 18 months? Then I see the same image 2 or 3 years 
later. I see Caldwell and Richmond sitting there looking at the data as the intervention they have 
put in place has changed that. The image I see is that twinkling eye and big smile coming over 
his face. 

The third image is again not one that I have actually seen. It is a courtroom in Florida in the 
present. On one side of the courtroom there are the suits, the rich lawyers for the tobacco 
industry. On the other side of the courtroom, there are just a couple of people, Ma and Pa Kettle 



STUDENT-MENTOR AWARD LUNCHEON 



lawyers, frumpy. Sitting in the witness chair is a very distinguished gendeman. He is sitting very 
calmly. The suit keeps coming up and asking him very precise questions about science. Every 
time, he asks whether tobacco does this, whether tobacco does that. The witness says, "Now, if 
you just look on page 322, you will find the answer." Then the "suit" asks another question, and 
he says. You just need to look on page 516." As each one comes up and asks a question, he 
answers similarly and sends them back. Finally, one gentleman comes up and says, "Dr. Rich- 
mond, how is it that you know this book so well? How is it that you actually went to the trouble 
of writing this book? Richmond just looks back. This book is a tome that was written during 
the time that he was Surgeon General in the 1980s, on the effects of tobacco on health. He looks 
at them in the eye; steely eyed, and says, "1 thought 1 might need it someday. " 

1 tell these three stories to give you a picture of this wonderful man. This man is a scholar. 
This man is a policy maker. This man is a visionary, and this man is a mentor. Finally, this man 
is a wonderful friend. 1 have learned so many things from Julius Richmond. It would be impos- 
sible to express my personal gratitude to him for the things that he has taught as a mentor. 

1 thought it was interesting that Mike Lopez mentioned mentors having a kind of softball 
team worth of mentees. If you quantify how many people's lives have been touched by Julius as 
mentees, you would probably have the whole American League, maybe the entire major league. 
The importance of the kind of mentoring relationships that Julius has is that there is not a single 
one of those people who does not feel like 1 do, very special, very singled out, as if our relation- 
ship is deep and profound. 

However, we are good siblings, and part of the reason we are an American League's worth of 
child development and child health scholars is because he has taught us to be that way. He has 
taught us how to collaborate, how to work at the frontier, and how to think in visionary ways. 

There is a slide that Julius used to teach all of us, and it has to do with the power of science 
and the power of data. It is taken from four pathologic specimens of the human — the brain cell 
at birth, 3 months, 6 months, and 9 months. Over the period of those first few months of life, 
something special is happening to our human brain. We are connecting. We have the same cell, 
but now with its connections. It is talking to all the other cells. Julius was showing this slide to 
Congress in 1960. He showed people why Head Start would work from a biological basis. You 
cannot abandon young children. You must nurture them. You must stimulate them. He could 
show this with the intervention data too. 

That is just one lesson that Julius Richmond has taught so many of us. The other kinds of 
lessons have been personal. They have been that he is always there for people. In my own 
experience, one of the things 1 do when 1 get a little discouraged is that 1 call him up. 1 say, "Can 
I come over? He always says sure; the word "no" does not exist in his vocabulary. 1 often will 
come with a long list of things that 1 am not doing very well at. 1 will go through the list with 
him, and he will say in a nice way, "Just keep doing what you are doing." Somehow, that is just 
enough to keep me going. He does not believe in making priorities and throwing anything off 
the list; just keep doing what you are doing unless someone stops you. 

Recently, 1 had one of the greatest honors of my personal life as a mentee— to be the faculty 
escort for Julius when he received an honorary degree from Harvard. 1 have a feeling that that 
honoraty degree is not going to mean anything compared to what he is about to receive. He is 
graduating from Head Start. This is Head Start's Sixth National Research Conference Lifelong 
Mentor Award. Congratulations. 

Julius Richmond: 1 have been introduced many times, but never like that. 1 am deeply touched 
that in this room there are so many people to whom 1 am indebted, who are so committed to a 
program that we all are committed to or we would not be here. However, there are so many 
people who have made so many contributions that one wonders why one is singled out. 1 guess 
1 have to take some comfort in the fact that through some peer review process, 1 emerged to have 
been designated for this award. 1 was feeling very comfortable about that until this morning. 



O 

ERIC 



78 



71 



SPfcCJlAL 



Over coffee, I was sitting with Rachel Cohen and Ed Zigler, and they were talking about the 
importance of getting material peer reviewed. Rachel appropriately pointed out that some recent 
studies of peer review have indicated that it is not too uncommon for some papers that have 
some significant defects to slip through the aacks. At that point, 1 became very apprehensive 
about the peer review process as it applied to me. 

This is a remarkable occasion, and these national research conferences have become extremely 
important events, not only in relationship to Head Start and its own development, but also in 
relationship to the development of children and how we try in various ways to help each child 
attain his or her greatest potentialities, which in the last analysis, is what Head Start is all about. 

Now the issue of mentoring is one that was very important in the early days of Head Start. It 
is difficult for me to talk about Head Start without mentioning those early days and the roots of 
the program. We are remarkably indebted as a nation to what President Lyndon Johnson was 
committed to when he saw the importance of developing the Economic Opportunity Act and 
establishing the OEO, which then gave an opportunity for the nation to develop a program for 
young children. He appointed Sargent Shriver, who at that time was directing the Peace Corps, 
to come over to the OEO on a part-time basis because he would not let go of the Peace Corps, as 
it was in its early days. Here we get back to the incidence of coincidence. Shriver had been 
serving as the Executive Director of the Kennedy Foundation, which was committed to helping 
children and families who had members with mental retardation. Through that experience, he 
had learned as a lay person quite a lot about child development. 

One of his first thoughts in dealing with poverty was asking if we could with this at an early 
point in the life cycle? He intuitively knew that that could be important. He established a 
committee of fifteen people, and Ed Zigler is the only person in the room who was on that 
committee. It worked over a short period of time to develop a statement that is of enduring 
significance. 1 would like to read the first few paragraphs of that statement, because at this time 
the public dialogue sometimes gets confused about what the origins of Head Start were and 
what its program commitment has been. 

It is time to go back to the roots and see what those people who thought hard about what the 
program ought to be had to say. This is their statement: 

"They say there is considerable evidence that the early years of childhood are the most critical 
point in the poverty cycle. During these years, the creation of learning patterns, emotional 
development, and the formation of individual expectations and aspirations take place at a very 
rapid pace. For the child of poverty, there are clearly observable deficiencies in the processes, 
which lay the foundation for a pattern of failure and then a pattern of poverty throughout the 
child's entire life. 

Within recent years, there has been experimentation and research designed to improve 
opportunities for the child of poverty. While much of this work is not yet complete, there is 
adequate evidence to support the view that special programs can be devised for those 4- and 5- 
year-olds, which will improve both the child's opportunities and achievement. It is clear that 
successful programs of this type need to be comprehensive." 

1 think that is an important emphasis these days, involving activities generally associated with 
the field of social services, health, and education. Similarly, it is clear that the programs must 
focus on the problems of the child and parent, and that these activities need to be carefully 
integrated with programs for the school years. 

The title for this year's meeting. The First Eight Years: Pathways to the Future, picks up on that 
theme of continuation. Ed Zigler will recall vividly the fact that we even had a term for that 
follow-up into the school years. We called it "Follow Through." 

For the mentees in the room, no matter how we define mentees, 1 would emphasize that we 
had a great deal of mentoring to do in those early days because the planning committee made 
the judgment in February 1965 that this program would be a national program operating that 
summer. We had our work cut out for us. 



ERIC 



72 



79 



STUDENT-MENTOR AWARD LUNCHEON 



First of all the committee focused on the fact that we should not skim the cream. We said we 
wanted to try to get the program started in the 300 poorest counties in the United States. To get 
the 300 poorest counties in the United States to write an application for a program and to do it 
in a 6-week timeframe was a challenge. We took 6 weeks to review them. Then essentially; the 
communities had about a month to recruit their staffs and find facilities, and so forth. It seemed 
impossible, but nonetheless it happened. 

I believe, and this is an interpretative point, that the American people have a tremendous 
interest and commitment to the care and development of children. Many people conclude that 
because we have not done all that is needed for children and families, we do not have a deep 
commitment. The commitment is there. It was illustrated in those early months of trying to 
organize Head Start. However, that commitment had been largely latent. What we did was to 
make it manifest. I would like to suggest to the mentees in the room to try to complete the 
agenda for getting all of the potentially eligible children for Head Start into the programs. It is 
important to focus the attention of people on what they can realistically do. With the coming of 
Head Start, we asked for volunteers. We could not use all of the volunteers who kept coming out 
of the woodwork to offer their services. I do not accept the fact that the American people do not 
really care about children and their development. To some extent, however, there has been a 
failure of leadership, a failure to crystallize and focus the attention of the nation on what people 
could do. 

We wanted to have the 300 poorest counties into the program, children and families in 
greatest need. My ingenious Associate Director, fules Sugarman, whom many in this room know, 
was a career civil servant. He said we have civil service interns scattered all around the agencies 
in Washington. They would like something like this and would be committed to it. We could 
train them and send them out to these communities. We sent out notices to the civil service 
interns and they too came pouring in. In the evenings we would train them to know and 
understand what the program was about. On weekends we would team one civil service intern 
up with an academic, usually from the academic community in child development. Together 
they knew the child development and the programmatic needs of the children. 

The interns had been taught about the administrative and the fiscal side because we 
mentored them. They in turn went out and mentored people in communities about how to 
build these programs. We had about 500,000 children that first summer in 2,700 communities 
across the country. We did not quite get all 300 of the poorest counties in that first summer, but 
we got more than half, about 189. 

We also needed teachers, and at that time, we could not even identify how many early 
childhood educators there were in the United States. Nobody knew. However, we knew there 
were not enough to deal with what we would need that summer. The only way we could start 
Head Start was as a summer program because we could recruit teachers. This reflects commit- 
ment. Elementary school teachers were willing to give up their summer vacations to come and 
work to get Head Start off the ground. 

We again had to invent something whereby we could retrain these teachers, who had an 
interest in younger children, for the program. To do that we asked the National Universities 
&ctension Association, the universities that run extension courses and were accustomed to 
ginning up courses in rapid fire, to develop a program whereby we could mentor these teachers. 
They in turn became available to develop the Head Start effort for that summer. Over time we 
shifted it over to a year-round program. 

Regarding the role of scientific work, fudy focused on the importance of science, and in those 
days, Ed and I worried too about how to show the effectiveness of the program. As all of us in 
this room know, we keep struggling in finding better and better ways to do that. I would say to 
Ed, "The program that we are trying to develop has humanitarian goals. We ought not to 
apologize for giving children medical care, dental care, and improving their nutrition, education 
and social services, and all of the other components of the program." 




73 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



I said if the science conies along to back that up, that is fine, but we should never apologize 
for feeding hungry children. I think that is a very important dimension of how we need to think 
about Head Start, its rich past, but also its future. To do that, I just want to read a little bit from a 
Head Start graduate. 

Before I read her words, there is a little story behind it. A number of years ago when David 
Hamburg was the President of the Carnegie Corporation, he established a number of task forces 
on early life. Ruby Takanishi chaired the one on adolescence and Eleanor Maccoby and I chaired 
a council on 0 to 3. We were strategizing about how to get the nation to move toward what is 
now Early Head Start. We rendered a report on the 0 to 3 years, and after that, David Hamburg 
thought we ought to give grants to governors who had interests in moving toward this earlier 
period. We thought the money could help stimulate more development in this area. We an- 
nounced the grants at a press conference in Washington where the program was announced. 

As the meeting broke up, there was a young, thin, African American woman who walked up 
to me a little timidly and introduced herself. I do not betray any confidences when I identify her 
because she wrote a piece that I want to quote from. Rachel Jones is her name. 

She said, "I'm the national correspondent for a national news service. I was in that first Head 
Start group in 1965." This is a long story that I commonly hear. She told me about how hungry 
she had been until she had gotten into Head Start, and I said she ought to write about that. 

She said, "Well I am a professional correspondent and this would appear to be self-serving." 

I said, "I think I can help you solve your ethical dilemma. Tell your editor that you are vmting 
a piece, but you will send it to another paper." So lo and behold, she did. She sent it to the 
Washington Post. Rachel Jones "When You Have to Pretend You're Not Hungry" is the title of the 
article. 

She writes, "The year was 1965, the place, a Head Start classroom at the Sumner Elementary 
School in Cairo, Illinois. That is where I come from. I remember it well for one important 
reason. They had instant mashed potatoes and to this spindly legged, pigtailed 3-year-old, it was 
much better than those ugly real potatoes we had at home. Everybody got milk. My hand-me- 
down clothing may have marked me as less than affluent, but at least I didn t have to sit in a 
comer and pretend I wasn't hungry while the other kids ate hamburgers and drank their milk. I 
didn't really understand who was responsible, but I was grateful." 

She said these memories had mshed back to her last summer, near the height of a tense 
debate over just how much help to give to the poor in America. 

"I often felt compelled to bear witness that Head Start and many of these other so-called 
failed, antipoverty programs were a staple of my own life." Then later on she goes down to say, 

"A hot breakfast or a nourishing lunch can make all the difference to a poor child. A full 
stomach is a terrific equalizer." 

We have to always recall these stories that we keep hearing of what has happened to the Head 
Start graduates. As somebody reminded me this morning, the Associate Commissioner of the 
Administration for Children, Youth, and Families (ACYF) is a Head Start graduate, and that tells 
us something too. I am enormously grateful to all of you who participated in designating me for 
this award, I also want to make a comment about the significance of the kind of collaboration 
that we see in these annual conferences. They include the scientific community, in the form of 
SRCD under John Hagen's leadership, along with the officers of that society, Esther Kresh, and 
others at the Head Start Bureau who have been so attentive over time, and the collaboration of 
Faith Lamb-Parker at the Mailman School of Public Health at Columbia University, along with 
all of the people in ACYF who have made these conferences a reality. It is that kind of collabora- 
tion between the public and the private sectors that has characterized these 37 years of history of 
Head Start, resulting in more than 20 million children having had the experience of being in the 
program. 




74 



81 



STUDENT-MENTOR AWARD LUNCHEON 



For the mentees, I would only conclude by saying that we should always remember Louis 
Pasteur's edict to cultivate the chance favors and the prepared mind. It is extremely important 
that we be prepared to take advantage of the kind of opportunity that we had in 1965 when we 
had the political will and the resources with which to begin Head Start, the program that has 
meant so much to those 20 million children. Prepare yourselves in order that we keep expand- 
ing our knowledge base. Then, when the opportunity comes along, help more children in need 
to help themselves to fulfill their greatest potentialities. Be prepared, then seize those opportuni- 
ties and do it boldly. 




82 



75 



Luncheon III 



Promoting Public Awareness of 
Issues in Early Learning 

INTRODUCTION OF KEYNOTE SPEAKER: Kathryn Barnard 
KEYNOTE SPEAKER: 

Mona Lee Locke 



Mona Lee Locke, wife of Washington Governor Gary Locke, became the state's twentieth First Lady on January 
15, 1997. As First Lady, she is an advocate for issues related to children and education. She is the honorary 
chair of the Washington state SAFEKIDS Goalition, and honorary cochair of Flealthy Mothers, Healthy 
Babies. She is also a member of the advisory board of Mothers Against Violence in America (MAVIA). 

As cochair of the Governor's Gommission on Early Learning, Mrs. Locke led the commission in its charge to 
ensure that every child in Washington state go to school prepared to succeed. It was comprised of leaders in 
education, child care, health, business and government. The commission primarily focused on helping all 
caregivers, whether parents, grandparents, or child care providers, get the tools they need to maximize the 
growth and development of children from birth to age five. The commission launched a statewide public 
awareness campaign and established the non-profit Washington Early Learning Foundation (WELF) to help 
reach this goal. Mrs. Locke currently serves as the WELF Board president. 

Mrs. Locke, who left her career as a television reporter when her husband ran for Governor, is still a 
journalist at heart. In 1999, she co-produced and narrated a local Public Broadcasting System documentary on 
early learning in Ghina. It was based on a cross-cultural exchange trip to Ghina that she led. Fifty teachers, 
child care providers and parent educators from five Northwest states participated. 

Mrs. Locke earned her bachelor's degree in English Literature from the University of Galifomia, at Berkeley. 
She has a master's degree from Northwestern University's Medill School of Journalism. She has worked as a 
television news reporter in Washington DG, Green Bay, Wisconsin and Seattle, Washington. 

Kathryn Barnard: Mona Lee Locke is the wife of Governor Gary Locke. As First Lady and 
mother, she has worked passionately and effectively to herald the importance of early learning. 
She cochaired the Commission on Early Learning that Governor Locke put in place. This 
Commission led to the establishment of the Foundation for Early Learning in the State of 
Washington, on whose Board of Directors she serves. The mission of this nonprofit organization 
is to try to influence the state to focus more on the early years of life. She promotes the expan- 
sion of parental education opportunities, and works diligently to ensure child care quality for all 
children in the state. As part of Mona's efforts on behalf of young children, she has traveled 
throughout the state talking to parents, listening to them and to other caregivers about their 
needs and concerns. She has been involved in the Commission and the Foundation's efforts to 
bring about public awareness of the early years. 



O 76 



ERIC 




111 



Mona is the honorary chair of a number of committees that serve children in the State of 
Washington, such as Healthy Mothers, Healthy Babies, and Safe Kids Coalition, and she has a 
wonderful association with a children's museum in the state capital. She is also associated with 
Mothers Against Violence, as well as many other organizations. 

As the Governor's wife, she is a passionate crusader, but she is a journalist at heart. I first met 
her when she came to Seattle as a reporter for one of the TV channels. This is why I asked her to 
come and speak here. For those of us in science, and actually in programs such as Head Start 
and Early Head Start, we have been in the closet about our message and our knowledge. We 
need to be much more public in order to help other people understand. It is from this journalis- 
tic ability and experience that I asked her to come and talk to us today about how to communi- 
cate the importance of early learning 

Mona Lee Locke: I am honored to be here among experts and luminaries in this field of early 
child development. Thank you for all of the energy and time you have invested in helping young 
children across this country get the best possible start in life. All of us remember the moment 
when we first became believers in the value of early childhood education and early learning. For 
some of you, it may have been during the course of your work with children, or for some of you, 
it may have been through scientific research. For myself, I vividly remember it was a slow and a 
gradual awakening. Actually, they were probably repeated awakenings from my first born, Emily, 
and then reminders from my second born, Dylan. 

Emily was bom shortly after we were inaugurated, about a month and a half after we had 
moved to the state capital. Nothing could have prepared us for the 24-hour-a-day responsibility 
that we sooii faced. I had quit my job to be a full-time mother, while also being the First Lady. It 
was fascinating watching Emily develop day-by-day, minute-by-minute. This child was like a 
little sponge soaking up information. It is one thing to hear about the importance of early 
learning and brain development from birth to age 3; it is quite another thing to actually witness 
it happening as a mother. Who would have known, that by age 2, my young, little daughter 
could say those four important words, "No mommy, you're wrong." I just keep asking, "Is that 
normal? Do most 2-year-olds say that?" 

When we became new parents, it was like we became instant members of a worldwide 
parent's club and identified with all of the characteristics: sleep deprivation, mumbling incoher- 
ently, incomplete sentences, and so forth. While we had so much in common with these other 
parents, we at the same time felt so isolated, so alone. We did not know exactly where to turn for 
information. That is when my husband and I decided to create the Governor's Gommission on 
Early Learning. We truly felt that if we, the Governor and First Lady of the State, as first time 
parents, did not know where to turn to get information on how best to care for our child, wasn't 
every other first-time parent going through the same experience? The Governor appointed 
Melinda Gates and I to cochair the commission for 2 years. By traveling all over the state and 
talking with other parents and caregivers, we learned what was available in our state and what 
was not. We also learned about toddlers like little Elbe. 

Elbe was bom 6 weeks premature and addicted to heroin. As a newborn, she was adminis- 
tered morphine for 9 days just to help her through the withdrawal pains. Elbe's biological 
parents were chronic intravenous dmg users and abusers. At age 2, her parents were deemed 
unfit to care for her. She was removed from their custody. This little girl was one of the lucky 
.ones. Elbe had an aunt who stepped in and agreed to take Elbe into her home. 

At age 4, Elbe was connected with a Head Start program in Washington State. By that time, 
she was already a handful. Gounselors said she would throw tantrums that would last for 2 to 3 
hours, and sometimes longer. She would throw furniture, flailing her arms; she would cry and 
scream uncontrollably. A mental health counselor found that although Elbe was now living in a 
stable living environment, she still had clear memories of those first few years of life, and she 
still had severe fear of abandonment. Gounselors then began working with Elbe's family, her 




84 



77 



Aunt Vicki and their family, to be sure they were all using similar language and approaches with 
the little girl. They also wanted to be sure that she was surrounded with acceptance and love. 

Over time, lots of kindness and gentleness allowed Ellie to make it through the tantrums. 
Eventually they stopped. By the time she left the program and headed to kindergarten, Ellie was 
a changed little girl; not without her continued share of problems, but she had learned how to 
love and how to be loved. 

We know that early learning makes all the difference in a child's life. We know that develop^ 
mentally appropriate experiences and good mental and physical health are critical to success. 
Your work has proven it scientifically. Ellie s story makes it real. 

Not everyone knows or believes in the importance of early learning and this critical period in 
a child's life. That is our challenge. Together, we must work toward helping everyone— parents, 
business, and policy makers — understand the importance of this period. We must raise the 
awareness of the profound impact early learning can have and support families and caregivers in 
their quest to do the right thing for their children. 

The Governor's Commission for Early Learning held a series of parent meetings across the 
state. We heard directly from the source — parents — about their needs. It may come as no 
surprise to you that the greatest need of all was for information. Parents wanted to know what 
resources were available, and how could they access them. While many genuinely appreciated 
our efforts, not everyone embraced our mission. The Commission for Early Learning met 
monthly for 2 years. During our last year, we definitely got attention for our work, and it was 
not always positive. 

What 1 have learned is that when it comes to children, people are extremely sensitive. I tell 
you that so you can learn from our experience. As word spread about our mission and our 
work, we started drawing protesters to our meetings. At first there were just a few, then a half 
dozen, and then dozens and dozens of protesters. These were citizens who firmly believed that 
government has no place in the lives of their families or their children. No program or public 
awareness campaign should interfere or try to influence families on how they should raise 
their children. 

For an entire year, every month, 20 to 30 protesters would attend our meetings; speak at our 
meetings, and picket holding signs, which read, Don t lock up our kids. They hung us in effigy. 
Talk radio soon took up their cause, and we were lambasted on the airwaves. Everyone joined 
the cause, people like John Birchers and every anti-government group. Our meetings even drew 
protesters from neighboring states. 

From this, 1 can proudly proclaim that 1 have drawn more protesters than my husband has 
ever drawn on any single issues. Putting a spin on it, I would say it only means that people 
understand how important this issue is. Their concern was that government should stay out of 
people's lives despite the fact that the Commission was comprised of private individuals from 
the private sector. The Commission was made up of child-care providers, teachers, business 
professionals, pediatricians, health and development experts, and Kathryn Barnard. We never 
tried to dictate to people what they should do. 

Therefore, the lesson that we learned is that everything we did had to be labeled "voluntary." 
We had to balance the objections of those protesters, because they truly felt that we were 
interfering in their lives. We also heard from other parents who were desperate for information. 
With that in mind, we moved ahead. 

First, we developed a public awareness campaign aimed at all parents and caregivers of young 
children in Washington State. We aired television ads and print magazine ads for months. As 
part of the campaign, we partnered with the '1 am Your Child Foundation' from California to 
distribute hundreds of thousands of early learning brochures by direct mail, through advertising 
a 1-800 number, and a web site. The brochures were sent to health clinics, to pediatricians, to 
child-care providers, libraries. Head Starts, Early Head Starts, preschool centers, as well as to 
parents at their homes. 




78 



85 



LUNCHEON III 



The campaign was designed to be first and foremost supportive. We definitely did not want to 
imply that parents did not know how to take care of their children, but rather let them know 
that if they wanted more information, it was out there and accessible. The print ad campaigns 
were published in local sections of national magazines like People, Time, Newsweek, and Rosie. 
One ad reads, "Who are you, litde one? Does she have music inside of her? A gift for seeing 
things in a fresh way? An award winning butterfly stroke? Eloquence? A warm and compassion- 
ate heart? There is a great deal you can do to help your baby become the person she was meant 
to be. If you would like to know more, please call or visit our web site." Another ad reads as 
follows: "What will your dreams be? He has busy fingers and a hearty laugh, and excellent sense 
of direction, a preference for peaches, and a favorite book; the one with the litde fuzzy farm 
animals. By the time your baby is a toddler, you know him very well, but the person he is 
becoming is still a work in progress. If you would like to give him the best possible start in life, 
just call for a copy of the ten simple ways to encourage your child's brain development or visit 
our web site." 

In addition to these print ads, we also produced some television ads that were also aimed to 
be supportive. The ad says, "Help your child become the person he or she was meant to be. Call 
toll-free for your early learning brochure." In addition to the ad campaign, the Commission 
sponsored bringing a program called TEACH to our state. TEACH, which is part of North 
Carolina's Smart Start campaign focuses on raising the quality of child care. This program 
actually provides scholarships to child care teachers as an incendve for them to go back to 
school and get their early learning degrees. After than, they in turn promise to come back to the 
centers with knowledge and newly found expertise in the field. I am proud to say that 2 years 
after bringing TEACH to our state, we have 21 out of 39 with the program in place. 

Finally, the Commission did not want its work to end with the conclusion of our 2-year 
timeline, but it was clear that government funding alone was not going to be able to support all 
of the work that we felt we needed to do. Therefore, we started a nonprofit foundation with a 
generous seed gift from the Bill and Melinda Cates Foundation, and created the Foundation for 
Early Learning. The Foundation's mission is to support the profound learning that children 
experience from birth to age 5. 

With the outreach that has been done by the Commission, the ads by the Foundation that 
were working, and numerous other organizations across our state, we have a wonderful move- 
ment starting. Polling indicates that the general public is actually beginning to get it when it 
comes to early learning. Although people understand that early learning is important, they are 
still trying to figure out what they can do for their children and their community. 

With this growing awareness, it is time to focus energy on translating the work into easy-to- 
understand action steps for parents, caregivers, preschool programs, and kindergarten teachers. 
Where do we go from here? There is growing energy in a movement. What can we do? Spread 
awareness. We must continue in our quest to help policy makers and the public at large under- 
stand that appropriate early childhood experiences are critical to the future of our country. 
Without their backing, nothing can change. 

We are talking about spreading awareness and changing opinion. We need to educate child- 
care providers and parents. You have the power to do that. Start a campaign to lobby legislators 
for reform and change. You have access to parents. You have access to people who really care. 
Have them write letters. Go down to your capital. Lobby your legislators. Let them hear about 
the importance of early learning. We need to continue support for families by providing them 
with the programs and information they need to help their children succeed in life. 

Form partnerships. As awareness grows, so do the number of businesses and organizations 
that want to support early learning. They have the capability to get our message across. If you 
look, you will find programs and organization within your own states focused on the impor- 
tance of early learning that would love to partner with you, and learn from your expertise. Seek 



ERIC 



86 



79 



SPECIAL SESSIONS 



business alliances. There are already some good partnership models out there. Child-care centers 
are teaming up with hospitals, businesses, and government to support early learning. 

Join a movement. In Washington State, we have numerous businesses, including Costco, that 
are working with community colleges and local school districts to build best practices child care 
centers for their employees. I am sure that there are businesses in states across the country that 
could be convinced to do the same thing. 

Start a dialogue. According to the 2000-2001 report of the Education Commission of States, 
early care and education is not so much a system as it is a nonsystem. It is a conglomeration of 
programs and policies that are largely disconnected from one another and from other levels of 
the education system. 

Think back to your own experiences. We were talking earlier about how fragmented we are. 
When you think of Head Start, what do you think— is it a preschool or is it above preschool? 
How about child-care centers? Do we think in terms of working together in bridging the gaps, 
communicating, and starting a dialogue? In order to succeed, we need to communicate with one 
another and better align child care, preschool, and kindergarten goals. Early learning can be the 
spark that ignites community-wide conversation about our current system. We need to start 
focusing on pre-K through twelve, if not earlier. 

Finally, show and inspire. Many people have heard about the importance of the brain 
development during the first 3 years of life. Few understand how that translates to the 
practicalities of everyday life. I found that while talking about the miracle of the brain is fasci- 
nating, there is nothing like the impact of actually seeing early learning take place. I recommend 
that if you have access to a politician, policy maker, potential donor for a program, or any other 
type of change agent, take them to two child-care centers. The first should be one that is strug- 
gling; a little run down and trying to make ends meet. The second one would be a child-care 
center that is doing an excellent job with well-trained professionals and thriving young children. 
Show them these differences. Inspire them to do something about it. 

In this day and age of deeper and deeper budget cuts, the reality is that we are all forced to do 
more with less. Think about it. None of the things I suggested really has anything to do with 
money. They need you. They need someone, an advocate, to step in with time and expertise. They 
need you to lead the charge and help build coalitions to move opinion and get things done. 

Remember Ellie, the little toddler I told you about at the beginning? Her Aunt Vicki and her 
family have adopted Ellie. She is undoubtedly better-adjusted and happier in life. This is quite a 
transformation from the aggressive, frightened toddler who used to alienate herself from all of 
her peers and adults. As you and I know, Ellie is one of the lucky few who did not fall through 
the cracks. 

I am sure that I do not need to remind you that as we move forward and celebrate our 
successes, we must not forget that for every Ellie out there, there are thousands of children and 
babies who are missing out on the opportunity to have a good start in life. 

We can make a profound difference in the lives of children, and ultimately in the very fabric 
of our society, by advocating for and fostering a loving, caring, nurturing, and stimulating 
environment for all children during the first few years of life. Together we can, and we will, 
create a better world one precious child at a time. Keep up the great work! 



O 

ERIC 



80 



87 



Symposia/ Roundtables/ 
Conversation Hours 




88 



Administration for Children and Families 



Improving the Performance of the Head Start 
Program: Findings From FACES 2000 

CHAIR: Louisa B. Tarullo 
DISCUSSANT: Margaret Burchinal 

PRESENTERS: Louisa B. Tarullo, Nicholas Zill, Gary Resnick, Ruth Hubbell McKey 

■ Constancy and Change in Head Start Classroom Quality 
and School Readiness Gains 

Nicholas Zill, Gary Resnick, Ruth Hubbell McKey 

■ Curricula Being Used in Head Start Programs: Who Gets What? 

Ruth Hubbell McKey, Shefali Pai-Samant 

■ Relationships of Type of Curriculum and Teacher-Directed 
Activities to Children's Progress in Head Start 

Nicholas Zill, Gary Resnick 

■ Relationships of Teacher Beliefs and Qualifications to 
Classroom Quality and Children's Gains 

Gary Resnick, Nicholas Zill 



Louisa B. Tarallo: We will discuss the results of the FACES 2000 study that is intended to 
provide a mechanism for Head Start to examine the quality of programs over time. The study 
represents two nationally stratified probability samples of Head Start programs, families, and 
children. It includes direct assessment of children when they enter the Head Start program, 
follows them through 1-2 years of the program, and again at the end of kindergarten. 

We are focusing on the following research questions; 

1. What are the similarities and differences between FACES 1997 and FACES 2000 with 
regard to Head Start classroom quality and school readiness gains? 

2. What types of curricula are used by Head Start programs across the nation in our repre- 
sentative sample in 2000? 

3. Is there a relationship between the type of curricula used and other factors in the class- 
room with regard to children's progress? 

4. What is the relationship between teacher qualifications and the belief that they espouse 
with regard to classroom quality and children's gains? 

The conceptual framework that underscores all of our work and performance measurement 
in Head Start has at the top of the pyramid what was originally called the child's social compe- 




83 

89 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



tence; this has now been expanded to be a concept of school readiness. The goal of Head Start is 
to enhance and foster the sAool readiness of children from low-income families. How do we 
get there? We ensure that there are positive outcomes for children and for their families as 
primary nurturers, through the provision of high-quality services. 

Some of the outcomes that we will discuss focus specifically on cognition and literacy, but we 
have information on the outcomes of all aspects of development. We have a comprehensive 
picture of what children's development entails and we want to study all aspects of children s 
development. 

The design includes two national cohorts, one started in the fall of 1997 and the other started 
in 2000. We followed a total of about 6000 children through kindergarten with observations of 
classroom quality, assessments, parent interviews, interviews of other relevant staff, and teacher 
and parent reports of children's literacy and learning, social-emotional, and other aspects of 
child development. 

Our first presenter is Dr. Nicholas Zill from Westat. He will discuss constancy and change in 
Head Start classroom quality and school readiness gains. 

Nicholas Zill: I want to begin by presenting some differences in the sample from 1997 and 
2000. We had about 2400 children in 43 programs from a stratified national probability sample 
of Head Start programs. We used a different sampling strategy in 2000, because we wanted more 
stable estimates at the classroom level as well as a larger sample size. Our sample consisted of 
about 265 classes where we included all the children who were new to Head Start. We included 
3- and 4-year-old children as they occurred proportionally in the program. This was a new, 
separate sample of 43 programs in 2000 as opposed to the 41 programs in 1997. 

Comparing 1997 and 2000, we wanted to find the extent of similarities and differences in the 
outcomes and whether those differences were statistically significant, particularly in a positive 
way that indicates progress in Head Start quality. 

Three research questions will be examined in this presentation: 

1 . Did average levels of classroom quality of Head Start classes change significantly between 
FACES 1997 and FACES 2000 (i.e., from 1997-98 to 2000-2001)? 

2. Did average levels of early literacy skills attained by spring of Head Start year and fall- 
spring gains change significantly between FACES 1997 and FACES 2000? 

3. In FACES 2000, Spanish-speaking language-minority children were given vocabulary and 
letter- word identification assessments in both Spanish and English. How did the literacy 
levels and gains of these children compare with those of language-minority children? 
How did they vary across the two languages? 

The changes (or lack thereof) in average levels of classroom quality were examined on four 
observational measures: (a) overall Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale (ECERS) scores, 
(b) ECERS component scales which are in the ECERS Revised (ECERS-R), (c) Assessment 
Profile-Scheduling Scale, and (d) Assessment Profile-Learning Environment Scale. 

We examined changes (or lack thereof) in vocabulary, letter-word identification, early writing 
(dictation), and early math (applied problems) using the Woodcock-Johnson Psychoeducational 
Battery. Comparisons were made for children assessed in English both times only. 

The procedure was changed with language-minority Spanish-speaking children in FACES 
2000. We assessed them in both languages in two components of the Scale in vocabulary and 
letter identification. The Spanish-speaking children received the bulk of the assessment in 
Spanish in the fall and then in English in the spring. For the first time, we were able to see their 
progress or changes in both languages in FACES 2000. Then we compared the literacy level and 
gains of these children with those of language-majority children and how they varied across the 
two languages. 




administration for children and families 



Gary Resnick: When you compare quality in the classrooms from two cohorts and FACES, one 
of the big changes we made was that in the fall of 2000, we used the ECERS-R whereas in the fall 
of 1997 we used the original ECERS scale. All the items are on a 7-point scale. The change in 
levels of quality is somewhat confounded with the differences in the scales. To date we do not 
know whether those scales are the same or not and the publishers have not presented data on 
how they are compatible. Even individual items have changed in various ways. 

The original ECERS has 37 items and the revised ECERS has 42 items. We only used 37 items 
of the ECERS-R; we did not use the adult and staff scale. We compared the average score across 
all of the items. With those caveats, we decided to look across the two scale measures. We found 
that the ECERS scores in FACES 2000 and FACES 1997 did show comparable scores overall. 

We used similar scales in other measures of quality, for example the Assessment Profile 
Scales. Those stayed the same from fall 1997 to 2000, so we were able to say that the ECERS is 
different but the Assessment Profile is the same. The Assessment Profile is well correlated with 
the ECERS. Therefore, we have some indication of whether the classroom quality remained the 
same or not, or whether it was an artifact of differences in the scales. We found that the Assess- 
ment Profile measures showed the same scores from fall of 1997 to fall of 2000. Therefore, we 
have some basis for indicating that quality stayed about the same. 

We calculated the average score that a classroom was assigned across all 37 items on the 
ECERS. Then we coded them in categories using the scale points as the midpoints of those 
categories. In 1997 there were no classrooms that scored 3 or below. In the fall of 2000, there 
were a few classrooms that scored a minimal 2 and 3. In addition, in fall 2000, we also had 
more programs scoring higher in the range of 6. This may be a result of the differences between 
the ECERS and the ECERS-R. The ECERS-R has more standardized instructions for assigning 
scores for each of the items. Therefore, it tends to stretch quality away from the center of the 
scale. However, many observers who are unsure about a particular item or a particular set of 
items tend to veer toward the center of the scale. There are more specific instructions with the 
ECERS-R for each of the scale points. It would tend to focus people more on the tails, the 
negative and positive traits. 

In the fall of 1997, the total overall score across the 37 items was 4.93 in 518 Head Start 
classrooms. In the fall of 2000, 168 Head Start classrooms had a total overall score of 4.84, 
which is about the same with no significant difference. The scores were comparable in the 
subscales of personal care, furnishings, and language. Furnishings went up quite a bit from a 
mean of 4.96 to a mean of 5.48. The social scale also showed change, but that may have been 
due to an increase in social and interaction activities and the larger focus on the interaction 
between the teacher and the children on the ECERS-R. 

We grouped the classrooms into low, good, and excellent quality categories. The low category 
is less than 4 on the overall ECERS score across all items. Good is 4 or 5, and excellent is 6 or 
above. There is a tendency in the fall 2000 ECERS-R scores for quality to come on the tails of the 
distribution, so that slightly more classrooms coded lower and slightly more classrooms coded 
higher. Again these were small differences that are not statistically significant. They reflect that 
quality has remained the same and that any differences are due to differences between the 
ECERS-R and the original ECERS. 

We used the language scale fairly prominently. We found about the same number of class- 
rooms in the lower quality group. It is interesting that the percentage of classrooms in the 
excellent category has shown a slight increase. The language items in the ECERS-R may work a 
bit better, but it may also reflect some changes in the Head Start curriculum that are focusing on 
literacy in language. 

We wanted to confirm that the similarities and quality from fall 1997 to fall 2000 were not 
only an artifact of a change in the ECERS scale. We used two scales from the Assessment Profile: 
scheduling and learning environment. There were no significant differences on scheduling and 
learning environment on the raw scores from fall 1997 to fall 2000. This provides some indica- 




91 



85 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



tion that the quality on the whole has remained the same and has remained at a fairly high level 
in Head Start classrooms. In fact, the quality is much higher than other studies in early child- 
hood settings. Furthermore, the substantive changes in the ECERS to the ECERS-R reflect some 
of the differences, but these changes are an improvement, because they are able to assist observ- 
ers in discriminating between good and poor levels of quality and good and excellent levels 
of quality. 

Zill: I will discuss the cognitive scores. On the PPVT-III, we found that children showed compa- 
rable standard score gains in vocabulary in FACES 2000 and FACES 1997. In FACES 2000, they 
began and ended wifli standard scores similar to those in FACES 1997. In 1997, the children 
began with a standard score of about 85, which is about one standard deviation below the 
national norm of 100. They moved up close to 90, an increase of 4.3 standard score points. 
FACES 2000 had similar findings: the children moved from 85 to 89. Again,, these are the 
children who had the vocabulary test administered in English both times. 

We found that there were greater raw score gains in letter identification, which meant that the 
children held their own against the national norms. In FACES 1997, they slipped backwards 
against the national norms. In 1997, the raw score on the Woodcock-Johnson went from 5 to 
6.6. That meant that for letter recognition they went from being able to recognize three letters to 
seven letters. In FACES 2000, they went from a raw score of 5.3 to 7.3, which means they started 
out and ended up knowing more letters; 3.9 letters to 8.9 letters. The congressional mandate is 
that children should know 10 letters of the alphabet at the end of Head Start. In FACES 2000 the 
children were quite close to that. A Woodcock-Johnson score of 7.8 is needed to attain the 
mandate, and the children scored 7.3. 

The children are still below the national mean of 100 in letter identification. In FACES 2000 
the childrens standard score starts at 92.4 and ends up 92.9. In early writing, the standard score 
gain was significantly larger in the earlier study than in the later one. There was a difference of 
4.3 in 1997 and 2.0 in 2000. With our large sample, that is statistically significant. 

In early math, the children had comparable score gains. In FACES 2000, children began and 
ended with higher standard scores than in FACES 1997. The level was higher but the gain was 
comparable although it was not statistically significant. 

To summarize the gains, there was constancy in vocabulary and math. There was positive 
movement in letter-word identification and some slippage in early writing skills. The overall 
comparability of the raw scores and the standard scores indicates that the assessment and 
sampling procedures are reliable and reasonably well-standardized, considering that we used 
two national samples and assessed thousands of children. The comparable results supported 
that we are using a good measurement procedure. 

Finally, how did the literacy levels and gains in Spanish-speaking language-minority children 
compare to those of language-majority children? How did the literacy levels and gains vary 
across the two languages? Spanish-speaking language-minority children entered with English 
language vocabulary skills that were considerably behind those of language-majority children, 
which is not surprising. They made greater gains over the course of the Head Start year, but 
remained behind language-majority children. The sample size of this group was 309 children. 

In vocabulary skills, the Spanish-speaking language-minority children started with a standard 
score of 59.7 and improved their score to 66.7; that is a 7-point gain compared to the 4-point 
gain in language-majority children. When we combined the two groups, the overall Head Start 
sample now has a beginning score of 81.4 and ends with a score of 85.7 in vocabulary skills. 

Spanish-speaking language-minority children entered the program with English-language 
letter recognition skills that were slightly behind those of language-majority children. However, 
they did not make gains over the course of the Head Start year, compared to national norms. 
They started at 89.5 but decreased to 87.5, compared to the language-majority children who are 
consistent in their scores. The overall combined sample is still below the national norm. 




86 



92 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



When we compared the two languages we found that the Spanish-speaking language- 
minority children made vocabulary gains in Head Start, but left with English vocabulary skills 
that trailed their Spanish vocabulary skills by a considerable margin. Their letter-recognition 
skills were roughly comparable in English and Spanish, but showed no gains over the course of 
the year. 

In conclusion. Head Start classroom quality remained in the "good" range in ECERS-R and 
Assessment Profile scales in 2000, as they had been in 1997. Head Start children showed 
significant gains in vocabulary skills against national norms in 2000-2001 as they had in 1997- 
98. They showed modesdy larger gains in letter recognition skills in 2000-2001 than they had in 
1997-98. Language-minority children in Head Start showed significant gains in English vocabu- 
lary skills without declines in their Spanish skills. They did not show any gains in letter recogni- 
tion skills. 

Ruth Hubbell McKcy: Curriculum is currently a topic of considerable interest because of the 
congressional mandates and the concerns about child outcomes, literacy, and school readiness. 
There are also several new studies starting to compare different types of curricula. We wanted to 
know what curricula the Head Start programs were using. 

The Head Start Program Performance Standards require that every program have a curricu- 
lum. The Standards delineate the areas that must be covered by the curriculum, but do not 
prescribe any particular curriculum. Programs can select a curriculum from a variety of sources; 
they can develop their own or they can use a combination of curricula. 

We addressed four research questions: 

1. What types of curricula are used in Head Start programs? 

2. Do Head Start teachers receive training and ongoing support in the use of their curriculum? 

3. Are Head Start teachers satisfied with their curriculum? 

4. Is there a relationship between the characteristics of a classroom and the type of curricula 
used in the classroom? 

The sample for this study included the 265 Head Start teachers from the 43 Head Start 
programs in FACES 2000. The field staff conducted personal interviews with the teachers on-site. 
The family data are from the fall 2000 parent interviews, and the data are weighted to represent 
Head Start programs nationwide. 

We asked teachers if they were using a single specific curriculum or a combination. About 
70% used a specific curriculum, 21% used a combination, and 9% reported using no curricu- 
lum. The most frequendy used curricula were High/Scope and Creative Curriculum. About 39% 
of the teachers used Creative Curriculum, 20% used High/Scope, and 41% used another curricu- 
lum. Some of the other curricula included High-Reach, Scholastic, Step-by-Step, Montessori, and 
Los Cantos/Los Ninos. Some teachers said they used a Head Start curriculum — apparently that 
was the way their curriculum had been interpreted to them — and others talked about using 
theme units. The number of children exposed to these various curricula is similar to the num- 
bers reported by the teachers. 

Ninety-three percent of the teachers had received training in their curriculum. Most had 
received the training from their program's staff, followed by the curriculum developers, which is 
the Head Start Quality Improvement Center (HSQIC), a university's school of education, or 
another source. 

Ongoing support is an important part of curriculum training. Almost all teachers reported 
that they did receive ongoing support in the use of their curriculum. Most often the support 
came from their supervisor or education coordinator. It also came from other teachers in the 
program, the curriculum developers, the HSQIC, or a mentor-teacher. It was interesting that the 
use of the mentor-teacher relationship was so small, considering that there is much interest in 
this approach now. The Head Start Disability Services Quality Improvement Centers (DSQICS) 
also provided some support, as did other sources. 




93 



87 



SYMPOS I A /ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



When we were developing these questionnaires for the teachers, we had been told that 
sometimes the curriculum was locked away in a central office and the teachers did not have 
access to it. We found that was not the case. By far, the majority of the teachers and assistant 
teachers had access to the curriculum materials. 

They also thought their curriculum had adequate learning materials. The teachers liked their 
respective curriculum for a variety of reasons. High percentages of them thought that their 
curriculum addressed multiple domains of learning, was easy to use and adapt, and involved 
parents as partners in the child's learning, which is also a Performance Standard requirement. 

Question: Were these generated by the teachers or were these choices you gave them? 

Hubbell McKey: These were choices where the teachers could agree or disagree. We examined 
where these curricula are being used across the regions of the country. The majority of teachers 
in the Northeast, Midwest, and West used the Creative Curriculum and High/Scope together. 

The majority of teachers in the South used other curricula. In all regions, teachers were more 
likely to use Creative Curriculum as a single curriculum. High/Scope is fairly evenly distributed 
across the regions. The majority of urban teachers used either Creative Curriculum or High/ 
Scope, while the teachers in mral programs were more likely to use Creative Curriculum. The 
findings from the number of children that experience these curricula are similar. 

Now 1 will present some differences in the quality measures. Head Start classrooms that used 
Creative Curriculum or High/Scope had significantly higher average quality factor scores than 
classrooms using other curricula. The quality faaor score is a combination of the Assessment 
Profile-Scheduling Scale, Assessment Profile-Learning Environment Scale, and the ECERS 
language score. The ECERS language scores were significantly different. The classrooms using 
Creative Curriculum or High/Scope had significantly higher ECERS language scores than 
classrooms using other curricula. This is a classroom measure and not a child measurement. 

There was a relationship between the income levels of these children's families and the use of 
these curricula. We found that children in classrooms using Creative Curriculum or High/Scope 
were from families with significantly higher monthly incomes than the children in classes using 
other curricula. This probably indicates that there is a higher level of program or community 
resources for these first two groups of children, so that they were able to purchase the more 
expensive curricula. 

Teachers who used other types of curricula were more likely to serve families who were the 
poorest. There were more poor families in those classrooms. Teachers who used High/Scope or 
other curricula served higher percentages of Non-White children than did teachers using the 
Creative Curriculum. There seems to be a trend that some of the children that were more 
disadvantaged may be receiving other curricula than High/Scope or Creative Curriculum. 

Our conclusions are that 91% of the Head Start classrooms used at least one curriculum, with 
a majority using a single, specific curriculum. Creative Curriculum and High/Scope were the 
most commonly used curricula. The majority of teachers received training and ongoing support 
in the use of their curriculum. Most teachers received training from their program staff. A copy 
of the curriculum was available to the majority of teachers and teacher assistants. The majority 
of teachers like their curriculum. The majority of teachers from the Northeast, Midwest, and 
West used either Creative Curriculum or High/Scope, while the majority of teachers from the 
South used other curricula. The majority of teachers from urban programs used either Creative 
Curriculum or High/Scope, while the majority of the teachers from mral programs used Creative 
Curriculum. Classrooms that used Creative Curriculum or High/Scope had significantly higher 
classroom quality scores and ECERS language scores than classrooms that used other curricula. 
Teachers who used other curricula served the highest percentages of poor children. Teachers who 
used High/Scope or other curriculum served more Non- White children. 




88 



94 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



Resnick: Ruth primarily presented the bivariate relationships between the use of specific 
curricula, teacher satisfaction with their curriculum, and characteristics of the classroom. Nick 
and I examined the relationships with a multilevel model to try and explain some of those 
relationships. 

The general research question for this presentation is how do program characteristics, teacher 
qualifications, and beliefs relate to classroom quality in Head Start? I will address this, and 
then Nick will address how classroom quality measures relate to children's developmental gains 
in Head Start. We looked at classroom quality and the factors that predict classroom quality. 
Then we looked at classroom quality as a variable predicting children's gains and outcomes in 
Head Start. 

There are different levels in the model we used for this study that included the level of the 
Head Start programs, the level of the classroom, and the level of the child. These kinds of analyses 
require going beyond the level of the classroom. There may be factors that are operating at the 
level of the Head Start program that organize these centers that are important to understand. 

At the same time we explored factors in children and families and family backgrounds. We 
believe that there is a relationship where program factors affect what is going on in the class- 
room, which then lead to changes and fall-to-spring gains in children's outcomes. In addition 
there is a pathway where program factors are linked to family backgrounds that affect gains or 
changes in children's outcomes. 

We wanted to assess the influence of program-level factors to explain the effects of teacher 
backgrounds, experiences, and beliefs on classroom quality. The rationale was that characteris- 
tics of the families served by Head Start programs indicated the challenges faced by these 
programs and the resources available to meet these challenges. 

Our hypothesis was that programs that provide for a common primary curriculum across 
classrooms and that pay their teachers well have sufficient resources available to positively 
influence classroom quality through the quality of the teachers hired, their experience, and their 
beliefs. The analysis with two-level models used SAS PROC MIXED to predict classroom process 
quality from classroom- and program-level factors. 

We conducted a prior study that examined the relationship between teacher background and 
experience and classroom quality. We found that there was an initial relationship between 
teacher backgrounds and experience in classroom quality where teachers with higher levels of 
education were in classrooms with higher levels of quality. However, when program-level 
characteristics were entered, those teacher background factors consistently disappeared from the 
relationship. They were no longer significant. Variations in quality seem to be strongly influ- 
enced by program-level factors, more than by the backgrounds or experience of classroom 
teachers. Programs located in communities that are resource-poor are limited in their ability to 
find well-trained and experienced teachers and to equip their classrooms with the learning 
materials and skills necessary to enhance quality. 

The problem with our initial study was that we used the fall of 1997 sample. Program-level 
predictors were limited to proxy indicators or families served by the program, but did not 
include factors that could direcdy influence classrooms such as curricula, teacher beliefs, or 
teacher salary. We added some program- and center-level characteristics using new information 
from FACES 2000. 

The new information in FACES 2000 included: (a) the primary curriculum used in most 
classrooms within a Head Start program, (b) average teacher salaries reflecting program re- 
sources, (c) teacher's beliefs about developmentally appropriate practices, (d) teacher salaries at 
the classroom level expressed as a deviation from the program average, and (e) the Teacher 
Individualizing Scale, which tracks each child's progress and modifies the curriculum for 
individual needs. We used primarily the observational items on the Teacher Individualizing 
scale. We broke the Scale into observational items and teacher-report items, and we are still 
analyzing the teacher-report items. 



ERIC 



95 



89 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



The program-level predictors are the characteristics of families served by the program and the 
type of curriculum that was used in the majority of programs. This addressed whether the 
curriculum was used by the individual classroom or across programs. Most of the primary 
curricula are used across all classrooms in a given program. Average annual teacher salary was 
used as an indicator of program resources. 

The classroom-level predictors were teacher background and experience and teacher beliefs. 
The teacher background and experience included total years of teaching, whether they hold a BA 
or an AA, their ethnicity, and their salary as a deviation from the program average. We used the 
Developmentally Appropriate Attitudes Scale to measure teacher beliefs. There was a subscale of 
10 items that measured their attitudes and beliefs toward developmentally appropriate practice 
(DAP). We coded it so that a higher score indicates a more positive attitude and more knowl- 
edge of developmentally appropriate practices. 

There was a range of years of Head Start teaching from 1-2 years to over 10 years; 28.9% had 
5-9 years of teaching Head Start and 29.6% had 10-plus years of experience. There was also a 
range of education levels. About 27% had a BA or undergraduate degree, about 21% had an 
associate's degree, and 32% (the highest proportion) said they attended college. Fifty-five 
percent of teachers reported that they had a Child Development Associate (CDA) certification. 
The ethnicity of teachers was 31% Black, 17% Hispanic, 2% Asian, and 49% White. 

The classroom quality measure we used to analyze classroom processes was the overall 
ECERS mean score. That was 4.84 for 258 classrooms. We used five observational items on the 
Assessment Profile Scale. The alpha coefficient was .62, fairly low. This reflects that there was not 
much variation in this scale. We did not expect big things from it, but we used it for the first 
time. We hope that the teacher-reported items, once we have analyzed those, give us much better 
variation in that scale. 

We measured the average child-adult ratio for classroom structure by recording observations 
of teachers, volunteers, and children at two particular points during day. We measured teacher 
sensitivity with the Caregiver Interaction Scale. The scale has 30 items rating the teacher's 
sensitivity, responsiveness, detachment, harshness, and encouragement of independence. The 
alpha coefficient and mean were good, .94 and 71.48 respectively. In addition, that did not 
change from 1997 to 2000. 

Programs that had a high percentage of non-minority students and programs that had a high 
percentage of language-minority students, had higher levels of quality at baseline. At the 
classroom level, teachers with more positive developmentally appropriate beliefs were in 
classrooms with higher levels of quality. The teacher beliefs seemed to be important, as were the 
percentage of non-minority students and percentage of language-minority students. 

When controlling for program factors, some of the factors remained important and some fell 
out. For example, teacher ethnicity was no longer significantly related when we controlled for 
program level characteristics. Program factors, including proportion of non-minority and lan- 
guage-minority families combined with teachers holding developmentally appropriate beliefs 
accounted for 23% of the total variance in quality and 47.8% of the variance across programs. 

After controlling for program-level characteristics, average annual teacher's salary remained a 
significant predictor of child-adult ratios, with higher average salaries related to lower ratios. 
Hence, higher quality program's average teacher salaries accounted for 5% of the total variance 
but 28% of the variance across programs in child-adult ratios. Programs that can afford to pay 
teachers more are also those programs that have more teachers in the classroom. 

We used the Caregiver Interaction Scale to predict teacher sensitivity. We found that the use of 
the Creative Curriculum was significantly related initially at the program level to quality. The 
same held for High/Scope, but it was a nonsignificant effect. The percentage of non-minority 
students was significant. At the program level, a greater percentage of non-minority students was 
related to higher levels of quality, but when classroom effects were controlled, the percentage of 
non-minority students was no longer significant. Creative Curriculum was still significant and 




90 



96 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



teacher s developmentally appropriate beliefs and years of teaching experience become signifi- 
cant. Teachers with BA or AA degrees were not related to quality once beliefs of developmentally 
appropriate practices and years of teaching experience were included. While ethnicity was 
related in a negative way initially those factors were no longer significant once we controlled for 
the program-level factors. Programs with a high proportion of non-minority students and that 
use a specific curriculum in most of their classrooms, with teachers holding DAP beliefs and 
having more years of teaching experience, accounted for 20% of the total variance and 60% of 
variation across programs in teacher sensitivity. 

Controlling for program-level characteristics, the proportion of higher income families 
remained a significant predictor of teacher individualizing while higher average teacher salaries 
became weakly related. In predicting teacher individualizing using the five-item observational 
portion of the Assessment Profile Scale, the only significant factor was higher income; these 
programs were located in communities where parents earned at least $ 1500/month. There were 
no relationships of classroom factors. This may not be a reliable finding because of the reduced 
variation in the scale. There may be more variation in the programs once we start using more of 
the items from the individualizing scale reported by the teachers. Predicting teacher individual- 
izing showed programs with higher income families, but it did not account for a large percent- 
age of the variation, so I do not consider this to be an important finding. 

The results suggest that variations in the quality of Head Start programs may be explained by 
characteristics of the families and the children they serve, by resources available to them, by 
curriculum used in the program, and by teacher beliefs. The relationship between program-level 
factors and classroom quality is explained by teachers' beliefs about DAP and their years of 
experience, rather than by teachers' levels of education. BA or AA teacher qualifications were not 
related to classroom quality after controlling for teacher experience and DAP beliefs and 
program factors. This is not a causal relationship; they are correlational findings. Classrooms 
that had higher DAP teachers with more positive DAP beliefs were also those classrooms that 
used a specific curriculum. 

Teachers' beliefs about DAP appears to be related to the programs' use of a specific curricu- 
lum in the majority of classrooms, and appears to have the strongest effect on teacher sensitivity. 
The child-adult ratio is primarily related to the average teacher salaries paid by the program. 
Programs who can afford higher salaries have classrooms with lower child-adult ratios and 
higher quality. 

Zill: I will discuss the relationship of classroom quality and type of curriculum to children's 
progress in Head Start. 

We addressed three research questions: 

1 . How much variation is there between programs and classes in children's achievement 
gains in Head Start? 

2. How do program characteristics and classroom quality measures relate to achievement 
gains? 

3. How does the use of a specific curriculum relate to achievement gains? 

We used the same model that was discussed earlier, but for this study it was a three-level 
model: program, classroom, and the child. We used fall-spring gains as the outcomes. The 
analysis is a three-level linear regression model using SAS-PROC MIXED to predict achievement 
gains (or achievement levels) from program-, classroom-, and child-level factors. The child 
achievement measures were in word knowledge (PPVT-III), letter recognition (WJ-R Letter- Word 
ID), early writing (WJ-R Dictation), and early math (WJ-R Applied Problems). 

The program-level predictors were the characteristics of families served by the program, 
primary curriculum used in a majority of classrooms, and program resources. The classroom- 
level predictors were teacher background and experience, and teacher beliefs. The classroom 
quality measures were ECERS Language Scale, Assessment Profile Individualizing Score, and 




97 



91 



SYMPOSl A/ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



child/adult ratio. We used the same predictors that Gary used in his models and added the 
classroom quality measures as another set of classroom-level predictors. 

As in FACES 1997, FACES 2000 found considerable diversity in the achievement of Head 
Start children, both across programs and within individual programs. The average level was 
about a standard deviation below the national mean. The upper quarter of Head Start children 
were at the national mean when they entered Head Start; the lower quarter were almost two 
standard deviations below the mean. We found similar variations across programs. The achieve- 
ment differences across programs seem to have more to do with the socioeconomic characteris- 
tics of the population served than with quality differences. 

Differences between programs were greater with respect to achievement levels than achieve- 
ment gains. There was more variation across programs in their spring levels. Thirty percent of the 
variance in vocabulary scores was across programs and classes. There was much less difference 
between programs on achievement gains. 

Achievement differences covaried with demographic variables, such as average parent 
education and percent minority. Program differences were greater for measures that correlated 
with SES and ethnicity. The PPVT-III showed considerable individual levels of correlation with 
ethnicity and with SES, and that showed greater variation across programs. Letter recognition 
and early writing skills showed less correlation at the individual child level with SES or ethnicity, 
and it showed less variation across programs. 

There were small differences between programs with respect to children's gains in vocabulary, 
early writing, and early math. About 2% to 6% of the variance was between programs and 
classes; most of the variation in gains was within classes. The multilevel regression models did a 
poor job of accounting for these variations in children s gains. Less than 1% to 4% of the 
variance was accounted for with the multiple of .2 or less. 

Programs with different average quality levels showed equivalent gains from fall to spring. 

On the PPVT-III, the programs that showed higher quality had higher scores in the spring, but 
also had higher scores in the fall. The lower-quality programs had lower scores in the spring and 
also had lower scores in the fall. The model does not explain much because there were equiva- 
lent gains at the different levels of quality. 

In letter recognition, there were greater differences between Head Start programs and classes 
with respect to Aildren s gain between fall and spring of the Head Start year. There was about 
12% variance between programs and classes, and the remainder was within classes. The multi- 
level model did a moderate job in accounting for these variations in children's gains in letter 
recognition. It accounted for 12% of the variance, or a multiple R of .35. We accounted for the 
majority of variation across programs. 

The fectors associated with fall-spring gains in letter recognition were the majority of classes 
in programs using High/Scope, higher average teacher salary, higher child/adult ratio, and 
whether parents read to children once or twice a week. Classes that used High/Scope had a 
significandy higher gain with a difference of about 3.69 in scores of letter recognition. For every 
additional $10,000 in annual wages, there was a gain of 1.76 in scores of letter recognition. 
Paradoxically, higher child-adult ratios or larger classes showed more gain in letter recognition. 
Parents who did not read to the child at all in the previous week or read only once or twice a 
week had children who showed less gain in letter recognition than children whose parents 
reported reading more frequently. 

How do we explain this higher child-adult ratio? It appears that there is greater gain with 
programs of high levels of African American children. These programs start below in letter 
recognition but show greater gains, so they catch up with the programs that have higher percent- 
ages of White children. Those programs also have higher child-adult ratios and fewer teachers 
with BA or AA degrees. 

The factors that seem to be significant with gains in vocabulary are the percent of language- 
minority children in the program, child's age, and welfare status. Language-minority children 




92 



98 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



showed more gain with respect to vocabulary than did the language-majority children. That 
factor became non-significant when child factors were introduced. One of the child factors was 
being a language-minority child, so we believe that the relationship is somewhat divided 
between those two. Older children show slightly less gain in vocabulary than younger children. 
There was some marginal finding that families with welfare status show less gain in vocabulary 
than other families. 

In conclusion, classroom quality as measured by ECERS was not associated with achievement 
gains in Head Start. Within the narrow range of class size in Head Start, child/adult ratios were 
not associated with achievement gains. Use of a specific curriculum, High/Scope, was associated 
with modestly larger gains in letter recognition. Use of a specific curriculum, either Creative 
Curriculum or High/Scope, was not associated with greater gains in vocabulary, early writing, or 
early math skills. Higher teacher salaries were associated with modestly larger gains in letter 
recognition. Teacher attitudes were not linked with greater achievement gains. The teacher's 
degree, having a BA or AA, was not linked with greater achievement gains. I want to point out 
that we linked the combined BA and AA degrees together. We should examine those with a BA 
separately. Then we might get a slightly different picture. 

The letter recognition findings suggest that activities aimed at bolstering skills (or lack of such 
activities) are associated with differential gains. Currently, the associations between gains and 
teacher-reported and observational activity measures are being explored with FACES 2000 data. 
We are exploring that association because we have some measures based on observation and 
others based on teacher-report. 

Question: In the two studies in 1997 and 2000, was there a difference in the sample size? It 
appears that one was smaller. Would that have made a significant difference in the outcome? 

Zill: Yes, the sample size was larger in FACES 1997 when we had more classrooms. 

Question: Do you think that would have made a significant difference in the outcome because 
you compared one to the other? 

Burchinal: Both samples were so large that you probably could detect relatively modest effects. 
Zill: You have enough statistical power for that. 

Question: 1 was referring to when you said that an n was 500 and something and then said that 
an n was 268. You had a larger sample, then a smaller one, yet you compared them as if they 
were the same size. To me in normal analysis, it seems the more you have of something would 
make a significant difference. 

Burchinal: 1 will try to work that into my comments if that is acceptable. As someone who has 
worked in the child-care field for longer than I would like to admit. Head Start has a record of 
being, at this point, probably the most-evaluated preschool early education program. The FACES 
study is one arm of the overall evaluation and research project within Head Start. 

Head Start should be commended for informing us about what works and does not work for 
vulnerable children in preparing them for school. The research program includes FACES, the 
IMPACT study which will be a random assignment study looking at the effectiveness of Head 
Start, the Head Start Partnership Project studies. Early Head Start, Head Start Transition, and 
so forth. 

The FACES project tells us a great deal about Head Start. The use of a probabilistic sample 
means that these results represent Head Start in the country. One of the major findings from 
this study is that Head Start programs are by and large providing quality child care. To put this 



O 

ERIC 



99 



93 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



in context, I will compare the results that were reported from FACES to other major child-care 

studies. , 

Within FACES, there was a mean score of 4.8 to 4.9 on the ECERS. This is on a 7-point scale. 
Scores of 5 and above are considered very good quality, so a 4.8 or 4.9 is very good. For com- 
parison, within the cost-quality and outcome study, which was a four-state study conducted in 
1993, our mean for the preschool classes was 4.0. We are completing the first round of data 
collection of a study where we evaluated state or federally funded pre-K programs in six states. 

We found a mean ECERS of 3.8 in these programs. I believe this shows that Head Start, within 
the context of their Performance Standards, has done a good job of ensuring that the children 
attending these programs are exposed to at least good quality. The quality of the programs seem 
to be of higher quality than other programs they would be eligible to attend within the commu- 
nity or through subsidies, and perhaps better than the types of programs they would be able to 
attend within pre-K programs. The research would suggest that, on average, those programs are 
not very good. 

We learned that most programs have curricula because it is required. The High/Scope and 
Creative Curriculum were the two most commonly selected curricula. That was the same finding 
in our pre-K project study as well. A high percentage, 40%, of the programs fell into that "Other" 
category. Children and programs within the "Other" category were not looking quite as good 
and that was worrisome to me. This suggests to me that it is a direction of future research. We 
should examine what kinds of programs are used, what is meant by a locally developed pro- 
gram, and whether it is fair to say that there is no curriculum. We should find out how well 
these curricula are implemented. 

There were some interesting links to child outcomes in analyses that controlled for family 
and program characteristics. I think that this would be worth pursuing further, especially as 
questions are being discussed among policy makers about whether Head Start children are ready 
to learn when they enter school. 

In response to the question about comparing the 1997 to 2000 results, while it is troublesome 
that one sample had twice as many participants, once you have a large sample, it probably does 
not affect the results at all. The statistical methods that were used were probably appropriate. 

In addition, from working with the developers of the ECERS, we have reason to believe that 
the revised ECERS is a bit tougher. It is a little more difficult to receive a good score on the 
revised ECERS than on the original ECERS. In fact the goal was to spread the distribution out, so 
I am glad that this happened. This suggests that perhaps there were some modest increases in 
terms of quality on the ECERS overall. We certainly found that to be tme on the language scale. 
On the language scale on the ECERS, there were more classrooms in the excellent range. That is 
the scale that probably links most closely to the development of reading skills. 

I will provide a brief discussion of the Head Start families in the study. In a smaller scale 
study that we conducted within the NICHD study of early child care, we found that the Head 
Start families tended to be the most disadvantaged compared to children who were attending 
other types of preschool programs, whether it was public pre-K or local child-care programs. I 
believe this is an issue that needs to be kept in mind as child outcomes are discussed. Comparing 
these children to a mean on any standardized test is probably an extremely high hurdle to set. 

It appears that the measures that were chosen are the standard measures used to evaluate 
young diildren and especially used within the child-care literature. The results that Zill and 
Resnick presented are similar to what other researchers are finding. 

There are issues that should be considered when evaluating the FACES study of fall to spring 
change on these kinds of measures. One, these are measures that are designed to assess where a 
given child is in terms of their skill level; they are used in individual evaluations for a child's 
individual education plan. They are the most widely used measures; however, they are designed 
to measure a wide range in terms of age and skill level, so they do not have as many items at any 
one level or age. They may not be the kinds of measures that will allow us to examine whether 




94 



100 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



children are gaining the skills that are being taught in the classrooms. They may be too gross a 
measure to describe whether children have changed. 

The second issue is change scores. There were two repeated measures and the change score is 
a very imprecise measure of true change. The methods that were used will only take into account 
true change to the extent that it is possible. With only two repeated measures, the ability to look 
at change and find factors that predict change is limited. 

In terms of the gains over time and standard scores for children who are disadvantaged, there 
is nothing wrong with holding your own. Typically, standardized scores for children from 
families with very low income start to lose ground at about age 2 compared with middle-class 
children. Since the Head Start children showed gains, that was reassuring to me. It was beneficial 
to find that the data were presented both in terms of the standardized scores, but also in terms 
of the number of letters recognized and the R scores. The use of standardized scores can be 
misleading in that it may appear that there is no learning or change, when in fact the scores 
must be even to maintain the same score over time. It was interesting to find that there were 
some gains in the non-English speaking children. 

Finally, I was impressed by the two-level and three-level analyses that found what predicts 
quality and then what predicts child outcomes. It is consistent with the findings in other child- 
care literature that teachers' beliefs about developmentally appropriate practices will be the best 
predictor of quality. 

It was reassuring that curriculum was linked to both quality and outcome. Creative Curricu- 
lum was related to teacher sensitivity and High/Scope to acquisition of letter-word identification 
skills. Perhaps we have been too linked in trying to measure and observe quality. It is clear that 
there are mandates that we must go beyond and try to identify practices, as well as measure the 
global quality, that prepare children to learn. I believe that analyzing the curriculum is the first 
step in that, then finding how well the curriculum is implemented, what specific teaching 
practices are in the classrooms, and how those relate to quality and to child outcomes — these 
are directions for future research. 

The child-adult ratio being negatively related to letter-word identification is not unique to 
this study. Other studies of child-care homes and some pre-K programs may have also found 
this. A very low ratio was reported and the mean was 5.4, which was well below what is typically 
seen within child care. For this age, the ratio is closer to 10:1. It is highly possible that within 
this study, the programs that were more professional and had a curriculum were also more likely 
to have more children in their classes. The fact that salary also linked was completely consistent 
with other research. 

For future research I would examine the implementation of curricula and the documentation 
of specific practices and how these link to child outcomes. If the focus is on change that occurs 
within a given year for children in Head Start or pre-K programs, then we should consider more 
fine-grain measures of our outcomes that document what skills we expect the children to learn 
during the year. 

As there is greater movement toward accountability, I would hope that there is consideration 
of the role of Head Start, which is a fairly centralized program, but where the Head Start 
Performance Standards have resulted in good quality child care for vulnerable children. I would 
like to contrast that to other programs such as with the block grants, where subsidy money for 
child care was given to the states, which resulted in children moving from high-quality programs 
to lower quality programs. At least the emerging evidence in our pre-K evaluation also suggests 
that there are not as high quality programs within the pre-K classrooms as there are within Head 
Start. I would hate to see a movement away from a program that has Performance Standards 
with accountability at such a high level. 

Question: On the second presentation about teacher sensitivity, I was excited because we spend 
a lot of time trying to figure out what about the child and/or the child's family would make a 





1 



95 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



program fail or succeed. An important stream that seemed to run through your talk about 
teachers was economic such as the child’s family’s income. In terms of future research, would 
you consider studying teacher expectations toward the family income or the background of the 
child and their expectations for the child’s success based on those factors? 

Resnick: We measured factors from information that was given to us from the program and 
teacher interviews, as well as from observations. It is hard to answer the question because there 
is information that is mixed together if you only rely on a teacher’s report of what they expect 
will happen in the future. 

Comment: It would be a hard thing to do, but it might work on the sensitivity measure with 
observations and the interaction. If there was some measure such as how the teacher interacted 
with low-income versus high-income families’ children. I believe that teacher expectations play 
into those interactions. It would be a stretch, but I wonder whether somewhere along the road 
that will be an important factor. 

Resnick: One thing that we are observing more is what actually happens in those classrooms. 

We are moving towards looking at how those expectations inight play out in terms of teacher- 
directed activities in the classrooms and the implementation of the curriculum. 

Comment: Economics keeps coming through here. 

Resnick: We discussed where economics comes from. It is not the teachers per se, but it is from 
the programs and the leeway that administrators have in hiring teachers, in their relations to the 
families they serve, the challenges that those families provide for the program, and how the 
program adjusts to those challenges. 

Question: There seems to be clustering in the quality of the classrooms that I think would make 
it hard for the classroom measures to predict. Have you looked at the extremes? 

Zill: That is an important point. With the child-adult ratio as well as the ECERS, we have a 
limited range within Head Start. It is easier to have strong effects statistically if there is a broader 
range. Indeed, in the child-care quality study there was a broader range; there was an association 
between ECERS quality measures and children’s gains. We would expect that if we had that kind 
of variation within Head Start, we certainly would have stronger relationships. 

The suggestion to look at some of the extreme cases is a good one. However, there is an 
important lesson here. The suggestion that by raising ECERS quality we will have dramatically 
greater gains is brought into question by these findings. We should find out whether we need to 
look at specific activities that are related to the measures that we used or whether we need to 
have substantially greater resources, as some findings from the classic studies would suggest. 
That is an issue we will attempt to address in future analyses. When interpreting these results 
this point must be home in mind. 

Burchinal: In other child-care research, low-performing, low-quality programs have a large 
association with child outcomes. It is worrisome that in looking at change over time, there are 
numerous issues that are going to make it difficult to detect. A big issue would be the tmncation 
of range on the ECERS scores. For the Head Start children, the lack of low-quality programs is 
positive, but those are the ones that tend to carry the variance in the analyses of other child-care 
programs. 




96 



102 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



ZUI: The higher quality programs also have children who have higher levels in the spring. It is 
the children's gains between fall and spring where there is not as strong a relationship. 

Resnick: I will address the measure of change. We used gain scores because we had two data 
points. Whenever there are two data points, one does not know where the scores are on any 
kind of projection or trajectory. As a measure of change, it is a suitable unbiased estimate of 
change. It tends to be a conservative estimate of change where there is a lot of error in the 
variance category, but you do not know why it is there. We would prefer to, and plan to, add a 
third data point. With the addition of a third data point, you can try to do growA curve analyses 
where you look at developmental and skill trajectories. That is where you get out of the bind of 
using gain scores. There is really no alternative to using gain scores or different scores. We 
looked at some of the alternatives and if we used anything that controlled for the first score, 
such as a residual gain score, then we would have basically thrown out the baby with the bath 
water. When too much variation is thrown out that is part of the signal, not part of the noise. 

Question: In terms of quality, would teacher salary make more of a difference in teacher quality 
than teacher education? 

Resnick: Teacher salaries only made a difference in the child-adult ratios in the analyses. In 
regards to teacher sensitivity, it was not the teacher salaries per se; it was the developmentally 
appropriate beliefs and the years of experience. We found in earlier analyses that there was a 
relationship between teacher levels of education and their scores on developmentally appropri- 
ate beliefs. It is likely that teacher education is still an important factor; however, the way it plays 
out is through developmentally appropriate beliefs. 

Comment: It is amazing what this study has done; however, I am worried about one aspect of it. 
With the kinds of trauma these children experience, it would be hard to interpret things when 
you have no social or emotional data. The number of life stressors among parents is enormous. 
Shouldn't you factor in risk and protective factors? 

Response: We did interview parents and do have some of that information, particularly about 
the multiple risk factors that children have, such as violence in their neighborhoods and in their 
homes, and exposure to family members who are involved in the criminal justice system. We 
only presented a slice of the findings we have. 

Comment: I am wondering about the extent to which you tested what was taught, the congru- 
ency between the curriculum that was used, and what the standardized measurements mea- 
sured. My guess is that there is probably some incongruency there. Is some of that accounted 
for? I typically think of developmentally appropriate practice and readiness as almost competing 
perspectives. The measures seem to be more readiness-oriented, where High/Scope is a bit more 
oriented to developmentally appropriate practices. There is no direct instruction with children 
on letter recognition in this program. 

Response: First of all, I want to emphasize that we are presenting a subset of the cognitive 
findings. We also have social and emotional findings, and we will apply the same kind of 
modeling to the social and emotional measures, which are a rich set. Unfortunately we do not 
have as carefully developed and normed socioemotional measures as in the cognitive and 
language domains. We want to consider that and we do take that seriously. 

In addition, even in the cognitive area, we have some measures that are more closely linked 
to topics that children typically learn in Head Start, such as the names of colors and book 
knowledge information. We focused on the areas where there were national norms. It is impor- 




103 



97 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



tant that these measures are predictive of how children perform in school later on, and we have 
high predictive validity in accounting for children's reading and general knowledge at the end 
of kindergarten. 

The FACES battery is a good predictor and the Head Start teachers' ratings of children's 
behavior and socioemotional development of social skills is a good predictor of teachers' ratings 
of the classroom adjustment of those children. We tried to do justice to what Head Start is 
doing, but we also noted that there is a mandate. Many people in Congress expert Head Start to 
bolster children's school readiness and narrow the achievement gap that tends to persist be- 
tween children from low-income families and children from higher socioeconomic backgrounds. 

Response: Income levels tend to go up in Head Start, but it is dangerous to attribute that solely 
to Head Start. As children grow older, mothers can work more, and incomes tend to increase. 
When we mentioned $1500 or more, that was the higher end of the poverty range. Our measure 
of programs is the percentage of families that are at the higher end of the poverty range. The 
average income in Head Start as a whole is even lower than that. It is a household income and it 
is from the fall when they entered the program. We did not look at a change in income over the 
course of their time in Head Start, but it does tend to increase. 

Question: What are the policy implications of the findings? 

Response: Someone was talking to me in the hall about translation of findings. I asked whether 
it was for practitioners or for policy makers, because it is important to translate the findings in 
both regards. These findings have not been fully digested in the program. Our experience with 
the first round of FACES 1997 data is that these findings are taken to heart and taken into 
account when decisions are made about policy. That is why we continue to do this. We are 
conducting the studies for accountability purposes, for the govemrhent Performance and Results 
Act, and to improve programs. You do that through how you set your policy. 

The importance of standards and regulations in setting high-quality standards and increasing 
mandates such as teacher education appears to make a difference. If anyone has any interpreta- 
tions of the findings and implications, we would like to hear them. Part of the reason that we 
share these findings at conferences is to receive feedback from the field, from policy makers, and 
from practitioners about how to interpret the findings and what the next steps for Head Start 
might be. 

Response: If I could msh in where angels fear to tread, I think bureaucratic controls that federal 
Head Start imposes on local programs are working. There are not many inadequate programs; 
there are very few minimal programs. A generally good standard is being kept where Head Start 
is providing a positive child-care environment. 

Expectations of dramatic gains in school-related skills or that t)q)e of quality is necessary, but 
not necessarily sufficient. Some of the experimental programs that are being done currently by 
the Quality Research Consortium examine specific interventions to boost literacy or address 
problem behavior in the classroom. They are applying many of the same FACES measures. That 
will provide a sense of whether it is possible to achieve more dramatic gains in the various 
domains. If so, then there would be some guidance towards the policy changes that may be 
necessary to produce additional positive results. 

Question: Why did you single out African Americans as opposed to staff that was reflective of 
the communities that were studied? 

Zill: First of all, we did not single out African Americans; we also looked at Hispanic teachers, 
language-minority children, and a variety of measures. It is the case historically that there are 




98 



104 



administration for children and families 



correlations such as the South being the area of greatest need. It is still the case that poverty in 
Mississippi or Louisiana is a deeper poverty than in other areas of the country. Those tend to 
also be areas that have large proportions of Afncan American teachers and children. The 
analyses showed that the community is more important than the individual teacher is. There is 
an interconnection between them, but as Gary suggested in his presentation, the root of it goes 
back to community poverty and the lack of resources in the community; those are far more 
important factors than ethnicity. 

Question: What was the reason that a program would use its own curriculum? Were you 
speculating that maybe they were from more resource-poor communities? Was that something 
you asked programs when you asked them why they used the curriculum that they used? 

Hubbell McKey: No, we did not ask the programs why they chose the curriculum they were 
using. It was through the funds that we discovered that other curricula than High/Scope or 
Creative Curriculum were being used in areas where the families tended to be poorer or more 
disadvantaged. 

Response; There is of a sort of bimodal distribution because there are some teachers who have 
fairly high levels of education and do not want to use a packaged curriculum. Their belief is that 
they know better and want to put together their own curriculum. 

Keep in mind that the use of a packaged curriculum requires a fair bit of resources. You do 
not write away for it, receive it in the mail, and start using it. It turns out that programs that have 
the resources for high teacher salaries also have the resources to get the curriculum as well as the 
proper training to use the curriculum. It is when there are Head Start programs in communities 
where they exist hand-to-mouth on the federal contribution. Many Head Start programs also 
receive additional funding and support from the community, but in resource-poor communities, 
there is no additional help. That may be why they cannot get the resources to pay the teachers 
more and use a specific curriculum. Furthermore, even the funding levels in those communities 
are lower. That is why it is important to study the communities where the programs are located. 



ERIC 



105 



99 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



A Tapestry of Head Start Families: Challenges 
They Face and Strengths They Possess 

Findings From the Family and 
Child Experiences Survey (FACES) 

CHAIR: Louisa B. Tarullo 
DISCUSSANT: Hirokazu Yoshikawa 

PRESENTERS: Louisa B. Tarullo, Robert W. O'Brien, Mary Ann D'Elio, Michael Vaden-Kiernan, 
Candice Grayton 

■ Exploring Diversity Among Head Start Families 

Robert W. O'Brien, Michael Vaden-Kiernan, Ruth Hubbell McKey, Shefali Pai-Samant 

■ Head Start Families and the Challenges They Encounter 

Mary Ann D'Elio, Robert W. O'Brien, Tina Younoszai 

■ Evidence of Strengths and Resilience Within Head Start Families 

Michael Vaden-Kiernan, Mary Ann D'Elio 

■ Head Start's Role in Helping Families 

Mary Ann D'Elio, Candice Grayton 

Louisa B. Tarullo: I am on the Child Outcomes Research and Evaluation Team from the 
Administration on Children and Families (ACF). 1 will start by providing a brief overview of the 
Family and Child Experiences Survey (FACES). Later in the conference, we will hear more about 
Head Start children in the context of their families, programs, and neighborhoods. We will 
present the conceptual framework that governs this study. We were cognizant of the empirical 
link between the outcomes for children and their families and the provision of services within 
programs. In this session we are focusing on this second objective of Head Start to strengthen 
femilies as the primary nurturers of their children, looking at areas of strength, resilience, and 
challenges faced by Head Start families. 

The particular data set on which we are focusing is from the FACES 1997 sample of 40 Head 
Start programs, which is a nationally representative sample. Children were enrolled in 403 
classrooms, and data were collected from 3,120 parents in a 1-hour interview in fall 1997 to 
establish the baseline data, and again in spring 1998. There is a case study across all of the 
programs, referred to as the "validation substudy of 1 20 families. " There is also a longitudinal 
sample of children whom we studied in both the fall and spring. Sometimes we will be talking 
about families at baseline and sometimes about change over time for a subset of families. 

We will give an overview of the instruments that we have used in the FACES 1997 data 
collection. In addition to an extensive parent interview, child assessments looked at social 
behavior, early literacy skills, and early math skills. 'There were also teacher reports of child 
behavior, interviews with staff, classroom quality observations, and child play observations. One 
paper will particularly focus on the family case study that included home visits, monthly 
telephone contacts, and observations of the neighborhoods and homes in which the parents 
and children lived. Further information about the FACES study and all of the Head Start 
research sponsored by the Administration for Children and Families can be found at 
www.acfhhs.gov. 




100 



106 



administration for children and families 



Robert W, O'Brien: The primary purpose of the work to be presented is to learn about Head 
Start families. I will discuss the steps taken by our research team to learn about the diversity of 
Head Start families. The first step was to look at individual descriptors and particular variables 
of Head Start families. We found that there are many possible descriptors of family structure. For 
example, we found that the range of well-represented family types included dual-parent families. 
About one third were single-parent families where the caregiver was never married, and between 
10-20% were single-parent families where the caregiver was widowed, divorced, separated, or 
living in blended families. Almost 50% of the parents were married, less than 50% of the 
children lived with both mother and father, and in one third of the households, mothers were 
the only adult. Two or more adults were present in just under 75% of the households. 

One special type of family structure that we encountered involved grandparents serving as the 
primary caregivers of the children. Five percent of the Head Start children had grandparents 
designated as their primary caregivers. About half of those children were African American. 
Grandparents who served as caregivers had less education and lower rates of employment than 
other primary caregivers, but those households where the grandparents served as primary 
caregivers had higher levels of income. A grandmother, a grandfather, or both grandparents 
resided in about 14% of the households. In almost two thirds of these cases, a mother and a 
grandmother lived with the child or children. Grandparents can play important roles as mem- 
bers of the household. Our Head Start Final Report findings indicate that fathers are absent 
more than half the time, and they are not very active with their children, even if they do live in 
the household. Sometimes other household members, including grandparents, can provide 
some compensation in terms of activity with the children. 

Back to the overall sample, we found that Head Start families are diverse in educational 
attainment. Three quarters of the parents had at least a high school diploma or Graduate 
Equivalency Diploma (GED). Almost all households had at least one individual with a high 
school diploma or GED, though not necessarily a parent. About one third of the parents had 
attended college and received an Associate of Arts (AA) degree. Only about 3% had actually 
earned a college degree. A quarter of the parents, at least at baseline, indicated that they were 
working on a degree, certificate, or license. 

Similarly, Head Start families were diverse in employment status. Over half of the parents 
were employed at baseline, and about one third of those were employed full-time. More than 
one fifth of the parents reported having no employed household members and most parents 
experienced some change either between no employment and employment or between full-time 
and part-time employment, sometime during the course of the study. 

We also noted that Head Start families are diverse across ethnicity and culture. Head Start 
families predominantly fell into three categories based on the ethnicity of the children: 29% 
were African American, 31% were White, and 28% were Latino. The remaining 12% in the 
"Other" category were generally families who reported having mixed race. 

While we saw variation across the groups, we also found that diversity was evident within 
ethnic groups. Michael Vaden-Kieman did some interesting analyses for our report, looking at 
variations within Latino families. For example, 17% of those families were living in Puerto Rico 
and 25% were families living on the mainland who reported that Spanish was the primary 
language spoken in the home. English-speaking, Latino families living on the mainland comprised 
58% of the Latino sample, reporting that English was the primary language spoken in the home. 

Comparing all the Latino families, those living in Puerto Rico were more likely to have 
parents with high school diplomas, GEDs, or college attendance. They were also more likely to 
be unemployed, living in households with an income below the federal poverty line, and less 
likely to experience family risk factors. 

We had a set of six particular risk factors, and for the families living in Puerto Rico, 1 out of 
10 of tJiese families had four or more risk factors. Compared with other Latino families, English- 
speaking, mainland Latino families had more single-parent households and were actually more 



ERIC 



107 



101 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



similar to non-Latino families than to other Latino families in areas such as employment and 
income, and they were more likely to have family risks. In Puerto Rico, 1 in 10 families had four 
or more risks; here on the mainland, more than two out of five families had this level of four or 
more risks. 

Finally, compared with other Latino families, the Spanish-speaking families who lived on the 
mainland were less likely to have parents with high school diplomas or GEDs, or to have 
attended college. They were more likely to have both parents living in the household, and they 
had fewer multiple family risks associated with negative outcomes for children than the English- 
speaking Latino families, but more than the families who lived in Puerto Rico. One can tell the 
difference across the three groups of families by the number of risks they had. 

I will give a brief summary of some findings from the report that looked at individual 
variables, including income and education. Our interest turned to looking at how we can 
describe families by combinations of variables, and to do that we took the six risks that are used 
in the Kids Count Data Book: (a) single head of household, (b) household head a high school 
dropout (in our case, we did not identify an individual as household head, so we used the 
mother), (c) family income below the poverty line, (d) child living with a parent without steady 
or full time employment, (e) child's family receiving welfare benefits, and (f) child without 
health insurance. 

We looked at cumulative or multiple risks. Individual family risk factors varied by urbanicity 
and by ethnicity. In terms of the individual factors, urban families were highest on four levels of 
risk, and were actually no different on single-parent households. They were slightly lower on 
Medicaid or health insurance than the rural families. For ethnicity, a number of them were 
highest for African American families on four of the cases, including single parents, household 
income below the poverty line, not having work, and receiving welfare. The other two risk 
factors of no health insurance and the mother not finishing high school were highest for Latino 
families. We then moved forward and counted up the risks per family, just as they did in Kids 
Count. They had set off four risks as a marker. There are real developmental concerns after that 
point. This is substantiated in the research literature. Again, we found that urbanicity is associ- 
ated with the highest level of risks, with three or more. For ethnicity, the highest seemed to be 
for African American families. This is a cut off because the marker there looks for developmental 
concerns. While these analyses show that there is some variation on this rough cumulative 
measure of risk, it does not tell us what kinds of risks go together. 

The third step presents some of the work we have in progress; developing clusters to see the 
different groupings. Cluster analysis categorizes cases, or in this case, families, according to 
groups of variables or characteristics that they have in common. The process that we have taken 
is borrowed from a framework that was laid out by the Rameys in the Transition Study. We used 
some of the variables they used, and added some additional variables that we knew were 
important, based on our earlier research. These are the primary variables that we included in the 
family-type cluster analysis. In this case, the critical pieces are caregiver work status, caregiver 
level of education, and household monthly income or use of entitlements, such as Medicaid, 
welfare, WIG, and food stamps. 

Interestingly, maternal depression turns out to be an important variable, as is ethnicity. We 
generated six family types, but we have not yet devised a simple way to define each of these six. 
Therefore, I have ordered them in a particular way. The first family type, 16% of the sample, had 
a household income below 50% of the poverty line. It was mostly single parents and parents not 
working full-time and, in this case, many of the families had three or more children. The second 
type was a less educated group. Several of these families presented themselves as depressed and 
did not work full-time. The third family type had parents who did not work full-time and did 
not finish high school, but in this case there are few single parents. This group is primarily 
Latino, and we found a number of families where the parents were not born in the USA and 
English was not their primary language. In the fourth type, parents were educated beyond high 



er|c 



102 



108 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



school, tended to be depressed, single, and working full time. This was actually the largest 
cluster, at 26%. Not every family in that cluster fits that mold, but these descriptions are repre- 
sentative. In the fifth type, the caregivers worked full time, they had income above the poverty 
line, and there were few single parents. Again, this was a case where a number of parents were 
not born in the USA and English was not the primary language in the home. Finally, the sixth 
family type includes cases where caregivers were educated beyond high school and parents spent 
' a lot of time with their children, even though they worked full time. There were few single 
parents, and this group seemed to have the highest income of the six types. 

This should give some indication of why I ordered them in this way, because I went back to 
the level of risks that we had and to the six Kids Count risks, and looked at the families in risk 
order. Therefore, in reverse order, on average, family type sbc actually had only one risk per 
family. Family type five had slightly less than two risks, on average. The level of risk goes up as 
we move to family type one, so that for family types one and two, there are almost three and a 
half risks per family. 

Next I will review a preliminary study. We want to look at family types related to other family 
characteristics, along with some of the child outcomes. There does not seem to be a pattern 
related to risk and the parent-reported child behavior, but there certainly are significant differ- 
ences across a number of the types. It will be challenging for us to revisit these family types and 
determine what aspects lead to one family type exhibiting a lot of positive child behavior or less 
child problem behavior versus other groups that have less positive child behavior and more 
problem behavior. 

We used the Achenbach (CBCL) short scale. We also looked at this information using some of 
the child cognitive outcomes. We Aank Westat for sharing some of these outcomes so that we 
could include them in the analyses. We have four measures: the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test 
(PPVT), the Woodcock-Johnson Letter- Word Identification Test for letter recognition and word 
decoding, Woodcock-Johnson Dictation Test for early writing and letters, and the Woodcock- 
Johnson Applied Problems Test for math and problem solving. These also are going to be 
ordered by level of risk. The highest level of risk was for the first cluster and, as the clusters go 
up, they start to slowly move up to scale, so as the number of risks drop, the scores on these 
scales go up. The fifth cluster was one of the primarily Latino groups. T^is group had the lowest 
number of risks, and they got the highest scores in most cases. 

To summarize, variability was evident across individual child and family characteristics and 
the number of risk factors. It varied across families, and looking at family types, it appears to be 
a useful strategy for linking individual and family characteristics without restricting the observed 
diversity that we have across families. Family types were related to differences in the number of 
family risks for developmental concerns, and cognitive and behavioral outcomes. 

This leaves us with some next steps. We plan to continue to use these complex approaches to 
refine the family types that we found thus far. We want to continue looking at the family types 
and how they relate to other family and contextual characteristics. We want to look at what the 
family types tell us about risks and additional characteristics that may indicate negative child 
outcomes. 

We like the sbc Kids Count variables, but we do not want to be tied to those, since we suspect 
that other variables may be equally important. We want to study the impact of family type on 
child performance, and hopefully we will be able to look at the stability of these family types 
over time. 

Mary Ann D'Elio: I will talk about Head Start families and the challenges they encounter in 
their lives. As is the case for many families with low incomes, Head Start families often face 
multiple challenges. For the purpose of this presentation, however, I will focus on three of these 
challenges. The first is maternal depression. The second is the exposure that families have to 
violence and involvement with the criminal justice system. Then I will present some informa- 



109 



103 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CON VbKbAl ION HOURS 



tion on the cumulative risk factors that O'Brien just described, and the effect on the lives of 
children and families. 

The first thing I will talk about is maternal depression. For the FACES study, depression 
among Head Start families was measured using ^e Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depres- 
sion Scale (CES-D). We used the 12-item version to measure levels of depression. The score 
ranged from 0 to 36, and then families were classified into four categories: 0 to 4 was "not 
depressed"; 5 to 9 was "mildly depressed"; 10 to 14 was "moderately depressed"; and scores pf 
15 or above were considered "severely depressed". We found that over one quarter of the 
mothers were classified as moderately or severely depressed. The larger proportion, almost 70%, 
was mildly depressed or not depressed. However, a significant group of almost 30% of families 
were categorized as moderately or severely depressed. 

We also found that levels of depression varied by ethnicity. Afncan American families had the 
highest levels of moderate or severe depression, and there were significant differences in those 
levels among the three groups. We also found that mothers were less depressed when fathers 
lived in the home. Thirty-three percent of mothers who lived without a father in the home were 
classified as moderately or severely depressed versus 23% who lived with the father in the home. 

Maternal depression has significant effects on parents. Parents who were more depressed were 
more likely to have lost employment from the fall to the spring. They had lower household 
income and a need for and use of more social services. These parents had an external locus of 
control, and reported less social support in their lives to help raise their children. They were 
more likely to live with smokers or problem drinkers, and they engaged in fewer safety practices 
with their children, like supervising their child in the bathtub, watching the child cross the 
street, or keeping matches out of the reach of children. 

Maternal depression also had significant effects on child outcomes. When parents were more 
depressed, we found that they participated in fewer activities with their children. They reported 
more problem behavior and less positive social behavior in their children. They also reported 
lower emergent literacy skills for their children. They were almost twice as likely to spank their 
children. Maternal depression also had an effect on children's cognitive outcomes. Children of 
parents who were severely depressed did significantly worse on one-to-one counting, book 
knowledge, color naming, creativity, design copying, social awareness, early writing and letters, 
the Woodcock- Johnson dictation tests, and the Woodcock-Johnson letter-word identification 
compared to children of parents who were not depressed. 

The next challenge I want to address is families' exposure to violence. In FACES, we measured 
families' exposure to neighborhood violence and personal violence. We used a five-item mea- 
sure where parents were asked to respond to questions by saying how frequently this had 
occurred in their lives: never, once, or more than once. This is a baseline measure, so it was used 
since the birth of the child. The five items were "saw a nonviolent crime in their neighbor- 
hoods," like selling drugs and stealing; "saw violent crime in their neighborhoods;" "knew a 
victim of violent crime in their neighborhood;" "were personally a victim of violent crime in 
their neighborhood;" or "were a victim of violent crime in their home." The score range on this 
was from 0 to 15, and the mean score was 6.1. We found that the reality of violence was very 
close to many Head Start families. More than one quarter, about 27%, reported that they saw 
nonviolent neighborhood crimes in their neighborhoods. More than 32% actually saw violent 
crime in their neighborhoods. Almost one quarter of them actually knew someone who was a 
victim of violent crime in their neighborhood. 

We also looked at exposure to violence by ethnic group, and it varied significantly. Among 
parents of the African American children, 43.5% reported that they had actually seen a nonvio- 
lent crime in their neighborhoods, which is almost twice the rate reported by parents of White 
or Latino children. For reports of victimization, parents of African American children were again 
the highest, with 10% reporting having been victimized in their neighborhood, and 12% had 
been victims in their home. These figures were generally twice as high as the reports for parents 
of White and Latino children. 





104 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



Exposure to violence had direct and indirect effects on child outcomes. It was related to 
repom of negative child behavior and maternal depression. Parents who lived in more violent 
neighborhoods reported more aggressive child behavior, more hyperactive child behavior, more 
withdrawn child behavior, and less positive social behavior. These parents reported more 
rnaternal depression. There is evidence in the literature that maternal depression might mediate 
this rdauonship. The question then became whether there was a direct relationship between 
neighborhood violence and child behavior. Or, perhaps living in a violent neighborhood 
somehow affected the mother's level of depression, which is another pathway. Mothers who 
were more dpressed were then more likely to have children with negative child behavior or 
were more likely to report their children as having negative behavior. We tested this in a media- 
lona model and found that that was true. Once we controlled for those other pathways, the 
significant relationship between neighborhood violence and child behavior fell out. We intend 
to further ^plore this area because there are many other factors that are involved. It certainly 
looks like the relationship is mediated in some way by maternal depression, with exposure to 
violence and the result of child behavior. 

T ? ^ involvement with the criminal justice system 

In the FACES interview with the parent, we asked them whether or not they, another household 
member, or a non-household biological parent had been arrested or charged with a crime by the 
police since the birth of the Head Start child. I want to point out that this is not incarcerated 
parents, this is just involvement at any level with the criminal justice system. If the parents said 
yes, they were asked to tell us what the relationship of this person was to the child and whether 
or not this person had spent any time in jail. 

We found that more than one fifth of the Head Start families had some involvement with the 
cnrnmal justice system; 23% of the families had someone who had been arrested or charged 
with a crime, and 18% reported that that person had spent some time in jail. Of those who 
reported an arrest, 94% of those arrested were mothers or fathers. In total, of our sample, 17% 
of all fathers and 5% of all mothers in our sample had been arrested or charged with a crime. 

Agaiii, we looked at involvement with the criminal justice system by ethnicity. Parents of 
atmo children had the lowest rates or proportion of reports of someone in their family having 
been arrested or charged. This is about a half of the percentage reported by parents of White or 
African American children, which were relatively at the same level. We looked at how involve- 
ment with the criminal justice system impacted the families and the children. We found that 
amihes with rnembers who had been arrested or charged with a crime were almost twice as 
likely to have depressed parents. They were also 2.5 times more likely to be families headed by 

single movers, and over four times more likely to have parents who had been victims of violent 
crime m the home. 

In looking at the relationship of this variable to children, children from families who had 
had someone arrested were at great risk for exposure to violence. Using logistic regression, we 
found that they were almost 5 times more likely to have wimessed violent crime or domestic 
^o ence arid they were four times more likely to have been a victim of violent crime or domestic 
violence. They also were reported by their teachers to have more problem behavior or be more 
a^ressive and hyperactive, and they had lower scores on the McCarthy Draw-A-Design Task and 
the Woodcock- Johnson Letter- Word Identification Test. 

The final thing I want to talk about builds on O'Brien's comments on cumulative family risk 
factors. Using that six-item risk index, we came up with a score and used it in the analysis to 
0 ^ 0 / of this variable to outcomes for children and families. We found that 

21 /o of the families had four or more risks. The Kids Count data says in their findings that 
families with four or more risks were much more likely to show negative outcomes for their 
children, and we found similar findings. Parents from families with four or more risk factors 
were more depressed, reported less social support, and had an external locus of control The 
children from families with four or more risk factors were also negatively affected. They were 




m 



105 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



reported by their teachers to have more problem behaviors. Looking at the cognitive outcomes, 
they had significantly lower scores on one-to-one counting, book knowledge, color naming, 
design copying, print concepts, the PPVT, the Woodcock-Johnson dictation, and applied 
problems in the letter-word identification. 

To summarize, we found that a significant number of Head Start families face challenges in 
their lives, and these challenges have negative consequences for the parents and for the children. 
Fortunately, the flip side of this is that families are also resilient, in possession of strengths. ^ 

Michael Vadcn-Kiernan: I would like to shift gears to talk about the findings from the FACES 
case study related to strengths and resilience of Head Start families. First, I would like to talk 
about the methodology of the case study as well as the analytic approach that we used. Then I 
would like to talk about our findings, again related to strength and resilience. I will organize 
them in terms of themes. The other thing I will do is highlight some of the findings with quotes 
from Head Start families taken from the family narratives, which were part of the case study. 

The FACES case study had two overarching goals. The first goal was to provide a more 
complete profile of Head Start families, their neighborhoods, and the nature of their interac- 
tions with Head Start. The second goal was to support and expand on the findings from the 
larger study, pursue research questions that were independent of the larger study, and generate 
hypotheses for future research. In this way, the case study is to be both illustrative and explana- 
tory, while developing a generative knowledge base for future research. 

Given these goals, the design needed to have a large sample and a representative group of 
Head Start families in order to test independent research hypotheses. The case study had 120 
Head Start families; 3 per site were randomly selected from the FACES sample. It was essentially 
a representative subsampling of the larger FACES sample. There were no statistically significant 
differences between the case study sample and the larger FACES sample in terms of basic 
demographic information such as household income, marital status, or ethnicity. Over the 
course of this study, which was about 16 months for the case study, we lost 14 families, mostly 
because they moved and could not be tracked, giving us a 12% attrition rate. 

TaruIIo touched on the measures in her introduction. Essentially, we had three primary data 
collections and components. One was home visit parent interviews, which were semi-structured, 
open-ended interviews with questions regarding parents' perceptions of themselves, their 
families, their experiences with Head Start, and their neighborhoods. These were given in fall 
1997 and spring 1998. At each home visit interview, we also did home and neighborhood 
observations from the physical environment subscale and the neighborhood observations 
checklists of the HOME scale. Interviewers as well as the families completed both of them. They 
covered items from neighborhood resources to physical and social quality indices about the 
neighborhoods. The last components were monthly family telephone interviews, which were 
essentially month-to-month updates from families on critical variables in the study, such as 
their household composition, changes in child-care arrangements, employment status, health 
status, and Head Start participation. 

There were three analytic strategies that we used to analyze the case study data. The first of 
these was content coding. We content-coded the open-ended responses given to us by parents 
during the home visit interviews. The responses were systematically organized in this fashion in 
order to generalize across cases. We used some of the content codes from an instrument that the 
Rameys had developed, and we adapted other preexisting codes. We also developed our own 
content code schemes for other new questions that were asked. The second analytic strategy 
involved descriptive analyses of the monthly telephone interviews to document change on a 
month-to-month basis. 

The third analytic strategy was family narratives. These narratives were 6-12 pages long, 
describing the families' lives over the course of the study. They were developed using a narrative 
process, but basically the first step was to integrate the qualitative information and the quantita- 



O 

ERIC 



106 



112 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



tive descriptive data from the case study measures while also including measures and descriptive 
data from the main FACES data. The narratives are organized around four themes; (a) the Head 
Start child, (b) the Head Start family, (c) the family's interactions with Head Start, and (d) the 
family's home and neighborhood. We used the narratives as a tool, or a vehicle, for identifying 
emergent themes within families as well as across families. 

To sum up, these three analytic approaches were used separately, but also as part of a larger 
qualitative approach. The intrinsic value of this approach was in its capacity to attain rich, in- 
depth data and stories about families in salient contexts of their lives that support as well as 
challenge some of the quantitative findings from the main FACES study. 

At this point, I would like to share some of the emergent themes related to family strengths 
that we found using this approach. The first theme was that parents had optimistic expectations 
for their children and they valued education. In the home visit interview, 75% of the parents 
reported hopes and goals relating to their children's education, such as doing well in school, 
completing appropriate tasks for their age, and having positive attitudes towards school. This is 
in response to a question that we asked about expectations, hopes, and goals for their Head Start 
year. Therefore, these are expectations about early schooling experiences. 

In terms of longer-term educational attainment goals, 65% of parents had specific long-term 
educational attainment goals for their children, such as graduating from high school and 
attending college. In terms of early schooling, one parent said, "I would like for her to learn how 
to enjoy learning so that when she is in school, she enjoys it and she can build upon her 
dreams." In terms of longer term goals, another parent said, "Education means a lot to me. I 
really want them to go to college." A nice combination of both of those ideas regarding her 
daughter's future is that the mother wanted her to become an engineer and get a good job. 
However, she clarified that the most important thing is her learning. In many of the narratives, 
we found that parents felt a strong desire to have the best for their children, and they instilled 
values focused on education. When parents were asked about what they thought was the most 
important thing to teach their children, over half said it was to teach them values or morals and 
to show them the importance of education. 

The second theme was about family relationships, which were seen as primary strengths as 
well as primary challenges for many of the Head Start families. Fifty-eight percent of the parents 
reported that their families' positive relationships were their biggest strength, and they character- 
ized these relationships as family closeness or togetherness, including the ability to rely on one 
another and take care of each other. At the same time, improving relationships in the family, 
including marital, sibling, and parent-child relationships, was the most important and most 
cited area in need of improvement for Head Start families, even more so than meeting financial 
and physical needs of their families. Thus, family relationships are seen as a critical resource for 
Head Start families, ones on which they rely, as well as something many families recognize they 
need to work on. One parent described family relationships as a strength by stating, "We stick 
together. We just love each other and try and keep each other happy. We have a willingness to 
keep it all together. We work together as a family. All of us are here for each other." Another 
parent addressed family relationships as an area in need of improvement, saying, "I need to 
work on my child-parent communication skills. I need to be able to talk without screaming. I 
tend to get angry at my daughter. I have to work hard on fixing this." 

The third theme that we saw was that Head Start families face challenges and demonstrate 
resilience. We saw this trait in a couple of different ways. Looking across cases, there is some 
indication that while most of the families described were relatively stable, they faced multiple 
challenges in the areas of employment status, health, child care, household changes, and 
relationships with significant others. In other words, for many of these families, change and the 
maintenance or management of change became a challenge in and of itself. This was also 
validated with our telephone month-to-month change data, which showed a large amount of 
change happening in the families on a month-to-month basis in terms of these basic structural 




113 



107 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



characteristics. In addition^ across the family narrative^ there was a persistent effort to develop 
and maintain a practical and feasible balance between the competing demands of school, work, 
and caring for children. 

When reading the narratives, one gets a sense that balancing the demands of school, work, 
and child care preoccupied much of the parent's time and energy. For instance, the family in this 
next quote is a blended two-parent family with five children living in the home. Both parents' 
jobs involved shift work that included periods of heavy overtime as well as strikes and layoffs. 
The family had experienced a number of changes in child care over the years and was also dealing 
with fairly long-term health and mental health issues with one of their younger children. 

The demands of balancing all the needs of a large family were subtle, but evident, in many of 
the mothers' comments throughout the narratives such as, "I hope I do not get really stressed 
out with five kids. I am doing really good, but I have a feeling I will get burnt out. Luckily, they 
are pretty good. I need organizational skills. I think having lots of kids, you need to get orga- 
nized so you keep the children's appointments and things straight. I would like to improve the 
fact that we work too much and need to spend more time together. I think we will be able to do 
that when they are in school. Maybe their father will get another shift. I would like to be a 
normal family." 

It is interesting that this parent is defining a normal family as one that is able to balance the 
demands of time between work and family. In addition, in terms of families' challenges and 
resilience, the narratives provide a different perspective in that one gets to work within cases. 

In that regard, perhaps the most striking theme from the narratives was that each family seemed 
to face their own set of unique challenges, and they demonstrated resilience in the face of their 
adversity. 

This next quote is from a two-parent, two-child family who had recently emigrated from El 
Salvador to the USA. In the span of the narrative, the family faced deportation of the father and 
lived in a dangerous neighborhood where the children were not allowed to play outdoors. 
However, even in the face of these challenges, this family's resilience and value system is a 
predominant theme in the narrative. Perhaps the strongest example of resilience is the mother's 
belief system. She says, "Our family is poor, but honorable, and our surroundings make it hard 
to show [my daughter] how to be good. But we try. I love my children and want to see them 
grow. We are poor, but we try to keep her on the right path." 

While voicing concerns about her low wages, the mother also focused on working to better 
her family, saying, "There's only one thing and that is to work for them." This quote gives a real 
sense of the obvious sacrifice on the part of this family, and the sacrifice is largely dedicated to 
the children. Similar to other narratives that we developed, the family's resilience in the face of 
their challenges is context-specific. They are tied to their particular circumstances, which leads us 
to believe that what is resilient in one context may not be resilient in another. 

Finally, I would like to touch on Head Start families' interactions with Head Start. Despite 
facing various barriers to participation, Head Start families demonstrated a strong desire to be 
involved in their children's Head Start education, and they valued their involvement in the 
program. Ninety-five percent of the families felt that it was important or very important for 
them to participate in Head Start activities, and most indicated that it was important to them 
because it somehow helped their children. 

Analyses using case study data also indicated that participation in Head Start activities 
positively moderated the relationship between neighborhood factors such as neighborhood 
violence and child behavior, indicating that parent involvement may play a significant role in 
reducing the negative effects of neighborhood factors on children's behavior. In sum, we found 
the parents had a strong desire to be involved in their children's education, they valued that 
involvement, and it may play an important role in protecting their children. 

We found that Head Start families are diverse, but they hold hopes and goals similar to other 
families. Each of the families faced unique challenges, but in many ways they also have underly- 
ing values similar to other families, particularly in terms of valuing education and wanting the 



ERIC 



108 



1,14 



AUM1M151 RATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



best for their children. Head Start families find their family relationships to be an important 
resource — a source of strength as well as a source of challenge. 

More work is needed to identify some of the critical dimensions of family relationships. For 
instance, the most common response that we got from families was something about together- 
ness and being close. What does that actually mean? How do we operationalize that? More work 
needs to be done to disentangle those concepts. Despite the challenges faced by Head Start 
families, they also possess strengths and resilience, both unique and shared among other 
families. Additional research in this area should focus on identifying and measuring family 
strengths or assets in the context of resilience, not simply focusing on risks or deficits. In addition, 
research should focus on context-specific strengths within the families. In other words, it was 
valuable to do analyses across cases as well as within cases, as we were able to do in this study. 

Finally, despite barriers. Head Start families value their involvement in their children's Head 
Start education. Their participation in Head Start may play an important role in protecting their 
children from negative outcomes. These findings encourage an analytic framework that includes 
risk and protective factors together in predicting outcomes that are of interest to children. 

Candice Crayton: In this presentation, we will look at families' involvement, perception, 
and satisfaction with the Head Start program, and the role that these factors play in Head Start's 
objectives of serving the neediest of the needy. In spring 1998, parents were asked about the 
ways in which they were involved in Head Start programs during the previous school year. 

Most parents were active in the program, and they identified that they had home visits with 
staff, parent-teacher conferences, classroom observations, volunteering in the children's class- 
rooms, preparing student materials for special events, attending social events, and assisting with 
field trips. 

In order to examine the relationship between involvement in Head Start and other factors, a 
summary involvement score and a categorical involvement variable were created for each parent. 
The scoring categories are based on a parent's report of how frequently they participated in each 
of the 12 activities over the past school year. The involvement score had a range of 12-36 with a 
mean of 22.1 and a standard deviation of 5.2. Involvement categories were low, with a score 
from 12-18, moderate ranging from 19-25, and high with a score ranging from 26-36. The 
amount of parent involvement varied by ethnicity. Parents of White children reported signifi- 
cantly higher levels of involvement than did parents of African American and Latino children. 

We examined the relationship between parent involvement in Head Start and other family 
factors. The study data showed that parents who were most involved in Head Start were more 
likely to participate in weekly or monthly activities with their children. These types of activities 
include going to the mall or doing arts and crafts with their children. They were also more likely 
to have had prior exposure to the Head Start program through the involvement of another child 
or grandchild. About 51% of our families said that they had prior experience with Head Start. 
They were also less likely to be employed, had a more internal locus of control, and a greater 
satisfaction with the Head Start program. 

To further investigate the role of parental involvement with Head Start, linear regression 
models tested whether or not involvement with Head Start predicted child and family out- 
comes. Parents who were more involved with Head Start had children with less aggressive 
behavior, more positive social behavior, higher emergent relation skills, and increased use of 
household risk and safety practices. In addition, children with parents who were more involved 
in Head Start also scored significantly higher on book knowledge, color naming, creativity, and 
design copying. While involvement seems to vary among different subgroups, in the 1998 
interview we found that almost all parents reported that they and their children have a very 
positive experience with Head Start. 

We found no significant differences in this rating by ethnicity, urbanicity, region, or prior 
experience with Head Start. Over 95% of parents reported that their children often or always felt 
safe and secure in Head Start. They were very happy to be in the program, their children felt 





109 



SYMP0SIA/R0UNDTABLES/C0NVtR5>A110N HOURS 



accepted by their teachers, their children were treated with respect by their teachers, and the 
teachers often or always made them feel welcome and supported as parents. 

The high ratings of positive feelings toward the Head Start experience are similar to the 
parents' reported levels of satisfaction with the program. Over 80% of parents indicated that 
Head Start maintained a safe program, respected their family's culture, helped the children to 
grow and to develop, provided them with services, and prepared their children for kindergarten. 
While satisfaction with the program was very high among all parents, we found that parents 
with higher levels of satisfaction were more involved with the Head Start program and had less 
than a high school diploma. They lived predominandy in the Southwest or Midwest, were 
parents of Latino children, were unemployed, and were parents of girls. We found that benefits 
received in Head Start exceeded the expectations of parents. 

In fall 1997, parents were asked to identify the major ways they felt Head Start could help 
their children and their families during the upcoming school year. For the most part. Head Start 
parents held optimistic expectations for their children and were less likely to report opdmisdc 
expectations for themselves. However, by spring 1998, many parents reported that Head Start 
had helped their families in ways they had not expected. For the most part, all of them received 
benefits and their expectations were superseded by the benefits they received. While most 
parents were satisfied and received many benefits, some saw room for improvement. In spring 
1998, parents were asked if they could change anything about Head Start, what would it be? 
Almost half of the parents said Head Start does not need any changes, and they were happy 
with Head Start the way it is. However, some said that Head Start needs to focus more on 
academic skills, have extended hours, improve facilities such as playgrounds and classrooms, 
and provide transportation. 

In further investigation of Head Start's role in helping families, we looked at other factors 
outside of the classroom. The reality of violence is close for many Head Start families, as noted 
by D'Elio. We know that exposure to violence predicted problem child behavior and exposure to 
extended violence predicted maternal depression. Does Head Start protect children and families 
from the negative effects of exposure to violence? In order to test the significance of Head Start's 
role in helping families, a series of linear regression models tested whether the extent of expo- 
sure to violence was associated with low levels of problem child behavior and maternal depres- 
sion. This was in relation to parents' positive ratings of satisfaction, experience, and involvement 
in the Head Start program. We found that being satisfied with Head Start and having positive 
experiences significandy moderated the negative effect of exposure to neighborhood violence on 
maternal depression and child behavior for Latino and White families. We also found that 
higher involvement with Head Start significantly moderated the negative effects of exposure to 
neighborhood violence on maternal depression for Latino women. There were no significant 
interactions found for African American families. 

In summary, the FACES data support the notion that having high parental involvement, 
posidve experiences, and increased satisfaction with Head Start may help protect families from 
the risks and challenges they often face. 

Hirokazu Yoshikawa: I want to oudine some of the major strengths so far, and then offer some 
suggestions. First, important data on the strengths and diversity of Head Start families should be 
disseminated as widely as possible to Head Start staff. I am sure all the staff present are apprecia- 
tive of these data, particularly on risk levels, resilience, and the challenges to service delivery. For 
example, we have new and urgent data on the extent of exposure to violence and criminal justice 
involvement, which has been a relatively neglected area of Head Start research and practice. The 
mental health practices that I am familiar with do not often consider the role of criminal justice 
involvement. What does that do in terms of increasing families' risks? These data suggest that 
they dramatically increase risks to parents, children, and maternal depression. 

We heard some interesting new findings on racial and ethnic differences, and an array of 




110 



116 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



family, neighborhood, and Head Start experiences. Many of these were surprising, some of them 
compounded stereotypes, and some of them raise urgent signs. For example, African Americans 
are twice as likely to be victims of neighborhood violence as White parents in the sample, and 
10 times as likely as Latino parents. There were many examples of differences by race and 
ethnicity that merit exploration. 

A real strength across these studies was the use of both qualitative and quantitative data to 
address some of the same research questions. The finding that Head Start use appeared to 
moderate the impact of neighborhood violence on children's problem behaviors and maternal 
depression, which was found in both the qualitative and quantitative data, was quite creative. In 
the first study, the creative combination of a cluster analytic approach with a risk index ap- 
proach, and then a comparison of those two methods, raised the interesting question of what 
each method can contribute that the other does not. 

There were many contributions to both the developmental and intervention literatures on 
families in poverty that should be emphasized. Some of these studies raise questions about the 
theoretical bases of the studies. For example, in the cluster analysis, I was not sure what the 
conceptual basis was for including certain variables and excluding others. Clarifying the key 
questions that the clusters were meant to address would help to sharpen the study. Another 
contribution to the literature was the interesting findings on subgroups of Latino families. There 
were families living in Puerto Rico, Spanish-speaking families on the mainland, and English- 
speaking families on the mainland. I would have liked to have seen more discussion of those in 
the context of the literature on immigration and transmigration among Latino populations. 

This is new data to Head Start, and it will be interesting to put it in the context of that 
literature. For example, it is a puzzle that when they compared those three groups of Latino 
families, they found that poverty rates were higher among the Puerto Rican families. At the same 
time, those families showed lower levels of risk on their risk index than the other groups. That 
might raise questions related to the cost of living that might be different in Puerto Rico versus 
the mainland. Are there other family history factors that might explain that? What do we know 
about the different kinds of immigration, not just from South American or Central American 
countries to the USA, but back and forth from Puerto Rico to the USA? That is not technically 
immigration, but certainly migration is significant between those two areas. It is not known 
whether the quantitative data may speak to that, but certainly there is qualitative data that could 
illuminate some of those questions. The overall emphasis seemed to be exploratory analyses, 
and that is one reason why these data were so rich, since the study was not investigating a 
particular hypothesis. 

However, hypothesis testing could be integrated into the exploratory analyses a bit more. For 
example, the first presentation associated clusters to child outcomes. There might have been 
room for hypothesizing that certain clusters might be more related to certain child outcomes 
than others. The study could do some planned contrasts among those clusters to give more 
statistical power to answer those questions. It also makes for a more interesting study in some 
ways. What is expected when looking for ideographic patterns and diversity in families? Are 
certain factors expected to co-occur more often than with other factors? 

I would have liked to get a sense of the strength of associations with child outcomes. In many 
of these areas, there were impressive associations with multiple child outcomes, but I could not 
tell the size of those associations or whether they were controlling for other factors that might 
also account for that association. For example, in the first study on the effects of cluster member- 
ship on child outcomes, I was not sure what the spread was on the outcome and how different 
those clusters were. In the second study, associations between maternal depression and family 
criminal justice involvement on child outcomes looked impressive, but I did not know the size 
of those effects. 

The fourth study, the associations of parent involvement with child outcomes, raises the next 
point, which is caution around causal conclusions. I have not seen these analyses in great detail. 




ERIC 



111 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLE S/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



However, the fourth study suggested that parent-reported Head Start experience appeared to 
moderate the negative effects of neighborhood violence on depression and child behavior. All of 
those are parent reports, so if there is a shared method variance contributing to some of those 
patterns, it might be interesting to see if those can be replicated with teacher-reported outcomes 
or standardized measures. 

As another example, the causal relationships were not clear for the relationship between 
maternal depression and parent-child outcomes in the second study. I was not sure what the 
authors thought were predictors of maternal depression versus consequences of maternal 
depression. More clarification on the theory of those factors would be nice. 

To address the causality issue in this type of nonexperimental study, it is important to control 
for competing third variable hypotheses. The longitudinal nature of the data could help one 
address some of the causality issues in both the quantitative and the qualitative data. Particu- 
larly for the qualitative data, the longitudinal aspect of those data would provide useful infor- 
mation on what processes are involved in resilience over time. What are the processes over time 
in balancing family and work? What are the processes over time in dealing with multiple 
challenges at the family level? 

Next, stretching the mixed method approach and integrating qualitative data into the 
quantitative studies would take a lot of work, but it would probably yield impressive benefits. A 
strength of this study is that ethnographic cases were randomly sampled from the larger studies 
with a sample of 120 families, which is large for a qualitative study. It is a wonderful opportu- 
nity to explore questions and mixed methods. 

I have some suggestions and ideas that might be interesting to pursue. First, in the area of 
family relationships, qualitative cases could be sampled from those with the most stressed 
family relationships. For example, there are hints that those who report criminal justice involve- 
ment and those who report violence in the home may be overlapping groups. There is some 
serious concern about those families. What does the qualitative data show about how those 
parents report their family's experiences with Head Start? Do those experiences represent 
barriers to being able to access the benefits of the Head Start program? What are the implica- 
tions for how Head Start staff should work with those families or what can those families reveal 
about how Head Start staff are already successfully working with those families? 

As another example, do those families with different numbers of risk factors or those with 
different risk typology differ when looking at the qualitative interviews? On one hand, it is a 
validation question, which might not be interesting. However, the qualitative data offers 
additional information and a richer picture of the different families in those cluster groups or 
those in that four-plus risk factor category. An interesting question to explore is if the qualitative 
data suggest causal mechanisms for how these different levels of risk or types of risk are linked 
to outcomes. Can the qualitative data suggest mediational patterns? 

Some of the puzzles around culture and racial ethnic differences would be interesting to 
explore with the qualitative data. Furthermore, a nice next step for these analyses would be to look 
at integrating staff practices and site characteristics, to make the findings more useful to staff. 

I was on another panel this morning so I did not hear the first FACES panel. What if the two 
panels were put together to integrate the data? How do family experiences vary across different 
kinds of programs? How do programs address some of the challenges that families face? Could 
data inform Head Start staff on how and when they should target services to families who experi- 
ence multiple risks? Many Head Start programs assess risk through checklists at enrollment or at 
other times during the Head Start year. What implications for practice are found to show that 
the multiple-risk group is at risk for poorer parent and child outcomes? How does Head Start 
program-level or classroom-level quality moderate the relationship of risk to child outcomes? 

Obviously, it is a challenge to disseminate all of these findings to the Head Start community. 
Beyond these conferences, I am sure that issue briefs and other communications are planned 
to convey these results to individual program staff. Overall, congratulations on a set of impor- 
tant data. 




112 



118 



Comment: Could you link what you said to how to tell Congress what we want? Have you seen 
data that could form the policy discussion that is upon us regarding Head Start, particularly 
about what the program looks like? 

Tarullo: The reason we are doing this study is that Head Start is a comprehensive, two-genera- 
tion program, linking the program to the child and the parent to their child. We must continue 
to focus our research on all the contexts of the child's development, not just the classroom, and 
not just the period of time focused on specific literacy instruction. Everything we hear about 
how the child is conceptualized within the program helps to support that feeling. 

The data we described today about various lands of family risk factors is challenging. Some of 
the more inspiring things that were described show that Head Start families are like all families 
in their love for and their desire to see their children do well. They feel that education is the key 
to do that. In terms of academic readiness, they had extremely high expectations for the pro- 
gram, and that is where they thought Head Start fell short. 

That is a challenge, and it is what most parents say they want from Head Start. They do not 
know as much about family support, which they learn about over the course of the year. We 
continue to hear that Head Start is seen as a comprehensive program of multiple services to 
families, and we want to understand the full context of where children are developing. 

One thing we have learned is that the more we can help to shape that message into what 
matters for a child's success in school, the better. We have to be able to continue to demonstrate 
the ways that these family factors impact the child's ultimate success in school, and we must 
make that message clear. In this session, we primarily discussed cognitive factors. We also are 
talking about social, emotional, and family factors. It is an important message to get across. 

Comment: 1 appreciate the diversity in ethnic groups in these studies. 1 wondered to what 
extent the findings have to do with the degree to which the Latino group embraces their tradi- 
tional culture. Might one answer be that Spanish-speakers embrace their culture because they 
speak their language? African Americans do not have the sense cjf identity that other ethnic 
groups have. 

Comment: There are more risk factors that 1 notice among the African American population. I 
wonder why and conclude that the support system is a cultural issue. However, looking at 
Washington Heights and Patterson, neither has a plentitude of services, so it boils down to race, 
ethnicity, and the types of family supports that exist in the two communities. It was based on 
observations of two different communities. 

Yoshikawa: A point to add to some of the racial and ethnic differences that 1 did not mention 
was that there is also the possibility of different responses to the same questionnaire items in 
the quantitative data. For example, it would be interesting to see whether the lower rates of 
criminal justice involvement reported among Latinos compared to Whites and African Ameri- 
cans are due to perception of the items in the same way or whether there are different levels of 
reporting such involvement to the researcher. One way to explore that is to literally ask the 
question in person or in phone interviews. If those questions were already asked, if some ethnic 
differences or the ease in the way that people talk about things like criminal justice involvement 
are noted, it can hint at whether people are responding to the questions in different ways. 

Question: When will the FACES report be available? 

Tarullo: The FACES report on the 1997 data is ready for web posting and is in its final clearance 
stages. We may have to go back and incorporate some of Yoshikawa 's suggestions. Part 1 of the 
full Technical Report on the 1997 FACES study will come out first, and then there will be a 




119 



113 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/ CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



subsequent report addressing some of the aspects that we heard about this morning for the 
1997 data. It will be a large report with many technical appendices. 

Question: Is this 1997 data comparable to the 2000 data set? A lot has happened with public 
policy with Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF), and other things since 1997 that 
would impact income, employment status, and maternal depression. 

Comment: Those families who are the most difficult to get off of public assistance would 
probably provide a whole additional set of data that we are addressing now in the field. 

Tarullo: FACES 2000 does not have the case study component, but we do have the extensive 
parent interview data in order to look at the differences you describe. It is unfortunate because 
this has been a rich data set to work with. 

Vaden-Kiernan: We are going to look at a number of different factors from a multilevel perspec- 
tive. We are currently involved with the FACES 1997 cohort to geo-code family addresses to 
neighborhood census data from the 2000 Census. That should allow us some opportunities for 
community and neighborhood level analyses, but in addition we plan to look at classroom 
factors that may impact child outcomes, in addition to some of these other family factors. For 
instance, we have the opportunity with the census data to geo-code the centers and the neigh- 
borhoods where the centers are located. 

Question: Will any summary or highlight report be available when 2000 is out? 

Tarullo: Yes, we will put these presentations on the web as soon as we can and have a progress 
report, hopefully, by the end of 2002. Our current progress reports are on the web site. 

Question: Parent involvement in Head Start predicted parent and child outcomes. In that cycle, 
it is hard to tell which came first. Have you done any research gathering the parents' school 
success, learning disabilities, or issues around the parents' comfort level in being involved with 
educators or education? All those other things can interfere with working with their own 
children. Was that type of information gathered? 

D'Elio: Some of that information was not gathered in FACES 1997. We have some information 
on substance use, but it is limited. In the 2000 data set, we have a much more comprehensive 
data collection on substance use, for example, in the families. We do not have information on 
school success; we just know their education levels. It would be great to have more information 
on the parent's own history of special education or learning disabilities. 

Tarullo: Maybe we can take that into account for FACES 2003. We do not have parent disability 
information. FACES 2000 gave parents illiteracy screeners, so we have direct information about 
their functional literacy. It is obvious that parents are concerned about educational issues for 
their children, but we do not know what their own actual involvement has been with schools 
when they were children. Head Start research has shown that parents feel comfortable becoming 
active with Head Start, but the further they go into public schools or any schools, the less likely 
they are to be closely involved. However, that is a factor that we had not taken into account. 




114 



120 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



POSTER SYMPOSIUM 

Head Start Quality Research Centers: Interventions 
to Promote School Readiness for Head Start Children 

FACILITATOR: Louisa B. Tarullo 
DISCUSSANT: Martha Zaslow 

PRESENTERS: Gayle Cunningham, Stacy Dimino, David Dickinson 
Columbia University 

■ Using Assessments to Improve School Readiness 
and Head Start Quality 

Sharon Lynn Kagan, Jeanne Brooks Gunn, Stacy S. Kim, Elizabeth Rigby, Elsa Jones Nance 
Education Development Center, Inc. 

■ Supporting Literacy Development Through a Systemic 
Program-Delivered Intervention - PD LIT 

David Dickinson 

High/Scope Educational Research Foundation 

■ High Scope's Quality Research Center: Achieving Head Start 
Effectiveness through Intensive Curriculum Training 

Larry Schweinhart 

Quality Counts, Inc. 

■ Quality Counts' Head Start Quality Research Center: 

Individualized Learning Intervention 

Martha Abbott-Shim 

State University of New York at Stony Brook ' 

■ Evaluation of Emergent Literacy Curricula in Head Start 

Janet E. Fischel 

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 

■ The Preschool Behavior Project: A Socioemotional 
Intervention to Enhance School Readiness 

Donna Bryant, Ellen Peisner-Feinberg, Janis Kupersmidt 

University of Oregon 

■ Promoting Head Start Children for Social/Emotional 
Success at School: Preliminary Results from the 
Preschool Adaptation of First Step to Success 

Hill Walker, Edward Fell 

University of South Carolina 

■ The Companion Curriculum: Connecting Head Start Parents and 
Teachers to Promote Early Learning and Development 

Julia Mendez 



O 

ERIC 



121 



115 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Data Collection Center 

■ A Coordinated Approach to Evaluating Multiple 
Interventions Aimed at Improving Head Start Quality 

Margaret Hunker, Kim Kwang, Louisa B. Tarullo, Ruth Hubbell McKey, Gary Resnick, 
Nicholas Zill 

Louisa B. Tarullo: The Head Start Quality Research Consortium (QRC) includes both indi- 
vidual and coordinated sites. This large group has agreed to the following mission: to support 
the continuous improvement of Head Start by developing, testing, refining, and disseminating 
interventions to enhance school readiness of Head Start children. People have gone about this 
task in a variety of ways. 

I will give a brief overview of the project, highlighting the goals of the individual interven- 
tions. The majority of the time will be spent with presenters and a discussant that represent our 
program partners. The first speaker is Gayle Cunningham, Executive Director of JCCEO Head 
Start in Birmingham, Alabama. The second speaker is Stacy Dimino, Executive Director of 
Communities United, in Waltham, Massachusetts. The cochair and third presenter for this 
session is David Dickinson from Education Development Center, Inc. (EDC) in Newton, 
Massachusetts. Finally, we will hear from our discussant Martha Zaslow from Children Trends. 

We have a number ,of research project partners. The first one is "Using Assessments to 
Improve School Readiness and Head Start Quality" at Columbia University, with principal 
investigators Sharon Lynn Kagan and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn and project director Stacy Kim. They 
are partnering with the Child Care Center of Stamford, Connecticut. This particular intervention 
is testing whether training the administration and using observational assessments S 3 ^tems at 
the child, classroom, and center levels results in improved program quality and school readiness 
outcomes for children. There is an increased focus on accountability and reporting of local 
outcomes, so this particular project has gained increased relevance since we first began in 
March, 2001. 

The second project is "A Systemic Approach to Fostering Language and Literacy Develop- 
ment." The principal investigator is David Dickinson, with a team from EDC, and Stacy Dimino 
from Communities United. They will be moving to Boston to work with the Action for Boston 
Community Development (ABCD) Head Start. This project focuses on a systemic program 
delivery, training, and mentoring intervention designed to improve children s language and 
literacy development. 

The third project is "Achieving Head Start Effectiveness through Intensive Curriculum 
Training." The principal investigator is Larry Schweinhart from High/Scope Educational Re- 
search Foundation, and he is here with Marijata Daniel-Echols. Their program partner has been 
the Oakland Livingston Human Services Agency. They have been looldng at intensive training 
and supportive mentoring in the High/Scope curriculum model in order to enhance children s 
development, especially focusing on language, literacy, and social skills. 

The fourth project is called "Supporting Children's Individualized Learning in Head Start led 
by Martha Abbott-Shim from Quality Counts and Rich Lambert from the University of North 
Carolina at Charlotte. Gayle Cunningham is their partner in Birmingham, Alabama, and three 
other Head Start programs in Georgia will eventually take part in their intervention. Their hypoth- 
esis utilizes a mentor/teacher and protege/teacher model. They are testing how self-directed and 
collaborative learning experiences can help improve teachers' abilities to use developmental 
assessments. Their goal is to individualize teaching and learning for Head Start children. 

The next project is "Evidence Based Emergent Literacy Approaches for Head Start" at the State 
University of New York at Stony Brook. Janet Fischel is the principal investigator for this project, 
working with Long Island Head Start Child Development Services. Their goal is to compare two 
classrooms' curriculum approaches, including the computer-delivered Waterford Early Reading 
Program and the ongoing curriculum in the Long Island Head Start, the High/Scope method. 




116 



122 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



They are looking at these two curricula that are particularly designed to support early language 
and literacy development, comparing them with the standard approach in that program. 

The sixth project is "Social/Emotional Intervention to Enhance School Readiness" at the 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Donna Bryant, Janice Cooper-Schmidt, and Ellen 
Peisner-Feinberg are the principal investigators based at the Frank Porter Graham Child Devel- 
opment Institute of the university. They have been working with Person County Head Start in 
Roxboro, North Carolina, and will move next year into Chapel Hill and Carrboro. Their inter- 
vention is a translation of the Preschool Behavior Project, which they previously implemented 
through an external intervention. They are translating that into an intervention administered by 
the program. It is primarily designed to enhance social and emotional development. 

The seventh project is the Adaptation of First Step to Success" at the University of Oregon led 
by Hill Walker, Ed Feil, Annemieke Golly, and Herb Severson at the Institute of Violence and 
Destructive Behavior in the College of Education. They work with Head Start of Lane County, in 
Springfield, Oregon. They are adapting the First Step to Success Intervention. It has both 
universal and targeted components and is designed to enhance children's social skills and 
reduce behavior problems. 

The final project is the "Companion Curriculum" at the University of South Carolina. Julia 
Mendez and Jean Ann Linney are the principal investigators for that project, working with the 
Gleams Human Resources Commission based in Greenwood. They are testing a parent involve- 
ment model, looking at whether Head Start families that participate in their multicomponent 
curriculum, which includes both sending materials home and having parents come in for 
workshops, show improvements in parental involvement and satisfaction in their children's 
learning and school readiness outcomes. Through a cooperative agreement, each of the indi- 
vidual sites is assessing the fidelity and implementation of their particular intervention, and is 
evaluating local measures targeted toward the kinds of outcomes they are hoping to achieve. 

We are also doing core data collection based on the measures and procedures from the Head 
Start Family and Child Experiences Survey (FACES). We want to look at baseline information on 
these sites and see how they compare to a national sample of Head Start children and programs. 
The coordinated data collection in most sites used a pre/post design of assessing the children, 
observing classroom quality, interviewing teachers, and getting teacher and parent reports on 
children. A couple of sites have done a more experimental design in the 1st year because their 
programs were ready to do that. In the 2nd year, we are moving to a treatment-controlled 
design. Both the intervention and controls classrooms will get all these data collected through 
the coordinated data collection. 

This is a quick overview of the assessments that will be familiar to those people with any of 
the FACES information. Regardless of the stated intention or hypothesis of these interventions, 
we are looking broadly at a comprehensive assessment of children's school readiness. We are 
observing in the classroom, looking at structural and process quality, and finally, interviewing 
parents on their involvement with Head Start and their demographic information. We are 
talking with the staff, particularly the teacher, as well as others who were involved in these 
interventions. 

Our 1st year s work shows that the research team and program partners who were selected 
through peer review for the scientific merit of their interventions and research designs have 
come out to be fairly representative of Head Start in general. They do not differ in terms of the 
children's baseline cognitive scores or observed classroom quality, although we did find that the 
parents in these programs seemed to be relatively advantaged on several dimensions compared 
to typical Head Start families. 

These findings lead us to conclude that the work we are doing might be even more useful to 
Head Start then we had first thought because this sample is an appropriate set of programs to 
test these interventions. Eventually, we hope to help refine, package, and make them available to 
Head Start in general, using the best aspects of them all. 




123 



117 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Stacy Dimino: I am the Executive Director of Communities United in the Boston area. We are 
suburban to Boston with nine locations. We were part of the early QRCs as a data collection site, 
so we pulled out and extracted information from our classrooms and teachers. It is a true 
partnership to develop the curriculum and the in-service changes for teachers. Therefore, it is a 
much more powerful approach and is more likely to make programs sustainable. It also makes 
the program understand the data more clearly and be able to use it more effectively. We were 
able to look at classrooms and see classroom change. Teachers have reported their strengths, 
beliefs, and how their teaching has changed. Looking at that from the teacher, supervisor, and 
manager perspectives has been exciting. 

In terms of partnership, programs come to the table looking for improvement and for how 
they build quality in their program. They seek out those factors and strive for quality. Each one 
of these projects comes from a different perspective. Our program had worked hard to gather the 
data, doing extras for 5 years, looking at program quality, and asking ourselves each year how we 
could improve our classrooms. All the teachers requested information and training on language 
and literacy. The program decided that this was a priority and something they wanted to do. 

A number of language and literacy projects exist. The projects have some similar as well as 
different approaches to that goal. There is also a focus on social and emotional curricula for 
children and parents and a parenting support piece. Each one looks at quality differently, but 
is focusing on many of these same aspects, probably because the programs seek those strengths 
as well. 

The maximum benefit of the partnership is that people come together and a leadership team 
of researchers and program people is created. The managers and the staff are involved. It meant 
that we sat at the table and decided the curriculum with teachers. How do we build on teachers' 
strengths? How do we make sure that they hear this information, try it out, and experiment with 
it? Our teachers were not used to the lecture model of in-service and our facilitators, because we 
cofacilitated the training, were not even used to an overhead projector. Through that process, we 
learned from teachers that they wanted more content in their training. 

Our teachers also wanted to know the research behind what they were learning. When we got 
short on time and were trying to condense the information to a 6-hour training, we did not 
want to lose Aat piece because it helped them to understand the basis of information. They 
became more data savvy. They wanted to hear the information and see the charts. 

Building the leadership team meant that the on-site managers had to help create the materi- 
als. If they were not part of the creation, they were part of the first training group, which meant 
they were able to understand and ask questions before their teachers went to the training. When 
the teachers came back, the managers were able to offer immediate support. That was a major 
influence on the success of this project. Overall, there is a desire for the programs to be able to 
sustain this model, even after the researchers leave. That is important, and certainly part of what 
we want to do at Communities United in terms of continuing. At the University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, it is a big part of what they are doing. Quality Counts uses a mentoring 
component to build program capacity and strength. Everyone rallied and supported this 
initiative, from the teacher assistants to the parents. Even the bus drivers were clear on the 
project, building on the excitement. 

Partnership is an ongoing dialogue. It involves understanding what the charts mean and what 
happened in the classroom. The project is excellent, because usually one does not have the 
opportunity to be part of that dialogue. This model allows programs exposure to and under- 
standing of data. We are not researchers, but we can do these things. We can go into the class- 
rooms and decide what we want to see. Head Start is pushing programs to be able to undertake 
the process, particularly with child outcomes. Information is thus more timely, because a 
program that wants improvement and quality cannot wait a couple of years to hear what 
happened. We need to know in the summer so that we can build on that information and make 
improvements by September. 




118 



124 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



We wove in the Head Start expectations on child outcomes and performance standards. 

When we focused on literacy, teachers did not feel pulled one way or the other between all their 
responsibilities. We tried to weave it all together for them. Each training session had content on 
language and literacy, but it also provided the domains for work sampling on how to collect 
information and what to look for. It is vital that teachers feel as if they can manage it all, rather 
than being inundated and unable to see the priorities. We reinforce the importance of the 
teachers' strengths and knowledge. They are not coming in not knowing what to do. They often 
want to know why it is important, and they bring a depth of experiences. For example, when we 
did phonemic awareness, we mentioned that they already do rhyming, through songs, chants, 
and games. Why do children like it so much? This approach was positive, because it was not 
saying, "You do not do this in your classrooms. We want you to do it." Instead, we were saying, 
"You do it, but let's see why it is effective, and then let's try and do it more often." Children are 
learning from the repetition, and it was effective in terms of emphasizing teacher strengths. 

We are all doing child outcomes, and that is scary for programs to do. One wonders if child 
assessment is accurate, and why there is such variation between classrooms. More training is 
needed on this issue. The project will now go to a much bigger program in Dorchester, in 
Boston. In East Boston and for Communities United, we will do it ourselves and see how we do 
on our own. We will try to maintain the quality that we learned, do our training sessions again, 
scale up a training model for teachers, and collect our own data. 

Gayle Cunningham: I am delighted to have the opportunity to share the work we have been 
doing in Birmingham, Alabama, and with the Georgia Project, which is Quality Counts Incorpo- 
rated. This is actually the second round of QRC projects — we also had the privilege of being a 
part of the first round. I direct one of the programs that is a part of the Quality Counts Research 
Center in Birmingham, Alabama. We are a community action agency, serving 1,400 children 
through Head Start and Early Head Start in 29 locations. 

I have organized my remarks on three levels, starting with myself, then talking about the 
value that this research has offered to our program, and then daring to talk about what the value 
has been on a project-wide basis. I have always been interested in research, but only interested 
enough to find out what is useful to take back and use. This has been a different experience, 
learning the guts of research and evaluation. I have learned that the old adage, "if you do not 
have data, you are just another person with an opinion," is tme. Some of our opinions have not 
been proven by the data, and some have been proven, to our delight. 

On a program level, one of the great things about this project is the diversity of programs that 
are involved, including programs with different curricula, sizes, locations, and grantee type. We 
have school systems, community action agencies, and independent Head Start grantees, so there 
is not just one type of Head Start program involved. The programs are also at various levels of 
quality development and relationships with themselves and others, with different abilities to 
use information. 

One of the great things about the implemented program interventions is that they all 
benefited. The interventions have not come to look at what we are doing; rather they have 
helped us improve what we already do. In each instance, there is something that is making a 
difference in the program and something that we will be able to continue doing as we move 
beyond the initial years of involvement. We have also had the advantage of time, since this is a 
5-year grant. There is time for planning, developing relationships between programs and 
researchers, and perfecting the intervention over time. They are real partnerships, which has 
made this project effective. 

One of the things that they have helped us with is to become much better at developing and 
implementing evidence-responsive program improvement activities. We are looking at 
mentoring, because in the last reauthorization for Head Start it was required that all Head Start 
programs develop mentor teachers. When this project came along, we decided that mentorship 




125 



119 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



was important to study. We wanted to know the best way to do it, and how to improve the ways 
we choose and support mentor teachers and determine whether or not they make a difference. 
We went from having an outside trainer to developing our own internal mentor/ teacher train- 
ing, with the guidance and support of the QRC Project. Many participating programs feel that 
they have been in the right place at the right time, given Head Start s new expectations regarding 
outcomes measurement, analysis, and evaluation. 

Our programs have become more sophisticated about assessment and data analysis. We have 
reached the point where we are actually adding assessment and data management capacity to 
the ChildPlus software that we have been using for years. We will have the opportunity to link 
child outcomes to family information and to look at findings in new ways. We can now look at 
the outcome data and see why it differs between centers, families, and individual children. 

Our staff has also dared to develop an assessment instrument on language and literacy to fill 
in the gaps of other assessments we were using. We have been using it for 1 year, and we have 
received positive feedback. We also now have data from children that we will continue to collect 
for the next few years. The other thing that has been good about this project is that we have had 
a chance to compare ourselves to others, including the FACES data and findings. This cross- 
project data collection is useful to see how one stacks up against others in similar circumstances. 

Overall, this is a special opportunity for eight projects to work together, meet regularly, and 
benefit from the leadership and guidance of research. Involvement with the FACES Project and the 
Impact Study has developed a special kind of synergy that has made all of our projects better. This 
is perhaps a model for how research can be even more beneficial. It may even be that looking at 
how this has been done over time could be as important as looking at any of our findings. 

David Dickinson: I want to offer a researcher s perspective on the partnership, after listening to 
the partners talk from the practitioner perspective. There is much talk about research partner- 
ships and the various ways they can play out over time. They are like marriages, which require 
good communication and a commitment to working through issues. Of course, there are also 
enormous benefits. 

I want to briefly address two points. First, how are interventions actually shaped? I cannot say 
enough about the materials we developed for the 4-hour workshops. Dimino and her staff have 
made incredible contributions thinking through training activities, how things get phrased, and 
the actual shaping of the partnership as we go larger scale. It raises the question of how to 
feasibly allow some room in what we are creating and to encourage ownership and maintenance 
of our work together. As interventions are created, if one can hook up with some Head Start 
Programs that are willing to put time and energy into the project, there are great benefits 
because there is a reality test. As well as we think we know Head Starts, we lack that integral level 
of detail. 

Second, how is data handled? Both Cunningham and Dimino made comments about the 
importance of seeing the data, even for their own use. That means that we wanted to know how 
Ms. X did in her classroom in the fall and in the spring. We want to know how the children in 
that classroom are doing. It does not mean they would like to see a model in 2 years about the 
impact of classroom quality on children whom they do not remember and staff who have long 
since moved on. 

Where do research and program evaluation come together? How far down the road can 
researchers go toward sharing data without compromising data? There are some data sharing 
issues. As researchers, it raises some interesting questions. How do we use our data? Are the data 
used as promised in the initial conversations about a partnership? For example, we thought we 
knew what we meant, and she thought she knew what she meant, but we may have different 
notions about this central issue. What about confidentiality? Who gets access to the data? There 
is some interesting learning in both directions, and if we are serious about partnership, we need 
to think deeply about these issues. 



er|c 



120 



126 



administration for children and families 



Martha Zaslow: I want to talk about the unique challenges that emerged from looking across 
this set of projects which falls into a young tradition of researchers working together to collect 
T T ^ fashion across sites. We have seen these challenges in child care with the 

Development Program (IHDP), Welfare to Work, and the five-state project on 
- eve 1 outcomes. Through collaboration on these projects, results can be leveraged for 
much more information and a broader context. 

Special Aallenges and issues also arise within the context of what we have heard. The first 
category of challenges is the set of implementations that have been described. In some partner- 
K programs make demands on the researchers and develop exciting 

CO aborations. The programs are saying, "If you want to train, tell us the evidence base of what 
you are talking about. If you want to do assessment, let us help develop the assessment ” Bridges 
east within these programs between the staff and the researchers. This is not the usual posture 
of the researchers looking m and directing from the outside. This process is exciting and builds 
Sf n also poses challenges about appropriate borders. It is not surprising 

1 different relationships such challenges arise; however, to be forthright and 

face those challenges is wonderful. ® 

Another set of challenges emerging under the heading of implementation is the issue of 
going to scale. Some of the evaluaUons described here have been tested in "hothouses " They are 
that have been tested when delivered by the experts, but if Head Start wants to work on 

quality, we have to be able to go to scale. How do we do that? What does it take? This is critical 
tor these projects. 

There is a pretest year to begin exploring some of fiiese issues. At one site, the staff is taking 
over an running the intervention. In a number of projects, the relationship between staff and 
researchers is changing m that the staff are taking over, running an intervention, and seeing if it 
can be brought to scale. We have a set of research issues around fine-tuning the programs Uat 
does It take to take over, and are these things only possible in a hothouse? Are theyfust deZn 
strauon projects or can they be brought to scale? There is an incredible richness of different staff/ 
researcher relaUonships. Where are the lines blurred, and where should the line remain? What ^ 
challenges are posed by having staff take over and run interventions and bring them to scale? 

PaneTpn*mn«pV^f ? challenging issues. These projects echo the National Education Goals 
urposes of Assessment documents, deariy distinguishing between assessment for 
particular purposes and having no such assessment. Assessment tools and technical require- 
ments for the tools should be shaped around the purpose of the assessment. Within these 

fnWrI! K ^ r purposes for assessment. One aspect is assessment to 

enrich the quality of instruction and programs. Whole interventions are based upon 
shaping observer skills m doing assessment: to learn where a child and teacher are and then 
feeding that information back into the system. 

A second type of assessment within these projects focuses on reporting. How are these 

^ challenge in distinguishing them and keeping 
them separate. Sull, pioneering efforts are attempting new methods where two types of aLefs- 
ment can be mapped onto each other. For example, what information is being recorded in work 
mp mg, 1 IS the assessment to inform instruction? How does that map onto the FACES 
assessments? This will be helpful to tell us whether there can be sharing across these t^p^ 
assessments or if we must be strict. These projects pose challenges about what types ofassess- 
ments should be earned out and how strictly they should be kept separate 

A third issue from this set of projects that has posed challenges to us is the breadth of 
mtervenuon School readiness has always been defined as having multiple components 

dimensions. The question arises that if we want 
•■^^diness, and school readiness is comprised of so many compo- 
nents, should we do single or multiple dimension interventions? 

These issues are not simple. They are complicated, and the coordinated nature of these 
projects should teach us a great deal. I am not sure that a single-dimension intervention exists. 



127 



121 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Some people talk about interventions that are strictly "literacy based;" however, there is a high 
correlation between children's scores on early math assessments and their literacy skills because 
many math issues get processed through language. What happens if an early language and 
literacy intervention fosters more talking between caregivers and children? Does that foster a 
different kind of relationship? 

Do we change the nature of caregiver/child relationships in Head Start because of a language/ 
literacy intervention? We will learn that through assessments of program quality. On the other 
hand, if we address both behavioral issues and language literacy, does that provide the child 
with a stronger push at the end of the day? We stand to benefit enormously from this set of 
programs that are now being mounted in thinking about the limits of any one dimension of 
school readiness and the uncharted territory of how closely are they related. 

I want to briefly talk about research design issues. It is critical that this research program is 
linked with the FACES assessments in a number of ways. The first is that this issue requires that a 
language/literacy intervention not only look at language outcomes, but across domains. The 
second issue is using FACES as a benchmark. One of the things that they are learning from the 
pre/post test data of the P' year is that Head Start is relatively homogeneous in terms of quality 
and children's background. We see the FACES scores and wonder if they can ever be budged. 

Even before seeing any impact or random assignment data, the pre/post data are showing 
evidence that they are not immovable and can be changed. This learning is critical to Head Start 
in general. 

We are learning about progression from pre/post design to random assignment design. This 
important sequence will enable us to review the comparative and pre/post designs and describe 
what we have learned from them. Everybody was challenged and surprised at how much the 
FACES results, in a nonexperimental descriptive mode, nevertheless emerged as having critical 
practice implications that are supposed to happen from impact results. This kind of pre/post 
design will also challenge the limits in terms of what we learn from the different designs and 
how the results of different designs map onto each other. 

One factor to discuss is how long the pre/post design period should be, because that period is 
also used to hone and refine the program itself Other requests for proposals, such as those from 
the National Institute for Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), expect people to 
hit the ground running with a random assignment design right away. This work will challenge us 
to think about how long a planning period should be before testing a program design. I hope to 
hear how much time was needed in the early planning phase and the pre/post design phase 
before the programs were at a point to be tested. 

I will conclude on this point. This set of projects is also challenging us with respect to 
traditional aspects of random assignment, which are often done at the level of the individual 
child. What happens within programs in terms of spread of program information? Should 
random assignment be done at the individual, classroom, or program level? Is it possible at the 
program level or are there too many differences in the populations across the program? We will 
also face important challenges in terms of design issues. I hope we will learn as much from the 
process of collaboration as we will from the results. 

Similarly, I hope that we come back here at the next research meeting and reflect not only on 
the results, but also on the research methodology in terms of duration of pre/post testing, unit 
of analysis, and random assignment. What kinds of relationships should researchers, evaluators, 
and program staff have? What are the appropriate boundaries in these wonderful collaborations? 

Question: I love the idea of bringing these interventions to scale. It is both a challenging and 
exciting time to see how things shake out once researchers get their hands off. I also wonder 
about fidelity and the extent to which program impacts reflect program implementation. How 
can partnerships be maintained as collaborative relationships? I am also curious about costs. 




122 



128 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIEiS 



Dickinson: The question about fidelity is something we will talk about 3 years from now What 

continues to happen as we let go? For those of us who are letting go, it is a matter of how to 
maintain quality. 



Janet Fischel: We purposely take two previously packaged literacy programs. One is a full 
pectrum program delivered by the teacher. A professional comes and checks, trains, and checks 
l am interested in teacher development in terms of whether teachers worry about the curriculum 

ey are elivering on-site at the Head Start centers or if they go to workshops or national 
proressional training. 

u ^ 15-minute add-on computer program to produce the data. If a 

mild has been absent for 2 months, then he will not have data for 2 months. We get the daily 
ata for the children. It involves the teacher to some extent because there is printout material to 
«pand It beyond the 15 minutes on the computer. However, it is a different fidelity question 
because the teacher is freed up to either do other things or continue to support the emergent 
literacy and oral language richness efforts. The teacher does not have to work individually while 
the child IS interacting with the computer teacher. 

We thought this was an exciting way of freeing a teacher from some of the nuts and bolts of 
teaching the domains of emerging literacy. They do not have to wait until we are done with this 
project. Our interest was in taking two different curricula and seeing how children fared in that 
realm and others, including school readiness. 

Larry Schweinhart: The question of fidelity of the science-type FACES question is unclear. It 
can mean rigorous adherence to precise methodology without any deviation or intelligent 
application of methodology with reasonable variations. I do not know what "reasonable" is. It 
could mean some kind of application of principle. In fact, different educational models vary in 
how they define what constitutes an acceptable degree of fidelity. It is an enormous and impor- 
tant quesnon, but it is difficult because one is looking at different models. To look at the 
1 erent degrees of variability in replication at the same time is not simple. There is a history of 
attempts to bundle up criteria in that fashion. It was previously represented by the Program 
Effectiveness Panel and others that were primarily administered by the U.S. Department of 

Education. They then came up with a variety of criteria, including cost. We are not there vet with 
these interventions. ^ 

Dickinson: Questions about fidelity and cost actually go together because the cost of our 
program per child is analyzed as we work with teachers who have 18 children in their class- 
rooms. If the impact is only for 1 year, then the cost is different than if we can say that the 
impact continues for 5 years, in which case the cost per child almost disappears. 

Comment: It is important for the various programs to document how much time they spent in 
ttammg, who delivered the training, when staff were involved, and how much of their time was 
devoted to this training as opposed to their routine duties. These measures indicate what that 
cost IS. ^ey are important questions because they help to shape the criteria used to develop an 
acceptable level of implementation. 



129 



123 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Findings From the Head Start 
Mental Health Research Consortium 

COCHAIRS: Michael L. Lopez, Cheryl Boyce 
DISCUSSANT: Matthew A. Timm 

PRESENTERS: Dofina Bryant, Edward G. Feil, Steve Forness, Terry Hancock, Lisa A. McCabe 

■ Results From a Classroom and Home-Based Intervention 
for Preschool Aggression 

Donna Bryant, Janis Kupersmidt, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 

■ Cross-Cultural Analysis of the Early Screening Project 

Edward G. Feil, Hill Walker, Oregon Research Institute 

■ Systematic Early Detection and Self Determination Approach 
for Mental Health Intervention in Head Start 

Loretta Serna, University of New Mexico 
Steve Forness, UCLA Neuropsychiatric Institute 

■ Early Identification and Prevention of Conduct Disorde 
in Head Start Children 

Ann Kaiser, Terry Hancock, Vanderbilt University 

■ The Emotional Health of Low-Income Children Over Time: 
Influences of Neighborhood, Family, Head Start, 

and Early School Experiences 

Lisa A. McCabe, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn , Columbia University 

Michael L. Lopez: Head Start's Mental Health Research Consortium was started in 1997 in 
partnership with the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). We got together to begin an 
initiative focused on developing new research in the area of mental health within the Head Start 
context. We wanted to try and support new research that would develop and test applications of 
theory-based research and state-of-the-art techniques for the prevention, identification, and 
treatment of children's mental health issues. That is a tall task in and of itself We put out an 
announcement and assembled a wonderful group of partners for the Consortium. 

Despite our attempts to cover a number of different areas, we ended up figuring out that the 
consortium falls into two main categories: assessment issues and intervention issues. In the 
assessment category, we have the University of Oregon Early Screening Project with Ed Feil. Lisa 
McCabe of Columbia University will describe the emotional health component. On the inter- 
vention side, Terry Hancock will present the Vanderbilt University project on early identification 
and prevention of behavior and communication problems. Then we will hear from our other 
two projects, including Donna Bryant of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and 
Steve Forness from the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA), representing the Univer- 
sity of New Mexico site. We will close with Matt Timm from Tennessee Voices. 1 will explain his 
connection and role in this activity, as he carries the torch of some of the research findings. This 
is the 5th year of the consortium, and 1 do not want to say final year, because we are doing some 
jointly-funded, cross-site data analysis which will continue over time. 

Edwards G. Feil: 1 am from the University of Oregon and the Oregon Research Institute. 1 feel 
fortunate to be one of the grantees working with this consortium, blending Head Start with the 



er|c 



124 



130 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



Administration on Children, Youth and Families (ACYF), and NIMH. We are focusing on 
children's mental health and trying to provide as much as we can, on both screening and 
interventions. 

Why screen young children? I am probably preaching to the choir, but I would like to lay out 
a few things to help you understand where I am coming from. Problem indicators are evident in 
preschool. These behaviors are not the same as those seen among adolescents or even early 
elementary school-aged children, but rather it is a kernel of what those later behavior problems 
will become. These behaviors begin with simple things like noncompliance, as well as more 
serious behaviors, such as biting. I am talking more about behaviors that are fairly t 3 q}ical for 
some children and that make teachers anxious. Later on in the course of the school year, these 
behaviors may increase. 

We are finding that when children reach preschool or enter any t 3 T?e of structured setting 
those behavioral problems start coming out in a fairly severe way. In some of the qualitative data 
we have collected for another project, we have found that the typical child's behavior gets worse 
over the school year, according to teachers. We need to do something early on to prevent that. 

I am not talking about a large proportion, but these estimates are fairly conservative. I have 
heard that upwards of 15% of children are in need of mental health services. About 5% of the 
children have conduct disorders and are more aggressive, requiring a large proportion of 
teachers' time later on. About half of those children maintain some t 3 q>e of behavior problem 
into adulthood. This 5% of children account for over 50% of discipline referrals. Sixty-eight 
percent of youth, aged 10 to 17 years, are arrested at least once. If we can intervene early with 
these children, we can possibly make a change. 

Some research has shown that if children are early starters with behavior problems coming 
into school, and are chronic offenders, these things will predict violent offending patterns later 
on. I think of those things as a tripod, which needs three legs or it will fall. When they come to 
us with behavior problems that we can affect, that is one leg. If we can stop that initial offending 
or that initial behavior problem, hopefully a continued pattern will stop. I think about it as a 
chronic disease after about fourth grade. Especially with Head Start and preschool, we have an 
opportunity from birth through fourth grade to intervene and "cure" them. After that, one is 
treating it as a chronic condition and just keeping it from getting worse. Early intervention in the 
school, home, and community is the best path. 

One issue in working with young children and their behavior problems is that behavior 
problems are a part of normal development. It is not necessarily deviant or pathological to 
exhibit some types of antisocial behaviors, but it is telling to compare the frequency and 
intensity of these behaviors over time. For example, a preschool child's tantrum is far less 
indicative of behavioral problems than a junior high school child's tantrum. With young 
children, it is not whether or not they have the tantrum, but rather how often and at what level 
of intensity. Does it happen every day? When they have a tantrum, does one have to clear the 
whole room? 

We look at this in two ways, along externalizing and internalizing dimensions: externalizing 
aggression, social skills deficits, hyperactivity, and lack of attention. For people who work in 
Head Start, three or four children probably come to mind who are internalizing children, 
socially withdrawn, with social skill deficits and inhibitions. Those are the two dimensions that 
we are looking at, so it is important to balance both the positive and the negative when doing 
assessment. This is an individualistic approach with the intervention focused on the positive. 

Screening in diverse Head Start centers must use appropriate gender and cultural norms while 
being user-friendly, but few screening instruments exist. There is always an issue of labeling 
versus eligibility for services. We want to focus on eligibility for services rather than labeling, but 
sometimes it is hard to tease those two apart, or to link the assessment to the intervention. 

Teachers have an amazing normative curve inside their heads. A teacher teaching for 10 years 
with 15 children in the classroom has a sample of 150 children with whom to compare social. 




125 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



emotional, and physical development. The idea is to take all these sources of information and 
overlay them for what I would call convergent validity, or the "truth or goodness to fit" question. 

For the Early Screening Project, we try to answer two questions. Is behavior affected by child 
ethnicity, teacher ethnicity, and minority status based on the classroom ethnicity? Does being 
"different" in the classroom change things for a child? 

Our Early Screening Project instrument is adapted from the SSRS, which is an elementary 
school version. It has three stages. The first stage involves a teacher ranking on externalizing and 
internalizing dimensions. Teachers then rate the top-ranked children. After that, there is a parent 
questionnaire and direct observation for a few children. Stage one provides standards and 
definitions for both acting out and withdrawing behaviors. Teachers review the class list. They 
list and rank five children from most down to least on the two dimensions. 

Stage two involves looking at more specific behaviors. There are critical events, which 
basically occur or do not occur. Direct observations confirm teacher judgments, but from a 
different angle. For normative data, we have 2,800 children in stage one. By stage three we are 
down to about 500 children, which is pretty good psychometrics, especially when looking at a 
6-month test/retest and at the age of these children. 

For our cross-cultural project, we had five Head Start grantees in Oregon with 42 classrooms. 
There were 164 children, one third of them were girls. Children were 4 V 2 years of age. Child 
ethnicity was mostly White (54%), but there was a pretty good mix. More importantly, we found 
no significant differences on teacher ratings based on child ethnicity. 

The teacher population was predominantly White (78%), and we matched child and teacher 
ethnicity to see if there was a match. There were no significant differences. Whether or not 
teachers and children had the same ethnicity did not seem to affect the teacher ratings. Interest- 
ingly, when we explored classroom ethnicity, we looked at the ethnic majority in the classroom. 
If the classroom was 40% Latino, we labeled it a Latino classroom. That is a rough measure. 
Again, child ethnicity matched with classroom. If the child was Latino and the classroom waS 
40% Latino then there was an agreement; if not, it was a no. Sixty-four percent of the children 
were a match. We did find significant differences on maladaptive behavior. What that tells me is 
that if one is different in the classroom, he or she will be rated slightly differently. Having 
someone within the community, a teacher of the same ethnicity as the same community, and 
rating the children or going through the screening process will yield a greater difference if that 
child is a little different from other children. 

These findings are in the preliminary stage, and we still need to go through and fine-tune 
them. However, it is interesting to know that teachers do not seem to be biased based on 
ethnicity. They do not seem to be biased based on their own ethnicity or the child’s ethnicity, 
but there seems to be a difference in relation to how different the child is within that classroom. 

Steve Forness: My colleagues are Loretta Serna and Elizabeth Neilsen, and we are focused on 
a primary prevention program, which is a universal classroom-wide program for Head Start. 

We are assuming that many children in Head Start are at-risk. We will do secondary and tertiary 
prevention for the children who do not respond. However, we are basically a primary prevention 
program. 

This primary prevention program in mental health is designed to teach social and self- 
determination sWlls to children. Since we are in Head Start, we embed these skills in stories, 
puppets, and songs. The children think that they are hearing stories about animals, but we are 
giving them primary mental health skills. Since we are located in the Southwest, coyotes and 
roadrunners star as the creatures in our stories. The story is embedded with a discussion for each 
of these four skills: discussion, rationale, modeling, and practice. For example, in the "sharing" 
story, Sally the groundhog wants to dig with some other children, but they will not share the 
shovels with her little playmate groundhogs. She goes to Wiley Coyote, and he describes to the 
whole group why it is important to share, how one can share, offers a rationale, and then they 
model how to share. The story is also embedded with songs and pictures. We then have centers 



ERIC 



126 



132 



in the classroom that focus on the songs for the lesson with puppets and learning centers for 
practice and generalization. This is integrated as much as possible into the Head Start curriculum. 

The major components of the project involve listening and following directions. That may 
not sound like a mental health skill, but if one thinks about children with Attention Deficit 
Disorder (ADD) and their difficulty following directions, it is one of the primary mental health 
adaptive skills. I also think it was Bob Pianta who found in a study that Idndergarten teachers 
said "following directions" was the number one thing that kindergarten children did not do well 
when they began school. Then there is self-management in the group, managing one's own 
behavior in a group, problem solving, and sharing. Those were the four major components of 
our self-determination program. 

For our study, we were in classrooms for two sessions per week for 1 6 weeks. We attended 
classrooms for 3 hours in the morning and then another 3 hours in the afternoon later in the 
week. We devote roughly 4 weeks to each of the story lessons, which are based on the major 
topical components described earlier. 

These are our data from last year. Of the teachers, one had 30 years of experience, one had 15 
years, and one had 2 years of experience. As Feil mentioned, they had different kinds of norm 
groups in their minds, depending on their experience. We had 98 students from six Head Start 
classrooms this year, with 51 children in three experimental classrooms and 47 children in three 
control classrooms. The participants were primarily Latino. There was a small amount of 
difference between our two groups, but we overwhelmingly had a Latino population with some 
Native Americans and African Americans. 

I am going to use the data from our first year. We used outcome measures that all of us are 
using, and we got interesting data from the Problem Behavior Scale, including significance 
between experimentals and controls. In many cases, experimentals were going up and controls 
without intervention were going down, which tells you how much risk there is in children at 
Head Start, without any kind of intervention. They are in a downward trend in some of these 
skills over the year. 

We found significant effects in a measure from the Early Screening Project (ESP) of adaptive 
behavior, and we came close on maladaptive behavior. There were significant differences on 
social interaction, but we did not seem to touch aggression and did not seem to touch critical 
events, which was a list of psychiatric symptoms. 

Also during that first year, out of the 10 or so measures, we got significance on a general 
measure of adaptation. On both the Attention Deficit Disorder Scales, particularly on the 
inattention measures, and on the Abbreviated Symptom Questionnaire, we got significant 
results. We did not touch opposition on defiant disorders or the aggression area. 

Therefore, primary prevention does not seem, at least in this area, to touch aggression as 
much as it does some of the other behaviors such as inattention. We also did not have any 
impact on the overall measure of adaptation, a psychiatric measure of adaptation. We did find 
significance on 5 out of our 10 measures, and all of them were in the right direction. 

That first year, we had what we might call a "Daniel effect." Daniel, a male teacher in the 
preschool class, is partly Native American and pardy Latino, and obviously a good role model 
for these children. We thought that perhaps all of those great results were a "Daniel effect," 
rather than our primary prevention curriculum. The next year, we wanted to have the teachers 
carry this out. We wanted to have 2 full days of training for Head Start at the beginning of the 
year, and we ended up getting only two 2-hour sessions. As a "train and hope" type of proce- 
dure, we did not do as well during the 2nd year. Out of eight measures, there was significance on 
the same two measures of problem behavior and on the Conner Scales; they were the same ones 
as the 1st year. We did not seem to touch any other ones, so that can hardly be called a partial 
replication. Without Daniel there, we were not getting any effects. 

We also thought it might be pardy because what we are measuring may be different from 
what we are teaching, which has always been a problem in social skills. We added on other 
evaluation procedures in our 3rd year, and we also added on structured situadons where we put 




127 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



the child in a situation with another child where they had to share, and we then reported their 
behavior on a very gross measure. The observers who were doing this were blind to which were 
experimental or control classrooms. If the child was actually able to do the behavior correctly, he 
got a 2; partially, he got a 1. If he could not do it, he got a 0. 

We took six probes throughout the year. We started at the beginning when we were pretesting. 
We did another one before the intervention began in October, and then we did four at the end 
of each 4-week segment. The baseline for listening and following directions was around 40%. 
After teaching, it goes up to close to 90 or 100%. For "managing your behavior," it is 20% at 
baseline, and it went up to 90 or 100% post-teaching. The same ^ing occurred with problem 
solving and sharing, but again we only had one data point to report. We wish that we had more 
data points, but the year ended before we could get another data point. The important thing is 
that they are learning the skills. Now we are starting to analyze other pre- and post-data on 
mental health measures to see if that corresponds. Are the children increasiiig on these skills, the 
same ones that are increasing on the mental health measures, and are there any correlations? 
There is always a problem of whether or not we are using good outcome measures for what we 
are doing. 

I want to shift gears and talk about our future plans by using a pilot study that we did at our 
site this year. This pilot study was looking at how to identify children as having emotional 
disorders. What we were looking at, and what our consortium is going to look at over the next 
couple of years as we share data, are the various combinations. We took off of those top three 
lines and matched problem behaviors as with adaptive behaviors, maladaptive behavior, or 
social interaction. Then we took the Critical Events Index, which is a list of psychiatric symp- 
toms, and matched those with three different measures of functional impairments. We did the 
same thing for aggression with three different measures of functional impairments. We found 
that 32% of children met criteria on at least one of these measures for having an emotional 
disorder that was fairly significant, of having both functional impairment and symptoms. 
However, the range was from 2 to 12%. 

The difference in males was also significant. Depending on which measures were used, males 
or females were overidentified in some cases. In regard to what Feil mentioned earlier about 
ethnicity, in our particular site only 6% of children were White, but they were getting identified 
at fairly high rates with about 25% identified as having emotional behavior problems. 

I do not know what exactly is going on there, but all of our teachers were Latino, and Latinos 
were slightly underidentified. They are slightly underidentified anyway in mental health services. 
The bottom line is that if these different kinds of measures are used, one must be aware in Head 
Start settings that one may be paying a price in terms of either ethnic or gender bias. This is only 
one site. Over the next few years, I look forward to joining my colleagues in a collaboration to 
pool all of our data and then tease out these issues again. 

Donna Bryant: I am coprincipal investigator with Janis Kupersmidt on the North Carolina site 
of the mental health center there and we have been joined in this past year by a post-doc, Mary 
Ellen Vogalar Lee. We have two great research coordinators and data collectors, and our clinical 
supervisor is Donna Marie Winn from Duke University, who has been a member of the Fast 
Track Project for many years. 

Feil did a great job explaining why we pay attention to our early child behavioral and non- 
compliance issues. I got into this field after doing measurement at a Head Start Quality Research 
Center for 3 or 4 years. Two of the directors at those meetings continued to ask when I would 
deal with the issue that most bothered them. They were concerned with the one, two, or three 
children in each class who were so difficult to deal with that they affected the entire classroom. 
When the RFP for this grant came out, I could not look these colleagues in the eye and not apply 
for it. I got into this through the backdoor, feeling like I owed it to my Head Start partners to 
study an issue that was most important to them. 




128 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



This intervention has three main targets: teachers, assistant teachers, and parents. We try hard 
to include the assistant teachers, involving them in both the training and on-site consultation. 
We do not want a two-tiered system. We also deal directly with parents or the primary caregivers 
and the children. It is both a universal intervention and a targeted intervention for those 
children who are having problems when they come into Head Start. We use teacher-training 
workshops, one-on-one teacher mentoring, parent group meetings, and home visiting. 

The goals of the teacher component of the intervention are to: (a) build positive relation- 
ships, to help teachers understand the behavior change process, (b) help them reduce inappro- 
priate behaviors and learn good ways of increasing appropriate behaviors, (c) learn better 
classroom transition management techniques, and (d) use reading to enhance children's pre- 
literacy and communication skills. We were influenced early on by Russ Whitehurst's dialogic 
reading results, which were coming out right about the time that we started this work. Ann 
Kaiser and Terry Hancock's work showing the impressive correlation between children with 
language problems and children with behavioral problems also influenced us. This is a chicken- 
and-egg issue; one is not sure which comes first, but the fact is they go together. Given that 
reading should be a natural and frequent part of early childhood programs, we wanted to build 
on that to infuse a mental health nature to it. 

The goals of the home visiting component are to help increase parents' positive involvement 
in their children's education, to encourage parents to read more to their children, and to read 
dialogically. For parents, we encourage more positive approaches and fewer negative approaches 
to help the children learn how to solve problems and manage anger. 

When we began this project in 1996, we were also working with some Office of Educational 
Research and Improvement (OERI) funding. During the first 2 years of this project, we had three 
interventionists working in the field supported by both Head Start and OERI, and we looked at 
the literature. My goal was not to develop a new curriculum, but rather to find what had been 
developed, tested, and shown to be successful with 3- to 5-year-olds. We wanted to know what a 
Head Start program could adopt or do, for which there was already some evidence. Excluding 
studies of children with developmental disabilities, we found few studies of typically developing 
young children that included any kind of data about 3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds. 

Seventeen studies met our criteria, which was very loose. We started with stricter criteria, but 
we could not find many studies with such young children, so we had to loosen our criteria. Most 
of this kind of intervention has been done with first through fifth graders. What one would see 
was the moving down of those ideas into the preschool children's age range. Or one would see a 
number of studies that had children aged 3 to 8 years, which meant they had perhaps five 
children who were 3 years old and six children who were 4 years old; but the studies were not 
specifically geared for 3- to 5-year-olds. 

We were looking for empirically tested interventions, and we found one led by Carol Webster 
Stratton, who had conducted a number of good studies in Seattle with her program, "The 
Teachers and Children's Series." The Committee for Children's Second Step program in Seattle 
had put together a nice intervention package for teaching children emotional understanding and 
how to solve problems. Russ Whitehurst's dialogic reading methods are easy to train, and one 
can easily understand the principles, but getting them to occur in classes every day in small 
reading groups is hard. 

We wanted to take these empirically proven interventions and weave them together. The first 
two were clearly related to mental health issues, but the third, reading, is not. The fact is that 
through this dialogic reading, one should learn to communicate better, learn more words, learn 
that it is okay to talk and give opinions and tell ideas and that adults and peers will pay atten- 
tion if one talks and explains things. We gradually wove those together over the 3 years. We have 
been adding additional pieces like managing transition and room arrangement to promote 
better social interaction and movement around the room. We now deliver a 27-hour training 
program, front-loaded in the beginning of the year and then scattered throughout the rest of the 




133 



129 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



year. We provide each intervention class with one Second Step kit and 30 children's reading 
books that have been tied to the lessons of the Second Step program, with one day of consulta- 
tion per week, per class. 

We spend one morning a week in each of the intervention classes, to carry ideas from the 
group-based training into the classroom setting. Given that a couple of our interventionists were 
previously teachers, they had credibility working with and being good role models and mentors 
for the teachers. The only thing that they were not allowed to do was to manage the class. They 
could not come in and allow the teacher to leave to do other work. They had to be partners in 
the class with the teacher, and they would often use lunch or nap times to meet with the teacher 
individually on the day they were in her class. 

We had 22 intervention classes and 15 control classes. The classrooms were randomly 
assigned by center. We did not assign within a center because we know teachers talk to each 
other and they share materials and they share ideas. We matched up and assigned centers, which 
is why we end up with an uneven number of classes in each group. If a center was in the control 
group, the teachers were told that they could train the following year. We have a huge teacher 
turnover issue in my state, so only three teachers from the control group have ever come back in 
the following year recjuesting the intervention. We involve teachers and assistant teachers. We do 
fall and spring teacher interviews and observations in the classroom, and we also do parent 
interviews. We did ECERS observations and quality measures in the classroom. We also had the 
relationships of the teachers and children rated by our data collectors. 

The measures I will report on today come from the Social Skills Rating System and the Child 
Global Assessment Scale. Forness had some results on this issue, and ours are just the opposite. I 
will also talk about Aggression Rating Scales, and a simple checklist of aggression developed in 
the first year of our project of children's behaviors and the frequency with which they do them. 

Many questions measure on scales of "a lot, a little, or none." We wanted to find out about 
behaviors occurring every day, once a week, or once a month. Sometimes, misbehaviors can be 
so salient that they do not have to occur very often for them to be perceived as a problem, and a 
child gets labeled early. We wanted to see how those behaviors stretched out. We have an article 
from an issue of Behavioral Disorders that was published 2 years ago, looking at 400 children 
rated in 40 community programs. 

This is the overall study design. In these classes, we had targeted both aggressive and 
nonaggressive children. In the fall, we had teachers rate all children in their classes on this issue, 
using measures of aggression and a couple of the Early Screening Project (ESP) scales. We had 
already obtained parent consent from a number of parents in the class to be a part of this study. 
We then looked at the ratings that the teachers gave to these children, still anonymous to us. We 
found out by initials which children were one and a half standard deviations above the mean on 
aggression and which children were at the mean or below on aggression. 

We ended up with 107 children in our study who were rated by their teachers as highly 
aggressive in the intervention and control classes, and 86 less aggressive children. Remember 
that we are missing that middle quartile. We identified those children at the mean and below as 
not aggressive; they are "okay " children. Children who are already showing problems with 
aggression in late September are one and a half standard deviations above the mean. 

This is data only from the children for whom we have intensive information, including 
parent interviews; if we look at the children who are anonymous to us in the total class, there 
are 714 children for whom we have data. Primarily, these Head Start programs were serving 
African American children who had African American teachers. About one third of the teachers 
had an undergraduate degree or higher. These were children from low-income families in 
Durham, Chapel Hill, Raleigh, Roxboro, and other places in North Carolina. The children were 
exposed to a lot of stress and violence. It is incredible how many children know about guns 
already. They are exposed to that in their communities, even in small mral communities of 
North Carolina. 





130 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



These are the results on our measure of aggression. If we had not shown a difference, I would 
have been worried because this is how we selected the sample. In the fall of their Head Start 
year, what we see are large differences between the children who were selected because of their 
problems with aggression and children who did not exhibit this problem. What one also sees is 
that there was no improvement over time in the children who were rated initially in the fall as 
aggressive by their teachers. That sounds similar to Forness' result, that the intervention did not 
touch the high-end, aggressive behaviors. We are also seeing that there was an increase in 
aggression from the fall to the spring among children who were originally selected as not 
aggressive in the fall. 

Unfortunately, when we look at other measures of behavior, they follow the same pattern. 
Whether we use the SSRS externalizing or the Conner's, they look about the same. However, we 
did see some effects when looking at the positive behaviors. Teachers rated most children with 
higher scores in the spring than in the fall on social skills using the SSRS. Perhaps what you are 
seeing, however, is a general effect of Head Start. There is some improvement from the fall and 
spring assessment on the child's social behaviors. Even the aggressive children in the control 
classes were rated higher on social skills in the spring. Adjusting for the fall scores in the spring, 
we saw a significant effect of the intervention on social sldlls. We did not see the effect on the 
misbehaviors, but we saw it on the positive social skills. 

A measure that Forness talked about, for which we did not see any changes is called the Child 
Global Assessment Scale. It is like a thermometer with a rating from 10 to 100, and it is easy to 
use. Teachers read the simple ratings by 10, and they give the child a score. A score of 60 or 
below is a sign of difficulty, above 60 is better, and above 80 is great. What we see on this 
measure is that the aggressive children in the control group get significandy worse in the spring. 
We do not see a difference over the course of the year for the nonaggressive children. However, 
for the children who begin the year rated by their teachers as having problems, we see the 
children in the intervention group improving and the children in the control group getting 
worse. 

Finally, what did the parents say? We did not see any differences in the parents' ratings of 
negative behaviors, but we did see differences in the parents' ratings, that is, a marginally 
significant effect of the intervention. We have presented these results from Cohort I before, and 
now we have another cohort. I thought that by the time we got both cohorts, we would see 
something. Even with both cohorts, it approaches significance but is not quite there. It also does 
show that the parents may see some changes. 

Overall, we see that there is a positive effect on children's social skills but not so much on 
their aggressive behaviors, which is what we were aiming for in the first place. We saw that all 
groups improved on several of the teacher rating scales. We have to remember that the life stress 
faced by these children is very high. The Head Start teachers all do a great job through the course 
of the year. Some teachers taper off at the end of the year as they get worn down. If we are 
developing an intervention that will work within the context of Head Start, we must be able to 
deal with those issues and integrate the program into those kinds of problems that they are 
having. Teachers report that the control group is significantly more impaired at the end of the 
year than at the beginning. 

For the future, we must look at moderator variables, which we have just barely begun to 
analyze. What is the quality of the classroom? What are the family moderator variables? Al- 
though they are all poor, there are different levels of poverty and stress. Can this intervention be 
adapted and used by Head Start programs? 

Tcny Hancock: Our group has been interested in looking at the connection between behavior 
and language. We know that there is a complex connection, so we are continuing to do studies 
looking at that connection in different ways. We have two different studies going on through our 
Head Start grant. One is a longitudinal study assessing children's behavior and language in Head 





131 



SYMPOSIA/ROUND TABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Start at 3 years, 4 years, and 5 years of age. We are doing that to look at the stability of children's 
behavior and language over time, to try to see that connection. 

We recently presented a poster on our preliminary findings at the Family Research consor- 
tium in North Carolina. It was interesting because the children who had assessed language 
difficulties at 3 years old were three times more likely to be rated by their teachers at 5-years-old 
as having behavior problems. There is not a real clear-cut path, whether it is the chicken or the 
egg as Bryant described, but we are learning more about it. Our other study investigates parent- 
based interventions with children who have a behavior problem, a language problem, or both. 

We are engaging parents in that process and working with them on strategies that we know work 
well with those children. 

Today I will present a parent-based intervention, its components, and the process we go 
through. Then I will explain how we work with a representative parent. 

We know that when there is too much adult talk about behavior, there is too little talk 
containing important information that children need to learn language well and to get the 
language-rich labels that we have in the world. As adults, we give many instructions to young 
children. If you are a parent, teacher, or therapist of young children, I challenge you to monitor 
your own behavior when you go home, and see how much you do that. See how many instruc- 
tions you give young children of preschool age, meaning 2-, 3-, or 4-year-old children. 

We have done some observations of teachers. This study did not use Head Start teachers but 
rather early childhood teachers. In individual interactions, we found that 75% of what they said 
to children was an instruction or a command. Children do not learn labels or language that way. 
Hopefully, they learn how to follow instructions, and that is important. However, that should 
not be the bulk of what we are doing with children throughout the day. 

We know that communication and behavior are learned in the context of interaction with 
significant others, teachers, parents, and adults with whom children spend time. We found that 
for some of those children, behavior problems are actually problems in communication. 
Sometimes that resides in the child, sometimes that resides in the adult. Most of the time there 
is a little piece of both. For example, children who have auditory processing problems do not 
understand what they are supposed to do when an adult gives them a complex instruction. They 
are unable to untangle it. 

An adult can say that the child is noncompliant, stubborn, or they just do not get it or know 
what is expected of them. We see children with expressive issues, and we see that playing out 
when they do not have the words to say what they need. They may resort to hitting, grabbing, or 
whatever they need to in order to express themselves. We see aggression with peers and then 
with adults, including tantrums and "melt-downs" because they cannot say what they want. 

Adults often give too many instructions. This is typical of the parents with whom we work. 

We do 10-minute sessions that I will tell you more about, and it is typical for parents to give 50 
instructions in a 10-minute session; that is 5 instructions per minute. I would challenge any of 
us to go back and have our boss give us five instructions a minute. I can guarantee that all of us 
would look noncompliant. Sometimes we give too many instructions, and sometimes we are 
not clear. Sometimes, the communication behavior resides in the adult. 

In the intervention, we work with parents and children. The child gets 30 sessions with our 
interventionist, and then we do the same thing with the parent. We model for the parent what 
we are doing, and the parent is also working with the child. We start with responsive interaction, 
which comes right out of play therapy strategies. We also discuss behavior management with 
basic and clear instructions, and follow through. There is a component of environmental 
arrangement, since making shifts in the environment often cuts down on some behavior. We 
teach parents not to have 98 toys out, and put the child where there is not as much going on. 
Sometimes, a little shift in the environment can make a real difference. We also are teaching 
children, through a prompting strategy, to use more words and longer sentences. 

With responsive interaction, we teach parents and our interventionist to follow the child s 
lead and to go with whatever the child does or says. Part of why children are not talking more or 





ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



using more complex sentences, even when we do this piece, is because they do not have to use 
energy to focus on what the adult is saying. They may think to themselves, "Okay, she said 
something about a ball, and I know I need to do this. I think I got it." The adult is joining the 
child right where the child is, so the child does not have to use so much energy or reach as far to 
internalize what that adult is saying to them. It is right on top of what the child is saying. This is 
a powerful strategy. 

We have another grant to work with children who have disabilities. Their parents tend to use 
a great deal of air space because they are used to their child not talking. For a lot of our Head 
Start parents, the balance turns was trying to bring them up to their child. We had a number of 
depressed mothers who did not say anything to their child. In this work, the balance turns was 
getting them to engage and talk as muA as their child was talking. 

Meaningful feedback was based on what the child was saying and then talking at the child's 
target level. There were some mothers, before we began working with them, who used sentences 
that were shorter than their child's. If that is their model, the children will not talk in longer 
sentences. Again, much of that was based on the mother's depression. It is important to get 
parents to speak in four and five word sentences to their children, using language-rich words. 

Another important thing was the Match effect. If the child was upbeat, we would talk with 
the parent about being upbeat. One of the most powerful strategies within responsive interac- 
tion is expanding. Expanding is adding a word to what the word already means. This is powerful 
because it does two things. The child knows that the adult heard him because the adult is saying 
it back with added language; so the child is being pushed up to the next language level. 

Interestingly, when we start teaching parents the responsive interaction without working on 
behavior, in some cases we would see negative behaviors decreasing. It was because the adult 
was being responsive, and the children were engaged and having a great time. The child did not 
need to do negative behaviors for attention since they already had the attention. 

We would focus on the ones who were harder to deal with and begin the behavior manage- 
ment part. That basically involves limiting instructions to the ones that matter. Some interven- 
tionists would tell parents to pretend they could only give ten commands to their child a day, 
and to think carefully about when to use them. That approach helped the parents to be careful 
about what they instructed the child to do, instead of giving many commands, such as "sit here, 
listen, do this." Parents should give instructions with an action verb and label, so it is clear what 
the child is supposed to do. The parents should then follow through with positive conse- 
quences. We had some children acting compliandy and the adults said nothing to them. Or the 
adult gave many instructions and the child looked at them as if to say, "I do not think so," and 
there was no follow through either way. We taught the parent to think about things that were 
important to them, and to praise those things, using a "catch the child being good" strategy. 

The enhancement teaching part is harder to teach, but it has to do with modeling so that the 
adult will tell the child exactly what to say. There is also question asking, how to ask questions 
and then follow up. Another method is time delay, where the adult has the material and waits 
for the child to initiate. 

Incidental teaching uses all those techniques, but one waits for a child request. One knows 
that when children request something using language, their interest is really high. That is when 
the adult steps in and either says, "I want to play with the ball," or "Which one do you want to 
play with?" It is a prompt after a child request, encouraging the child to say more. 

I will now describe a 31-year-old mother. She has a GED, and has four children under 6 years 
of age. She was unemployed when she took part in our intervention, but she later found 
employment. The child was about 3 V 2 years of age when we started the intervention. When we 
started, the child had a Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence (WPPSI) score of 
68 and a Preschool Language Scale (PLS) score of 63. We did language assessments, PLS, and 
PPVT. We also had the teacher assess the child on the SSRS and the CBCL. When this child came 
into the intervention the teacher and the parent had pointed her out. We know that we need to 



139 



133 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



pay attention to children who have a language problem and whose parents and teachers both 
identify a problem. A session was set up using a transition of 3 minutes with the toy, clean up, 

3 minutes with the toy, clean up, 3 minutes with the toy, clean up. We thought that pattern 
would elicit some behavior that parents had to address, but it did not. Since the children had 
their parents present to play, they were happy and did not mind switching toys. However, we 
still use those transitions as time for parents to practice commands. 

In our data, baseline is the first 5 months, then the intervention, and then a 6-month follow 
up and a 1-year follow up. Responsiveness is the first thing that one teaches parents. If a child 
says something, say something back. We definitely impacted this aspect of communication. For 
advanced feedback including expansions harder, high-level interactions, we had significant 
effects. Parent negatives dropped out. We looked at parent praise and at three different kinds of 
praises. We looked at labeled praises, like telling a child, "I love the way that you are playing 
with the dog today." Unlabeled praise would be, "Great job." Unlabeled praise is acceptable, but 
we try to go for the labeled praise because the child can hear the lan^age for exactly what they 
are doing and for what the parent likes. We are also monitoring physical praise. 

We talk to the parent about what feels good to her, what she wants to work on, and what she 
likes. Then we try to put down the instmctions in play, and give the parent the concept of when 
the child should be in charge and how in transition, the parent should be in charge. We had 
parents who said it was hard for them to let the child be in charge, even in play; on the contrary, 
some parents had difficulty being in charge at any time. This format helped deal with that issue. 

Results showed that while we were there coaching parents, things went well, but when we 
were not there and were seeing the parent only once in a while, it was not enough to keep the 
whole thing going. We know from talking to parents that they did not do this at home once we 
were out of the picture. We saw that the child changed from pre- to postintervention. The 
posttest results right after the intervention went up 10 to 20 points. By posttest two a year later, 
the POS had dropped back down while the EBT stayed high. Again, the mother was not working 
with her, and we see it with the child. There was no a difference in how the parent or teacher 
rated the child's behavior in pre- or posttests. By posttest two a year later, she was getting down 
into the normal levels; the mother did do those strategies and saw a difference. 

What did we learn? The contents of a parent's language impact children's language and 
behavior, and parents can learn these strategies and enjoy doing them. It makes their own 
intervention with their child much more positive. Parents need more support over time than we 
gave them in this study. It seems that all of our families have chaotic lives, yet they said it is a 
commitment to attend our sessions. In the short-term, it is stressful because it adds one more 
thing to their already packed lives. However, parents tell us it is worth it through rating scales 
and discussion. We see their stress levels drop on the Parenting Stress Index, and they tell us they 
enjoy their child. That is worth a lot. 

Lisa McCabe: We have been looking at self-regulation and low-income children, and we are 
specifically focused on the influences of child, family, and neighborhood characteristics. We are 
interested in self-regulation because it is predictive of and related to a number of child and 
adolescent outcomes. For example, it is related to externalizing disorders, aggression, conduct 
disorder, and Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD). It is also related to internalizing disorders, 
such as eating disorders and depression. Social and academic competence is also related to self- 
regulation. The work of Walter Mischel has been particularly informative. He has found that in 
using delay of gratification tasks, children who are more able to delay while waiting for a treat 
demonstrate better social relationships in adolescence. They also demonstrate better cognitive 
skills; for example, their SAT scores are higher. Finally, self-regulation is related to the develop- 
ment of conscience. Children who do better on a battery of effortful control tasks demonstrate 
more conscience. 

We focus on four key components of self-regulation. The first is impulse control or delay of 
gratification, where children are waiting for something desirable. The second is sustained 



ERIC 




134 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



attention, which is the ability to pay attention to a task over time. The third is motor control or 
the ability to slow down motor responses. The fourth component is cognitive control or the 
ability to inhibit automated responses in favor of a less dominant response. The classic example 
for adults is the strip test. For children, a strip variation would be where they are told to perform 
a behavior only if Simon says to. They have to inhibit the desire to perform a behavior on 
command. 

Our project began with a pilot project called the GAMES Project. GAMES is a measurement 
for early self-control. We looked at low-income, 3- to 5 -year-old, English and Spanish speaking 
children. We wanted to develop and adapt some measures that had been used in clinical or 
laboratory settings and see if we could get them to work in homes and classrooms. We hoped to 
use those that worked in a larger study. 

There were three different batteries of assessments that we tested. The first was live coding 
assessments, which can be administered and coded on the spot in the home. I will focus on this 
for the rest of the talk. The other two we included in a battery of assessment could be adminis- 
tered, videotaped, and coded at a later date. The third assessments could be used both with 
individuals one-on-one and with a group of children. We took four familiar peers and tested 
them all at once with an administrator to see how different self-regulation would look in 
different contexts. 

This is a quick look at our piloting sample of 115 children. They had a mean age of 51 
months, approximately the same number of boys and girls, and were mostly Latino and/or 
Afncan American. Seventy-two percent of the assessments were conducted in English and 28% 
were conducted in Spanish. 

From that group of children, we developed the live coded assessment battery, which includes 
four different tasks. The first is the Circles task, based on some of the work by Kochanska. It is a 
fine motor control task where children are asked to draw a circle. They would have a sheet of 
paper with a larger circle and a smaller circle within it, and we asked them to draw a circle in 
between those two lines. One instruction says to draw at baseline speed, one says as quickly as 
possible, and then one says as slowly as possible. We are particularly interested in how well those 
children can slow down after we have just asked them to do something as quickly as possible. 

The second test was Walk the Line, originally developed by Maccoby in the 1960s and used 
since in a variety of studies. It is a gross motor control task similar to circles. We put a line on 
the floor and ask children to walk once at baseline speed and then twice as slowly as possible. 

We did not do the fast trial since we did not want children running down the line. 

The third test involves Gift Wrap, and is a delay of gratification task. Again, it comes from the 
work of Kochanska, who used it in laboratory settings. The variation that we used was to tell 
children that we had a present for them, but we wanted it to be a surprise, so we needed to wrap 
it. We would ask the children to help by not peeking while the present was wrapped. We would 
have them sit with their back to the administrator, and the administrator would make wrapping 
noises and entice them to peek. We would make them wait for 60 seconds, observing the 
peeking behavior during that time. 

Finally, we used a measure from the Leiter battery, an attention sustained drawing game. It is 
a non-verbal test of the ability to sustain attention to a task. Based on the piloting work, we 
decided that these four assessments were appropriate for use in this larger scale study on human 
development in Chicago neighborhoods. The study has two major components, but I will focus 
on the longitudinal component. 

The longitudinal study has an accelerated longitudinal design that involves 7,000 respon- 
dents from seven cohorts. The children are drawn from 80 Chicago neighborhood clusters. 

Our focus is actually on the 7 birth cohorts. During this third wave of data collection, the birth 
cohort is now 4 years of age. This is a quick look at the sample of 4-year-olds with which we 
were working. We had approximately 866 children, with equal numbers of boys and girls. It is a 
largely Latino and African American population. It is predominantly low-income, with about 





135 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



two thirds of the families reporting an annual income of less than $30,000. The highest level 
of education for the majority of families was high school or less, and most of them were married 
families. 

The data from wave 3 is new. It is not fully cleaned yet, so what I will present are some 
preliminary, descriptive findings. At the end, I will describe what we plan to do with these data. 

Let us begin with the Gift Wrap assessment. The first thing that we wanted to see was whether 
these measures work, because this is one of the first large scale projects to include these mea- 
sures in a home-based setting. We wanted to look at variability. The Gift Wrap measure is a 6- 
point scale, ranging from no peeks at all, all the way to getting up out of the chair and coming 
over and trying to peek in the bag. The majority of children did not peek, but a significant 
number of children, about 40%, did peek on this task. We were especially interested in those 
children. The mean peeking score, from zero to six, was a four. 

In addition to looking at peeking behavior, we also asked our coders to record when children 
vocalized during the task. We categorized the vocalizations into two types. One was prompts, 
like "is it done yet, is it ready, can I have it now?" Another category included the sorts of conver- 
sations children would have. If one has ever worked with 4-year-olds, you know they can start 
random conversations about a birthday next week or some other attempt to talk. When we look 
at those prompting and talking behaviors, we actually see that the peekers are doing more of the 
talking in both of those categories than the nonpeekers. 

We also looked at the latency to peek, of finding how long it took before peeking for those 
children who peeked. We found a mean of 18 seconds. More than one-third of the children 
peeked within the first 5 seconds. Three quarters of them peeked within the first 30 seconds. It 
does not take them too long before they are turning around, because remember it was only a 
60-second period. 

For our two motor control tasks, most of the children were able to slow down, but there were 
significant numbers who did not. In the Gircle task, about 40% were not able to slow down, 
compared to 20% in the Walk the Line task. As one can see, the Walk the Line task is easier for 
this age group of children. The mean slow-down time on Gircles compared to baseline was 1 
second slower. For Walk the Line it was 3 seconds slower, and it is a large range from 38 seconds 
faster to 65 seconds slower on the circle. 

In our preliminary look at gender, boys are more likely to peek, and peek sooner, than girls. 
This is as one might expect. However, boys were more likely to slow down on circles than were 
girls, so we are getting some contradictory data in terms of gender, and we are going to explore 
this in more depth. There were no differences on Walk the Line. 

We are also looking at the potential influence of race and ethnicity. From the Gircles data, 
one can see that the White children are doing better. More White children are able to slow down 
than either Latino or African American children. Again, this is something we want to pursue 
further. One hypothesis for this difference is that language issues could have an impact. It may 
be that our Spanish version of assessments did not work as well for whatever reason. Another 
hypothesis is that Latino children may have fewer formalized early childhood experiences, and 
they would therefore not be as familiar with these types of testing, namely one-on-one assess- 
ment situations and formalized games. 

This is the influence of the primary caregiver's level of education. More of those children are 
slowing down who come from families where the primary caregiver had more education. Also, 
more of the children from higher-income families were able to slow down. This is again the 
Gircles task. This relationship was not significant in Walk a line nor in Gift Wrap. It may be that 
delay of gratification is not as susceptible to this kind of environmental influence as motor 
control. There is some evidence in the literature that motor control, in particular, may be 
susceptible to environmental influences. 

Finally, one of the unique aspects of the project on human development in Ghicago neigh- 
borhoods is all the neighborhood level data that we are gathering. Across all three tasks one can 




136 



142 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



see a neighborhood socioeconomic status (SES) effect, such that children from neighborhoods 
with higher SES are doing better at self-regulating in all three of the tasks. 

To conclude, Gift Wrap, Circles, and Walk a line seem to work well in this large scale data set. 
They have good variability and adapted well to the home environment. They were also easy to 
administer, which is key when worldng with 800 children and 20 different data collectors. 
Preliminary data also shows self-regulation is related to child, family, and neighborhood 
characteristics and expected directions. 

For our future analysis we plan to use a variety of multilevel modeling techniques to capture 
the fact that we have child, family, and neighborhood levels, and we can tease apart the complex 
relationships that might be involved in the development of self-regulation in children. We can 
look at the relationship of self-regulation to cognitive development, to exposure to violence, to 
early school experience, and to neighborhood racial composition. We can also look at the 
development of self-regulation over time because this is a longitudinal sample that we have 
followed from birth to 4 years of age. 

Lopez: In the consortium we learned early on that with five sites and the amount of data 
collected, there is no way that we can do anything but gloss over the surface. The latest Head 
Start Research Bulletin has a nice description of the consortium, among other Head Start-related 
research events. There is also a wealth of information on our web site where we list all of the 
consortium members and the publications they have been generating. This effort has been 
instrumental in keeping the movement going on mental health-related issues in Head Start, and 
we are in the process of reviewing our grants and proposals for infant mental health research 
projects. 

That is a perfect segue to our discussion because we asked Matt Timm to be our discussant. 

He represents the link that we are trying to build between our research efforts and what actually 
happens in the programs. This research may be wonderful, but if it does not go beyond the 
academic research journals, it will not have any staying power. One of the efforts we have 
emphasized is the translation of research to practice. We funded a Center on the Social and 
Emotional Foundations for Early Learning, which is about the translation or identification of 
research-based best practices. We are trying to become part of the program community through 
training and technical assistance. The Office of Special Education funded a parallel center that 
does some of the same things, so we are fortunate to have collaboration across centers. It is an 
example of two different entities funded by two different parts of the federal government, 
working together in collaboration. Timm is the coprincipal investigator of the Early Childhood 
Intervention Study based in Tennessee Voices for Children and the University of Colorado at 
Denver. It is a long-term follow up investigation of families served by the Regional Intervention 
Program (RIP). He is a senior faculty member at both of these centers. 

Matthew A. Timm: Every one of us that knows families and young children, and particularly 
those of us who have had the opportunity to be part of informal and formal longitudinal efforts, 
know that for the children who present serious challenging behaviors early in their lives, the 
grim realities or trajectory is often disturbing. Nicholas Hobbs, a mentor and a friend, once 
described these children as troubled and troubling, and it certainly applies for those of us who 
live and work with them. Ed Feil and others have shared some of that trajectory, but I would just 
like to mention three more, to remind us of what we are talking about and working toward. We 
know that in the absence of timely, effective intervention, the correlation of stability for extreme 
aggressive behavior from age 4 to 10 years is stronger than for IQ measures. That is an extraordi- 
nary study, but it holds and echoes what we have already heard from panel members. When it 
appears early and it appears strong, there is a high probability that it is going to persist in the 
absence of some significant, effective intervention. 

Ken Dodge and Associates also concluded, on the basis of work across multiple centers, that 
when aggressive behavior persisted until 9 years of age the best we could expect in most in- 




137 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



stances for the individual child is that antisocial behavior would be held in partial check 
through increasingly extensive and expensive interventions. Hope is not lost by 9 years old, but 
it certainly suggests that when it is still there by then, the chances become increasingly fewer and 
fewer. That is an individual who will be able to first of all survive, and secondly survive in a way 
that has meaning. 

We know from a variety of Department of Education efforts that children who are classified 
as seriously emotionally disturbed (SED) within the special education classification miss more 
days of school than do children from any other special education category. We know that of 
those children described as SED, 25% of them will be arrested while they are still in school and 
that fewer of them will finish high school. Of those who drop out, almost 75% of them are 
arrested within 5 years of departure from school. That is the trajectory we are talking about for 
many of the children. While acting out visibly aggressive anti-social behavior captures most of 
the attention, we are beginning to learn more about other mental health needs of young 
children that are not immediately visible, but which also carry a significant, predictive, trajectory 
relationship. 

I mentioned Hobbs and I would like to share another statement from him. It is one that it is 
deceptively simple on its face but profound upon reflection. It leads us to the next part of my 
remarks, which is to discuss how we frame research questions and what the implications of that 
framing might be for translation into practice. I do not have the answers, but I do have good 
questions that have been raised by many others. 

First, Hobbs says that the manner in which one defines a problem will substantially deter- 
mine the strategies used to solve it. That is simple and self-evident, and yet if we pause for a 
moment and consider its implications, it says so much. I would like to use the issue of school 
readiness, learning readiness, and reading readiness to look at the ways in which we initially 
define the problem, and then to look at some implications. 

One of the first tasks of the National Advisory Board for the Center on the Social and 
Emotional Foundations for Early Learning, 9 months into the first year of operation, was to 
develop a web site. We encountered a microcosmic moment facing problems that we all con- 
front. Once we begin to take what we think we know into the next arena, there are many 
challenges. There is so much concern about how much information is too much in the absence 
of ongoing technical system support and face-to-face collaboration. 

What we do know is that if effective interventions are presented early and in an organized 
fashion they do work. We are weaving our way through the process of what works and what 
does not work. The good news is that there many that do, and can work powerfully. If more 
longitudinal studies commence and continue, we can realize that some of these facts have 
durability attached as well. 

The bad news is that for those looking for the silver bullet, the golden goose, or the magic 
pill, it is not there in the work we know. These are complex considerations that do not lend 
themselves to a simple statement that says "do it and you're home free." The frustration that 
practitioners, teachers, and clinicians and family members and others have is that they are 
hungry for what works. They do not want to hear from the research side that something works 
sometimes, maybe, if, when, if you'll be careful and watch out for this or that. That is not a 
message that most of us facing children every day, particularly children with challenging 
behaviors, need to wade through. 

I would like to share four definitions of the problem from the senior four faculty members 
who are involved in both centers, including Glen Dunlap, Lise Fox, Phillip Strain, and myself. 
As you listen to these words, it is appropriate to suggest that one of those persons specialized in 
being cogent, another in being compelling, another in being combative, and another in being 
cryptic. You can decide who was who as you listen to this. 

We decided to see if we might indeed look at that issue of ready to learn. Very often, that 
readiness to learn does suffer from an overly restrictive definition that equates readiness with 
getting a head start in the curriculum of early school grades. While some efforts based on this 





ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



particular definition of the problem have met limited success, we would suggest that for the 
most part there are far too many examples of developmentally inappropriate practice and a 
general neglect of children who are different or who are at-risk. In other words, if we are going 
to have children ready for school, the presumption is that includes children with challenging 
behaviors, children who are struggling to simply maintain themselves at the most basic level 
within a group setting. 

Here are the four definitions. Developmental coherence is the first part of the definition. We 
would suggest that a great fraction of educational and psychological research compartmentalizes 
and treats various domains of performance, such as peer social skills or early literacy skills, as 
separate and distinct entities. This approach is more a matter of convenience than of logic and 
sound theory, and children, for the most part, do not desegregate when it comes to their skills. 
This being the case, the invitation is to utilize a curriculum and an intervention focus for being 
"ready to learn" that not only prevents and remediates challenging behaviors, but also impacts 
on children's overall development. The implication for measurement, and ultimately for 
practice, is comprehensive developmental assessment, repeated developmental and challenging 
behavior assessments, and then various examinations, the comorbidity of the conditions that 
might include developmental delay, part of the challenging behavior profile. 

The second we termed ecological grounding, suggesting that both theoretical writings and 
empirical evidence support the notion that behavior is not just a function of purposefully 
planned intervention environments. Behavior is a function of all the environments in which the 
child participates, most particularly the child's family; yet we know that for some children, there 
are distal influences that have a powerful influence on challenging behavior. 

Take for example tlte compelling data on violent neighborhoods, including what Bryant 
reported from Chapel Hill and Roxboro, around repeated media exposure to violent images. To 
understand being "ready to learn," we must understand the complex ecologies in which these 
children learn and to assure that "all children ready to learn" means that in many cases the child 
alone cannot be the sole focus of the intervention. We know from Carolyn Webb Stratton's work 
and other extensive literature reviews on early intervention with this group of children, that skill 
training with children alone often has limited effect. 

The third definition is consumer social validity. In preparing children to be "ready to learn," 
it seems important and practical to examine the social and behavioral standards of teachers in 
the early grades. The literature in this area provides a consistent and clear picture of the entering 
school repertoires necessary for success. Pivotal skills, among others, include working indepen- 
dently, following multi-step verbal directions, self- regulation, compliance with class rules 
concerning deportment, following class and school routines with minimal assistance, making 
requests for adult assistance with socially acceptable behaviors, and resolving peer conflicts 
without verbal or physical aggression. That is a full plate for the young child who needs to be 
ready for school. 

Importantly, the literature also shows that teachers differentially distribute their positive 
social attention in their instructional time toward the children who engage in these desired 
behaviors. Conversely, the children who do not have these skills primarily experience negative 
statements and fewer instructional interactions from teachers. There are obvious implications in 
terms of addressing not just the child needs, but also the implications within that setting. 

The fourth and final point we would call the reciprocal influence. A colloquial reading of 
"ready to learn" would apply that the onus for readiness resides solely with children. 'This is 
obviously not the case because learning is an interactive process with a social and physical 
environment. Within these social and physical environments, there are variants in the readiness 
to teach appropriate skills in an effective fashion. 

We have the rare opportunity to build upon the cumulative, critical knowledge interest, 
resources, attention, and concern regarding the needs of children with challenging behaviors 
and their families. 




145 



139 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



EARLY. HEAD START: NATIONAL EVALUATION 

Early Head Start: Program Impacts on 
3-Year-Old Children and Their Families 

CHAIR: Rachel Chazan Cohen 

DISCUSSANTS: Judith Jerald, Helen H. Raikes 

PRESENTERS: John Love, Ellen Eliason Kisker, Rachel Chazan Cohen 

■ Impacts of the Early Head Start Program 

on 36-Month-Old Children and Their Families 

John Love, Ellen Eliason Kisker, Jeanne Brookes-Gunn, C. Ross, R Schochet, K. Boiler, 

J. Constantine, C. Vogel, Helen H. Raikes, Rachel Chazan Cohen 

■ Early Head Start Implementation, Services, 
and 36-Month Outcomes 

Ellen Eliason Kisker, D. Paulsell, John Love, Helen H. Raikes 

■ Mediators of Early Head Start Impacts on Children 

Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, C. Ross, P. Schochet, A. Fuligni, C. Brady-Smith, 

Rachel Chazan Cohen 

Rachel Chazan Cohen: Today we are presenting tlie findings from tlie Early Head Start Re- 
search and Evaluation Project, a random assignment study of approximately 3,000 children and 
families in 17 Early Head Start programs across the country. This is the first time the results of 
this study are being presented to such a broad audience of researchers and program staff, so we 
look forward to hearing your comments at the end of the presentations. 

Early Head Start is a relative newcomer to the family of Head Start services, serving pregnant 
women and families with infants and toddlers up to age 3. The program provides comprehen- 
sive child development services through four program options: (1) home-based, (2) center- 
based, (3) combination options, and (4) locally designed options. 

The program, which began in 1995 with 68 programs, has now grown to over 664 serving 
approximately 55,000 children. The authorizing legislation, the Head Start Act of 1994, man- 
dated a rigorous national evaluation, and while we thought it was important to use a rigorous 
random assignment design in order to determine the impact of the program, we also knew it 
would not answer all our questions. Therefore, in addition to the impact study, we also con- 
ducted an implementation study to look at the early development of these 1 7 programs and 
learn about how they were growing and changing over time. At each of the 1 7 program sites, 
there also was a local researcher who teamed up with a program to conduct additional site- 
specific research of particular interest to that program and community. The local researchers 
collected much more information on program context and in-depth information on children 
and families. 

Our speakers today are John Love, a Senior Fellow of Policy Research at Mathematica who has 
been conducting evaluation work in Head Start for approximately 30 years and has been a 
principal investigator on this study since it began. He will present the overall impacts, as well as 
impacts for a selected number of family subgroups. Next Ellen Kisler, a Senior Researcher at 
MPR and also a principal investigator on the study since its beginning, will present impacts for 
different program subgroups. I will then talk about the mediating role of parenting impacts at 
age 2 on child outcomes at age 3 . Following these presentations we will hear from two discus- 



er|c 



140 



146 



administration for children and families 



sants Helen Raikes, a Society for Research in Child Development visiting scholar at ACE She has 
also been working on this evaluation since the beginning, and she will talk about the implica- 
tions of the work for ftiture research. Finally, Judy Jerald, the Nadonal Coordinator of Early 
Head Start, will talk about implications of the research for programs. 

John Love; As you see each one of our papers and presentations have many authors. This is the 
group that collaborated to produce the final report. For the next hour or so, we are going to 
invite you to join us on a tour of the highlights of the Early Head Start findings and what they 
mean for children, parents, programs, and policy. 

For the most part. Early Head Start programs did their job. They delivered their intended 
services to most families. We also saw interesting variations in what programs were able to do 
arid mat enables us to learn a great deal about foe impact of foose variations. While we see 
relatively modest effects, we see many of foem in many different areas: both for children and for 
meir parents, foeir families, and foeir home environments. Early Head Start serves diverse 
families and could make a difference for most of them. 

How do we know all fois? Let me take a few minutes to expand on Rachel's point foat fois 
was a very rigorous evaluation foat was mandated by Congress. In 1995 and 1996, 68 Early 
Head Start programs were ftmded. From foose programs we worked wifo ACF to select 17 foat 

j research. Those 1 7 programs spent the first 9 monfos after foey were 

fonded beginning to develop recruitment strategies, doing outreach, and so forfo. By July of 
1996 mey had recruited families foat foey began enrolling. When the families were recruited 
and came and filled out an application form, foe program sent foe names to us and we flipped a 
com, ran a lottery. In this case it was a computer program, but in a totally objective way, that 
assigned half of the families to a control group and the other half to the program to which they 

applied. All the families that applied knew of this possibility when they filled out the applica- 
tion form. 

of data that you will hear about— mostly about the impact on the child. 

We ha^ a large collection of developmental indices that were obtained at different points in 
time. 'Hiis information was collected at approximately 1-, 2-, and 3-years-of-age. There also is 
other information about services the families received in both the program and the control 
groups, which we thought was more a function of how much time they had been in the pro- 
gram. We collected these data at four time points, at 6, 15, and 26 months after random assign- 
ment and also when the families exited the program, based on the enrollment of the family and 
the random assignment. We also did a brief exit interview. This made it possible to compare the 
average outcomes of the program and control group members at each time point. 

Early Head Start serves pregnant women as well as infants and toddlers. The entire sample 
was enrolled before the children were 1 year of age, with the average age of enrollment about 4 
months. About 30 or 40 % were enrolled prenatally. Obviously, we could not get baseline data 
on anguage development for a child who is not yet born, but because this is a random assign- 
inent study, we know the differences we find at age 2 or age 3 or at age 20 or whatever, between 
the program and the control group, we know it is because of the influence of the program 

We looked at overall impacts across 17 sites and then identified important subgroups, the 
irM being program characteristics. Within different program characteristics, for example, with 
different patterns and implementation are those that took different approaches to serving 
families. They were randomly assigned to program and control groups. We collected informa- 
tion about those characteristics at the time the families enrolled, so we knew at baseline family's 
race, ethnicity, age of mother, and so forth. Ellen will report on the patterns of findings related 
to pro^am subgroups and I am reporting on patterns and findings based on family subgroups. 
Ne«, Rachel will talk about a special set of analyses that looked at the extent to which we found 

e^derice that the program's impacts at 2 years of age function as mediators on the impacts on 
the children at 3 years of age. 




147 



141 



SYMPOSIA/ROUND TA BLES/CONVERS AT ION HOURS 



The bottom line is that Early Head Start had positive impacts on multiple dimensions of 
children's development. Two measures used at age 3 were the Bayley Mental Development Index 
(MDI) and the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT). We found higher mean scores for the 
program group than for the control group, but perhaps even more importantly, we saw Early 
Head Start bringing children up from the bottom of the distribution, so that there are a smaller 
percentage of children who scored below 85 on these standardized tests. The program had that 
effect for both cognitive and language development. 

At age 2 we found a number of indicators that social/emotional development was being 
affected, such as lower levels of aggressive behavior, increased sustained attention, and increased 
parent engagement. By age 3 we found a larger number of these variables being impacted by 
the program. 

On the Bayley there was a 15% of a standard deviation size impact at 2 years of age and a 
slightly smaller impact, 12% at age 3. The pattern we found is what we consider important; 15% 
effect size at age 2 was significant at the .01 level and the 12% effect size at age 3 was significant 
at the .05 level. The same pattern appears with the percent Bayley MDI below 85. 

In terms of vocabulary we see a slightly larger impact at age 3. One has to recognize that Aere 
were different measures used at age 2 and age 3 because at age 2 the PPVT cannot be adminis- 
tered. However, we did do a parent report called the MacArthur Communicative Development 
Inventory. We found exactly the same pattern on this parent report of vocabulary at age 2 as we 
found on the standardized direct assessment of children on the PPVT at age 3. ^ 

On measures of the social/emotional aspects of behavior that are important for the child s 
development, we found increased sustained attention with objects, engagement with the parent, 
and decreased negativity with the parent. These were coded from videotapes of the parent and 
child interacting. In the case of sustained attention and engagement, the impacts were not 
significant at age 2, but they were much larger and significant at age 3. At both age 2 and age 3, 
there were significant impacts on reducing aggressive behavior problems. 

Along with the child impacts are a number of impacts on parenting in the home environ- 
ment, such as more warmth and supportiveness, reduction in parental detachment from their 
child in a play situation, an increase in the quality of how the parent assisted the child in a 
learning task; which relates to support for language, literacy, and learning. Support for language 
and literacy were coded from the Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment 
(HOME) scale. These include questions about how much the parents read to their child. We saw 
that Early Head Start parents were more likely to read every day than were control parents. There 
also was a reduction in negative forms of discipline, both in terms of reported spanking and an 
increase in the parents being able to talk about more constructive or positive discipline strate- 
gies, when given a hypothetical conflict situation. 

One goal of Early Head Start programs also is to enhance parents' economic self-sufficiency. 

It is not necessarily their primary goal, but it is part of what the programs are doing, while at the 
same time trying to enhance children's development and parents' interactions with their 
children. We saw a significant increase in the extent to which parents were engaged in education 
and training activities when the children were age 2 and 3 and having a job at some point. There 
was almost no effect early when the children were just 2 years old, but at the next time point, we 
begin to see merging at the .01 level impacts from being employed. There is a small difference 
favoring the program group to be more likely to be employed, but there is not a great difference 
of this impact on Early Head Start. Remember, however, that many parents are very young— 
there are many teenage parents in this sample — so some of them may not have been ready to be 
employed. In the third quarter of the 1st year, the program group was significantly more likely 
to be involved in education and training programs than the control group. 

Early Head Start programs also focus on health services, but we found that the control group 
also had access to a wide range of health services. Both groups were close to 100% in receiving 



O 

ERIC 



142 



148 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



some health services, in the number of doctor visits, the percentage visiting emergency rooms, 
the number of hospitalizations, and the parent rating of the child's health status. There was, 
however, a statistically significant difference in immunization; the control group was at 98% and 
die program group was up to 99%. An important difference we would like to learn more about 
is in the area of rates of hospitalization for accident or injury— the control group had a rate of 
1.6 % while the rate for the program group was 'A of that at .40%. 

Early Head Start has not shown major effects overall in the areas of health, family conflict, 
and stress, although there was an effect at age 2 in child safety pracdces. Again, these analyses 
were done within the randomized design. The groups were defined at baseline before anybody 
knew to which group they were being assigned. Now let us look at subgroups defined by various 
characteristics of the family. The first is whether the mother was pregnant or the child was 
already born at time of enrollment. On the MDI there were no significant impacts for the 
families who enrolled when the child was older, even though it was significant overall. Interpret- 
ing a subgroup finding is actually a combination of science, stadsdcs, and art, because there are 
so many factors to take into account. For the subgroups, the sample sizes are cut by about half 
so the same magnitude difference could be significant overall, but not significant for the 
subgroup. Looking at sustained attention, a whopping 47% effect size was found for the families 
who enrolled when the mother was still pregnant. For those who enrolled later the effect size 
was smaller (13%), but still significant. The conclusion is that the program also is making a 
difference for those families who enrolled later, but not as great a difference. The difference 
between the 47% and 13% has a significant high score of .01. 

Question: Did you also include the families who did not stay in the program, at their various 
levels of participation? 

Love: It is a litde more complicated than that, basically, because these analyses are not based 
stricdy on all the families that went through random assignment. However, we did an adjust- 
ment for some minimal degree of participation. The problem with that analysis is that one 
cannot determine who in the control group would have not participated had they been in the 
program group. 

Question: Did the control group participate in any other programs or no programs at all? 

Love: They could find any programs on their own in the community, and they did participate in 
a variety of programs. We have data on the control group, but not to the degree or intensity as 
for the Early Head Start families. 

Another subgroup was in the category of whether the mother was a teenager or was older at 
the time that they enrolled. For this group the baby usually had already been bom. We did not 
find that the programs are more effective for teen mothers than for older ones, but we did find 
that the programs were effective with this often difficult-to-serve population. 

There was a subgroup of sites (8 out of the 17) where local researchers agreed to administer 
the CESD depression scale at baseline. We found that even though a mother was depressed at 
the time they began the program, the mother was able to work with the child and the program 
was able to have an impact on the child like in the area of increased sustained attention and 
encouragement— again, a group that is often difficult to serve. The mothers also came out higher 
in the program subgroup than controls on supportiveness, and were less likely to be detached in 
interactions with their child even though they began the program depressed. However, things 
like education were more likely to be an impact if the mother was not depressed at the time of 
enrollment. In conclusion, we can say that Early Head Start has delivered services to nearly all of 
the families and that the programs are making a difference. 



Q 

ERIC 



149 



143 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Ellen Eliason Kisker: One priority in the evaluation was to get beyond the question of did it 
work, to learn as much as possible about for whom it worked and also what worked. In ap- 
proaching the latter question of what worked, we focused on variations and impacts among 
programs taking different approaches to providing services to families, and among programs 
that followed different patterns of program implementation. 

As specified in the Head Start Program Performance Standards, programs designed their services 
in response to community needs and in a particular context. As a result, program features varied 
across the 17 sites that participated in the study. It was not feasible to do a planned variation 
study, that is, to assign programs randomly to implement services in particular ways or to take 
particular approaches. It was feasible, however, to group programs according to the approaches 
that they took or the patterns of implementation that they followed, to look at impact separately. 

These impacts are still based on the experimental design and they tell us about the effective- 
ness of the various program approaches and patterns of implementation among the programs 
that took those approaches or followed those patterns of implementation, given all of their 
other characteristics. They do not necessarily tell us whether those approaches would have been 
effective if other programs that chose other approaches had adopted that approach instead. 

The Early Head Start Research Programs provided child development services in several 
different ways. Some of the programs provided child development services in center-based child 
development centers for at least 20 hours per week, supplemented by parenting education arid 
family support services. Home-based programs served families primarily in weekly home visits 
and regular parent/ child group activities, along with other types of parenting education and 
parenting support. Some of the programs in the research were mixed approach programs, which 
offered home-based services to some families, center-based services to other families, or a 

combination of home and center-based services to some families. 

It is important to note that the approaches programs took were dynamic over the evaluation 
period. Over time, as welfare reform was implemented and parents began facing work require- 
ments, some of the home-based programs added center-based services and became mixed- 
approach programs. For the research, we used the program approach in 1997, which we 
judged to best represent the type of services that families received through most of the evalua- 
tion period. 

What we found when looking at the impacts on child development by program approach 
was that, for most child development outcomes, program impacts did not differ significantly by 
program approach. However, the mixed approach programs had a much stronger pattern of 
favorable impact with some affect sizes in the 20 to 30% range. 

Impacts on the Bayley MDI did not differ significantly by approach, nor did the impacts on 
the percentage scoring below 85. The differences across approaches and impacts on the PPVT 
were not statistically significant. Only the impact for mixed approach programs was large 
enough to reach statistical significance, and the mixed approach programs also significantly 
reduced a proportion of children that score below 85 on the PPVT. They did that to a signifi- 
cantly greater degree than the other types of programs. That continues for a pattern of stronger 
impacts on language development among the mixed approach programs that we saw when 
children were 2 years old. 

Both mixed approach programs and home-based programs also had some favorable impacts on 
positive aspects of children's behavior, such as engagement of the parent during a play task, while 
the center-based programs had a much stronger pattern of favorable impacts on negative aspects of 
children's behavior. Overall across the approaches, each approach had some favorable impacts on 
child development, with some modest variations in those patterns of impact by approach. 

Early Head Start also had favorable impacts on important aspects of parenting when children 
were age 3. In fact, the impacts appeared to be stronger and more consistent across a broad 
range of parenting outcomes for parents in the mixed approach programs. 



er|c 



144 



150 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



For each approach, the impact of Early Head Start on the home was favorable, but not 
statistically significant. When children were age 3, the impacts of mixed approach and home- 
based programs on emotional supportiveness of parents during play were favorable and statisti- 
cally significant. Mixed approach programs had a significant impact on a range of outcomes 
related to stimulation of language and learning, as shown by the large percentage of parents 
who read to their children at least daily. Only the mixed approach programs had a significant 
impact on detachment of the parent during play. Overall, mixed approach programs had the 
strongest pattern of impacts across the range of parenting behaviors that we looked at. 

Center-based programs also had a favorable pattern of impacts, but the sample was smaller 
and many of those impacts were not statistically significant. We found a few impacts in home- 
based programs, but the impacts on parenting were much fewer. 

Finally, turning to parent self-sufficiency, the Early Head Start impacts on participation in 
education and training activities were favorable for all program approaches, but the mixed 
approach programs had significantly larger favorable impact during the 2 years after program 
enrollment than the other programs. Both home-based and mixed approach programs also 
significantly increased parents" average hours in education activities. The mixed approach 
programs also had a significant impact on the proportion of parents who were ever employed 
during the 2-year follow up period, with most of that impact emerging in the 2nd year. Their 
impact on hours of employment was also positive, but not statistically significant. We did not 
find any significant impacts on receipt of welfare cash assistance, either in the full sample or in 
any of the subgroups. 

In addition to exploring variations and impacts by program approach, we also investigated 
whether programs that reached full implementation of the performance standards had different 
impact. We grouped programs for this analysis based on ratings of implementation of key 
elements of the Program Performance Standards and Program Guidelines using information 
collected in site visits during the fall of 1997 and the fall of 1999. Prior to making those visits, 
we selected 24 key program elements and developed five-point rating scales that characterized 
the degree of implementation on that particular element. The selected elements covered were 
related to child development services, family development services, community building, staff 
development, and program management. 

Following each round of site visits, a team that included the site visitors, other evaluation 
team members, and several outside experts independently created ratings for each program on 
each of the scales that we developed. Then the team members met to discuss any discrepancies 
in their ratings and to arrive at consensus based on ratings of the program on each of the 24 
program elements, as well as to create a rating of overall implementation. To be rated as fully 
implemented overall, the programs had to achieve a high rating on most of the elements that we 
rated. It is important to note that these ratings were completed before any of our impact 
analyses were conducted. 

Based on these ratings, we identified three groups of programs. There was a group of pro- 
grams that we called early implementers. They were the programs that were rated as fully 
implemented in both 1997 and 1999. Six of the 17 programs in the study were early 
implementers. The second group (6 of 17) consists of later implementers and those were the 
programs that were not rated as fully implemented in 1997, but reached a rating of full imple- 
mentation in 1999. Finally, there were a group of programs that were not rated as fully imple- 
mented in either 1997 or 1999, and we called these the incomplete implementers. It is impor- 
tant to note that although these programs did not reach ratings of "fully implemented", overall, 
they did have some strengths and showed improvement over the evaluation period. In particu- 
lar, some of them had a strong family support emphasis. 

Looking at the different patterns of impacts, we saw among these three groups of programs, 
when children were 2 years old, a clear pattern of stronger impacts among the early-imple- 




i5x 



145 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



mented programs. When children were 3 years old, the differences between impacts became less 
distinct and we found some important impacts in all three groups of programs. 

In the case of child development outcomes both the early and later implementers had 
significant impacts on cognitive development. The later implementers also had significant 
impact on receptive vocabulary, as measured by the PPVT. The incomplete implementers did not 
have any significant impact on children's cognitive or language development, but they tended to 
have the most consistent favorable impacts on children's social/emotional development. 

Moving to parenting, when children were 3 years old. Early Head Start impacts on parenting 
behavior were mainly concentrated in the early and later implemented programs. Very few 
impacts on parenting emerged in the incompletely implemented programs. At age 3, the 
programs had a favorable impact overall on the HOME, but the impacts on the HOME were 
significant only among the early implementers. 

Early Head Start also had some important impacts on emotional support among parents. In 
the case of parent supportiveness during a play task, the impacts were significant among the 
later and incomplete implementers. 

Cohen: 1 will present an overview of early parenting impacts as mediators of program 
mpacts on 3-year-old children. This includes: (a) the purposes of mediated analyses, (b) the 
hypotheses guiding the analyses, (c) the analytic approadi, (d) mediators of overall impacts, 
and (e) mediators operating within program approaches. 

The purposes of the mediated analyses in the context of the impact study was to estimate the 
extent to which impacts on parenting at age 2 were associated with impacts on children at age 3. 
Additionally, the mediated analyses allowed for an investigation of the plausibility of programs 
theories of change, and a vehicle for deriving guidance for programs in the area of parent 
education and engagement. 

Hypotheses guiding the analyses were: (a) greater supportiveness, cognitive stimulation, 
support for language and learning, and daily reading are associated with enhanced cognitive and 
language development; (b) greater warmth, emotional responsivity and support for language 
and leaning are associated with higher levels of child engagement of the parent; (c) parent 
support for language and learning, knowledge of child development, and lower stress are 
associated with higher levels of child sustained attention; (d) reduced spanking and parenting 
stress, more regular bedtimes, and greater warmth are associated with lower aggressive behavior; 
and (e) reduced spanking, parent distress and intrusiveness, and higher warm sensitivity are 
associated with lower levels of child negativity toward the parent. 

The analytic approach to mediation in the context of the impact study are as follows: The 3- 
year outcomes were regressed on the mediators and other explanatory factors (moderators). 
Then, regression coefficients for each mediator were multiplied by the impact on that mediator 
suggesting "implied" impact. Finally, implied impacts were compared to actual impacts on 3- 
year outcomes. One needs to be cautious when interpreting mediated analyses since significant 
relationships do not necessarily allow for the attribution of causality. This is true because of 
possible upward bias due to the tendency for child outcomes to be better in families with better 
parent outcomes. With this caution in mind, there were several finding of note from these 
analyses. 

For the overall analysis, impacts on 3-year-old Bayley and PPVT were associated with parents 
who were more supportive of children and provided more language and literacy supports in the 
home at age 2. Additionally, impacts on engagement of the parent and sustained attention at 
age 3 were associated with parent's warm sensitivity, emotional responsivity, and knowledge of 
development at age 2. Lastly, reduced aggressive behavior and negativity at age 3 was mediated 
by parenting with less physical punishment, lower distress, and greater warmth. 

The results of mediated analysis for within center- and home-based programs were that in 
center-based sites, parenting with children were 2 was a weak mediator of 3-year-old impacts. 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



Furthermore, in home-based sites, impacts on parent supportiveness, cognitive stimulation, and 
lan^age support at age 2 were positively related to impacts on cognitive and language and 
social-emotional behavior at age 3, and inversely related to aggressiveness at age 3. Finally, 
impacts on negative aspects of parenting at age 2 were inversely related to positive aspects of 
social-emotional behavior at 3. 

Results of mediated analysis mixed approach programs were that parent supportiveness in ' 
semistmctured play at age 2 was associated with higher PPVT scores at age 3. Also, parents' 
warm sensitivity was positively associated with child engagement at age 3; parent detachment at 
age 2 negatively related to child engagement at age 3. Reduced parenting distress at age 2 was 
associated with lower aggressiveness at age 3. 

In conclusion, in the full sample, the results are consistent with the theory of change that at 
least a portion of program impacts on children when they are 3 could be due to favorable 
impacts on parenting and home environment at age 2. Additionally, for the within approaches, 
the strongest evidence was for the role of parenting as a mediator of program impacts on 
children seen in home-based and mixed-approach programs. 

Judith Jerald: A key lesson to take from these results is that for practice and policy, implemen- 
tation matters and different approaches and program options matter. It seems that there has 
been a community ripple effect over time in that the quality of the programs has improved. In 
the policy arena, more emphasis should be placed on partnerships and attention to infant/ 
toddler and maternal mental health. Those that care for young children should have a strong 
base in child development and an understanding of how to impact children's educational and 
socioemotional outcomes. For both policy and practice, the biggest challenge is to develop 
strategies for how to get the results of research such as this disseminated. 

Helen H. Raikes: We need to learn more about how to effectively serve low-income families 
with infants and toddlers. There is much to do and more research will be done in this area. 

Peter Lenrow: What is wonderful about Early Head Start is that we still have an opportunity to 
be innovative. We have experience of 35 years or more of Head Start, yet we also have a newness, 
which means that we do not need to be held back just because something was done in a certain 
way. I also want to say that the Revised Program Performance Standards allow us to make sure that 
the programs are not told something has to be done. The Standards say, "This is what needs to 
be part of your program, but how you do it is based on your own community." This means that 
the choice to use home-based, center-based, the delivery of services and how long it takes a 
program to implement them, depends on the particular needs in those communities and they 
are very different. I appreciate that. 

Raymond Arons: This is essentially a landmark national study. When do you think our students 
and graduate students would have access to the public data of the entire study, stripping away 
some of the confidential variables and allowing us do to somewhat weighted sampling that 
would generalize the data for the nation? 

Raikes: That is a very important question. There will be a public use data set. The data are now 
in the process of having the identifiers stripped so that confidentiality can be maintained in an 
impeachable impeccable fashion. It is not a very simple process and so it is going to take a few 
months for that to happen. We have to be absolutely certain that confidentiality is respected. Most 
likely, there will be a support system issued around the release of the data. People will be able to 
apply to use it by going through the procedures that are issued since it may be restricted data. 

Cohen: I want to add that these data will not be able to be weighted to a nationally representa- 
tive sample. This is not a representative sample in any way. However, there are linkages between 



er|c 



153 



147 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



this study and the ECLSB study. That is a nationally representative study and we hope to have a 
link between the two data sets. 

Jerald: The study is defined as a purposively selected sample representing the demographic 
characteristics that existed in Head Start and Early Head Start at the time the sample was 
selected. 

Margaret Kane: I am with a large Early Head Start program in Tampa, Florida. In response to 
the legislation and the accountability in the eight domains, the State of Florida has started to 
purchase outcome managers who are researchers housed in an Early Head Start center. That is 
my role and I am charged with creating an in-house assessment and evaluation infrastructure 
that is self-sustaining and where we will not have to rely on external evaluators. I am interested 
in obtaining more information about the partnerships that you describe between local research- 
ers and yourselves and other nadonal evaluators. I find that there are not many others like 
myself in this particular role. There are external evaluators and my role with them is conflictual. 

I wonder what that relationship looks like, because this is a rigorous study and I doubt that I could 
ever replicate that within my center. There are components that can be modified or adjusted for 
our particular program and should be done because I am concerned about our EHS program. They 
also want to link up with the Head Start evaluation process that they also want me to create. 
Besides being frustrating, I do not know how to best analyze or create assessments and evaluation 
processes that incorporate these domains, especially infant mental health services. 

Jerald: First, it is innovative and exciting that your Early Start Head Start program has hired 
somebody to take a look at this. I think it is an open book, so you can create, at this point, 
whatever you want to create. Soon there will be performance measures for Early Head Start to 
help you. Please do not take the outcome measures or the measures for 3- and 4-year-olds and 
begin using them with the infants, because we have not yet completed our work on infant 
measures. However, I do think that you could get some support, perhaps from some of the local 
researchers who are involved in this process — we have a list of those names. Where you want to 
start is within your own organization, asking them what it is they want to know. If you could get 
a group of people together in your organization and your community to begin to look at that, 
that is what you want to do. I believe that some of the local researchers would be more than 
happy to talk with you and help you with your own self-evaluation. 

Question: Did you consider stand-alone Early Head Start programs versus those that were part 
of an existing Head Start structure? Did you control for that? 

/ 

Raikes: Yes, we had programs from many different auspices in the evaluations. That is the short 
answer, but I will ask Ellen to talk about how she thinte our analyses addressed them. There 
were sites that had been CCDPs in the past, there were sites that had been Head Starts and 
added an Early Head Start, and former parent/ child centers. 

Kisker: In terms of estimating impacts, we did not distinguish stand-alone programs and 
programs that were part of Head Start programs as subgroups that we looked at. However, we 
learned from that, and in the implementation study we looked at some of that information. 

Ronit Kahana- Kalman: I am at Albert Einstein College of Medicine and I am conducting an 
evaluation supported by ACYF of a mixed model of Head Start programs in the Bronx. Families 
obviously make use of the program at different levels. Some of them use the program to its 
fullest, whereas other parents and children only attend the program for some of the time. Are 
you going to look at your data based on levels of engagement of the families? 




148 



154 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



Jerald: "Hie quick answer to that is that we have several measures of engagement, in addition to 
the services we talked about where we collected data on program and control groups at these 
three intervals. We asked our program staff to rate the engagement level of all of the families 
who had been in the program. We have duration data also and then we have their uptake of 
services, the number of home visits they had, and the percentage of home visits they completed. 
We have extensive analyses that are underway right now. 

Edward Zigler: First, 1 want to offer my own congratulations to this group. This is monumental 
work. 1 am glad that you did it. This, of course, is part of a long tradition in Head Start, namely 
one that 1 started way back in the 1970s; "We are more than Head Start, we are a national 
laboratory." 

A special thanks to my friend, John Love. The first spin-off was Home Start, now called the 
home-based programs. They are still there and my remembrance is that yOu did that evaluation 
for us. People like me have to testify about your program and 1 want to be as supportive as 1 can. 
When 1 go to Congress and talk about Head Start, whatever our problems are with the GAO 
about whether it is efficacious or not, nobody questions what the treatment is in scientific lingo. 
We know the components, we have this, we have that, if we don't have that, you do not have 
Head Start. 

We hear about these different models. We are living in the time when there is much more 
data than we had when Head Start began. The fact is that we have heard about two generation 
programs. We say. If you want to impact the life of the child optimally, you had better work 
with both the parent and the child." Now 1 hear that there is this model or that model— I 
would like to hear from you because at some time you and others are going to have to answer 
the question. What is Early Head Start? You learn from these types of-studies what it should 
be— the pregnancy data are dynamite. There are two ways to look at it— as a dosage affect or as a 
critical period; latching on to parents at that time there is a better chance for effects than at any 
other time. The only thing that makes me a little bit nervous is whether we can make Congress 
understand what it is that we are talking about. 

Jerald: 1 believe you already know the answer, Ed, because it comes right out of the Advisory 
Committee and those nine components that we mentioned earlier. Early Head Start is a pro- 
gram for children and families that is intensive; that is continuous; that is based on relation- 
ships; that is integrated with the community; that involves quality and staff development; that is 
community based, family based, and child centered. Everything we do, regardless of what the 
model is, has to include all of those elements. 

Raikes: We happen to have several options by which this can be carried out to the extent that 
they are responsive to community needs. However, it is a discrete set of options. 




i 



5d 



149 



SYMPOSIA/ROUND TABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



EARLY HEAD START: LOCAL RESEARCH 

The Early Head Start Research Consortium's 
Poster Symposium on Mediators and Moderators 
of Local Early Head Start Outcomes 

MODERATOR: Kathryn Barnard 

PRESENTERS: EHS Research Consortium 

DISCUSSANTS: Robert N. Emde, Catherine S. Tamis-LeMonda 

Catholic University of America 

■ Early Identification of Disabilities in the United Cerebral Palsy 
Early Head Start Program 

Shavaun Wall, Nancy Taylor, Harriet Liebow, Christine Sabatino, Michaela L. Zaijek-Farber, 
Elizabeth Timberlake 

The Catholic University of America (CUA), research partner of the United Cerebral Palsy Early 
Head Start (UCP EHS) Program in Alexandria, VA, conducted this qualitative study in order to 
develop an understanding of the pathways to acquiring early intervention/special education 
services for families with low incomes whose infants and toddlers were referred due to sus- 
pected developmental delays or disabilities. While EHS must include at least 10 percent of 
infants and toddlers with eligibility for early intervention services (Head Start Program Perfor- 
mance Standards Final Rule, 1996; Head Start Publications Management Center, 1999) and 
collaborate with early intervention services (Head Start Act, 1998; U.S. Department of Health & 
Human Services, 1994), these mandates can be challenging to meet. Although families with 
low incomes face a higher risk of delays and disabilities (Brooks-Gunn & Duncan, 1997; 
Klebanov, Brooks-Gunn, McCarton & McCormick, 1998; Meyers, Lukemeyer & Smeeding, 

1998), they are less likely to obtain early intervention services than higher-income families 
(Hebbeler et al., 2001; U.S. Department of Education, 2000). 

The UCP EHS program served a multicultural population of families along the Route 1 corridor 
in Fairfax County, Virginia, providing home visiting, family child care, and center-based child care. 
This study focused on 32 research families (19 in EHS, 13 in a comparison group) whose infants 
and toddlers had suspected or confirmed developmental delays or disabilities and were referred 
for early intervention assessment. Case studies integrated in-depth interviews of mothers and EHS 
program staff with reviews of program and research records. From reviews of transcribed inter- 
views and records the researchers developed matrices, aeated categories, and identified themes 
and exceptions, applying the constant-comparative method for trends aaoss cases. 

EHS enhanced the likelihood that families pursued referrals for assessment and obtaiiied 
early intervention services. It also played a role in the factors that contributed to mothers 
attitudinal shifts toward their children's developmental status and the need for assessment and 
services. Specifically, these factors included (a) the parents' acceptance of the expertise of the 
referring agent, (b) the parents' understanding of child development milestones and how their 
children's status compared, (c) the parents' willingness to make adjustments and organize their 
lives around the needs of their children (becoming "child focused"), and (d) the parents' 
perception that their basic needs were met. The work of EHS appeared to influence the contrib- 
uting factors in a positive direction, such that barriers were often transformed into facilitators to 
pursuing early intervention assessment and services. EHS staff accepted families priorities, in 
meeting them where they were. They built trust and established relationships by assisting 
with problem solving and resource identification to meet urgent basic family needs. They were 
then able to help parents with the less familiar challenges associated with understanding child 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



development, recognizing and accepting their child's unique challenges, comprehending what 
early intervention might offer, and navigating the complex early intervention system. Cases 
illustrated how EHS staff scaffolded their work with parents differendy according to individual 
learning needs, such as, through information sharing, task analysis and the achievement of 
small successes, teaching by modeling, and learning by doing. 

References 

Brooks-Gunn, & Duncan, G. I. (1997). The effects of poverty on children. The Future of Children, 
7(2), 55-71. 

Head Start Art, 42 U.S.G. § 9801 (1998). 

Head Start Program Performance Standards Final Rule, 45 G.F.R. § 1304 (1996). 

Head Start Publications Management Genter. (1999). Early head start fact sheet [On-line]. Available: 
http://www.hskids-tmsc.org. 

Hebbeler, K., Wagner, M., Spiker, D., Scarborough, A., Simeonsson, R., & Gollier, M. (2001). National 
Early Intervention Longitudinal Study: A First Look at the Characteristics of Children and Families 
Entering Early Inteivention Services. Menlo Park, GA: SRI International. 

Klebanov, P. K., Brooks-Gunn, McGarton, G., & McGormick, M. G. (1998). The contribution of 
neighborhood and family income to developmental test scores over the first three years of life. 
Child Development, 69, 1420-1436. 

Meyers, M. K., Lukemeyer, A., & Smeeding, T. (1998). The cost of caring: Ghildhood disability and 
poor families. Social Service Review, 72, 209-223. 

U.S. Department of Education. (2000). Twenty-second annual report to the congress on the implementation 
of the individuals with disabilities education act: To assure the free appropriate public education of all 
children with disabilities. Available from the U.S. Department of Education web site: http:// 
www.ed.gov/pubs/edpubs.html 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (1994). The statement of the advisory committee on 
services for families with infants and toddlers (DHHS Publication No. 1994-615-032/03062). Wash- 
ington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 



Harvard University 

■ Early Head Start Program Effects: Maternal Distress, Parenting 
Stress, Child Language, and Socio-Emotional Behavior 

Catherine Ayoub, Barbara A. Pan, Catherine Snow 

This study explores the relationships between parenting stress, parental distress, children's 
language, and socioemotional behavior for children at 36 months of age enrolled in early Head 
Start. Our research question is the following: What selected mother and/or child characteristics 
are impacted by Early Head Start participation by the child's third birthday? 

The sample consists of 141 mothers who are part of the Early Head Start Research Partnership at 
Early Education Services in Bratdeboro, Vermont (VT). More than half of these rural families, 
like many of their urban counterparts, consists of single-female heads of households. Most 
mothers were between 20 and 29 years old at enrollment in the study; the youngest was 17 years 
old and the oldest 41. The majority of the mothers enrolled in the study just after the birth of 
their first child. In contrast to families in some urban sites, the majority of families in the VT 
sample are White, native English speakers. Families in the comparison group received services 
typical for this community. 

The constructs and respective measures included in these analyses are the following: 

1. Parenting stress and maternal distress (Parenting Stress Index [PSIj; Abidin, 1995). 

2. Ghild language development by parent report (The MacArthur Gommunicative Develop- 
mental Inventory [GDI]; Fenson et al., 2000). 



O 




157 



151 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



3. Child problem behaviors (Child Behavior Checklist [CBCL]; Achenbach & Edelbrock, 
1983). 

Analysis began with simple comparative statistics including t tests. Multi-level analysis of 
change over time was applied to time-varying predictors and outcomes. All analyses were 
controlled for maternal age and education. These variables were removed from the models when 
they did not contribute significantly to the final model. 

There were statistically significant program impacts at 36 months on the following: 

1. Children's destmctive behavior (CBCL) (program = 59.24, comparison = 65.88; p = .03). 

2. Children's somatic behavior problems (CBCL) (program = 51.56, comparison = 54.09; 

3. Children's language production (CDI) (program = 73.7, comparison = 62.05; p - .02). 

4. Maternal stress related to parenting (PSI) (program = 65.13, comparison = 74.26; 

p=.001). 

Program and comparison mothers demonstrated two patterns of change in parenting stress 
over time. In each case, program mothers decreased their overall parenting stress significantly 
more quickly (p = .001) than their counterparts. 

On average, program and comparison mothers became less distressed over time. Although 
maternal distress fell in both groups as children got older, there was a statistically significant 
difference (p = .0001) in the rate of this decrease over time with the program mothers showing a 
significantly lower level of distress than the comparison mothers. 

In summary, there are statistically significant differences between 36-month-old children in 
the Vermont Early Head Start Program and children in the community who are not enrolled in 
the program. The program group includes children who on average have fewer destmctive 
behavior problems, fewer somatic problems, and improved language production. Mothers with 
children in Early Head Start experienced reduced distress and overall parenting stress. Further- 
more, growth models revealed that the rates of these mothers' reduced distress and parenting 
stress were significantly greater than those of the comparison group. 

References 

Abidin, R. (1995). Parenting Stress Index Professional Manual, 3rd edition. Odessa, FL: Psychological 
Assessment Resources. 

Achenbach, T, & Edelbrock, C. (1983). Child Behavior Checklist. Burlington VT: University Associates 
in Psychiatry. 

Fenson, L, Bates, E., Dale, P., Goodman, J., Reznick, S., &Thal, D. (2000). Measuring variability in 
early child language: Don't shoot the messenger. Child Development, 71, 323-328. 



Iowa State University 

■ An Analysis of the Home Visitation Model Provided by the Mid- 
Iowa Community Action's Early Head Start Program. 

Gayle Luze, Carla A. Peterson, Diane Draper 

(Summary not available) 




152 



153 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



Medical University of South Carolina 

■ Parental Mental Health and Child Outcomes in the Sumter School 
District 17 Early Head Start Program 

Richard A. Faldowski, Gui-Young Hong 

While parental mental health conditions such as depression, substance abuse, and other 
psychiatric conditions are widely acknowledged as risk factors for adverse child developmental 
outcomes (Mayes, Bornstein, Chaworska, & Granger, 1995; Radke- Yarrow & Sherman, 1992; 
Greenberg, Lengua, Coie, & Pinderhughes 1999; Gross, Conrad, Fogg, & Garvey, 1995), and 
Early Head Start (EHS) programs are mandated to address family and child mental health issues 
[Head Start Program Regulations and Program Guidance for Parts 1301 and 13011, 45 CFR 
1304.40(f); 45 CFR 1304.24(a)], little is known about how comprehensive services like those 
delivered by EHS can impact family mental health functioning or child development outcomes 
over time. The Sumter School District 17 EHS program is one of two school-based programs 
represented in the EHS Research Consortium. It was designed to focus on the special needs of 
adolescent and young mothers in a small South Carolina (SC) town and rural community. The 
eligible service population included a high percentage of adolescents and young mothers with 
various social deficits; educational (lack of high school degree), teen pregnancy, and (perceived) 
significant degrees of alcohol and drug use. It is estimated that 36% of Sumter's children were 
born to mothers who had received inadequate prenatal care, 26% were raised in single-parent 
households, 30% were raised in families with incomes at or below the federal poverty level, and 
20% were born to mothers without a high school diploma or equivalency (Wray, 1995). 

Consonant with the broad EHS mission, the Sumter EHS program focused on working with 
enrolled children, young mothers, and their extended families (often the infant's grandparents) 
to promote a normal developmental trajectory for the child and to help the young mother work 
toward her own educational and other self-sufficiency goals. Families could receive services 
through either home-based or center-based service delivery options. Center-based children who 
were at highest risk for abuse, neglect, or adverse developmental outcomes were also eligible to 
receive Therapeutic Child Care (TCC) services. 

Consistent with the EHS program goals, mothers in the SC research sample are overwhelm- 
ingly young (85% less than 20 years old, 50% less than 18 years old), unmarried (94%), still in 
school or training (79% without high school diplomas and 75% in school or training pro- 
grams), and possessing few economic resources (77% with annual incomes less than $ 15,000). 
Relative to the Sumter community at large as well as the Sumter School District population, 
African Americans are overrepresented in the EHS program and research sample (88%). Just over 
half of the children in the sample are female (52%), of which a substantial minority had low 
birth weight (16% weighing less than 2500g at birth). About 31% of the cases were applied for 
services before the child was born. 

Several key results have emerged from analyses so far. First, few of the SC EHS-eligible 
research mothers had clinically significant psychiatric disorders according to DSM-IV criteria. 
This result held true for all three primary mental health conditions considered— depression, 
alcohol use, and drug use — and rates did not differ between EHS or comparison conditions. The 
lack of clinically significant depression among the participants, however, does not imply that 
they were free of depression symptoms, and indeed, many participants expressed substantial 
depression-spectrum symptom loads. Second, comparisons of the marginal trajectories of 
change over time (i.e. without taking covariates into account) revealed few differences between 
the EHS and comparison conditions on most outcomes (psychiatric symptoms, parenting stress, 
parent child interaction ratings, or child development measures). Only when key background 
variables — especially degree of program participation — were taken into account, did systematic 
benefits of EHS emerge. 



ERIC 



159 



153 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Overall the results emphasize the challenges to EHS programs working with young mothers. 
In addition to giving birth at an early age, many of the mothers may experience substantial 
degrees of psychiatric distress without exceeding clinical severity or duration thresholds. Mothers 
from this population may be difficult to retain and engage in services, but benefits can be 
realized among those mothers and children who can be kept in services. 

References 

Head Start Program Regulations and Program Guidance for Parts 1301 and 13011, 45 CFR 1304.40(f); 
45 CFR 1304.24(a). 

Mayes, L. C., Bornstein, M. H., Chawarska, K., & Granger, R. H. (1995). Information processing and 
developmental assessments in 3-month-old infants exposed prenatally to cocaine. 

Pediatrics, 95(4): 539-545. 

Greenberg, M. T., Lengua, L. )., Coie, J. D., Pinderhughes, E. E. (1999). Predicting developmental 
outcomes at school entry using a multiple-risk model: four American communities. The Conduct 
Problems Prevention Research Group. Developmental Psychology 35{2)\ 403-417. 

Gross, D., Conrad, B., Fogg, L, & Garvey, C. (1995). A longitudinal study of maternal depression and 
preschool children's mental health. Nursing Research, 44(2): 96-101. 

Radke-Yarrow, M., & Sherman, T. (1990). Hard growing: Children who survive. In 
J. E. Rolf, & N. Garmezy (Eds.), Risk and Protective Factors in the Development of Psychopathology 
(pp. 97-119). New York: Cambridge University Press. 



Michigan State University 

■ Family Functioning as a Mediator of Parent, Child, 
and Family Outcomes: A Preliminary Analysis 

Rachel F. Schiffman, Lorraine M. McKelvey, Hiram E. Fitzgerald 

Poverty and economic need have been linked to decreased levels of functioning for family 
systems (Fisher, Fagot, & Leve, 1998; Gomel, Tinsley, Parke, & Clark, 1998). Parents who are 
living with financial strain have been shown to engage in more disrupted parenting behaviors 
when interacting with their children (Brooks-Gunn, Leventhal, & Duncan, 2000). The purpose 
of this study was to begin preliminary investigation into family functioning as an intermediate 
outcome of the Early Head Start (EHS) Program at the Community Action Agency in Jackson, 
Michigan and as a mediator of parent, child, and family outcomes. 

The sample for this study was 160 families with low incomes who participated in the 
Michigan site of the Early Head Start Research and Evaluation Project; 84 families were ran- 
domly assigned to the program group and 76 families to the comparison group. Interviews and 
observations of parents and children were completed at enrollment and at 14, 24, and 36 
months of the child's age. Data for this study were taken from the 36-month assessment. Family 
functioning was assessed by the 12-item general functioning scale of McMaster Family Assess- 
ment Device (FAD; Epstein, Baldwin, & Bishop, 1983) with two subscales, healthy and un- 
healthy functioning. The following outcomes were investigated: parenting stress (Abidin, 1990), 
family conflict (Moos & Moos, 1984), support and stimulation of the child (Home Observation 
for Measurement of the Environment [HOME]; Caldwell & Bradley, 1984), physical punish- 
ment, child vocabulary (Dunn & Dunn, 1997), child cognitive development (Bayley, 1993), and 
child behavior (Child Behavior Checklist [CBCLj; Achenbach, 1993). 

Scores for family functioning were high for healthy items and low for unhealthy items. 
Program families had significandy higher mean scores on the healthy items than the compari- 
son families (4.51 + .7 vs. 4.27 + .8). There were no significant group differences for the un- 
healthy items. The healthy items were dichotomized with families at or above the median (4.67) 



O 

ERIC 



154 



160 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



in one group (Higher Health, HH) and families below the median in the other group (Lower 
Health, LH). There was a significantly greater proportion of program families in the HH func- 
tioning group (64.3%, n = 54) than comparison families (44.7%, n = 34). There were significant 
main effects for the healthy functioning groupings in all areas except physical punishment and 
Bayley scores with families in the HH functioning group doing better than families in the LH 
functioning group. There was a significant main effect of program on CBCL scores with program 
families having better scores than comparison families. There were significant interaction effects 
for parenting stress, for the total HOME scale and its external physical environment and 
language exposure subscales, for the CBCL, and for family conflict. These interactions were 
largely driven by healthy functioning, with families in the highest functioning group performing 
better than those in the lower functioning group. In some cases, the highest functioning pro- 
gram families were performing in more positive ways. Additional multivariate and longitudinal 
analyses will be conducted to identify predictors of family functioning and to investigate direct 
and indirect effects of program intervention on family functioning and parent, child, and 
family outcomes. 

References 

Abidin, R. R. (1990). The Parenting Stress Index (PSITM) Third Edition Manual. San Antonio, TX; The 
Psychological Corporation. 

Achenbach, T. M. (1993). Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist 2-3 and 1992 profile. Department of 
Psychiatry, Burlington, University of Vermont. 

Bayley, N. (1993). The Bayley Scales of Infant Development Manual (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX: The 
Psychological Corporation. 

Brool«-Gunn, J., Leventhal, T, & Duncan, G. L (2000). Why poverty matters for young children: 
Implications for policy. In L D. Osofsky & H. E. Fitzgerald (Eds.), WAIMH Handbook of Infant 
Mental Health (Vol. 3, pp. 89-131). New York: Wiley. 

Caldwell, B., & Bradley, R. (1984). Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment. Little Rock, 
AR: University of Arkansas at Little Rock. 

Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Examiner's Manual for the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (3"‘‘ ed.). 
Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 

Epstein, N., Baldwin, L., & Bishop, D. (1983). The McMaster Family Assessment Device. Journal of 
Marital and Family Therapy, 9(2), 171-180. 

Fisher, P, Fagot, B., & Leve, C. (1998). Assessment of family stress across low-, medium-, and high- 
risk samples using the family events checklist. Family Relations, 47 (3), 215-219. 

Gomel, J., Tinsley, B., Parke, R., & Clark, K. (1998). The effects of economic hardship on family 
relations among African American, Latino, and Euro-American families. Journal of Family Issues, 
19(4), 436-467. 

Moos, R. H., & Moos, B. S. (1984). Family Environment Scale manual (3rd ed.). Palo Alto, CA: Pub- 
lisher Consulting Psychologists Press. 



New York University 

■ Outcomes of Program Participation and Correlates 
of Children's Cognitive Development at the 
Educational Alliance's Early Head Start 

Mark Spellmann, Catherine Tamis-LeMonda, Lisa Baumwell 

In this study, we addressed two research questions: 

1. What child and parent outcomes were affected by participation in Early Head Start (EHS)? 

2. What child and parent characteristics were associated with children's cognitive development? 




161 



155 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLE S/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Two dimensions of program participation were tested for effects on child and parent out- 
comes: children's attendance at the EHS child care centers and the degree of parent involvement 
with EHS social service staff. As for outcomes of program participation on children, these 
included greater cognitive development at 14, 24, and 36 months, greater social development, 
and greater language development. We were also interested in exploring correlates of children s 
cognitive development, as measured by the Bayley Mental Development Index (MDI; Bayley, 
1993), which were given when children were 14, 24, and 36 months old. 

Parental domains significantly associated with program participation included the quality of 
parent-child interaction, the quality of parenting, discipline strategies, parenting stress, psycho- 
logical well-being, and social support. Observational measures showed that the quality of 
parenting, of parent language use, and of parent-child interaction had substantial associations 
with cognitive development at 24 and 36 months. Self-rated parenting measures, father involve- 
ment, and the quality of the home environment indicated these associations as well. 

Social-emotional support and advice that mothers received, both fi:om their own mothers 
and from their infants' fathers, were associated with child cognitive development and with MDI 
scores. Symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder and parenting stress were negatively associ- 
ated with cognitive development. Harsh, rejecting fathering that mothers received when they 
were growing up was negatively associated with cognitive development of their children at all 
three age milestones. As for quality of mothering in mothers' families of origin, this was 
associated with MDI scores at the 14- and 24-month milestones. 

Program engagement variables were associated with child cognitive development as well. 

Four measures of positive program involvement, (a) Social Support from EHS staff, (b) "What I 
Got from EHS: Growth as a Parent," (c) "What I Got from EHS: Family-Program Bond," and (d) 
"What I Got from EHS: Child Development," were positively associated with children's cognitive 
development at 14 and 36 months. 

Other aspects of child development demonstrated significant associations with cognitive 
development. Social development as measured both by parent ratings of children's social 
development and by observational measures of child-parent interaction showed a strong 
correlation with cognitive development. Specifically, mother's ratings of children's distractibility, 
difficult temperament, and difficult behavior were associated with lower MDI scores at 36 
months. Meanwhile, children's health was associated with cognitive development at 36 months 
as well. 

The wide range of factors associated with cognitive development scores of children involved 
with EHS illustrates that this aspect of child development is embedded in a multi-level system, 
including the child, family, and program levels. The implication of these findings is that the 
effectiveness of early intervention programs is linked to the degree to which they are able to 
address each level of the system. 

Reference 

Bayley, N. (1993). The Bayley Scales of Infant Development Manual (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX: The 

Psychological Corporation. 




156 



162 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



University of Arkansas 

5 The Association and Treatment Moderation of the Quality of Adult 
Relationships on Parenting and Parent Characteristics 

Leanne Whiteside-Mansell, Rick Clubb, Robert Bradley, Mark Swanson 

The quality of adult relationships is thought to be an influence on parenting (Belsky, 1984), 
discipline style (Wakschlag, Chase-Lansdale, Brooks-Gunn, 1996), and factors associated with 
parenting such as depression (Shelly & Jacobvitz, 2002). These parenting-associated and 
parenting characteristics are thought to be mediators of the impact of interventions such as Early 
Head Start (EHS). This study examines the associations of self-report and observational mea- 
sures of the quality of adult relationships with parenting discipline style, parendng efficacy, 
parent-child interactions, and maternal depression. Then, the degree to which quality of adult 
relationships moderates the impact of EHS treatment was analyzed by looking at parenting 
characteristics as they mediate program effects on child development. 

The quality of adult relationships was assessed early in this EHS study for all participants 
(N = 107) using the self-report, 13-item Simpson Adult Attachment Survey (Simpson, Rholes, 

6 Nelligan, 1992) and the family conflict subscale from the Family Environment Scale (Moos, 
1974). The Simpson results in three subscales representing secure, avoident, and dependent 
attachment. The quality of the intergenerational relationship was assessed when children were 
14 months of age for a subset of EHS mothers (n = 50) that identified frequent contact with a 
mother figure. An observational assessment of the interactions between mother and mother 
figure resulted in four scales: emotional closeness, positive affect, grandmother directness, and 
mother individuation. In addition, mother figures were asked to rate the level of conflict they 
had with EHS mothers (on a scale of 1 to 5). 

Discipline style was assessed using a survey of control techniques (Greenberger & Goldberg, 
1989) in three domains: harsh (13 items), lax (13 items) and firm (13 items) control. Maternal 
parenting self-efficacy was assessed using a 10-item survey developed using items and item stems 
proposed by Bandura (1993, 1997). Parenting behaviors were assessed using the semi-structured 
Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment (HOME; Galdwell, 1984) total, HOME 
warmth subscale, and the parent-child dysfunctional interaction from the Parenting Stress Index 
Short Form (PSI/SF; Abidin, 1990). Depression and distress were assessed using the Genter for 
Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (GES-D; Radloff, 1977) and the parental distress scale 
from the PSI. 

Participants were 100 EHS families living in rural Arkansas. Mothers were 22.7 years of age 
(SD = 5.2) with 50% living with or married to the biological father when the child was 36 
months of age. Half of the children were male. Forty-seven percent received EHS services. 

A subset of the 100 families (n = 50) were assessed using a videotaped, observational assess- 
ment of the motlier and modier figure discussion two areas of conflict. Mothers participating in 
the national evaluation of Early Head Start were asked to identify a grandmother figure with 
whom they had contact at least every 2 weeks and lived within 60 miles. Mothers in this study 
were between the ages of 15 and 33 years (mean = 21.5, SD = 4.2). Forty-three percent of 
mothers (n = 22) had lived with their mother figure for at least 6 months of the previous year. 
Most of the mothers were married (64%) and White (77%) and most indicated money as the 
reason for their living arrangement (69%). Most grandmother figures (62%) were the target- 
mother's mother. The remaining were target-mother's grandmother (n = 5), mother-in-law 
(n = 6), or stepmother (n = 1). 

Results of correlational analyses showed low correlations (r from .20 to .27) between quality 
of adult relationships and parent discipline style. For example, mother's secure adult attachment 
was negatively associated with harsh discipline control style (-.27), whereas ratings of avoident 
adult attachment were positively associated with harsh control (.21). Mother's emotionally close 
interactions with mother figure were negatively associated with harsh control (-.26) and 




157 



1G3 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



positively associated with firm control. Mother-figure ratings of conflict with the EHS mother 
were positively associated with harsh and lax control (.21). Dependent adult attachment was 
positively correlated with lax discipline control (.22). Moderation was examined in multivariate 
analyses of each type of parenting disciple style with main effects of program participation, 
quality of relationship, and the interaction of the two. All multivariate analyses controlled for 
maternal age. No interaction terms were significant. 

Correlational analyses between quality of adult relationships and maternal parenting efficacy 
suggested little association. Only the assessment of maternal autonomy (from the observational 
assessment of the dyad) showed an association (r = .25). Maternal warmth (from the HOME) 
was positively associated with secure adult attachment (.27) and emotional closeness between 
mother and mother figure; it was negatively associated with self-reports of family conflict 
(-.30) and mother and mother figure dyad conflict (-.21). Similar, if somewhat stronger associa- 
tions were found between measures of adult relationships and the HOME total. Parent-child 
dysfunctional interaction was positively associated with avoident (.24) and dependent (.32) 
adult attachment and with reports of family conflict (.24). None of the interaction terms 
between program participation and quality of relationships were significant. 

Parental distress was negatively associated with secure adult attachment (-.29) and positively 
associated with dependent (.21) adult attachment and family conflict (.31). Depression as 
assessed by the CES-D was positively associated with family conflict (.31). None of the interac- 
tion terms between program participation and quality of relationships were significant. 

This study found evidence of associations between multiple aspects of adult relationships 
and factors that are thought to mediate intervention impacts on child outcomes (parenting 
discipline style, parenting efficacy, parent-child interactions, and maternal depression). How- 
ever, no evidence was found to suggest that the quality of adult relationships itself moderated 
the treatment impact. 

References 

Abidin, R. R. (1990). Parenting Stress Index (Short Form)(PSI/SF). Charlottesville, VA: Pediatric 
Psychology Press. 

Bandura, A. (1993). Perceived self-efficacy in cognitive development and functioning. Educational 
Psychologist, 28, 117-148. 

Bandura, A. (1997). Self Efficacy: The Exercise of Control W. H. Freeman Company. 

Belsky, J. (1984). The determinants of parenting: a process model. Child Development, 55(1): 83-96. 
Caldwell, B. M. (1984). Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment, Revised Edition. Univer- 
sity of Arkansas at Little Rock; Center for Child Development and Education; Little Rock, AR. 
Greenberger, E. & Goldberg, W. (1989) Work, parenting, and the socialization of children. Develop- 
mental Psychology, 25, 22-35. 

Moos, R. H. (1974). Family Environment Scale. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 

Radloff, R. (1977). A self-report depression scale for research in the general population. Applied 
Psychological Measurement, 1, 385-401. 

Riggs, S. A., & Jacobvitz, D. (2002). Expectant parents' representations of early attachment relation- 
ships: associations with mental health and family history. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 70(1): 195-204. 

Simpson, J. A., Rholes, W. S., & Nelligan, J. S. (1992). Support-seeking and support-giving within 
couples in an anxiety-provoking situation: The role of attachment styles. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 62, 434-446. 

Wakschlag, L. S., Chase- Lansdale, P. L., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (1996). Not just "ghosts in the nursery": 
contemporaneous intergenerational relationships and parenting in young African-American 
families. Child Development, 67(5): 2131-47. 




158 



164 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



University of California at Los Anglees 

■ Early Head Start Latino Families in Los Angeles: 

Immigration Influences 

Carollee Howes 

Many of our Venice Family Clinic Early Head Start (EHS) families (76%) are part of what is 
often called a second wave of Latino immigrants. These families immigrate from rural areas of 
Mexico and Central America and generally have had little formal education or vocational 
training prior to entering the United States (US). In addition, they tend to have children quite 
soon after arriving in the country. We looked at the contrasts between these families and Latino 
EHS families who had entered the country as children or were born in the US. 

Across the similar and differing characteristics of these three Latino groups, all the new 
immigrant families spoke Spanish at home, while somewhat over half of the older immigrant 
families did so. These three groups of families differed in maternal adult attachment security, 
patterns of caring for children, and socialization practices. Despite these differences, by 36 
months of age most children in all three family groups had constmcted secure child-mother 
attachment relationships. 



University of Colorado 

■ Difficult Relationship Attitudes and Depression Levels as 
Moderators of Outcomes in Two Early Head Start Programs 

JoAnn Robinson, Robert Emde, Jon Korfmacher, Paul Spicer, Norman Watt, Jeffrey Shears 

Two Colorado Early Head Start (EHS) programs, Clayton EHS and Family Star, are considered in 
respect to salience between the programs' theories of change and specific outcomes relevant to 
the theories— parenting distress, maternal sensitivity, child language, and child attentiveness/ 
curiosity. Moderators of program outcomes included security of relationship attitudes as 
measured by the Simpson Adult Relationship Scale (Simpson, Rholes, & Nelligan, 1992) and 
maternal depression measured by the CESD (Radloff, 1977). Insecure attitudes moderated 
impacts on parenting distress. Depression moderated impacts on maternal sensitivity, child 
language, and child attentiveness and curiosity. 

At-risk groups made the greatest gains in the EHS programs overall. Consistent with their 
respective theories of change, the Clayton EHS program showed stronger impacts than Family 
Star in maternal sensitivity; while Family Star showed stronger impacts than Clayton in child 
attentiveness. 

Reference 

Radloff, R. (1977). A self-report depression scale for research in the general population. Applied 
Psychological Measurement, 1, 385-401. 




165 



159 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



University of Kansas 

■ Parent-Child Interaction and Program Engagement as Predictors 
of Outcomes in Project Eagle's Early Head Start Program 

Jane Atwater, Judith Carta, Jean Ann Summers, Martha Staker 

Project EAGLE, an Early Head Start (EHS) program in Kansas City, Kansas, has identified 
responsive parent-child interaction as an optimal and essential context for promoting children s 
development and for fostering families^ well-being. The present analyses were designed to 
support this program focus by examining parent responsiveness (close involvement and verbal 
response) as a predictor of early development for children in multi-risk families. In addition, for 
EHS families, we asked whether the level of engagement in home-based services, which were 
designed to enhance parent-child relationships, would be related to the level of parents respon- 
siveness with their children and to children's developmental progress. The analysis sample 
included 74 families randomly assigned to the EHS Program Group and 79 control families. 

All families in the Program Group were offered home-based EHS services; and, for families with 
child care needs, the EHS program also provided placement in developmentally appropriate, 
community-based child care. Families in the Control Group were free to access community 
services other than those provided by Project Eagle. The following variables were measured: 

(a) cumulative risk index (e.g., Sameroff & Fiese, 1990) determined at program enrollment, 

(b) parent responsiveness, and (c) children's communication behavior as recorded in home- 
based naturalistic observations using the Code for Interactive Recording of Children's Learning 
Environments (CIRCLE; Atwater, Montagna, Creighton, Williams, & Hou, 1993), and 

(d) children's cognitive development as assessed on the Bayley Scales of Infant Development 
(Bayley, 1969) when children were 8, 14, 18, 24, 30 and 36 months. Level of family engagement 
was ascertained based on EHS program staff ratings of consistency of parent participation over 
time, active interest during home visits, and follow-through on individual program goals 
between visits. 

Surprisingly, hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) analyses (Raudenbush, Bryk, Cheong, & 
Congdon, 2000) revealed no relationship between risk status and group assignment and 
children's cognitive outcomes or verbal communication. However, when measures of respon- 
siveness were examined individually as possible predictors of children's outcomes, we found 
that the amount of time parents were observed talking to their children, prompting and expand- 
ing on what they had said, or engaging in positive/ exuberant responses all predicted their 
children's Bayley outcomes. In addition, the amount of time parents verbally interacted with 
their children and shared in the children's activities predicted children's cognitive and commu- 
nication growth between 8 and 36 months. When we examined whether responsive parent 
behavior would be more frequent among those families who had participated most actively and 
consistently in EHS services, we found that parents with the highest level of program engage- 
ment had higher rates of verbal responsiveness with their children. In other words, those 
parenting behaviors that were most clearly related to child outcomes occurred more frequently 
in families who were highly engaged in the EHS program. Engagement in the program was 
predictive of more positive outcomes in children's cognitive development and verbal communi- 
cation and of growth over time in verbal communication. These analyses provide empirical 
support for the EHS program's emphasis on responsive parent-child interactions as a key 
component of intervention for children and families who experience multiple risks. 

References 

Atwater, )., Montagna, D., Creighton, M., Williams, R., & Hou, S. (1993). CIRCLE-II: Code for Interac- 
tive Recording of Caregiving and Learning Environments — Infancy Through Early Childhood. Kansas City, 
KS: Early Childhood Research Institute on Substance Abuse, Juniper Gardens Children's Project. 





160 



administration for children and families 



Bayley, N. (1969). Bayley Scales of Infant Development. San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. 
Raudenbush, S. W., Bryk, A. S., Cheong, Y. F., Congdon, R. (2000). HIM 5: Hierarchical Linear and 
Nonlinear Modeling. Chicago: Scientific Software International. 

Sameroff, A. & Fiese, B. H. (1990). Transactional regulation and early intervention. In S. J. Meisels 
& I. P. Shonkoff (Eds.), Handbook of early intervention (pp. 119-149). New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 



University of Missouri at Columbia 

■ The Quality of the Relationship Between Home-Visitors 
and Parents as a Mediator of Program Outcomes 
at KCMC's Early Head Start Project 

Mark Fine, Jean Ispa, Kathy Thornburg, Gary Stangler 

(Summary not available) 



University of Pittsburgh 

B Social Support and Self-Efficacy: 

Stepping Stones to Parenting Success? 

Beth L. Green, Carol L. McAllister, Carrie Furrer, Martha Ann Terry 

Following the principles of theory-based participatory research (Green & McAllister 1998), our 
Early Head Start (EHS) research in Pittsburgh, PA was designed to reflect the "theory of change" 
of the local program. The Pittsburgh model theorizes that child outcomes are best achieved 
through good parenting which in turn is influenced by (a) providing parents with needed 
emotional and tangible supports and (b) working to empower parents and develop parents' 
sense of self-efficacy. Our research questions were the following: Do self-efficacy and social 
support make a difference in parenting outcomes? Which aspects of self-efficacy and social 
support are most important to parenting outcomes? How do parents talk about the role of self- 
efficacy and support in helping them to reach their goals? 

Our study used a mixed-methods research design. Structured interviews, which measured 
specific domains of social support, efficacy, and parenting, were conducted with approximately 
120 parents at four time points during the child's early years. Findings reported here are based 
on the 14- and 36-month interviews. Qualitative research included participant observation of 
program activities, ethnographic case studies with six program families, and in-depth interviews 
with 18 families concerning the goals they identified and worked on while in EHS. 

Because of our small sample size, we found no statistically significant program vs. control 
group differences in terms of parenting outcomes. However, regression analysis yielded some 
interesting findings. No parenting outcomes were predicted by size of a family's support 
network. But "support satisfaction" and "perceived support" predicted parenting outcomes 
related to parent-child interactions and parent-child play. In terms of self-efficacy, "empower- 
ment attitudes and skills" predicted all parenting outcomes. "General mastery" predicted 
parenting outcomes specifically as related to parent-child interactions and parent-child play. 

Our qualitative research provided additional insights into these findings. Through case 
studies, parent narratives, and observations of staff discussions, we came to appreciate that the 
key to good parenting is not size. Rather, the quality of relationships, including relationships 
between program staff and parents, is more important. We may be identifying a basic founda- 



ERIC 




167 



161 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



tional element— the ability to form and sustain healthy relationships, itself stimulated and 
modeled by program staff— that is more essential to engaged parenting than social support as 
traditionally conceived. 

Our quantitative results imply that having specific skills, along rvith feeling that one has 
choices and control, are important predictors of parenting outcomes, and that these effects are 
strongest when the skills and choice making are closely related to family life. These findings 
were reflected in the narratives of EHS parents. One of our early hypotheses was that such self- 
efficacy is developed through opportunities for parent-parent interaction in EHS. While this was 
very important for some of the parents, especially for those who played leadership roles in 
parent committees and policy council, our qualitative research revealed that there are several 
possible paths to strengthened self-efficacy. 

These findings support the local program's own evolving theory of change which continues 
to promote child outcomes through good parenting, emphasizes building healthy relationships, 
and attempts to provide multiple and individualized paths to confident and competent 
parenting. 

Reference 

Green, B. L, & McAllister, C. (1998). Theory-based, participatory evaluation: A powerful tool for 

evaluating family support programs. Zero to Three, 4 (Febmary/March), 30-37. 



University of Washington 

■ Unraveling Possible Adverse Effects of Early Head Start 

Susan Spieker, Kathryn Barnard, Michelle DeKlyen, Dana Nelson, Sandra Jolley 

Analyses of the national sample of Early Head Start (EHS) at 24 months suggest that the 
program may have had negative effects on families with low demographic risk. Within low 
demographic risk and high psychological resource families at the Seattle EHS site, we found 
similar evidence for possible negative program effects on child cognitive, language, and behav- 
ioral outcomes as well as on attachment. Baseline data on this sample, collected at the time of 
random assignment, were analyzed for differential attrition between program and comparison 
groups. Analyses indicated that attrition from data collection was greatest among program 
mothers with fewer depressive symptoms and comparison mothers with more depressive 
symptoms at intake. This pattern of attrition was consistent across most assessment points, 
including the 19-month attachment paradigm. The site-specific analyses presented here further 
support the national observation of Ae potentially adverse effects of EHS program participation. 



University of Washington, College of Education 

■ Parent's Perceptions of Training and Service Activities 
Regarding their Child's Nurturing and Development: 
Implementation and Benefits of Early Head Start 

Eduardo Armijo, Joseph Stowitschek 

Two overriding purposes of the Yakima Valley Early Head Start (EHS) Research Project were to 
determine whether families participating in EHS (a) experienced and partook of child nurturing 
and development services that they would not have received otherwise, and (b) perceived 
themselves and/or their children to have benefited from those services. In reference to service 




162 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



receipt and participation, we were interested in determining the extent to which these findings 
were attenuated by home language use and other acculturation variables. Finally, we were 
interested in tracking selected outcome indicators regarding EHS program benefits to families 
and children. 

Considerable benefit from EHS participation was indicated, but tangible differences in 
benefit between EHS and comparison group families were moderate and circumscribed. EHS 
families reported as high as an eightfold advantage in access to, and receipt of training, services, 
and support pertaining to child care and child nurturing. Children's social development was one 
of the positive outcome indicators. There was a trend toward greater confidence in child care 
and child development abilities among EHS families. While a standard index of acculturation 
showed litde Aange and few group differences, indicators of functional acculturation— family 
and community participation — suggested bilingual EHS families had enhanced involvement in 
selected areas 



Utah State University 

■ Parenting as the Pathway to Child Outcomes 
in Utah's Early Head Start Program 

Lori A. Roggman, Lisa K. Boyce, Andrea D. Hart, Gina A. Cook 

As part of our research partnership with a local Early Head Start (EHS) program. Bear River EHS, 
we studied two groups of infants and toddlers from 200 low-income families in northern Utah 
and southern Idaho, randomly assigned to either EHS or a comparison group. Bear River EHS 
provides weekly home visits to families in their homes. The aim of the program is to foster 
positive parenting and thereby help parents support their children's early development. The 
focus of our local research was to examine parenting in relation to children's attachment, play, 
and development. 

Children were tested using standardized tests of cognitive and language development. Parents 
were interviewed using a variety of measures including measures of parenting attitudes and 
reported parent and child behaviors. Also, parents and children were videotaped playing 
together. Videotapes were later observed and coded by trained observers to provide measures of 
parent cognitive stimulation, parent intrusiveness, and other parent and child behaviors. Data 
collection occurred at multiple age-points including child ages 18, 24, and 36 months. As early 
as age 2, toddlers in this local program were doing better than expected, both socially and 
cognitively. Compared to toddlers in the comparison group, the EHS toddlers by age 2 had 
more secure relationships with their mothers and were doing better on cognitive tests. These 
effects were likely related to the positive impacts of EHS on the mothers. Mothers in EHS, versus 
the comparison group, played more responsively (less intrusively) with their toddlers, provided 
more cognitive stimulation, and had more flexible attitudes toward their children at age 2. They 
also spanked their children less at age 3. 

The parenting impacts of Utah's Bear River EHS program led to better outcomes for children 
at age 3. EHS mothers' earlier responsiveness in play predicted greater security of attachment, 
higher cognitive and language test scores, more attentiveness, and more persistence in the 
children. Decreased spanking by EHS mothers was related to greater security of attachment and 
higher cognitive test scores as well. One of the mothers in Utah's EHS said that being in the EHS 
home-visiting program helped her learn more about parenting, "It has been a really big help for 
me. . . I learned a ton!" What many Bear River EHS mothers learned was to be less intrusive 
when playing with their children, to stimulate their children's learning, to allow their children 
to have their own opinions, and to refi-ain from using physical punishment as a discipline 





163 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



technique. These impacts of our local EHS on parenting helped parents to support optimal 
development in their children, which includes not only their cognitive and language skills but 
the attentiveness, persistence, and security that will help these children in their future learning. 

DISCUSSION 

Robert N. Emde: Cathie Tamis-LeMonda and I are going to offer some remarks to orient a 
discussion. 

Catherine S. Tamis-LeMonda: I will begin by discussing each of the posters; covering method- 
ology, aims, and goals; what each group has done; their findings; and the implications of the 
research. 

I will begin by talking about the five questions or pieces that comprise the larger framework 
of our work. One of the first questions or issues that arises is what is in the black box— what 
exactly is the Early Head Start experience? I think much of the effort in this group of investiga- 
tors has been to shed light and understanding on what that experience is. 

There are posters about who receives the services and what services they receive. There is 
some indication that, for example. Latinos might be receiving more services in certain sites than 
are other families at those same sites. What are the factors determining who gets services? Also, 
there is a great deal of discussion about home visits — what goes on, what comprises a home 
visit? Who are the participants most likely to receive home visits, and what goes on in those 
home visits? There were questions about the goals of families in Head Start. How do we identify 
the goals and establish guidelines as to what families should be receiving? 

There are presentations on identifying disabilities. How is Early Head Start doing in identify- 
ing disabilities or even issues that face families. How do they identify those challenges, and how 
do they determine what challenges to work with? 

Then there are many questions in that black box about engagement, dosage issues, who is 
engaged, and why? What are the factors that promote family engagement? The diversity factor 
in promoting family engagement has been quite telling. I have seen things I would never have 
even thought of. For example, one of the posters talked about home visitors stress propensities 
as an important predictor of how much time families are in home visits? Now who would think 
about looking at the stress levels of the home visitors as a predictor? We might also look at the 
stress levels of the families as potentially explaining their engagement. The different ways of 
thinking about this are only possible when you have many sites tackling this question of what is 
in the black box, from different perspectives. Summarizing, mothers' personality seems to 
matter for the question of who is engaged or not. Even the home visitor s perception of the 
relationship predicts engagement, and does so even more than the mother's perception of 
her relationship. 

What does all this mean? How are we explaining what is going on, why it is going on, and 
for whom it is going on? That is the first overarching emphasis I saw as I looked at the posters. 

The second is the constmct of mediators. Mediators is the notion of pathways that we talk 
about in our theories of change — How does it work? What are the pathways? Our group and 
everyone in this room have spent years considering pathways. Does Early Head Start work or 
impact through a parent's sense of efficacy, through bearing on creating healthy relationships in 
families, through its bearing on healthy relationships between staff and families? Does it affect 
parenting as a mediator such that it promotes positive parenting, which affects depression in 
parents? Many of the posters talk about depression as one pathway — that what Early Head Start 
does is work with the mental health of families— mothers and others included. This working on 
mental health, in turn, helps promote positive parenting. 

These are two mediators— the effect of depression, which in turn affects parenting, which in 
turn affects the child, so there are many steps to get to that end point of the child. 



O 

ERIC 



164 



170 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



There was a poster on the relationships between home visitors and parents as mediators. 
Programs that promote healthy home visitor/parent relationships, in turn promoted relation- 
ships that lead to better parenting, better child outcomes, and so forth. There are many 
different examples of the ways in which pathways explain how it works, that were presented in 
the posters. 

The third emphasis is moderators. That is the question of what works for whom? We have 
frequently talked about fixed moderators. I learned the difference between fixed moderators and 
transient changing moderators. Attendance is an important moderator. The impact of Early 
Head Start seems to matter, according to some posters, for those people who attend more and 
who receive a greater dosage. It is not always that simple, however, because there are other cases 
in which we have more attendance being associated with less of an impact, perhaps because 
families who attend more have more problems or issues they confront, which shows how 
complex this is. 

For what works for whom, some people have shown parent attachment history and adult 
relationships to be important moderators. We have attitudes about relationships being impor- 
tant moderators. There will be differential effectiveness depending on how parents think about 
relationships with program staff and their attitudes about relationships with children. 

Depression and mental health is another important moderator, as is exposure to violence. 
These all work to alter the effect sizes of impacts on family and child outcomes. 

The fourth emphasis is that of outcomes. The term outcome means what is affected, what is it 
that we are looking at as the ultimate effect? Being a developmentalist, in my world outcomes 
are children. That is how I view the world. Possibly outcomes are parenting, I think that is an 
important outcome, but here, the richness in what outcomes are, is highlighted. There are the 
traditional child outcomes. Different researchers in the different sites have focused on the CBCL 
(Child Behavior Checklist) and behavioral functioning of children. Language development is 
emphasized in some sites, while cognitive development and children's social interactions with 
parents are emphasized in other sites. Many focus on parenting and child-rearing styles. Focus 
also extends to mental health outcomes — somatic disorders in parents, depression, and so forth. 
Whereas one research site might think of mental health as a mediator and another research site 
thinks of it as a mediator and/or a moderator, a third research site will target mental health as a 
principal outcome in relation to attendance or other factors. 

There are outcomes such as stability in the home, community involvement, and one of the 
most interesting outcomes, which from my perspective is different and distinct from the way I 
would think of outcomes, was the likelihood of referrals for services. This was Catholic Univer- 
sity emphasizing whether Early Head Start affected the likelihood that parents will engage in 
early intervention. That is an important outcome if you think of it affecting the sensitivity of 
parents to what their children might need and what are the best ways to access resources. An 
interesting outcome is the fact that there is no single outcome. We are tackling this from 
different lenses and different vantagepoints. It is a way of pulling together what is in the black 
box and what is working for whom, and via what mechanisms. At the end of this 6-year period, 
we have probably raised many more questions than we have answered, and I hope that was our 
mission. 

Emde: Thank you for orienting us in that way. I also did a similar scheme, and I will add some 
additional themes that I picked up. I was struck by the content themes of the posters from the 
local sites. I found five themes and three of them had to do with relationships. 

One set of mediators and moderators had to do with what I would refer to as parenting 
relationship resources, which includes adult attachment, adult relationship insecurity, character- 
istics of maternal sense of efficacy, mastery, and so forth. Another set in the relationship category 
had to do with the parent/child relationship. The parenting relationship resources were typically 
treated as moderators, that is, as things that you could assess external to the intervention or to 





165 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



the black box. In this sense, you could assess the moderators and then look at what happens 
with the intervention subsequent to that — see the outcomes — this is how the moderator 
influenced the outcomes. The parent/child relationship variables were assessed by many sites, 
perhaps most sites, and were typically assessed as mediators, but in some instances, as outcomes. 

Another theme was the parent-intervener relationship. It is important that we assess varying 
degrees and varying qualities of the parent-intervener relationship as it mediates outcomes. It 
would be valuable for all of us to learn from the programs, in particular, and to learn from 
continuous improvement. 

Another theme was health, as was mentioned, and mental health is part of that. Those were 
seen at all levels. They could be seen as moderators, but typically they are treated as mediators. 
We also had the early abstracts, which were promissory notes that you had to submit to the 
meeting before the data were in. That was very interesting — of course things change when you 
have results. Also expressed were, in addition to the wishes, the expectations of the investigators 
of what was going to be done. They were not able to accomplish everything they wanted to do. 
We know that, for example in the health area, from those early abstracts, that many of the sites 
were going to look at health outcomes. However, we have not been able to look at outcomes as 
much as we would have liked. Another theme, as Cathie mentioned, has to do with service use, 
mainly examined by Yakima, DC, and Virginia. That is looked at as an outcome, as well as a 
mediator of engagement. 

I would also mention a few things about mental health that I thought were striking. In our 
overall results, for the national sample as a whole as well as the local results, in the 36-month 
report (impacts at age 3), there were no significant effects on the parents physical and mental 
health, and family functioning. 

There were some effects at 24 months that did not show up as significant at age 3, although 
the direction of the effects were the same for example, in the subscale of the parenting distress 
index and the PSI in general. For the Vermont sample, detailed analyses and growth-related 
analyses, were done. In this instance, the parenting distress subscale is declining over time in 
both program and comparison groups. However, there is more declination in the program 
group of parenting distress. It is interesting to look at the way they did that, and the methods 
that we hope to be using more and more that look at functions over time, either growth or 
declination of distress indices. 

At a few sites, especially fascinating was Seattle, maternal depression showed a interesting 
interaction with attrition from the program. The analysis comparing program and comparison 
groups showed that depressed mothers accounted for more of the attrition in the comparison 
group, and less in the program group. 

In Colorado, we found a direct moderating effect across a number of variables of child 
development as well as interactional parent/child outcomes. A moderating effect of maternal 
depression assessed prior to random assignment makes it particularly powerful in our view; 
namely that the programs helped more mothers who were depressed. There are also some 
indications of this in the national data samples. A number of sites have used the relationship 
insecurity measure. The Simpson Adult Attachment Survey is an adult measure used at study 
entry. Using maternal reports, findings in Colorado, at least in some variables, show that those 
who enter the program with more relationship insecurity were helped more. 

There are some intriguing leads that we will be probing, not only in these local data sets, 
as we integrate them with the national data set, but longitudinally as we get more time points. 

I point again to the promise of the Vermont data leading the way in the methods for doing 
that. We can gain power by multiple data points over time, and we gain a depth of understand- 
ing, too. 

Talking about moderators, mediators, and outcomes is dependent on one's theory because it 
is a playful enterprise, doing model fitting. One time, when I was introducing a symposium in 
behavioral genetics, I made a slip and I called it model fiddling. The behavioral geneticists loved 




166 



172 



AUM1N18TRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



it. I myself was horrified! This playful enterprise works best when done predictably, according to 
a theory, which is applied ahead of time, and, obviously, one gains more logical power that way. 
We are trying to do that through theories of change as elaborated by the programs, which would 
be the most meaningful of all. 

We would like to begin the discussion by asking a person from each site to give one take- 
home message from their poster. Do not summarize the poster, but just articulate one message 
for us to take home. 

CaroIIee Howes: At UCLA we were looking at the outcome of mother/child relationships and 
whether there were variations in child and mother engagement in addition to the child-mother 
outcomes. We found similar levels of security in mother-child attachment across the three 
cultural groups. 

Emde: I already mentioned the Colorado take-home message, which is that for the programs it 
has been uplifting for them to know that the people hardest to work with are helped the most, 
with respect to depression and difficulties in relationships. 

Comment— Michigan State: Our outcome data showed that families who perceive themselves 
as functioning at a very high level may be a good mediator for looking at child outcomes. We are 
pleased to see that our Family Functioning measure holds some promise. 

Joseph Stowitschek: At Yakima, we are interested in a parent's perspective of services across 
both Early Head Start and comparison programs: focusing on the amount of service, frequency, 
and time. We found that Early Head Start substantially impacts both opportunity and participa- 
tion, and we also found that time is precious. Due to many circumstances, home visits might 
occur only once every 6 weeks. That makes it imperative to provide a concentrated intervention 
and focus on what can do the most for the child's development. As an example, I would teach 
and encourage parents to get their young child talking a blue streak. 

Comment — Harvard University: One of our interests was how the Vermont program affected 
parenting. We looked at the effects of distressive parenting over time, and found that the 
program did have a significant effect on reducing parent stress over time. Interestingly, there 
were a few patterns of reduction of stress. Families with multiple stressors, all of which were 
affected by the program, had different patterns in the reduction of stress, than those mothers 
whose parenting stress was not quite as high to begin with, and who did not have other risk 
factors, particularly depression and violent life events. We are going to continue to look at what 
happens to these mothers over time. 



Comment— D.C./Virginia: An important part of our local research was children with disabili- 
tip, and our poster focuses on our qualitative case studies of 32 families. We found a dramatic 
difference between Early Head Start and the comparison group. Early Head Start had more 
educated eyes on the child, and through their scaffolding of their work with the parents, the 
parents took the step of seeking referrals and obtaining services to a much greater extent. The 
children at the comparison site had more severe disabilities with medical involvement; whereas in 
the Early Head Start families the children had milder delays and ended up getting served earlier. 

Comment— Pittsburgh: We looked at relationships and efficacy. What we found is that helping 
families to be able to build and maintain healthy relationships was an important pathway to 
good parenting, which we found was more important than social support as conventionally 
conceived. The issue of being able to build and maintain healthy relationships, and through 
those relationships, to begin to realize a sense of efficacy, or "I can do it." Also, the program's 





1.67 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



strength-based approach was instrumental in fostering this relationship-building capacity and 
sense of efficacy in families. Finally, to say that we could not have seen this except for the faa 
that we strongly based our research on a closer parmership with the program and on the 
program's theory of change. Another factor was combining qualitative and quantitative meth- 
ods. Through that process, we were able, ourselves, and help the program understand the theory 
of change. 

Comment — University of Missouri at Columbia: We hypothesized that the home visitor s 
assessment of the relationship quality between the home visitor and the parent would mediate 
the link between maternal personality, home visitor personality, and time spent in home visits. 
What we found was that maternal personality negativity predicted both relationship quality and 
time spent in home visits, and the home visitor's personality and well-being also predicted time 
spent in home visits. Then the relationship quality, as assessed by the home, visit, predicted time 
spent in home visits. We did not find a mediational effect, but we surmise that because of our 
small sample size, we had low statistical power, which compromised our ability to detect 
significant mediation effects. 

Comment: In Utah the main emphasis and theory of change is to impact parenting, which will 
then affect children. They want to have parents and children interacting and having a good time 
together, playing well, and then through that experience, parents will promote optimal develop- 
ment. We do see early impacts, as early as between 18 and 24 months, on both parents and 
children. Interestingly, in these interactions parents were more sensitive in playing with their 
children, and that those were strong predictors of later outcomes for children, in both cognitive 
development and attachment security. 

Comment— -Iowa: We looked at the process of home visits and what happens when the home 
visitors are there. We also had the same theory of change for the program. Our poster focused on 
several different families to show that even though they received about the same amount of 
service, the focus of the service could vary widely, based on the family's goals, but not as widely 
as we had hoped. There was a great deal of continuity in what the families received, so there was 
not as much individualization as we had hoped. The program was meeting its goals, but not 
necessarily the individual goals of the family. 

Comment — Seattle: One of the nicest messages has already been mentioned: that possibly the 
parents with the highest depression may have benefited the most. We tackled the apparent 
adverse effects that showed up in the national study to try to find out what that was about. The 
messages I would like to address to researchers here are the following: (a) it is important to do, 
as this project did, very broad-based outcome measures so that one is looking at costs in the 
scheme instead of pinpointing one domain and to pay close attention to possible negative 
effects, and (b) it is very important to look at attrition and its potential causes. 

Comment — Kansas: Our program had an explicit focus on parent responsiveness as a pathway 
to positive outcomes for children. Parent responsiveness did increase over time, in that families 
who were more responsive, actively involved, and engaged in the program affected children s 
positive outcomes in cognitive and language development. 

Comment — Arkansas: We were interested in looking at the parent's relationships with other 
adults. We conducted a videotaped assessment of the target mother, with the grandmother or 
grandmother figure. We also used the Simpson Adult Attachment Survey for the mother's self- 
report of relationships with other adults. From the national data set, we took the family conflict 
subscale from the Family Environment Scale. Another local measure was the grandmother's 



er|c 



168 



■i y* 

1/4 



administration for children and families 



report of her level of conflict with the mother. In the areas of maternal self-efficacy of their 
parenting, or parenting discipline practices, we did not find a moderating effect, and therefore 
did not see a different relationship between the adult relationships and the parenting variables 
across treatment groups. What we did find, however, was a clear pattern of relationships between 
the parents relationships with other adults and the way in which they parent. In this first look 
at the data, we were hindered by both a small sample size and by the fact that most of the 
measures we collected to assess adult relationships were not baseline, but were taken when the 
child was about 14 months old. At that time, the parents had varying levels of treatment. What 
we want to do now is go back and take a much closer look at the potential impact of treatment 
on those adult relationships, but also control for the time at which we collect that data. 

Tamis-LeMonda: At NYU our findings were very similar to Kansas, in that what we looked at 
was parent attendance and child attendance at sites. Not surprisingly, we found a significant 
impact of Early Head Start on parenting and child cognition. We assessed a large range of 
affective measures, but only for parents who attended either in a fair, good, or very good range. 
Obviously for those nonattenders we did not have an effect when compared to the control 
group. We found that dosage was an important moderator. 

Questions: Were nonattenders different, systematically, in some way, from attenders? 

Tamis-LeMonda: That is a great question. The answer is, I do not know yet. This is one of those 
dash-to-finish things, code the parents and get done in time! That is an important question for 
all of us — that they might have had dramatically different starting points. 

Emde: In Seattle, are the non-attenders different from the attenders? 

Answer Seattle: We found that the disorganized, detached mothers were less likely to be 
engaged with the home visitors than were other mothers. I do not honestly have the answer 
because we have not teased it out beyond that. 

Question: You mentioned adverse effects, do you mean there were negative effects of interven- 
tion, or that there were no positive results? 

Emde: I think we have to be cautious about our words, because the term adverse effect is usually 
linked to an intervention, like in dmg adverse effects. In this instance, as I understand it, we do 
not know yet whether that was due to the intervention, or due to the nature of the comparison 
group. I think you might want to consider using a term other than adverse effects. 

Tamis-LeMonda: Counter-intuitive would be fine. 

Question: Did you shift to qualitative methods to find out how they treat the stresses? 
Tamis-LeMonda: Have any of the other sites used qualitative data? 

Answer— Michigan: We have not yet put together our qualitative and quantitative data. How- 
ever, at every parent services interview, we did talk to parents about what their life was like at 
this time, what were the good events, what were the bad events. We asked them about their 
family and about the services they were receiving. That data was all transcribed, all coded, and 
now they just have to be analyzed. If there is something that the family has told us that would 
help us understand what their answers to the instmment were, we will see it. 



ERIC 




169 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Tamis-LeMonda: Then perhaps begin developing indices of risk based on the perspectives of 
participants themselves 

Question: All of you are involved in partnerships with programs in this effort, and in the 
morning session on Early Head Start, we had some questions about how these partnerships 
work. I wonder if some of you might comment on program response to feedback. Have there 
been any programmatic changes? 

Lori A. Roggman: A rocky beginning was resolved through both sides being committed to 
sharing the data and the program getting feedback quickly. We gathered the data that they asked 
for. We wrote three reports for them, and in every case, we came back and met with them 
informally to present what we were finding. By the time we had a written document, they had 
already begun incorporating most of the changes we were suggesting. They were quick to make 
changes, and Utah is not unique. If we started over today, we would now have programs that are 
functioning so well that they are more powerful than they were when we began. 

Answer: Our program, in talking about theories of change, had a focus on parent responsive- 
ness and parent/ child interaction, but much of what they were doing in practice was probably 
more family support. We had conducted observations within the home, and they wanted 
information about how parents were interacting with their children. They were not happy with 
what they were seeing in the data and decided to adopt a more explicit focus on activities to do 
with parent/child interaction. They used the data to make a significant change in the way they 
conducted their program. After that change, they have been asking us for more information. 

They have been very interested in the results of this evaluation. 

Answer — Pittsburgh: Our collaboration began immediately, even before we wrote the pro- 
posal. We went through a long process. I sat in program meetings where there were long discus- 
sions about whether to apply to be a research site because of concerns about the randomization 
process. 

Writing the proposal involved the beginnings of looking at the program's theory of change, 
though we did not call it that then. At Pittsburgh the feedback has been done in both formal 
and informal ways. In some ways the informal feedback was probably more significant and 
important as an ongoing interaction. Part of that was facilitated by the fact that I functioned as 
an on-site ethnographer and did many participant observations. Where this is clear is the theory 
of change and its evolution over time. It was a combination of data collection, trying to under- 
stand that evolution, but also giving back a sense of what we were finding. There was a similar 
change in that this program was also strength-based and family support focused at first. We also 
had real concern of how to be child-focused. How can one be child-focused and family support 
focused at the same time. It was not so much that we collected data and then went back and 
reported it, but in an ongoing dialogue, we continued to see what was happening to the theory 
of change and through discussions at program meetings and then fed back of what we were 
hearing. In addition, feedback to the programs then becomes further research data, or research 
understanding and research information, which enlightens us. If a good relationship is built, 
then when you bring back your findings, people are both interested and able to use them. 

Answer — Michigan: Our experience in Michigan, while it was an extremely wonderful collabo- 
rative relationship, differs in one fundamental way. We did not start out being a quality im- 
provement facilitator. We were involved in another service that they provided, we collaborated 
on the outcomes that we wanted, but we were not expecting to be able to have feedback because 
of the embargoes, and so on. One can develop the relationship and have a collaborative relation- 
ship across time in this type of research without having the need to feed the information back. 




170 



176 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



I believe in the up-front work to develop the partnership, to understand the nature of the 
study, and to gain the trust of the program staff. Let the staff know that they can trust you to do 
the job well, and be able, when appropriate, to give them feedback. 

Question: As researchers, does it bother you that because of the way in which those 17 projects 
were launched, without starting time, that you put all this effort into something where it would 
be a miracle for anything positive to happen? Do you plan to go back and study the program 
now that you have more time? 

Emde: At a previous roundtable, that was one of my two presentation points: the need and 
design for that and the study of mature programs. ACF and NICHD are in the planning phase to 
do just that, not so much in order to say whether Early Head Start works or not, it does. It is to 
take the next step, based on what we have learned, and look at specific, manualized curricula in 
the areas of social competence and preliteracy. We were all very nervous researchers, but then we 
were reassured by the pattern of results. You are absolutely right, however, it should be an 
incentive to go further, particularly longitudinally. 

Comment: It occurs to me that it may be helpful to start thinking in terms of adult develop- 
mental issues — the transition to parenthood, the renegotiation of roles, and the renegotiation of 
interpersonal relationships — and the interface between those adult relationships and the 
relationship development of the infant. 

Comment: I had a similar percolating thought related to one piece of data about how families 
are more stressed when they went back to work. I wondered if that was not necessarily a func- 
tion of work, or financial issues, but maybe a function of continuous transitions in and out of 
work. It is these instabilities — "Am I working, am I not working, am I going to have child care, 
am I not going to have child care"— those are the stressors as opposed to work per se. 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Does Head Start Work? Overview and Update 
on the New Head Start Impact Study 

CHAIR: Michael L. Lopez 

PRESENTERS: Michael L. Lopez, Ronna Cook, Mike Puma, Richard Gonzales, Gina Adams 

Michael L. Lopez: This is a report from the Head Start Impact Study. In the almost 11 years that 
I have been with the agency, this has been the most complicated, challenging, and anxiety- 
provoking study to conceptualize, design, and implement. It has also assembled one of the best 
teams of researchers. Here reporting for the larger team are Ronna Cook from Westat, the Project 
Director of the study who oversees the consortium of our contractors; the other presenters and 
their organizations are Mike Puma and Gina Adams from the Urban Institute, Richard Gonzales 
from American Institute for Research (AIR), and also on the team, but not represented is 
Decision Information Resources (DIR). 

Today we will talk about the background, design, measures, recmitment, and the random 
assignment process that makes the study different from other studies. The study began in 1998, 
actually it probably started well before that with the infamous Government Performance and 
Results Act that basically put most federal agencies on a trajectory for more accountability for 
how they are spending federal tax dollars. The Government Accounting Office had done a 
review of the research and had basically concluded that there was not enough empirical re- 
search, demonstrating the effectiveness of Head Start. As a result, in 1998, Gongress determined, 
as part of Head Start's reauthorization, that DHHS should conduct a national study to deter- 
mine the impact of Head Start on the children it serves. 

The legislative language included a number of specifications for this study. Included in the 
Act was a requirement to name an Advisory Gommittee on Head Start Research and Evaluation 
comprised of experts in research and practice to help provide a set of recommendations on how 
to conduct the study. 

The study is designed to address two research goals: 

1 . What difference does Head Start make to key outcomes of development and learning 
(and in particular, the multiple domains of school readiness) for low-income children? 

2. Under what circumstances does Head Start achieve the greatest impact? What works for 
which children? What Head Start services are most related to impact? 

There are some similarities and some differences between the Impact Study and the PAGES 
Study that we will discuss when we talk about the design. The Advisory Gommittee was helpful 
in their recommendations on the study design. They said that in addition to the basic require- 
ments that Gongress mandated, the study has to be credible and it has to be feasible. It also has 
to be a study that could be implemented — it could not be one of those hothouse laboratory 
studies that could not be done anywhere else. The Advisory Gommittee also touched on the 
critical issue of the ethics of random assignment and how that could be done in a Head Start 
context. Since random assignment was built into the law, it had to be built into the study. 
Gongress believed that to do a rigorous study, given the standards of science, it must involve 
random assignment. Given the requirements, and random assignment being the only way to do 
a defensible study, the Advisory Gommittee wanted to make sure that the study be done only in 
locations where there were already more children than programs could serve. This avoids the 
ethical dilemma of denying children service. 

Mike Puma: There are three guiding principles for the sample design that come from the 
Gongressional Mandate and the Advisory Panel. The first one is that the study sample had to be 
nationally representative. We want it to cover Head Start in all its variations throughout the 
entire country, a national sample. The second principle required us to have sufficient variation, 



O 

ERIC 



172 



173 



AUMIN15 TRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



not just in the context in the community, but also in the types of children. Therefore, we needed 
a large sample of Head Start Grantees and Head Start Agencies in different geographic places to 
achieve that type of variation. The third principle was the need to have the most rigorous design 
possible, which meant using a randomized experiment. 

To select the grantees and delegate agencies we began with every Head Start Grantee and 
Delegate Agency in the country, eliminating migrant, tribal, and Early Head Start programs. We 
then took these programs and created geographic clusters throughout the country. 

Lopez: The exclusion of migrant, tribal, and Early Head Start programs was written into the 
legislative language. For Early Head Start, there is presumptive eligibility so we could not 
randomly assign Early Head Start graduates because then that would deny some children service 
and they are required to be served, if they are income eligible. 

Puma: We took these geographic clusters and then stratified them along several dimensions: 

The extent to which the pre-K program operating in the state was similar to Head Start. We 
included geographic region, race, ethnicity of the children in the Head Start program, and 
urban location. 

We then created 25 strata along those dimensions and then picked one cluster in each of the 
strata. Within those 25 clusters there were 355 grantees/delegate agencies. We wanted to only do 
the randomized experiment in places where there were a sufficient number of applicants, more 
applicants than they had slots to fill. Therefore, we conducted phone interviews and determined 
that 85 % of those grantees in the clusters were eligible for the study. 

We then combined small programs and then stratified the grantees again along several 
dimensions: urban location, whether they were or were not a school-based program, race, 
ethnicity, whether they had a full-day program, a part-day program, or both program options, 
and the ratio of 3-year-olds to 4-year-olds. We created strata and then sampled 90 grantees from 
these clusters. That represents the sample of grantees/delegate agencies that are in the study. 

For the center selection we then sampled Head Start centers within the grantee/delegate 
agency's programs. For each of the 90 grantees, we collected information on every operating 
Head Start center, representing 1400 centers. We then tried to determine which of these centers 
typically had more applicants than they had available slots. At that point, we eliminated those 
that could not meet our requirements, about 12% of the centers. We did some combining of 
small centers, did stratification again, and then did a random sample of 471 individual Head 
Start centers. That is our current study sample. I think this may be the largest multi-site random- 
ized experiment. 

The process of random assignments is as follows: 

Identify newly-entering children, beginning with all 3- and 4-year-old applicants, excluding 
returning children. We want to be able to estimate the impact of Head Start for children entering 
the program with no prior Head Start experience. At each center we collected all of their applica- 
tions and develop a roster of names; excluding any returning children, except in the case of 
severe need where an exception can be made. Whatever the reason, this child has to be excluded 
from the random assignment, and that child is enrolled in the program. Those remaining on the 
list are the newly entering children to fill the available Head Start slots. 

That list was extended to another 11 children for each Head Start center in order to have 
enough extra children for a comparison group. From that pool, 16 children are enrolled in Head 
Start and become part of the study and 11 children, who will not be enrolled in Head Start, 
become the comparison group. 

Comment: It seems that you are going to get the children who are the most needy in your 
experimental group. 




179 



173 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Puma: Exactly. We definitely want to make sure that we are picking children in their need order, 
so that we get the same mix of the children who would otherwise be enrolled in the program. 

Question: How do you address the ethics issue of a parent coming in to enroll their child in a 
program and that child, ending up as a part of the control group, but they could really benefit 
from Head Start? 

Puma: Prior to engaging in this process, we sent letters to all of the parents who are about to 
apply to the program, letting them know that this was a possibility. Everybody had the same 
chance to get into the program, but questions are raised about the ethics of doing it this way. 
When 1 explain to people the importance of doing this right, and getting the right answer, and 
getting the program to be better for hundreds of thousands of children, most parents under- 
stand it, and the process seems fair because it is a random process and not based on any 
characteristics. 

Lopez: In addition to that, some of the program directors themselves have said that there are 
other families who are not getting into the program as well and they see it as an equally fair 
approach for deciding who gets in and who does not get in. There have been very few cases that 
have not received support from the program directors. 

Question: If a child does not get into the program, does that parent have a right to refuse to be 
a part of the study as a participant in the control group? 

Puma: Yes. There is no right to have the child enrolled, but participation in the data collection is 
certainly voluntary. 

Question: Do you have incentives for parents in the control group? We have a difficult time 
getting parents of comparison group children to complete surveys. 

Cook: Yes. The parents receive $20.00 for participating in each interview. The child gets a little 
present for participating in assessments. When we are actually doing observations with teachers, 
the teachers and classrooms receive gifts. If parents of the comparison group children help us by 
letting us know where their child is in day care or child care, those centers are also given an 
incentive for participating. 

Puma: When I have done similar projects, what is surprising is that we really do not find a 
difference in cooperation between the parents in the treatment and in the control groups. In 
fact, we did a field test of this study and found no difference in cooperation. The way I look at 
this is that parents enjoy the opportunity to talk about their children. 

Question: My understanding is that usually Head Start centers use a ranking by need and take 
the neediest children. By changing this you are not taking the neediest children. Could this have 
an impact on the effectiveness of Head Start? Can this slight change in who you enroll actually 
change the program that you are actually trying to assess? 

Puma: It is a good question. When one looks down the list of children ranked by need criteria, I 
have to tell you, there is not a whole lot of difference between the ones that are in the eligible 
pool that would normally enroll and those on the waiting list. There is not a large variation in 
need. These children are all in need, and they normally do turn away children who belong in 
the program. 



ERIC 




174 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



Question: I am with the Canadian Program. In most of our communities, people would not 
have an option. If they did not get into the Head Start program, the children would be staying at 
home. They would not be in another program. I am wondering what your expectation is? It 
sounded as if your expectation is that you are comparing Head Start to another experience in an 
early childhood program rather than comparing it to a group of children who were not enrolled 
in any program. 

Puma: It is not intended to be a comparison of Head Start to nothing. It is a comparison of 
Head Start to whatever the parents chose to do with their child and what is available in that 
community. It varies extensively. In some places there are many programs from which parents 
can choose as alternative placements for the children. 

Question: Are you looking at what the control children and families do during their noninter- 
vention period, which was significant in the CCDP Study. That study found that the children did 
not stand still and parents ran around finding other resources for them. In the end it showed the 
CCDP children did not have a much different experience. I wonder if that is a danger here and 
whether you are looking at that? 

Puma: Ronna will talk more in depth about that in her presentation. We are doing completely 
parallel data collection for both the children in Head Start and ones that are not in Head Start 
and we are capturing their experience Monday to Friday about 8:00 AM to 6:00 PM, 
nonsummertime. 

Question: In your choosing children based on this rank or need, how did you address children 
with disabilities? Often progranfs will give higher ranking to children with disabilities or at risk 
for disabilities. We they included in the sample, or were they the ones that may be the few 
exceptions, or how did you deal with that? 

Puma: It is our intent to include them in the study sample. There are instances where those may 
be the children that the center chose to exempt from random assignment, but to the extent 
possible, we want to include all types of children that Head Start serves. 

Richard Gonzales: In fact, the decision was made by the federal government that it would be 
inappropriate not to include children with disabilities, because they wanted to know the impact 
Head Start was having on children with disabilities versus children who do not have disabilities. 
When we were in the early stages of discussing which children would we exempt, the decision 
was not to exempt any of them. We will look at whoever applies to Head Start. Everyone has an 
equal chance and then we will compare what those impact differences are across the entire 
population. 

Cook: We are not exempting any category systematically. However, there well may be, in a 
particular center, a child that somebody feels strongly should not be in the study. Then that is 
brought back to us to talk about and to talk with the center about, to make a decision about 
that child. 

Puma: The study sample is about 6,000 children. We will follow these children through the end 
of first grade. This is true for both 3- and 4-year-olds with the 3-year-olds participating in Head 
Start for 2 years, then kindergarten and first grade. 

We conducted a field test of eight grantees and 24 centers with a sample of 430 children. The 
sites were chosen to represent a wide range of program configurations. Sites were recruited in 
April and May, 2001, and random assignment was done in the summer of 2001. This field test 




131 



175 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



gave us the opportunity to iron out any problems. There were high response rates and no major 
differences between treatment and control groups. 

Question: You said that the 3-year-olds would have 2 years in Head Start. Is that an assumption 
on your part or is that being planned as part of the study? Do you assume that they do not leave 
Head Start at age 4 for another option that may better meet their needs? 

Puma: They enter the program at age 3 and they have the potential to spend up to 2 years in 
Head Start. What they actually do is up to their parents. 

Puma: We are not requiring that they stay for 2 years. However, we intentionally wanted to 
include both 3s and 4s to find out whether or not there was a difference if a child received 2 
years exposure versus lyear exposure. 

Question: You said that you are going to follow them through first grade. Wouldn't the quality 
of the schools that they transition to affect the study? 

Puma: Yes, and we plan to focus on the quality of the school that these children move into 
and the extent to which that has an effect, and if there are long-standing effects from being in 
Head Start. 

Question: If the quality of the school affects that child, then would that child be excluded from 
the study? Since we are trying to determine if Head Start works, and if there is something that is 
going to set that child back, would it be best to take that child out of the study or have the child 
remain in the study but counted in a different category. Then you would not say that Head Start 
did not work for that child, but that it was the school system that was not ready for that child? 

Puma: No, we would not take that child out of the study or be counted in a different category. 
What we are going to be able to do is estimate the impact of Head Start from the time the child 
begins the program until the end of either 1 or 2 years of Head Start, after kindergarten, and 
after first grade. We hope to find out the extent to which those gains may be decreasing over 
time and the effect the schools may be having. 

Cook: For the data collection timing and resources, we begin with children at 3 and 4 years old 
and follow them through first grade. This means that we will be continuing to collect data all 
the way through 2005. On every child data will be collected in the fall and in the spring each 
year. In the fall the focus will be on child assessments, with direct assessment of the child, and 
parent interviews. We allow some time, especially in the first year, for things to settle down 
before we go into the classrooms to conduct observations, and begin to collect information 
from the teachers, directors, and family service workers. In addition to program measures, we 
also plan to obtain comprehensive service measures. We will talk about that in terms of how to 
do that comparably between a Head Start program and other programs, or other childcare 
arrangements. 

We have been working on the measures for the 3- and 4-year-olds while they are in pre- 
school. We have not yet finalized what measures we will use for kindergarten and first grade, but 
we do know that we will be collecting data on these children in the fall of both their kindergar- 
ten and first grade years. One question we still have is if we will collect data on these children in 
the spring as well. 

One of our greatest challenges has been choosing the measures we are going to use for the 
study. There are so many different types of measures available that it is not an easy task to 
choose the right ones. We started by building upon the FACES measures, which is a very good 
base of measures that have been successfully used with this population. In addition, we looked 




176 



182 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



at measures used in other large child care studies and at the literature to determine what we 
might be missing. 

This also has been a very inclusive process where we brought in people from all fields and all 
disciplines for their input into the best way to conduct the study. I am very process-oriented, but 
this process has sometimes made me want to be a dictator. Yet, it is an important process to go 
through in order to choose the best set of measures that we could find. 

Six work groups were selected to review measures, identify constructs, and recommend 
measures. The individual groups reviewed measures in the following categories: (a) language 
and literacy (child assessments), (b) educational environment, (c) socio-emotional develop- 
ment, (d) parenting skills and activities, (e) comprehensive services, and (f) assessing Spanish- 
speaking children. 

We used the following criteria when looking at measures for possible use in the study: 

1. Measure outcomes for children/ families that are expected to be impacted by Head Start. 

2. Need to have measures to obtain comparable information for children not in Head Start. 

3. Capable of measuring growth over time. 

4. Use instruments that predict later school achievement. 

5. Ensure trained field interviewers can administer them with acceptable reliability. 

6. Ensure overall battery is of reasonable length and can maintain interest and performance 
of young children. 

7. Have parallel tests in Spanish and English for core subset of assessment battery. 

8 Maintain measures from FACES that showed significant gains against national norms in 
Head Start. 

9. Strengthen oral language component and phonemic awareness components. 

Most important is that we will be measuring outcomes for children and families expected to 
be impacted by Head Start. Therefore, we want to make sure that we carefully define what Head 
Start is supposed to accomplish. We need to know what we are measuring in order to be able to 
talk about the impact of Head Start from that perspective. 

Although not all of the measures have been chosen, we do know many of them that we will 
be using when data collection begins in September. Measures for language and literacy are the 
Woodcock-Johnson III Letter-Work Identification, Woodcock-Johnson III Applied Problems, 
Woodcock-Johnson III Spelling, Woodcock-Johnson III Oral Comprehension, Developing Skills 
Checklist Segmenting Sentences Task, Story and Print Concepts, shortened version of PPVT-III, 
McCarthy Draw-A-Design, Letter Naming, Abbreviated version of Leiter-R AS, and Counting 
Bear Task. 

Hopefully, one of the ways we are going to shorten the battery and stay within the 25 
minutes for the 3-year-olds is that are some of our staff back at Westat are working on an 
adaptive version of the PPVT. We want to shorten the time so that the children will not have to 
go through the entire test. 

Lopez: As Ronna mentioned this is our near-final projected set of measures, but there are still 
some decisions to be made so that the final version that will be finished in the next couple 
weeks may look a litde different. We continue to discuss some new measures, for example, Chris 
Lonigan's new phonemic awareness measure. Perhaps that might be one of the answers for the 
challenge we have had of trying to pick a measure that works for 3-year-olds. Another example is 
a social/emotional measure that John Fantuzzo has developed. 

Question: When you say "center" are you talking about a building, a program, or multiple 
programs? 

Lopez: We have discovered that just about everything has multiple definitions. When looking 
across all programs, all centers, or all entities, there are so many different variations, giving one a 
sense of how complicated this is. There can be two centers in the same building, or a one- 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



classroom center. We did not quite anticipate such wide variations. We have had to try to 
understand each organization s structure, procedures, policies, and recruitment and enrollment 
practices. 

Puma: What is so difficult about this is trying to maintain the rigor of doing a randomized 
experiment within various program settings. We have had to think hard about how to tailor our 
procedures a little bit here and there, maintain the rigor of it, but try to adapt it to local circum- 
stances. A real challenge. 

Cook: The data on social/emotional development will be obtained from parents, using the 
Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL); Social Skills Rating System (SSRS); and the Developing Skills 
Checklist — Home Inventory. In ^e spring, input from the teacher or other child care provider 
also will be obtained using the Child Observation Record (COR); CBCL; SSRS; and the Adjust- 
ment Scale for Preschool Intervention (ASPI). 

We will be looking at a number of things from the parent and family perspective. Demo- 
graphic characteristics we will be collecting are the basics! race/ ethnicity, health, disabilities, 
household composition, employment, economic assistance, education, and housing. In addi- 
tion, we will be looking at parenting styles and rules; the home educational environment; 
parental stress and depression; family social support; child care arrangements; home health and 
safety practices; use of social services; home and neighborhood characteristics; and parent 
literacy. 

Even though this is a large study, there has to be a limit on what it can include. We will 
obtain most of our information from the primary care setting, where the child is between the 
hours of 9:00 am and 3:00 pm every day. However, we also want to know if there is a secondary 
setting, and obtain some information from the parent about that setting, and from that be able 
to figure out dosage. The challenge obviously is going to be answering the question, what is the 
treatment and for how much time did the child have the treatment, and how do we measure that? 

We will then go into programs and services. This is a challenging piece where we have had 
many friendly battles— actually struggles— particularly from the comprehensive service perspec- 
tive. Since Head Start is able to do so many things for a family, we question how we are going to 
measure that for the non-Head Start families. How do you ask those questions and get informa- 
tion that is comparable across both groups? We are definitely trying to get at those comprehen- 
sive services and find out who helps families obtain services. We want to know if there is a 
difference, and what that difference is, between the comprehensiveness of Head Start and what 
is provided for non-Head Start families. Then, how can one do the observations— children in 
their own homes, children in day care homes, children in various types of centers what 
measures will we use? In a field test we used the ECERS for all center-based programs. We are 
using the Family Day Care Ratings Scale (FDCRS) for the family day care homes. We also tried 
using this measure in some of the children's own homes to see if it would work. As yet, we do 
not have the data to be able to tell you how it works, but the response rate was not as good in 
the families own homes. We created an environmental scale that took some items from the 
HOME scale, as well as from Fast Track, and parents were much more willing to let us do this 
short type of observation in the home rather than trying to do the FDCRS. The reason for that is 
one would have to make two different appointments to do it the FDCRS other way, whereas the 
scale we created could be done in one visit. In addition, we used a checklist of teacher-directed 
activities as well as an assessment profile 

Because we think it is important to make sure that we work carefully, we have taken an entire 
year of recruitment to work hard with all of the grantees and centers. We have taken seriously 
the issue of how we build communication and have done this in a variety of ways. First of all, we 
have specific two-person teams that work with specific areas of the country. Each team has been 
out at least two times, and in some areas many more times. We are working with policy coun- 
cils, staff, and parents about the study and what it is going to involve. 



178 



184 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



One of the things I have learned from past studies is that you can go out and talk about it 
and you go home and nobody remembers what you said because it is not part of the daily 
routine. There really needs be someone on site who is going to help continue helping people 
understand the study. To address this issue, we have hired local site coordinators. Each one has 
three grantees for which they are responsible. They will also be responsible for helping with 
random assignment, and then will be the supervisors of data collection. As of June 25 we have 
done at least one round of random assignment in 150 of the 470 centers. 

Now Richard Gonzales will tell you about some of those challenges and how we have been 
dealing with them. 

Gonzales: Picture this scene: There is a class of young children and they are sitting down and 
drawing. There is a substitute teacher who usually teaches sixth grade, so she does not know 
much about young children. She comes into the room and looks at one of the children's 
drawings. The teacher asks a little girl what she is drawing. The child answers, "I am drawing a 
picture of Jonah and the whale. Jonah is being swallowed by the whale." The sixth grade teacher 
thinks this is a moment to teach something and so she starts to explain to the young girl, "Well, 
you know, in reality that did not happen because the whale's throat is very small and cannot 
actually swallow a person. A whale is not able to do that." The child looks at the teacher and 
says, "No, no, the whale swallowed Jonah," and the teacher tries to insist again, "No, this did 
not happen." The little girl says, "Yes," and the teacher says, "I'm sorry, but it cannot happen." 
The little girl thinks a moment and she says, "When I go to Heaven, I am going to ask Jonah," 
and the teacher says, "What if he is not in Heaven?" The child says, "Then you ask him." 

You might not think there is a relationship between that joke and what we are talking about, 
but I was thinking about the conversation I had yesterday with one of the directors in the study. 
She said, "Do you realize how mlich I really hate you," and I thought okay, this is good. One of 
the challenges is the feelings that this study creates, and while people want to cooperate, and 
while they understand the importance of the study, they also are challenged on many levels. We 
talked about the ethical issues and concerns, the sensitivity of families, the fact that we are 
serving the neediest children, and wonder what this does to the selection process. 

Just understanding the variations across Head Start programs is the first challenge. Not only 
must we understand home-base, the family day care model, and part-day and full-day programs; 
but we need to understand the differences that exist in the various states and in those communi- 
ties that have competition versus no competition, enrolled programs and urban programs, and 
partnerships versus non-partnerships programs, and so on. Add to that integrating random 
assignment into the existing Head Start program operations. At the same time, we told programs 
that we want to stay as true to their normal process as we possibly could. Each of the decisions 
of how to do random assignment, and when to do random assignment, is based on conversa- 
tion with each individual agency about when it makes sense for them to make these choices. 

Another challenge is enrollment, which is not necessarily at a single point in time. Unfortu- 
nately, while the idea of an impact study was first discussed many years ago and was put in the 
legislation in 1998, it was at a time when there were waiting lists in all of our programs. We are 
now facing the reality that in many of our communities it is a struggle to get funded enrollment 
or to maintain funded enrollment once it has been achieved. After looking at the funded enroll- 
ment and calculate the number of returning children, then you come up with a new number. 

Now you need the number of applications to fill all the remaining slots, plus in an ideal 
world, at least 11 more applications to create a comparison group. In reality, there are some 
programs that never quite get to a point where they have 11 extra applications and if you wait 
too long, because of the competition in the community, you could lose those families to other 
services. That means that you might have to do rounds of selections, in which you take a group 
of applications that are not quite enough to fill all the slots, but you still are selecting a small 
number of children not to receive Head Start, even before the program has filled all of its slots. 





179 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Then the program is challenged with what might happen if they do not fill all of their slots. We 
have alerted all of the programs that are participating that they would not be penalized in their 
review process if, because of the study, they did not have the enrollment numbers they needed. 

I want to come back to the issue of program concerns about serving the neediest. It is 
important to look at how families are selected. As a result of underenrollment issues, more 
programs are accepting families on a first come, first served basis. If that is true then they are not 
necessarily ranking the neediest, which makes a random selection process just as valid as first 
come first served for enrolling children. Except, this is not the same on an emotional level. 

Family workers still believe that when a family comes in and fills out an application there is an 
obligation to enroll the child. It would be very difficult for them to tell the family that Head 
Start cannot accept the child, especially when all of the slots are not filled. 

The last point is about how to ensure the staff buy-in for the study. We noticed there were 
several issues. However, this is where all of our site visits and discussions with directors and 
administrators were important. We tried to make sure people understood all aspects of the 
study, and we also were there to try to understand their unique realities. One problem was that 
these discussions occurred many months prior to the time where we were actually going to 
do anything. 

When we were ready 8 months later, many no longer remembered what we had said and, in 
addition, we were meeting with staff who may or may not have been informed about the study. 
Often in this second visit we were starting all over again to make sure people understood all the 
various aspects of the study and how it would affect them. It is one thing to talk to a director 
about how the study will affect his/her program. It is another thing to talk to the family service 
staff about random assignment. Our challenge was to talk to staff, and deal with their feelings, 
concerns, and questions about the ethics and legality of the study design. Every parent received a 
letter prior to any decisions about acceptance being made. The letter said: (a) our center has 
been accepted or selected for a congressionally mandated study, (b) that this year, despite what 
we may have done in past years as a selection process, we will be using a lottery process for 
selection, and not all families who apply will be able to be accepted, and (c) at a later time we will 
be seeking your agreement to allow your child to be in the study as part of a comparison group. 

What happened, however, is that when we began the discussion about feelings, ethics, and so 
on, a major concern from the programs was, "Why not just let us accept all of the children who 
come first and then whoever is left over can be the comparison group?", or "why not just go to a 
pre-K center or child care center or home day care and tell them they have been selected to be 
the comparison group?" The answer to that is we cannot do that because when looking for 
similarities, the characteristics must be as similar as possible. That includes the characteristic of 
those who come early to apply to a program. We may not know the reasons that drives certain 
parents to come 6 months before a program starts, versus the parent who comes when school 
opens. The families are ranked and the computer does the selection. Selections for both treat- 
ment and comparison groups are taken from the very top of the list, from the middle of the list, 
and from the end of the list. This ensures randomness, making it more likely that children who 
are comparable are in each group. When this is explained to program staff they do understand 
intellectually, but they have a difficult time coming to terms with how they will inform a parent 
that she and her child have not been selected for the program. 

It is important to make sure information is shared across the board. It can be a problem if the 
staff members who actually do the work have not been kept informed. In addition, there is the 
issue of what is actually understood. There is always the danger of people not sharing the 
definition of different words. For example, what do we mean when we use the word center, or 
lEP — there are numerous words and concepts that we had to discuss with great care and clarity. 

In terms of serving the neediest, we argued that every person who applies to Head Start is 
needy. We pointed out that it would be wonderful if all these families could be served, but in the 





0 



180 



administration for children and families 



past families had to be turned away. They were not told where they fell in the ranking. They were 
just told, "I am sorry but we filled up our slots and we do not have enough room to be able to 
offer you a place," and were then told about other places to find services. That was true, but 
unfortunately, staff knew where the families fell in the ranking because they had the roster, 
while the computer might have picked the first child on the list to not receive Head Start 
services, or the tenth, or the twenty-seventh. 

There were also issues of who actually selects the children. We came across surprising situa- 
tions with partnership arrangements. For example, in a Head Start pre-K partnership we found 
out that it was actually the pre-K that was selecting the children and then determining who 
Head Start would provide support to. In those cases we could not do random assignment unless 
we could obtain the buy-in of the pre-K or the child care to allow us to randomly select from 
their rooster. 

Another challenge is how carefully programs identify rosters. On the roster they have to 
indicate every returning child so we know who they are and how many slots are available. You 
will not be surprised to know that in many cases a comparison child was selected to be compari- 
son and then we find out that child actually had 3 months of Head Start. What do we do with 
that child? You follow the child for the study, right, but it becomes a violation if a child who 
has been a comparison actually did have some Head Start experience. What happens in terms of 
our study with that? 

Cook: If the child actually has had Head Start experience, we would not follow that child. That 
child would be ineligible because we only want newly entering children. However, if it is a 
comparison child that then enters Head Start we will follow them, but they remain a compari- 
son child even though they are in Head Start. 

Gonzales: Now you are thoroughly confused and so am I and I have been working on this for 
the last year. Basically, once the child has been assigned to one group, the child is followed and 
the data collected. If you think that is a problem wait until you see the problems with the 
analysis. In the analysis, there will be comparisons of not only full-day with part-day, home-base 
with center-base, and rural with urban; but analysis also compares variety of comparison 
services. In one state, the comparison services look exactly like Head Start, and some states 
actually follow Head Start Program Performance Standards in non-Head Start programs. 

Technically, the rule is that once a child has been identified as a comparison, he or she is not 
eligible to receive Head Start services at any point in time. However, there is an exception to this 
rule : (a) after much discussion with programs, we made a decision that a 3-year-old child who 
was selerted to be in the comparison group would not be able to enter Head Start for the rest of 
that program year, but when that child turned 4, if the family was interested in applying for 
Head Start, they would have the possibility of entering Head Start. We would be comparing 
children who were in Head Start 1 year versus children who had 2 years of experience. I would 
argue that most parents who find another service for their child and are happy with that service 
are not likely come back to Head Start. However, there are examples that we can think of where 
they, in fact, do. 

Cook: The way to think about it is that children will receive different dosages of the treatment 
and that is just a reality of life. That is one of the reasons it is important when talking with 
parents and following children that we are able to understand where the children are at various 
points in time. The analysis will need to take those things into account. In terms of the fidelity 
of the study, we need to maintain that a treatment child is always a treatment child and a 
comparison child is always a comparison child. 




187 



181 



SYMPOSIA/ROUND TABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Puma: We can do the impact estimate with all the children, including those who get no services, 
and we can do the calculation of the impact estimate on only those who receive treatment. We 
can calculate it both ways and that is our plan. 

Question: I am really curious about kindergarten and first grade and how you are going to find 
the children. Right now you do not even know where they will be for kindergarten and first 
grade. You might have some rough idea that it might be this big city school district, but it might 
not, and I do not know if that is a question you want to answer now or not? 

Lopez: The Transition Project showed the way for some of this. One of the things we realized is 
that when you have a Head Start center that is in the same community as the school, one cannot 
assume that the children would go to that school when they left Head Start. We learned that it is 
difficult to predict, and one cannot make assumptions about where the children will go. 
Hopefully we will be able to incorporate that into this study. 

Question: You said that the children had never previously enrolled in Head Start. Does that 
mean that it is the parent's first time with the child in Head Start, because you could have a 
parent 5 years later with a different child? 

Lopez: There was a good deal of discussion about where we draw the line; the final decision was 
made that, because we are primarily going after the effects on the child, we would have to allow 
for the fact that there may be a variety of parent effects. Everyone would agree that there are 
effects of the Head Start experience on parents, but that by and large, the greatest effects are 
going to be on the child. We would have to account for that in the way that we devise, otherwise 
we would be excluding too many. 

Gonzales: We had to address the issue of siblings and finally realized that there are so many 
siblings in Head Start that if we eliminated siblings we might have no one else to study. Our 
solution was that if there were two children from the same family— defining family as not just 
brother and sister, but cousin, and children living in the same household — applied at the same 
time for the first exposure to Head Start, they would be treated together. They would either both 
become treatment or both become comparison children. However, if the child was in Head Start 
the year before and is returning, this is considered a new child applying, and would be subject 
to random selection and could end up in either grouping. That is just one more challenge. 

Question: I am a public management person. I am curious as to how much thought you have 
given to the indirect effect organizational and program characteristics may be having on the 
service technology. For example, looking at an organized Head Start Grantee that has been 
receiving pre-K funding. We have been studying that in New York and that may have some real 
qualitative impact on the service technology. I am curious about management, overall organiza- 
tional capacity variables. 

Gina Adams: We actually have thought about that. We have not completely defined how we are 
going to measure that, but, clearly, what the whole field has been working at is integrated 
services, collaboration, and coordination. This is lovely for children and hard for researchers. 
The challenge for us is how to collect as much information about that so that we can try to 
disentangle it. It is a bit limited as to how much you can disentangle, but at least we will be able 
to have a sense of the inputs and how these issues play out together. 

Puma: One of the key questions for this study is how do the impacts vary as a function of local 
characteristics? Another question is how do the organizational characteristics change or modify 
those impacts? 



O 

ERIC 



182 



188 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



Question: Could you tell me why you are redesigning the wheel when there are so many other 
models? What makes your study different from the other longitudinal studies that have already 
been done? 

Puma: As far as 1 know, this is the first time anyone has ever tried to do a national randomized 
experiment with Head Start children. 

Question: How were they done before? Maybe I am misunderstanding. 

Puma: Many of them have used comparison of Head Start children to national norms on 
assessments, the way FACES did, or to other types of comparison groups. 

Lopez: Actually, FACES is the only other nationally representative study of Head Start and in the 
first two cohorts looked only at Head Start children. Based on a review of the FACES methodol- 
ogy, the GAO acknowledged that it was a good effort. However, they said it was not good 
enough to get a rigorous, scientifically defensible, credible answer to the question that they want 
to have answered. 

Larry Schweinhart: A while ago you were talking about what might be termed assignment 
crossovers. It seems to me that assignment crossovers have the potential, if there are enough of 
them, to distort the meaning of the study. I wonder, with the pilot study, if you have gone far 
enough to come up with an estimate of assignment crossovers? 

Cook: I do not have a percentage for you. However, there are always some assignment cross- 
overs and we are doing everything possible to be able to capture them when they happen. The 
first step is knowing they are occurring. We actually had a small number in the field test — 
perhaps 5 out of 200 children. 

Puma: The most challenging aspect of this is in places like New York City, where there are many 
Head Start programs and a child can walk down the street literally and enroll in another 
program. Trying to prevent that becomes an enormous challenge for us. 

Lopez: In an earlier study we learned that crossover is just one of many different possibilities in 
which the study could experience difficulties. There is differential attrition, and so many other 
issues. That is one of the main reasons we built in an additional year of relationship building, 
negotiating, and so on. We told Congress in the design of the study that we felt that it was so 
critical to build in that year for understanding programs intimately and build relationships if we 
were going to have any chance of implementing the study and minimizing the number of issues 
that are likely to come up. 

Puma: I also want to add that the programs themselves realize that it is important to minimize 
the assignment crossovers because they now understand the implication of that; how it would 
make Head Start look worse. Therefore, they are doing their best to minimize the crossovers. 

Question: I come from a multicultural, multiethnic community with Head Start classes that 
look like United Nations. These children and families speak many different languages beyond 
Spanish and English. Are parents whose primary language is not Spanish or English excluded 
from the study? 

Cook: For the parent interviews we hope to have the capacity have to translators in whatever 
language the parent speaks. We are not translating the instmment itself into every language, but 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



we will have translators available for the various languages. With the assessments it is more 
difficult because most of them have been normed only in Spanish and English. For that reason, 
we have included some nonverbal assessments. The other possibility is that for some of them, 
the instmctions can be given in another language. 

Gonzales: We explain to programs that whatever is done for children in the treatment group 
will be done in the comparison group, so that the experience of the assessment will be similar. 

Puma: If a child cannot be assessed in English or Spanish when they are 3 or 4, we may be able 
to be assessed by the time they are in kindergarten or first grade. We actually have an outcome 
measure if they are assessed later on in the study. 

In response to an earlier comment about measures and the requirement to develop a na- 
tional reporting system to aggregate all this information it was clear that in the early childhood 
research community, the state of measurement is abysmal. What we have is the best of many 
really bad measures. What measures are available are often not appropriate for 3 or 4-year-olds. 
Many measures had been extended downward. Norms on some of them are weak when one 
looks at the actual psychometric data. We have gone through an extensive, obsessive-compulsive, 
and labor intensive process to look at every single measure. 

We had to figure out how to design this study and other large studies with that in mind 
because programs are stmggling with local assessment systems and decision making. Therefore, 
trying to make it possible for them to coexist as peacefully as possible and not be in conflict, but 
yet still accomplish the two mandated sets of goals is important 

Comment/Question: 1 cross both the worlds of research and practice, and one of the problems 
that 1 see with the measures that you mentioned is that they would be cjifficult to implement in 
a comparison group where the agency was not doing this systematically for all their children. 

1 also have two questions. When we used the Social Skills Rating Scale on the Transition Study, 
we found that the use of middle class language, such as, "does your child attend to speakers?" 
was definitely a challenge. Parents interpreted "attend" to mean going to church regularly. One 
of the challenges was translating words like "attend," that only psychologists use, into words 
that parents understand. I wondered if you were stmggling with that? However, the real ques- 
tion 1 had was about the informed consent process. Are the percentage of parents who give 
informed similar in the demonstration and comparison groups? 1 wondered if you were able to 
see if your refusal rate is different among the different levels of needs that Head Start serves. Do 
you have any information that would tell you, for example, that the highest need families are 
the most likely to refuse to participate in the study? 

Cook: There was no difference quantitatively. However, some of the anecdotes from our 
interviewers were that it was almost more difficult to get a family that did not show up for Head 
Start, but was in the treatment group, to participate than it was to get a control family. That was 
really more from a perspective of finding them rather than anything else. 

Puma: It was not a lack of cooperation; it was a matter of locating them. That was the difficult 
part. 

Gonzales: We do know that the approval rate was somewhere in the 80*'’ percentile for both 
groups. 

Question: 1 am in the 4th year of a 5-year study that is somewhat similar to what you are doing, 
although it did not involve a randomized sample. 1 am looking at two groups of Head Start 
children, one group who were in Head Start prior to their conversion to a Montessori curricu- 



O 

ERIC 



184 



190 



ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES 



lum and another group of 54 children who were the Montessori children. I am also interested in 
a question earlier about what will you do at kindergarten and first grade in terms of teacher 
cooperation and objectivity? I continually find, that despite assuring teachers that this is not a 
reflection of them, some children inevitably turn up with perfect scores. 

Gonzales: For one thing, the assessment of children is actually going to be done by outside 
assessors and not the teachers. Head Start will actually send in assessors at the points of time for 
assessment. 

Cook: The process of getting cooperation is labor-intensive. It varies from state to state on what 
one has to do with a particular school district to get into a public school. We have had success in 
previous studies in getting into the schools. 

Puma: In terms of teacher objectivity, that is why we have the multiple informants approach. 

We are going to observe children in classrooms. We have the teachers' perspective and the 
parents' perspective, which will collectively give us an idea of how the children are behaving. 

Gonzales: Going back to the issue of kindergarten and first grade — this is not a guarantee, but 
what we have found, at least in some places, is that when the parent says, "I have given approval 
for my child to be assessed," it often assists the school in being more cooperative. 

Lopez: Much of tlie information presented is available on our web site at 
www.acfdhhs.gov/programs/core . 

Question: When are we going to see the report? 

Lopez: There are a number of reports, the final reports will not be out until 2006. A report to 
Congress is required by 2003. This will only be a status update. Reporting on the data will not 
occur for a while. Our first real report on findings will not be out until 2004, at the earliest. 

Question: How do you plan on identifying and selecting the outside assessors and the site 
coordinators? Will these be people from the community with some familiarity with the commu- 
nity? I guess the question really relates to the implications of assessing young children outside 
the context of the learning environment and the implication of that. 

Cook: The answer is yes. We have 26 Site Coordinators who have all been hired and have been 
on since January, 2002. The Site Coordinators were hired directly from the community. Many of 
them had past experience with other studies. For others we have advertised locally to find the 
appropriate people for those jobs. The Site Coordinators helped hire the other people we need. 
We have a large pool of assessors and interviewers that have been used by Westat in the past. It is 
important that the assessors and the interviewers are reflective of the communities' makeup and 
we are being careful about that. 

Question: I am a Head Start Director in Minnesota and my question is on this whole confer- 
ence; the burning issue for me is what would people do if Head Start goes to the Department of 
Education? Does the study go on; do we all roll our tents up and go home? 

Lopez: I was thinking of going into cabinet making myself. This is an anxiety provoking 
question for many people — people in the agency, people in Head Start programs, many different 
people — and there is no answer. There is a great deal of speculation, and I think that the only 
thing that we can say is that we will have to wait and see what happens with the reauthorization 




191 



185 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



discussions and whether or not there is enough interest to move Head Start. There are many 
people debating both sides of the issue. 

Question: Would it be possible for you to document on the web site some of the things that 
have come up for those facilitating research in local communities. For example, even just an 
inventory of the instruments that you have looked at and which ones you think are good and 
which are not. One of the things I believe people might want to do is to try to parallel the work 
that is being done in the study, even if we only look at limited variables. If you do that it would 
help people in local comrriunities. 

Lopez: That is a great point. What we did for the FACES Study was something similar to that. 
We took all the measures and listed them on our web site with detailed information about 
which version we chose, and we anticipate doing that for this study. The other piece you men- 
tioned was measures that were under consideration and were not used. That is a critical point 
because there are so many measures to choose from. We are probably not going to post all of 
the measures we considered and discarded. There have been some discussions about whether or 
not a compendium would be helpful that would list some of the issues around psychometrics 
and measures and, in fact, we did a first round of that. Child trends helped us pull together 
some of the information for an interagency meeting where we did just that — looked at psycho- 
metrics and all the different measures that people are using, and did an expanded version of the 
results one could expect to get. 

Question: I am still not clear about whether you will analyze or take out or somehow attempt 
to mitigate in your data those children who go from Head Start and are labeled Head Start to 
your control group and vice versa. I did not hear you address whether your analysis will remove 
the that influence, which really could muddy the waters. I have a second very short question, of 
the 85 centers, how many are Head Start Grantees? 

Cook: There are 90 grantees and 475 centers. 

Puma: In answer to your first question, our plan is to calculate and present in a final report the 
impact estimates calculated in different ways, with the entire treatment and control group and 
then backing out the ones who cross over the original assignment. People can judge the results 
themselves at that point. 

Lopez: We have tried to take all of these issues into account and our web site has a log of more 
detailed technical information. We will be posting much more information on the web as it 
becomes available. 



O 

ERIC 



186 



192 



Other Federal Presentations 



New Research-Based Federal Initiatives 

CHAIR: Louisa B. Tarullo 

PRESENTERS: Beth Ann Bryan, Susan B. Neuman, Grover J. Whitehurst, Robert H. Pasternack 

Louisa B. Tarullo: We have a distinguished panel of representatives from the United States 
Department of Education. We will hear brief remarks from our panel and then have a discussion 
among the panelists and respond to questions from the audience. 

Our first speaker is Beth Ann Bryan, Senior Advisor to the United States Secretary of Educa- 
tion, Rod Paige. Ms. Bryan started early in her career as a kindergarten teacher and since that 
time has gone on to distinguished service in the field of education. She was Director of Educa- 
tion Policy for then Texas Governor George W. Bush during the first year of his administration in 
1995. After that she served as an advisor to the Texas Governor's Business Gouncil and was a key 
leader in the Governor's reading initiative. She also served as Program Director for the First 
Lady's Family Literacy Initiative for Texas, and has been a psychological associate for 12 years in 
private practice involved with educational evaluation and therapy for children. Ms. Bryan earned 
her Bachelor's degree in elementary education and English from Houston Baptist University and 
holds a Master's in education, guidance, and counseling from the University of Houston. 

Beth Ann Bryan: I would like to briefly go through Good Start Grow Smart, which is the policy 
document on early childhood for the administration. This document can also be viewed on our 
website. 

A main emphasis of the policy will be on identifying ways to strengthen all early childhood 
programs to make them more effective, and particularly to help children be more prepared to 
succeed in kindergarten and first grade. 

The second objective is to work with states and make sure they are working with their various 
agencies to communicate and coordinate services. One thing we have tried to do at a federal 
level is to model this. If we cannot do it at a federal level, it is difficult to ask the states to do it. 
The DOE is communicating with the DHHS on a regular basis. Susan Neuman met just a few 
days ago with Shannon Ghristian who is in charge of child care at the AGE We also communi- 
cate with Windy Hill and Joan Ohl at the Head Start Bureau, ACYF. 

There are so many agencies that have funds related to early childhood. I was fascinated when 
we started looking at the funding stream. There is money in Agriculture, in Labor, in the Justice 
Department. There is early childhood funding in just about every department in the United 
States government, yet we do not know what each of these departments is doing. 

Part of what we are trying to do at the federal level, and trying to have states also do, is 
institute coordination efforts. We want them to look at their funding streams and make sure that 
they are making the best use of these for a clear, single purpose that everyone is focused on. 

We also hope that the people who are working in early childhood are communicating, on a 
regular basis, with state departments of education, knowing what is expected of the children 




193 



187 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



when they enter the K-12 system. There also should be constant discussion between that system 
and the early childhood systems in order for everyone to know what is needed at both ends. The 
result will be that we do a better job of helping children be prepared to transition to school. 

The third objective is providing information to teachers, parents, and caregivers. We have 
realized how critical it is to let anyone who deals with a child from birth through age 5 know 
the critical components of childhood development. We find that children are in a variety of 
settings. They may be with grandmother 3 days a week, with their parents some of the time, in a 
child-care setting part of the time, or they may be in separate child-care settings. It behooves us 
to disseminate information in the same way we have made sure that everybody knows the seven 
warning signs of cancer. Do we all know the seven important things we should be doing with 
very young children to help them develop well? 

We have focused on the big bang for the buck that we get with improved cognitive develop- 
ment. However, we also care about social and emotional development. We are very interested in 
that and we know there has been a keen focus on these domains for a long time. We are trying 
to identify prereading and language development to help children function better in school. 

We are looking toward strengthening Head Start, and continuing high quality teacher 
training and professional development is going to be critical in that effort. We want to help 
workers make early childhood education their career. We want to help them find ways to learn 
to be more professional, to feel more professional, and to be more excited about pursuing 
higher education. 

We have many objectives. For example, we hope that the Child Care and Development Fund 
(CCDF) money can be more closely connected to making sure there are state guidelines in place 
for programs. With some guidance in the plans submitted, they may get increased matching 
money. We hope this will be an incentive. 

There are materials that were prepared as a result of the DHHS and DOE task force. Teaching 
Our Youngest, for example, is for child-care workers, Head Start teachers, pre-k teachers, and 
parents. It includes specific activities that can be done with young children to enhance cognitive 
development. Another tool is called Super Things Parents and Caregivers Can Do. They are: 
(a) talk often with your children from the day they are born, (b) hug them, hold them, and 
respond to their needs and interests, (c) listen carefully as your children communicate with you, 
(d) read aloud to your children every day, even when they are babies, play and sing with them 
often, (e) say 'yes" and "I love you" as much as you say "no" and "don t,"(f) ensure a safe, 
orderly, and predictable environment wherever Aey are, and (g) set limits on their behavior and 
discipline them calmly, not harshly. 

If everyone in the United States knew and practiced these, we would be in great shape. 

Also available are the Healthy Start Grow Smart booklets that are being prepared for every 
parent of a newborn. Parents will receive these booklets every month for the first 12 months of 
their child's life. These booklets are being prepared now and are edited by Craig Ramey and 
Susan Landry. There will eventually be 13 of them, in Spanish and English. 

I hope all of this information will be of help to you in your local work. 

Tarullo: Now we will hear from Assistant Secretary for Elementary and Secondary Education, 
Susan B. Neuman. Dr. Neuman comes to the Department of Education most recently from the 
University of Michigan. There she was a professor of education and Director of the Center for 
Improvement of Early Reading Achievement. Prior to that Dr. Neuman taught at Temple 
University where she was the coordinator for the Reading and Language Arts Graduate Program. 
Her areas of focus include beginning reading, writing, family literacy, and parent involvement. 
She has been the coeditor of The Journal of Literacy Research. Her most recent books include 
Handbook of Early Literacy Research (2001) and Learning to Read and Write: Developmentally 
Appropriate Practices (2000). Access for All: Closing the Book Gap for Children in Early Childhood is a 
recent study that uncovered the disparity in books for high- and low-income children. 



ERIC 



188 



194 



OTHER FEDERAL PRESENTATIONS 



Susan B. Neuman: I will give you an overview of No Child Left Behind and then highlight 
some of the programs in elementary and secondary education and some of the foci across our 
various programs. 

January 8, 2002 was a landmark date. It was the date that the legislation for No Child Left 
Behind was signed. We believe this is the most dramatic reform that we have ever seen in educa- 
tion. Secretary Paige says that we had an audacious goal when we signed No Child Left Behind, 
which was that all children should succeed. We should not triage our children, some receiving the 
highest quality instruction and others receiving mediocre instruction. All of our children deserve 
the best education. They deserve to be able to read by the end of third grade. 

No Child Left Behind has four essential pillars: 

1. Accountability is the central element for fundamental change across all of our programs. 
We cannot proceed in education until we know whether children are currently achieving 
or not. As we disaggregate the data, a step which is essential to accountability, we begin to 
recognize the disparities in the quality of instruction that our children have received. We 
want one system of accountability for all children. In many states there are dual systems 
of accountability; we assume that Title I children should have one set of goals and 
achievements, and all other children should have another set of goals. No Child Left 
Behind says there should be a single system and that all children deserve the best educa- 
tion. The third through eighth grade assessments are essential to accountability. Ongoing 
assessments help us to know, on a regular basis, how well children are achieving. Another 
essential element of accountability is public reporting. We need to provide evidence to 
our parents so that they know whether their children are achieving. Public reporting 
allows the states to report what is happening in a comprehensible manner, so that parents 
will have the necessary information to make choices. 

2. The second pillar is choice. No child should be trapped in a failing school. With No Child 
Left Behind there is voluntary public school choice. A child who is trapped in a failing 
school has the option of going to a school that is succeeding for all of its children. 

3. The third pillar is flexibility. This means the states now have more flexibility to use 
various funding streams to target their needs. In other words, if a state has specific needs 
in the area of professional development, it can use different funding streams to buttress 
and extend what it wants to do. This is critical because it require states to consider their 
needs, and to consider how they can use the monies available to target those needs, in 
order for children to achieve. 

4. The fourth and final pillar is a focus on what works. In the field of reading in early child- 
hood, there is a great deal of research and we know what should be done. However, so often 
when we go to classrooms, we do not see instructional practices based on high quality 
research. It is imperative that we begin to use the research to improve practices. To do this 
most efficiently and effectively, we must ensure that we apply the research in classrooms. 

Our largest initiative is in Reading First, a K-3 hybrid grant program that is designed to bring 
research-based practice and state formula funding to local educational agencies, for children in 
schools of greatest need. Again, it is designed to bring proven strategies into the classroom to 
improve comprehensive reading instmction, and to make sure that high quality instruction is 
provided in those schools. 

This program is funded at $900 million this year, with an increase to $1 billion over 6 years. 

It is a dramatic and major reform. Three states have recently passed this rigorous review and will 
receive their monies as of July 1st. 

Our office has many early childhood programs for children, ages 0-3 and 3-5, such as Early 
Start, Title I Pre-k, Migrant Even Start, and Early Reading First. There are five essential elements 
in these programs: 

1. Regardless of funding streams, and regardless of where children are, they should receive 
the same high quality program. 




195 



189 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



2. There will be an emphasis on professional development. We believe it is critical that we 
"professionalize" early childhood care. Early childhood care providers are not just 
providers; they are the teachers of our children, and some of us think they are the most 
critical and important teachers. We need to address our providers as teachers and regard 
them in a professional manner. We need new ways to provide professional development 
and to best addresses caregivers' needs. One way is through mentorship prograrris. going 
into the setting, working with the teachers, and treating them like professionals in those 
settings. Recent NICHD research found that teachers are more likely to stay in the 
profession when they feel that they are considered as professionals. 

3. We need to increase quality across all early childhood settings. Often, the quality indica- 
tors that we use do not measure quality in a way that is useful. What do 1 mean by that? 
Sometimes we focus on quality as stmctural variables that look at environment and the 
quality of the environment. However, there are other more important issues to consider 
when measuring quality, such as language. We need to see rich language interactions in 
our early childhood environments, since we know that this is significant in determining 
eventual success or failure for children. Bruner once said that in his studies of early 
childhood environments, children were language impoverished and they did not have a 
rich, interactional language base. We need to find or develop quality indicators to 
examine the critical variables that are precursors to school success. 

4. We have targeted and focused on cognitive development. This is not to say that social/ 
emotional development is not important. However, cognitive development has often 
been underrecognized or underutilized. When 1 visit early childhood settings, 1 often see 
cut-and-paste curricula. 1 see Crayola curricula. 1 do not see children's minds being 
activated and 1 know that in these early years stimulation is absolutely critical to success. 
Therefore, one of our foci is ensuring that children receive the rich curricula, ideas, and 
practices they deserve. 

5. Last is a focus on accountability. We need to develop a results orientation. In early 
childhood, we often focus on how children learn, on hands-on activities; but we don't ask 
about what children learn or how they are learning. We have often dichotomized the two, 
which is unfortunate because they need to be hand-in-hand. We need to focus on the 
process, but we also need to focus on the outcome. 

Tarullo: Our next speaker is Grover 1. Whitehurst, Assistant Secretary for the Office of Educa- 
tional Research and Improvement. Dr. Whitehurst advises the Secretary on research issues in 
education and directs OERI, which includes the National Center for Education Statistics, five 
national research institutes, the National Library of Education, the Office of Reform Assistance 
and Dissemination, and a number of interagency research initiatives. Prior to coming to the 
government. Dr. Whitehurst was a professor of psychology and pediatrics and Chairman of the 
Department of Psychology at the State University of New York at Stony Brook. He has been 
editor-in-chief of two leading journals in his field and has published numerous research studies 
on children's development of language and prereading skills, including work with children in 
Head Start. 

Grover J. Whitehurst: This is the Sixth Head Start National Research Conference, and it is the 
sixth one that 1 have attended, so I have been involved in this for quite a while. . 

My responsibility in the Department of Education is encapsulated in the Secretary's strategic 
plan for the department, and particularly in goal number four of that strategic plan, which is to 
make the field of education evidence-based. In general, that is now not the case. The goal, 
within a relatively short period of time, is to enable people who make decisions about educa- 
tion— whether they are school administrators. Head Start personnel, or parents— to think about 
what evidence exists that might influence their decisions. We want these people to use that 
evidence in their decision making. 



O 

ERIC 



190 



196 



OTHER FEDERAL PRESENTATIONS 



We know that there are fields in which this routinely happens. There is no farmer, no matter 
how small his or her farm, who does not turn to research when making decisions about seeds, 
fertilizers, or soil. The farmer is not necessarily looking up studies in agricultural journals, but he 
or she is turning to sources of information that are presumed to be reliable and vetted. He or 
she utilizes that information to make farming decisions. We need to get to a similar point in 
education. 

We need to utilize research in preschool programs. We need research that is of high quality. 
First, high quality must be defined; using the right tool for the task is one aspect of high quality. 
Given a question that has to be answered or a claim that has to be presented, we need to find 
the most rigorous and the strongest tool— both statistically and logically— that can be brought 
to bear with respect to that question or problem. Thus far, we have not done that often in the 
field of education. For example, I recently read findings from a study that stated, "research 
indicates that testing is bad for children." Looking into the study further, I found that this was a 
narrative report from someone who spent some time in one school in Arizona, talked to some 
teachers, and concluded that testing was bad for children. Testing may be bad for children, but a 
narrative report based on interviews with teachers in one school is certainly not the strongest 
possible evidence that could be brought to bear with respect to that conclusion. 

We need research that is relevant for people who are making important educational deci- 
sions. That research will not always be of high value to academic peers, but we need that 
research, and we need it now. 

Finally, we must focus on utilization of research. It does us no good to do high quality 
research that is relevant to important issues if no one is going to use it. One aspect of No Child 
Left Behind is that there must be incentives for programs to utilize research. The accountability 
provisions in No Child Left Behind have had effects in that area that surprised me. 

We had an historic meeting, at Mount Vernon with the chief state school officers. This was the 
first time that the U.S. Department of Education met with this group at one time. At the meeting, 

I was deluged with questions about what research shows about professional development — 
about what tutoring programs work best and why, and so forth. The reason for these questions is 
that making the wrong decision results in significant consequences. Making the wrong decision 
could mean a school being labeled as "in need of improvement." This would lead to children 
being bused to other schools and result in an increase in the state's busing expenses. The school 
officials now know that they have to make the right decision, choose the right curriculum, the 
right tutoring program, and the right professional development program, to avoid funding 
consequences. We need these incentives, and we have to provide information in an understand- 
able way. We are trying to do that at the Office of Educational Research and Improvement. 

Most relevant to the concerns of this audience is a research competition that we launched this 
year in preschool curriculum evaluation research. The competition for this year is completed 
and there are seven grantees, and one national contractor. The purpose of this competition is to 
address certain questions. Which of the curricula available for purchase actually work? For which 
children do they work? What are the outcomes? Each of the grantees will do randomized trials, 
each evaluating a different curriculum, and there will be a national contractor who will develop 
and utilize the same pretest and posttest measures across the various sites. All of the sites will 
follow the children into first grade. 

That competition will be repeated next year with a substantial increase in funding. We 
invested $5 million this year and there will be an additional $10 million for a new round of 
competition next year. For the first competition we received 65 applications. We would like to 
receive at least 200 in the next round. We will announce the rules and the timing for the 
competition shortly after we have confirmation of our 2003 budget, hopefully by late fall of 
this year. 

The National Center for Early Development and Learning at Chapel Hill is supported by 
OERI and that contract will continue for the next few years. In addition, field-initiated projects 



ERIC 




191 



SYMPOSI A/ ROUNDTABLE S/ CONVERSATION HOURS 



in early childhood are supported by funds of about $2 million a year. We are planning a new 
and expanded round of field-initiated competitions next year. These are open to all those who 
want to apply and certainly open to those who are interested in early childhood research. We 
also have launched a new initiative on cognition and learning in the classroom. This focuses on 
basic research and is attempting to understand how children learn specific subject matter. 

We also have an investment, through the National Center for Education Statistics, in the Early 
Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten cohort. These children are now in second grade 
and are being evaluated annually. You will find information about this study on the National 
Center for Education Statistics website. They have very interesting information on the correlation 
between the skills with which children enter kindergarten and their progress in academic 
achievement through their early school years. Another one of our initiatives is in the evaluations 
of Early Reading First and Even Start, the latter being the U.S. Department of Education s major 
investment in early childhood. 

In the years to come we are going to need the cooperation and involvement of both the 
research and practitioner communities. From researchers, we need high quality research that is 
relevant, that is produced in a usable way. From practitioners we need an indication of what the 
problems are, and what questions need to be answered. 

Virtually all of the issues that educators deal with on a day-to-day basis turn out to be 
empirical questions. They are problems that require solutions, and often the best solutions can 
be identified by research. Researchers need to be made aware of those questions and issues. 



Tarullo: Some of the initiatives mentioned are good examples of interagency partnerships that 
are already in progress. It is better to be able to pool our resources for these large-scale studies 
and have NIH, ACF, and so on, add their particular interests to them. Another good example is 
the preschool curriculum education research endeavor previously mentioned. That is a study 
similar to Head Start's Quality Research Centers and uses measures similar to the Head Start 
FACES Study, and we should all have a great deal of information we can pool. The lessons we 
learn about children in Head Start and other pre-k settings will help the field as a whole. We 
find that this kind of collaboration and partnership, working in research across departments, 
is important. 

Our next panelist Robert H. Pasternack, Assistant Secretary for Special Education and Reha- 
bilitative Services in the Department of Education. In this role, he is the principle advisor to the 
Secretary on all matters related to special education and rehabilitative services. Dr. Pasternack 
has served as State Director of Special Education for the New Mexico State Department of 
Education where, for more than 25 years, he worked with students with disabilities and their 
families, increasing parental involvement in all aspects of education, particularly special educa- 
tion. He led the development and implementation of state regulations for special education, 
and created a variety of statewide initiatives designed to improve results for students with 
disabilities. In addition. Dr. Pasternack led the effort to develop the New Mexico Reading 
Initiative and led its replication in a number of other states. He received a Ph.D. in special 
education with a minor in neuropsychology from the University of New Mexico. 

Robert H. Pasternack: I am going to talk briefly about issues concerning young children with 
disabilities. Yesterday I had the privilege of chairing the Federal Interagency Coordinating 
Council, which is one of the many responsibilities I have in my current position. The Federal 
Interagency Coordinating Council provides guidance to nine Cabinet secretaries on issues 
affecting young children with disabilities. This year, for the first time, we are making sure that 
the efforts of the Federal Interagency Coordinating Council are focused, and have assigned 
ourselves two priorities; the first one is child care. 

One of the major issues affecting families of children with disabilities, particularly young 
children with disabilities, is the lack of access to quality child care. It is time for this country to 
provide quality child care to children with disabilities and their families. 



er|c 



192 



193 



OTHER FEDERAL PRESENTATIONS 



The second issue is providing technical assistance, when requested, to programs in the area of 
young children with behavior problems. Therefore, we have added the issue of mental health in 
very young children to our agenda. 

President Bush has created the first Commission on Excellence in Special Education. This 
Commission will be releasing its report to the President on Monday. The report is the result of 6 
months of hearing testimony from experts and getting the public's input. 

In 1975, when we began providing federal support to children with disabilities, the issue was 
that 1 million children did not have access to education. We won that battle and now children 
with disabilities have access to a free and appropriate public education in the least restrictive 
environment. The challenge given to us by the President is to make sure that the services provide 
an excellent education to these children. 

In addition, the President has created, for the first time, a Commission on Mental Health. In 
the New Freedom Initiative, he discusses the statistics on adults with disabilities: there is a 70% 
unemployment rate for adults with disabilities, less than 10% of adults with disabilities own a 
home, adults with disabilities do not have access to transportation, and they do not have access 
to assistive technology. The last issue he mentions is the fragmentation in mental health service 
delivery across the federal government. 

Families with preschoolers with disabilities want a safe and supportive preschool environ- 
ment where their children can learn, grow, and develop; preschools should be accessible — not 
only architecturally, but programmatically — so that we may continue to include children with 
disabilities in growing numbers. 

I want to applaud Head Start because the program requires a minimum of 10% of children 
enrolled be children with disabilities. Data suggests that Head Start has exceeded that minimum 
requirement, and that in the national aggregate it is at 13%. 

Next is a need for a simplified educational service system. In the view of Secretary Paige, it is 
too complicated, too regulatory, too compliance-driven, and too process-oriented. We have 
taken the focus away from instruction and driven it towards compliance with process. We need 
to focus more on accountability and results. Lastly, parents tell us that they want to know how 
to effectively help their children learn and develop. 

What do we want to see in terms of outcomes for children with disabilities in Head Start? 

First, we would like to see planned intervention to promote social skills and peer engagement. If 
we are going to continue to transform society's attitude towards people with disabilities, we 
must start early. We have taken one step, by integrating very young children with disabilities into 
the programs, so that young children get the message that disability does not mean inability. 

This sends the message that people with disabilities can make a wonderful contribution to the 
rich fabric of American life if we give them the opportunity they deserve, and that we clearly 
leave no child behind. Second, we would like to see comprehensive child-, family-, and commu- 
nity-focused interventions. Third, we want to continue to include children with disabilities in all 
the research activities in Head Start. Yesterday I met with some people who are doing the Early 
Head Start research. They want to make sure that they continue their efforts to look at issues 
affecting young children with disabilities in their research. Fourth, and last, we want to expand 
the research agenda to include the impact of Head Start on children with disabilities and their 
families. In order to do that, we will have to work aggressively with our federal partners, which 
we have begun through the Federal Interagency Coordinating Council, and through a cross- 
agency initiative on early childhood. 

We know that, particularly for children with disabilities, early intervention works. The earlier 
we can identify children with problems, the earlier we can begin to deliver high quality interven- 
tions to them. When well-trained personnel deliver services, there is a higher probability of 
successfully changing children's life trajectories from risk to resiliency. With your help and with 
our continued work together, we hope to make that a reality. 



ERIC 




193 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Question: How do we obtain funding for research? 

Whitehurst: Through OERI's field initiated grants program, there is an opportunity for indi- 
vidual researchers with focused questions to compete for funds. 

Pasternack: We have field-initiated research projects as well. Look on our website at 
www.ed.gov and you will be able to find both OERI and our Office of Special Education and ■ 
Rehabilitative Services. 

Question: How can we obtain information about available research findings — information 
about interventions that work? 

Whitehurst: We will be releasing a new contract in the next couple of weeks called The What 
Works Clearinghouse. Once it is available it will also be on the web. It will be a place to which 
practitioners and others can go, to determine what evidence exists with respect to particular 
products, materials, or approaches. They also will be able to find out what the quality of that 
evidence is, what effects are suggested, and the degree to which the results, if any, have been 
generalized across different settings, ages, and stages. We hope this will be the principal tool 
used for making decisions. 

Looking to medicine for a model, we do not expect the family physician to turn to a journal 
to determine what medication to prescribe for a particular malady. However, that physician does 
have sources to turn to, which indicate what medicines he or she should prescribe. Those places 
utilize high, consistent, and transparent standards to make judgments and form those consensus 
presentations, and we need to do that. 

We also anticipate funding to conduct research on how best to get educators to utilize 
research in their decision making. There is an empirical question as to whether it is a good idea 
to include an education research extension agent in large school districts. It would be their 
responsibility to make people aware of what the research suggests, with respect to particular 
problems, and what might aid them in decision making. They would encourage educators to 
utilize research. A number of other approaches come to mind as well. Unless there is high 
quality and valid research to begin with, there is no sense in having tools or extension agents 
available. There are significant gaps in education research. In some areas there is either little 
research, or a lack of high quality research with which to generate reasonable decisions. 

Neuman: I want to mention two important grant programs. One is Early Reading First, a $75 
million initiative designed to bring research into practice, focusing specifically on early literacy. 
The second is Early Childhood Professional Development, a $15 million initiative. This initia- 
tive is designed to bring research into practice settings, getting researchers to work with practitio- 
ners. This program focuses not only on early language, literacy, and social-emotional develop- 
ment, but targets those children who might have behavioral problems or special education 
needs. These competitions are coming out now, so I encourage you to look at the website. 

Pasternack: We have a research-to-practice division at the Office of Special Education Programs 
that addresses the issue of how to get good research into practice, how to bridge the gap between 
knowledge production and knowledge utilization. One example is our Positive Behavioral 
Supports Initiative at the University of Oregon, which has developed school-wide models to 
decrease referrals for disciplinary problems by building a culture that focuses on positive behavior 
and supporting children when they exhibit positive behaviors. Through that center, the model we 
initially developed is now in practice in over 700 schools around the countiy. This is one of the 
best examples of doing good research and, once there are findings, making the information 





194 



OTHER FEDERAL PRESENTATIONS 



available to the people who need it. Our research-to-practice division is aggressively trying to 
produce findings where we need them, and then maldng sure that those findings are utilized. 

Sue Bredekamp: We are in an absurd predicament. We know what the needs are in the areas of 
curriculum development and professional development, but funding to develop strategies is not 
available; there are only funds for implementing proven strategies. 

Neuman: That is not true in our grant program. We are not requiring researched-based profes- 
sional development, because I am convinced that professional development for this population 
requires a different approach than we have used in the past. With Early Reading First, we are 
trying to create centers of excellence across the country that combine professional development, 
good practice, and developmentally appropriate curricula. We do not presume that we have a 
rich research base in professional development because, especially for early child-care workers, 
we do not. 

Question: Where can one find information about the competitions mentioned? 

Whitehurst: The information regarding the preschool curriculum evaluation is on the DOE 
website. That competition is closed for this year but will be coming up again next year. To 
respond to the previous question, I do not think there is a predicament at all, at least not at 
OERI. We have a large upcoming investment in reading comprehension. Rather than evaluating 
reading comprehension approaches, we are engaging in a long-term process to build a knowl- 
edge base about how reading comprehension is represented, and how best to teach it. Presum- 
ably from that we will develop the knowledge that will allow people to construct and assess 
actual curriculum interventions. I believe one needs to focus on what works, but one also needs 
the funding streams under which people can develop the bits and pieces, if you will, from which 
interventions are eventually constructed. 

Pasternack: Yesterday, at the Federal Interagency Coordinating Council, one of the entities 
represented was Maternal and Child Health Care, and they were talking about a large-scale study 
that they are doing on the prevalence and incidence of disabling conditions among children 
around the country. The Part C program of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act is the 
system of services provided to infants and toddlers with disabilities, children from birth through 
2 years of age. Section 619 of Part B provides services to 3- and 4-year-old children. However, the 
reality is that in Part C, we have historically served 2% of what we estimate states should be 
serving. When I came to Washington, I wanted to know where that 2% came from. I found that 
there is no solid research base to suggest that 2% is a figure that states should be serving in Part 
C. In their study. Maternal and Child Health estimated that about 17 to 18% of children need 
services. They specifically mentioned children with asthma, as an example, and children with 
other special health needs. We fund and work with a national organization called Family Voices 
that focuses on the special health care needs of children with disabilities. 

We are also concerned about what will happen in Head Start in the area of professional 
development. We would be excited to work with HHS and Head Start to make sure that profes- 
sional development training focuses on all children, particularly children with disabilities and 
children with health issues. 

Question: What are the implications of proposed changes regarding accountability and testing? 
What will accountability look like? 





195 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Bryan: There are some changes going on right now. First, there is a much stronger emphasis on 
the professional development of the teachers, helping them learn some of the intentional 
activities they can do with young children that will help them do better when they get to school. 

The second initiative is going to be on accountability mechanisms. The Standards obviously 
exist, and they are not going away. In fact, they will probably be significantly increased. If what 
is happening in K through 12 is any evidence of the changes we might expect I believe that we 
will constandy see standards elevated, in terms of expectations of what children know and do. 
The accountability system in Head Start that is being designed will address many of these issues 
in the same way that accountability in K through 12 has addressed these issues. People pay 
attention to the standards that one is expected to achieve, and people pay attention to what will 
be measured. When that accountability system is determined and in place, everyone will have a 
better idea of what the expectations are and what the focus is going to be. Until then, there is no 
definitive answer. There will probably be an increased focus on cognitive development issues, 
and this will include ideas for improving prereading and language skills. Among other things, 
we want good research that determines what kinds of programs best prepare children for the K 
through 12 system, as well as research on children in the K through 12 system. 

Whitehurst: We have a hypothesis that we have not yet tested in this country: A seamless system 
that begins when a child is 3-years-old, and takes a child through elementary school, would be 
best. By seamless system I mean a shared understanding, at least at a state level and perhaps at a 
federal level, for what children can be reasonably expected to learn and do at specific points in 
time. There should be a sequence of steps to go through, and there is a general understanding of 
what the skill hierarchy should be. Since we currently do not have that system, there is often no 
relationship between the skills and abilities learned in Head Start, or other good preschool 
programs, and what is expected or taught in the elementary schools. Without that continuity 
and seamlessness, we are likely to continue with what we have now: discontinuities in growth 
and development, and a nonoptimal series of outcomes for children. 

Tarullo: Are you also thinking of a seamless system that would include children from birth to 
age 3? 

Neuman: I would like to respond to that question in another way. I want to highlight another 
one of our initiatives, the Early Childhood Academies. Our goal there is to create a seamlessness 
across different contexts. We did a study called Access for All: Closing the Book Gap, which looked 
at guidelines across various states and found that child care guidelines were in the child care 
office of DHHS in the state. There were sometimes other guidelines in the Department of 
Education, and sometimes not. Neither of these offices at the state level talked to each other, 
and as a result children were receiving discontinuous instruction. The problem was that what 
was being done in good programs such as Even Start or Head Start was suddenly dropped, 
instead of being continued. One of our goals is to help states create voluntary guidelines that 
will help bring these offices together, and allow them to talk to one another. This ensures that 
when children enter elementary school, the standards or guidelines for instruction are appropri- 
ate to that age level. The other critical point is that we begin to merge social, emotional, and 
cognitive development together and move away from dichotomies. 

Question: Why are representatives from the Department of Education presenting at this 
conference, and what is their involvement with Head Start? 

Pasternack: Our presence here today is indicative of how much interest we have in early 
childhood, and how much we value high quality early childhood programs and rigorous 
research in early childhood. This same panel, with the addition of Reid Lyon from NICHD, 



ERIC 



196 



202 



OTHER FEDERAL PRESENTATIONS 



presented a similar roundtable at the NAEYC conference. They told me it was the first time in 
their 25-year history that the Assistant Secretary for Special Education had come to that confer- 
ence. This is my first time at a Head Start conference, so it is probably the first time there has 
been this level of involvement. It is not just rhetoric on our part. Our presence here should be 
evidence that we are interested in early Aildhood, are very concerned about it, and understand 
its importance. 

Question: What are the regulations and guidance for Title 1 pre-Ks, and how does that affect 
Head Start? 

Neuman: The Title 1 pre-Ks are required to use Head Start guidelines, which can be augmented. 
Head Start, Even Start, and Title 1 pre-K are all successful programs and we do not want to take 
pieces from each program. We want to base our work on what research tells us is critical for 
children to learn. We want to develop guidance based on what the research tells us is best for 
children's development, in terms of cognition and social-emotional development. 

Whitehurst: The President said, in a speech on preschool issues and policy, that he intends to 
provide incentives for states to coordinate preschool services. This means that the standards that 
apply to Head Start would apply to other state-funded preschool programs so that a parent should 
not be concerned about who is writing the check when making decisions about child care. 

Some states have done this in an impressive way. For example, in Massachusetts there is a 
consistent set of standards applied to all preschool settings. The federal government or the 
Department of Education cannot dictate to the states what those standards should be. However, 
we encourage states to develop a set of standards, in order to assess what their preschool providers 
are doing, and to encourage all providers in the state to contribute to that coordinated plan.^ 

Question: The Early Childhood Academies was mentioned earlier. Can you tell us more about 
that? 

Neuman: The Early Childhood Academies is an initiative designed to focus on how to collabo- 
rate across contexts. Our focus is on how to bring the people in state offices together — people 
from DHHS, child care licensee bureaus, Research and Evaluation Departments, as well as 
departments of education, Title 1 Pre-K, and Even Start — aiid focus on the guidelines. Guidelines 
are important because they help the profession focus on what should be taught, what are 
considered good instructional activities for children, how to build a knowledge base for chil- 
dren, and how to focus on skills. The critical issues we will focus on are: guidelines, instruction, 
professional development, and assessment. 

Question: What would happen to parent involvement if Head Start is moved to DOE? 

Neuman: I am at the Department of Education and my programs are Even Start, Migrant Even 
Start, Title 1 pre-K, Early Reading First, and Early Childhood Professional Development — not 
Head Start — but I would like to address the issue of parent involvement. We believe that we can 
do much more in the early childhood setting, and that the setting has been underrecognized. 

We believe that we can do a great deal more than just enriching the environment, for example, 
by providing professional development to teachers so they are prepared to change children's 
lives. We also believe that with high quality teaching, children from diverse settings can improve 
and succeed in life. We have evidence of this. 

1 want to tell you about a wonderful program called Bright Beginnings. Prior to Bright 
Beginnings a school district's scores were continually increasing and then after a certain period 
of time they reached a plateau. The district tried to understand why these scores were plateauing. 




203 



197 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



By disaggregating the data, they recognized that some, but not all, children were achieving. The 
African American and Hispanic children were not achieving, while the White children were 
doing fine. They took 80% of the district's Tide 1 funds, placed them in Pre-K, and designed 
Bright Beginnings, a program that combines much of what we know is good early childhood 
practice with a focus on cognitive development. My point is that when we create settings where 
we combine what we know about child development, cognitive development, and social and 
emotional development, we can make a tremendous difference in children's lives, and that is 
what we are trying to do in the Department of Education. 

Pasternack: 1 am going to answer the question differendy. One of the principle premises of the 
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) is the importance of parental involvement in 
decision making. One of our tenets is that parents are the true experts and know more about 
their children than anybody else. We must create partnerships and effectively involve parents m 
decision making. We fund a system of parent training and information centers through the 
United States. In addition, we have community-planned resource centers that are targeted 
specifically toward people of color, and culturally and linguistically diverse populations, because 
of their unique needs. By statute, the Federal Interagency Coordinating Council includes parents 
of children with disabilities, and Head Start has a seat on the council as well. We are actively 
engaged in promoting initiatives to involve parents more effectively. 

Bryan: We are trying very hard to provide incentives for states to include^ and to communicate 
with every single agency that deals with very young children. 

Question: Tell us how you plan to look at children holistically like Head Start does. 

Whitehurst: Let me point out that my role in the Department of Education is not to contribute 
to a national policy regarding which department Head Start should be in. My role is to address 
important issues about which policy decisions will be made, and to provide, through our 
funding decisions, the best possible information to aid people in making those decisions. 

I am concerned with how best to constmct an early childhood education program, and what is 
the most appropriate role of parental involvement. These are issues that I think we should 
examine, and I think we should find out what the added value is of these various components. 
The Head Start community assumes that this is the best way to do things, and it may well be, 
but we need to find out. 

Neuman: I can respond in terms of Even Start. When I first came to the department, there was 
an evaluation of Even Start that had just come out, and the response was not good: there were 
no effects of Even Start, which was quite discouraging. This was a comprehensive evaluation and 
we did not see a great effect. We decided that we needed to examine the critical components 
underlying the Even Start model, including parent involvement. In Even Start parent involve- 
ment is called parent interaction or parent education. From that examination, we are trying to 
ensure that the adult education portion of Even Start is of the highest quality. How can we begin 
to say what is critical about parent education, or any other component of Even Start? Looking at 
the evaluation allows us to strengthen each particular part and bring them together to make a 
stronger program. 

Comment: I wanted to acknowledge the panel for being here, and I also wanted to acknowledge 
that we are in a wonderful time for early childhood, a time where there is funding for research, 
and particularly funding for professional development. Two things have been substantiated, 
study after study: the level of education of the teacher, and the salary of the teacher strongly 
predict outcomes for children. We need training, but we also need to find ways of keeping good 
people on the job. 





198 



OTHER FEDERAL PRESENTATIONS 



Children's Early Learning and Educational Experiences: 
The Early Childhood Longitudinal Studies 



CHAIR; Rachel Cohen 

PRESENTERS: Elvira Germino Hausken, Lizabeth Reaney, Jerry West, Christine Nord, 

Kathleen Wallner-Allen 

Rachel Cohen: The focus of this session is the Early Childhood Longitudinal Studies (ECLS) 
program at the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES), U.S. Department of Education. 
Two studies comprise the Early Childhood Longitudinal Studies program: the Early Childhood 
Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten Class of 1998-99 (ECLS-K) and the Early Childhood Longitu- 
dinal Study-Birth Cohort (ECLS-B). 

The ECLS program is comprehensive in its approach to gathering information about young 
children's lives. It takes a perspective of looking at the multiple influences on children's growth 
and development across numerous settings. Information about the different environments in 
which children live and learn, and the outcomes of these experiences, is collected from parents, 
other caregivers, teachers, and from the children themselves. Both studies use a multimethod 
approach to data collection. There are self-administered questionnaires, interviews, observa- 
tions, and direct child assessments. 

The data that will come from this study are quite rich, and many questions can be asked of 
the data, including policy questions about child care and early education, as well as basic 
development questions about impacts or factors that affect developmental trajectories of 
children over time. As the presentations are given, 1 encourage everyone in the audience to think 
about other research questions that they might explore using the data from these studies. 

The first two presenters will provide an overview of the two studies. Elvira Germino Hausken 
is an educational statistician with the Early Childhood Studies Program at the NCES, and is 
Project Officer for the Kindergarten Cohort study. Lizabeth Reaney is a research analyst at the 
Education Statistic Services Institute, and she is working with NCES on the Birth Cohort study. 

Jerry West will then highlight some of the early findings from the ECLS-K. He is Director of 
the Early Childhood and Household Studies Program at NCES, and his program includes the 
Early Childhood Longitudinal Studies and the National Household Education Surveys. Chris- 
tine Nord from Westat will follow him. She works on both the ECLS-B and the ECLS-K projects, 
and she will talk about the father component of the ECLS-B. Our final speaker will be Kathleen 
Wallner Allen, who is also at Westat, and she will discuss the child-care study component of the 
ECLS-B. 

Elvira Germino Hausken: In the late 1980s and early 1990s, there were few large-scale, 
national studies of the development and educational progress of very young children. The 
existing studies were either focused on specific outcomes, limited to children with certain 
characteristics, or designed to study children's educational outcomes through later elementary or 
middle school grades. There was no national data on how children were doing in school prior to 
fourth grade, and no data that could be used to study children's progress from the start of school 
through the primary grades. Similarly, there was no study that followed a broad, nationally 
representative sample of children from birth to school. NCES decided that information about 
young children, and how they progress before school and through school, was needed at the 
national level to help inform policies regarding the care and education of children in the U.S. 
The ECLS program was launched to respond to this need. 

The basic role of the Early Childhood Longitudinal Studies program is to provide national 
data on children s development during the early childhood period, from birth to school entry 
and through the early school years. The two studies are designed to follow children longitudi- 



199 



ERIC 




SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



nally as they transition from one environment to another. The studies will provide descriptive 
data on the children's status at certain points in time and aaoss time, and their transitions from 
one environment to another, like from the home to early child care, to early education pro- 
grams, and to school. The data from these studies will also enable researchers to study the effects 
of these different variables or factors, in terms of how they affect children s development and 
academic achievement. 

The design of the two studies was guided by a research framework that recognizes the 
relationships among and between children's environments, between the child and family, and 
between the family and school. It is especially interested in the roles of parents and families in 
helping children prepare for and adjust to critical transitions, and how schools and early 
childhood programs respond to needs of these children. Unlike earlier national education 
longitudinal studies, the ECLS is not limited to the study of children's school achievement, but 
includes a broader focus on physical, social, emotional, and cognitive development, as well as 
health outcomes. It looks at how each of these factors are affected by characteristics of children's 
homes and early care and education programs. 

The ECLS-K is a study of kindergartners, specifically children who were enrolled in kindergar- 
ten during the school years 1998 and 1999. It is the first large-scale, federally-sponsored study of 
kindergartners and kindergarten programs. The study is a collaborative effort involving NCES 
and other offices in the U.S. Department of Education, and the Administration of Children, 
Youth, and Families. Each agency participating in the study provides both substantive and 
financial support. 

A number of research questions can be explored with the data from the ECLS-K; Do the gaps 
in achievement we see at school entry widen or narrow across the school years? How do the 
school experiences of children from disadvantaged backgrounds and homes compare to the 
school experiences of other children? What is the impact of retention on children s achievement 
across the early years of school? What are the benefits of full-day versus part-day kindergarten 
programs? What are the benefits of various class sizes? How do early home activities influence 
children's scholastic success and socioemotional development? The answers the ECLS-K will 
provide to these and other questions may assist parents, educators, and policymakers to make 
informed decisions about our nation's schools and education programs. 

The ECLS-K began with a nationally representative sample of kindergartners attending both 
public and private schools. It includes children with disabilities, English language learners, first- 
time kindergartners, and kindergartners who are repeating kindergarten. Data are collected at 
multiple points in time, twice during the kindergarten year (fall and spring), and again in the 
fall and spring of first grade. After that, two additional waves of data are collected in the spring 
of third and fifth grades. We have just finished collecting the third grade data. 

As Cohen said in her introductory remarks, the ECLS-K is a multisource, multicomponent 
study. There are four types of data collected. We collect directly from the child, the child's 
parent, teacher, and school. From the child we collect information about their skills and abilities 
in reading, mathematics, general knowledge (kindergarten and first grade only), psychomotor 
skills (fall kindergarten only), as well as their height and weight. The ECLS-K direct child 
assessment battery is administered in English, although there is a Spanish version of the 
mathematics assessment. Children from language minority homes are administered a short 
assessment to determine whether or not they have the English skills required by the core 
assessment battery. In third grade, we change some of the subject areas in the assessment battery. 
Instead of assessing children's general knowledge, we assess them in science. In third grade, 
children's perception of themselves is assessed through the Self-Description Questionnaire (SDQ). 

The subject matter domains are assessed using a two-stage, adaptive, computer-assisted 
assessment instrument that was developed specifically for use in the ECLS-K. Children are first 
administered a set of items that range in difficulty from very easy to very difficult. Based on their 
performance on what is called the Routing Test, they go to a level test where we collect more 



O 

ERIC 



200 



O i) 



OTHER FEDERAL PRESENTATIONS 



of ability. Parents in the ECLS-K are 

^er^lT "oniPuter-assisted telephone interviewing. Children's classroom teachers and 

Seh schools self-administered paper-and-pencil questionnaires, as do 

From attempted to verify children's Head Start attendance. 

Thu.! f parents and schools often misreport Head Start attendance 

Sided He\"Ltartth" TS" having at- ' 

tended Head Start the year before kindergarten, the child's attendance was verified through 

u,e Head S^r, program. TTe ou“ l“rptess 
data file. ^ ^ kindergarten and first grade longitudinal 

To date, the ECLS-K contractor, Westat, has conducted some 60,000 one-on-one child 
aboutTh 50,000 parent interviews. Children's teachers have completed 

rece“iJ ovriroOO ane°,^” °f*' hL 

erou^ f“"> ‘“chers providing infomation about their back- 

grounds, teaching styles, and mstmctional practices. 

The data are currently available for the base year and first grade. The third grade data are 

::dTols^v 

mancr™eVaTv“Sb “"“'"“a"'''"® f” ““ “">' 'chS pX 

rep"fflenaXXe Study-Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) begins with a nationally 

thrnnah tK r To ^ T ^om in the year 2001 and follows these children from birth 

through their first 2 years of school, kindergarten and first grade. ' 

^!T ECLS-B is a collaboration of many federal agencies. It is snon- 

NaTional InstftuteT^f hTh^ Education Statistics, along with various institutes within the 

Deve°oXnoX H D™ L “,“Ta ' “i ^hild Health and Human 

ueve opmentj the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the Administration of Children Youth ;md 

erXon'tXir ' "-an J"d*’ 

chJilf ^ of questions; What is the prevalence and incidence of 

conditions for different groups of children? What are most 
lanmT 'h ^ ^^oited States able to do in the domains of motor, cognitive, socioemotional and 
a ^age development at 9 months of age and beyond? At what ages do children first enter child 
care, and does this vary by characteristics of children and their farcifies? How are frtherf 

"S'lTcT K this change over time? 

the wL It ^ nauonally representative sample of over 13,500 children born in 

theyear 2001. It includes oversamples of Asian and Pacific Islander, Chinese, and American 
lnd,an b.nhs, I, oversamples children who are moderately low birth weight aTviTlorWrth 

weight. Twins are also oversampled in the Study. veiy low oirtn 

4 vXold whXhe!'/™ T-a' “ *' ^ °W' 24 months old, 

. y ^8^^ kindergarten, and when they begin first grade Similar to ECLS K 

(bmh r *a' ■‘4“ “"X frL the Andren.Zh 

V, if ^ mulusource study, where trained assessors go into the child's home In the 
home chtldren are assessed and their mothers interviewed, FaLrs are asked to cZptae sel^f- 

at rrXai“Th"T"'“ “'JZ fathers. At 24 XZ and a" in 

4 years of age, the design includes interviews with children's child-care providers and when 

ey reach school age, questionnaires are completed by schools and teachers. The child assess- 



207 



201 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



ment covers all the major domains of physical development, cognitive development, and 
socioemotional development. From parents, we obtain information about themselves, their 
families, home life, neighborhoods, and communities. 

When child-care providers are interviewed, we learn about the settings where children receive 
care, as well as about the providers themselves. More information about the content of the 
different instruments used can be found on the study website. The parent interview for the 
9-month data collection, as well as the father instrument, can be downloaded from the website. 

The ECLS-B design is complex, and the field staff is asked to do many things while in the 
child^s home. In a relatively short 90-minute home visit, the field staff administers a 50-minute 
parent interview and a direct child assessment. For the direct child assessments, we use the 
Bayley Short Form-Research Edition, which is an adaptation of the Bayley Scales of Infant 
Development. This instmment was developed specifically for use in the ECLS-B. We are also 
collecting physical measurements such as the child's length, weight, and middle/upper arm 
circumference. For very low birth weight children, we measure their head circumference. \Ve also 
observe parent/child interaction. We have the parent and the child perform a task together, 
videotape it, and then code that information for analysis. The Nursing Child Assessment 
Teaching Scale (NCATS) is used for this purpose. 

At 9 months, we also have father self-administered questionnaires, which Christine Nord will 
describe. At 24 months, the same components are repeated with the addition of a child-care 
component, in which we interview children s child-care providers. For a subsample, we do 
observations. Allen will elaborate on this design feature at the end of this session. 

For the ECLS-B, we are in the midst of a 9-month data collection. The first data from the 
study's 9-month collection should be released in the fall of 2003, and the 24-month data 
released in the fall of 2004. For more information on both the ECLS— B and the ECLS— K, please 
visit our website at http;//nces.ed.gov/ecls. Now Jerry West will present some of the early 
findings from the ECLS-K. 

Jerry West: The ECLS is an ambitious program. Between the two studies, we are always in 
design, always in data collection, always processing and analyzing the data; there is a continuous 
stream of work associated with both studies. 1 would like to take this opportunity to thank all 
the people who are presenting today, because they have done a lot of hard work on these two 
studies in order to get them off the ground and make the data and findings available to the 
research and policy communities. 

I want to share some of the early findings from the kindergarten study. 1 will concentrate on 
findings pertaining to one of the many populations of children represented in our sample — 
children in poverty. As Hausken mentioned, the ECLS-K can be used to address numerous 
questions. The data can be used to examine children s academic achievement and experiences, 
and this can be done for different groups of children. One can do the typical group compari- 
sons, looking at children in poverty versus other children, comparing group means, or looking 
at the output from various regression analyses. But one of the most valuable aspects of this 
database, because of the size of the sample, is that it offers detail on particular subgroups. It 
allows the researcher to study the variation within the population of children in poverty as 
opposed to just comparing these children to other children. Thus, it can be used to help answer 
the question of why some poor children are doing better than others. 

In terms of the study, our sample is nationally representative; roughly 20% of our chfidren 
live in households that are belOw the poverty threshold. When one looks at the distribution of 
children who live in households that are below the poverty threshold versus others, we see a 
good deal of variation. This is something we know but sometimes forget. For example, looking 
at the race and ethnic distribution, and the distribution for mother's education, we are reminded 
that not every child who is poor is a racial or ethnic minority, and not every child who is poor 
has a mother who is a high school dropout. While the distribution of these characteristics for 




202 



208 



OTHER FEDERAL PRESENTATIONS 



disadvantaged children is clearly different than the distribution for all children, there is some 
variability within the population of poor children. 

With the ECLS-K data, one can study the relationships of some of these variables, including 
characteristics of children and of families, focusing just on poor children. What patterns do we 
see when we look at children who are in poverty as a single population? 

As Hausken said, the ECLS-K assesses children's reading, mathematics, and general knowl- 
edge. Information from the ECLS-K reveals that all children are learning quite a lot during their 
first 2 years of schooling. Within the population of children in poverty, differences in children's 
reading and mathematics achievement by race or ethnicity were not detected. However, when we 
look at these same children's reading knowledge and skills by their mother's education, we see a 
pattern that, in many ways, looks like what one sees for the population as a whole. Children 
whose mothers have more education demonsUate higher levels of reading achievement at each 
data collection point (fall and spring kindergarten, and spring first grade) than children whose 
mothers have less education. The gap between these groups increases over time and is wider at 
the end of first grade than it was when children first came to school in the fall of kindergarten. 

One can also look at the growth that occurs in these different skill sets for children who 
begin school at different skill levels. Again, not all children who are poor have poor skills at the 
beginning of kindergarten and not every child who is advantaged has high skills; there is 
variability in both groups. Thus, ECLS-K kindergarten and first grade data can be used to see 
where a child began his or her educational career and how much growth (learning) occurred 
over the first 2 years of school. Do children who start school with higher skills learn more over 
the early school years than children who begin school behind? 

There are several different ways to approach this question using the variables available in the 
ECLS-K data. By placing children into three groups based on their beginning reading skills, we 
find that children who start school with a higher level of reading skills continue to maintain 
that advantage, and widen their advantage. The gap is around 12 points between the highest and 
the lowest groups at the beginning of kindergarten, and increases to about a 19-point advantage 
at the end of first grade. 

One could also use the data to see what is going on in the lives of these different groups of 
children that may account for the increasing gap in achievement. Is there something about their 
family life, their education, the types of schools and classrooms they are in that may be facilitat- 
ing the widening of the achievement gap? 

We can also examine the relationships between the specific skills and resources children have 
when they begin kindergarten and their subsequent achievement. For the population as a whole, 
we find what one might expect — early factors such as early literacy (e.g., being read to, knowing 
letters and numbers), early approaches to learning, and children's general health relate to 
subsequent achievement. However, children who are below the poverty threshold come to 
school less likely to know letters, less likely to be read to, and are less likely to know their 
numbers and shapes. These children are also less likely than their more advantaged peers to be 
able to identify or understand the concept of relative size (e.g., how does this object compare to 
this object in non-standard units?). Children in poverty are less likely to be identified by their 
teachers as having a positive approach to learning, and are more likely to be in poorer health 
than children above the poverty threshold. 

The findings of our analysis of children in poverty suggests that having these beginning skills 
and resources is important for later academic achievement. Children who are proficient in 
letters in the fall of kindergarten are much more likely to move on to higher skill sets during the 
kindergarten year and are more likely to have higher skills at the end of first grade. These 
patterns hold when one controls for race or ethnicity and mother's education. 

Some of the nonacademic skills are also important. Poor children who come to school with a 
positive approach to learning, such as persisting at tasks and being attentive, do better academi- 
cally at the end of kindergarten and first grade than children who do not have these skills. 



209 



203 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



In addition to looking at achievement and the achievement gap, one can also use the ECLS-K 
data to look at other issues, once again focusing on children in poverty. One of the things we 
have looked at is parent involvement in children's education. In the ECLS-K, parent involve- 
ment can be defined in numerous ways. Parental involvement data in the study ranges from 
informal home activities to involvement with schools and other formal organizations. Here, we 
are only considering their involvement with their children's schools. Again, just like children 
living below the poverty threshold, the more time an activity takes, the less likely parents are to 
do it. For things that do not require a lot of time, like going to a parent-teacher conference or a 
PTA meeting, there is a fairly high level of participation. But when it comes to things that require 
more time, such as volunteering or serving on an advisory group or panel, there is a much lower 
level of involvement. This same kind of pattern exists for the population as a whole. 

Again, one can look at this by characteristics of children's femilies, or in this case, by 
children's parents' education. The common pattern we see in the national data for children as a 
whole is that as education increases, so does involvement. This same pattern is found among the 
population of children in poverty. 

In addition to asking whether one or more parents participate in these kinds of activities, the 
ECLS-K asks about who participates: is it the mother, is it the father, or is it both? Our findings 
suggest that mothers are more involved than fathers, and that the least involved person in the 
two-parent family is the father. We see this repeatedly in these data and also in the data from the 
National Household Education Survey and other sources. 

In summary, the ECLS-K can be used to study many different questions about children, their 
families, and their schools, as they begin their education careers. I have offered some brief 
glimpses at the potential of the database. I hope that you will delve into these data more 
comprehensively and run more sophisticated models. 

Christine Nord: Over the last several years, there has been an increased interest in the role that 
fathers play in the lives of their children. We know that fathers play an important role, but they 
have not always been included in studies of child development and education. Fathers have not 
been asked how they feel about being a father, what they think fathering involves, or how they 
go about the tasks associated with being a father. Recognizing these shortcomings, studies 
conducted by the federal government and others have looked for ways of incorporating fathers 
into their study designs. The ECLS-B represents one such effort. In the brief time I have for this 
presentation, I would like to provide a broad overview of the father component of the ECLS-B. 

The father component of the ECLS-B is intended to help answer several types of questions: 
Does father involvement change as children grow? What are fathers' perceptions of themselves 
as fathers, and do these perceptions change as children age? Is father involvement affected by 
children's health and limitations? Is it related to how well children make the transition to 
school and to their school success? Does the relationship between children's parents influence 
children's readiness for school? 

The ECLS-B father component has two parts. First, we identify and attempt to collect data 
from fathers who are living in the child's home (resident father), and we define this person as 
the spouse or partner of the primary respondent, who is usually the child's mother. At the 9- 
month collection, resident fathers are for the most part biological fathers, but there are already 
some stepfathers and adoptive parents at 9 months. Second, we attempt to identify and collect 
data from biological fathers who are not living with their children (nonresident fathers). We 
have heard about the difficulties studies have had trying to identify, locate, and get responses 
frorn these men, and about how these efforts can consume study resources. Therefore, we added 
the criteria that nonresident fathers had to have contact in the last three months with either the 
mother or the child to be eligible for the ECLS-B. It did not have to be physical contact; it could 
be telephone or mail, but they had to be in touch with the mother or child in some form. In this 
way, we hoped to limit the size of the nonresident father sample and to be able to find and gain 
the cooperation of this group of men. 



ERIC 



O 204 




OTHER FEDERAL PRESENTATIONS 



In the ECLS-B, like most other studies, we rely on the mother for information about the 
nonresident father and only attempt to contact fathers with the mother's permission. There are 
Uvo reasons for this. First, we sample from birth certificates, so we do not necessarily have any 
iiiformation on the father, and we need the mother to give us the information. Second, after a 
divorce or separation, we do not know the circumstances surrounding the couple's decision to 
split up, and we do not want to get into the middle of situations with high levels of conflict. 

Collecting data about nonresident fathers has many challenges. First, the mother must be 
willing to identify the father and give her permission for the father to be contacted. Second, 
she must be willing and able to provide the information that is needed to locate and contact 
the father. Sometimes, this information is not accurate. And then, of course, we have to get the 
father to agree to participate and answer questions about his role as the father of the sampled 
child. ^ 

There are two ECLS-B father questionnaires, one for resident and one for nonresident fathers. 
The two questionnaires contain some questions that are asked of both resident and nonresident 
fathers and some questions that are only asked of resident fathers or only of nonresident fathers. 
For all fathers, we ask about their feelings on being a father, whether they were involved during 
the pregnancy of the child, and about their current relationship with the child's mother. We also 
collect information on the father's employment, education, and background. 

Resident fathers, because they are living with the child, are asked about their expectations for 
child development— what they think children of different ages are capable of doing. We ask 
about the types of activities they do with their child, and we ask if they have been separated 
from their child for a week or more. The resident father questionnaire at 9 months consists of 
about 80 questions, so it can take 15 or 20 minutes to complete. Of nonresident fathers, we ask 
the more typical questions that one sees in the research literature: the amount of contact they 
have with their children, whether they are expected to pay child support, and if so, how much, 
and about their current living arrangements. 

The father questionnaires in the ECLS-B include several questions that are also in the Early 
Head Start Father Study questionnaires and in the father questionnaire being used by the Fragile 
Families Study. Through the DADS (Developing a Daddy Survey) group, the three studies have 
tried to work together to provide an integrated view of father involvement. 

The samples of these three different studies are quite different. The ECLS-B is the largest 
(13,500), is drawn from birth certificates, and is representative of children bom in the U.S in 
2001. The Early Head Start study is focusing on 17 Head Start sites, and there are about 3,000 
children involved. The Fragile Families Study sample is comprised of 4,700 families, primarily 
unmarried couples who were sampled from hospitals in 20 cities. The hope is that the ECLS-B 
will provide the broad context for which these other studies can compare their populations and 
have a point of reference. ' 

In developing the questionnaires, we drew on Michael Lamb's model of father involvement. 
Three types of involvement were tapped: (a) interaction, how actively engaged the father was 
with the child; (b) accessibility, whether he was present and available should the child need him 
or yant to seek him out; and (c) responsibility, the ways in which he was taking the requisite 
actions needed to foster the health, growth, and development of the child, even if just maintain- 
ing a job or taking the child to the doctor. 

To measure each of these three types of father involvement, various ECLS-B questions are 
asked. For interaction, there are questions on activities like playing peek-a-boo, holding the 
child, reading books to the child, telling stories, singing songs, or taking them on outings. 
Accessibility includes the separation questions, as well as the number of hours the father works 
per week, and whether they work shift work. For resident fathers, accessibility also includes 
questions about how often they provide child care for the child. Responsibility questions center 
around issues like actively taking care of the child, changing diapers, and giving them bottles; but 
it also includes broader questions, like providing hospital insurance and benefits through work. 




2 i 1 



205 



i 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



The nonresident father questions includes questions about the father's contact with the child 
and his involvement at the child's birth, such as how soon after the child s birth he held the 
child. At 9 months, we had a rather short questionnaire for nonresident fathers— it was only 10 
minutes long— so we did not collect information on the activities they did with the child. At 
24 months, we will collect information on activities. 

The accessibility questions for nonresident fathers include questions about contact with the 
child and his or her mother, and how much time he spends with the child. There are questions 
about provision of responsibilities and taking responsibility for the child. There are questions 
about formal child support and the types of informal support they provide for the child 
(e.g., buying clothes and diapers, giving the mother extra money to help out, paying for child's 
health care and expenses, helping with repairs, and making rent/ mortgage payments for child's 
household). 

Questions for resident fathers about fatherhood include how they think about themselves as 
fathers and what they think are the important things that fathers should do. Similar questions 
are asked of nonresident fathers, and we ask these men whether they want to be involved in 
raising the child in the coming years. 

As mentioned earlier, the resident father questionnaire has about 88 questions, and the 
nonresident father questionnaire is a lot shorter, with 38 questions. The shorter questionnaire 
was developed to help raise the response rates for nonresident fathers. In the first ECLS-B field 
test, conducted in the fall of 1999, the response rates for resident and nonresident fathers were 
72% and 55%, respectively. 

The nonresident father questionnaire was shortened as part of a major redesign effort. The 
use of the shorter questionnaire, together with other data collection changes (e.g., paying fathers 
for participating up front and following up immediately for nonresponse), improved the 
response rates in a field test conducted in the fall of 2000. In this second field test, the resident 
father response rate was 85%, and the nonresident father questionnaire response rate was 67%. 

Kathleen Wallner-Allen: The ECLS-B recognizes the important role that child care plays in 
children's lives and has made child care an integral part of this study. The key goals of the child 
care component are to determine the quality of the care children receive, and to ascertain the 
characteristics of children's nonparental care settings, both formal and informal. 

The ECLS-B collects data about children's child care and early education settings in three 
ways: During the primary caregiver interview, mothers are asked about any child care their child 
is currendy receiving; a telephone interview is conducted with the child's primary child-care 
provider; and the child's primary child-care setting is observed. The data that are collected about 
child care contributes to, and complements, the data that are collected through the child 
assessments, the parent interviews, and later, the children's teachers and schools. 

The data from the child-care component will be used to answer a variety of questions about 
children's early care and education. One of the important research questions that this study will 
be able to address may be of particular interest to the participants at this conference: What are 
the early child-care experiences of children living in poor families who may be eligible for Head 
Start? Because we collect data about these children before they enter Head Start, we will be able 
to learn about the types of child-care experiences these children have before Head Start, and 
about the experiences they bring with them to Head Start. Another research question has to do 
with child outcomes: How do aspects of, or differences in, children's child-care environrnents 
influence the child's development and later school achievement? 

Because we will collect information about the child-care setting using different instmments — 
a caregiver report and direct observations — we will be able to make comparisons between these 
different sources. This is a third research question: How different is the information collected 
during the child-care provider telephone interview from information obtained through observa- 
tion of the child-care settings? Answers to this question are of both substantive and method- 
ological interest. 



ERIC 



O 206 




a 



OTHER FEDERAL PRESENTATIONS 



A parent interview will be conducted at each wave of the study, and at each of these visits, 
parents will be asked, among other things, about the study child's nonparental child care 
arrangements. If a child has a regular nonparental care arrangement, a telephone interview with 
the child's primary caregiver will be conducted at 24 and 48 months of age. If the child is in 
center-based care, there will be two parts to this interview. First, a short interview will be con- 



ducted with the center director. Then, the child's teacher will be interviewed by telephone. 

A child-care observation study will be conducted when the children are 24-months-old, and 
again at 4 years of age. If the child is in a center-based arrangement, the center director will also 
be asked to complete a short questionnaire. The presentation today will focus on the child-care 
components at 24 months of age; however, it is anticipated that the child-care components at 
4-years-old will closely parallel those at 24-months-old. 

All child care arrangements will be initially classified into three basic types. We have center- 
based care and two tjqies of home-based care. Center-based care is care that does not occur in a 
private home. It typically takes place in a school, community center, or its own building and 
includes preschools, nursery schools, and other tjqies of child care centers. 

Home-based care is provided in a private home, either the child's or another person's. It may 
be provided by a relative or by a nonrelative. Relative care includes care provided by a relative 
other than the child's parents, such as siblings, grandparents, aunts, and cousins. Nonrelative 
care is care the child receives from someone who is not related to him or her. Examples of this 
type of care arrangement are nannies, the neighborhood sitter, or a family child-care provider. 

During the parent interview, we will obtain information about participation in child care. A 
child is considered to be in child care if the child receives care, on a regular basis, from someone 
other than the child's parents. This includes any care that is received on a regular basis, whether 
or not a fee is charged, but does not include occasional babysitting. 

To be eligible for the child-care provider study, the arrangement must be with someone other 
than the child's parents or guardians, and the child must be in the arrangement 10 or more 
hours per week. If a child is in more than one arrangement, the provider with whom the child 
spends the most time is selected. 

The child-care provider telephone interview is an interview that lasts approximately 30 to 
45 minutes. It is usually 45 minutes for centers, and has two separate parts for the director and 
caregiver/teacher, and 30 to 40 minutes for home-based child care. During this interview, 
information is obtained about a variety of different aspects of the child-care setting and child- 
care environment. Information is collected about the structure, organization, staffing, services 
provided, the care of the study child and other children in the setting, the temperament of the 
study child, the caregiver-child relationship, parental involvement, caregiver beliefs and atti- 
tudes, the learning environment, and the caregiver's background, health, and income. 

While a telephone interview is suitable for collecting certain types of data, it is limited in its 
ability to obtain certain information about children's child-care settings. Characteristics such as 
the nature of the caregiver-child interaction, the caregiver's warmth and sensitivity, the availabil- 
ity and adequacy of learning materials, and other characteristics of quality that are directly 
experienced by the child, are best obtained through observation. The primary care setting will be 
visited by trained observers for a sample of 1,720 children in the study. 

A child-care observation will be conducted with both home- and center-based providers who 
complete the telephone interview. The child-care observation sample is supported by the 
Administration for Children, Youth, and Families (ACYF) and will include both a low-income 
group and a non-low-income group. AYCF is interested in the low-income group of children 
who will potentially be eligible for Head Start when they get older. ACYF is interested in 
learning about the types of early experiences these young children have prior to entering Head 
Start. A major purpose of the child-care observation is to enhance the information about the 
types and quality of child care received by children who are essentially Head Start eligible, and 
to then link differences in the quality of care to children's later health, development, and 
academic achievement. 




213 



207 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



The child-care observation will take about 3 hours to complete. Child-care observers will go 
into the settings and record the number of children and adults in the study child's classroom so 
that the staff-to-child ratio and group size can be calculated. The observation instruments will 
include the Infant/Toddler Environment Rating Scale (ITERS), the Family Day Care Rating Scale 
(FDCRS), and the Arnett Scale. Both the ITERS and FDCRS are ratings of child-care quality that 
are based on features of the classroom and the caregiver s interaction with the children. The 
ITERS and the FDCRS are ratings of the quality of the setting, and the Arnett scale is a rating of 
the quality of the caregiver, at the caregiver level. 

The End of Visit ratings are global ratings that are made by the ECLS-B child-care observer at 
the end of the child-care observation. The observer is asked to rate the overall positive relation- 
ship of the caregiver with the study child, and with all of the children. They are also asked to 
rate the child-centeredness of the care setting, and whether the focus is on the child s needs or 
the adult's needs. Finally, they are asked to give their overall impression of the child-care setting 
on a scale of 1 to 5. 

For some of the care settings, like the center-based care, there is a short, 10-minute, self- 
administered questionnaire that is completed by the center director. It builds upon the data 
collected in the telephone interview, and the purpose of the questionnaire is to collect addi- 
tional in-depth information about the center, including program operations, and collaborations 
with other agencies such as Head Start and Early Head Start recruitment staff. It also asks for 
information about the background of the center director. 

A field test of the observational study and child-care provider telephone interview was 
conducted from May to December 2001. The field test findings are not yet available, but I want 
to talk about the field test experience and the challenges that we face with the study. In the field 
test, 249 cases were fielded for the child-care provider telephone interview, and of those, we 
completed 87%, or 217 cases. For the observation study, 117 cases were fielded among all low- 
income children in care and half of the other children, and 95 cases were completed (81%). Of 
the 117 observations, 46 were relative care, 35 were nonrelative care settings, and 36 were center- 
based care. Response rates varied by the type of care setting. Centers were the most likely to be 
completed (89%), and nonrelative care settings were the least likely to be completed (71%). The 
relative care completion rate was around 82%. 

One of the challenges for any child-care study is that children's child-care arrangements 
change. There is a high provider turnover rate in the child-care field. Therefore, one of our goals 
was to complete both the telephone interview and the observation as quickly as possible 
following the parent interview, so that we limited the number of changes in arrangements 
between the time the arrangement was identified and the observation completed. Ideally, we 
would like all the information in the parent interview to match the telephone provider interview 
and the observation. 

On average, it took about 4 weeks to complete the child-care provider telephone interview 
following the initial parent interview, when Ae arrangement was a center. Relative care and 
nonrelative care each took about 17 days. Centers took longer because there were two contacts, 
one with the center director and one with the child's primary caregiver/ teacher. It took another 3 
weeks, on average, to complete the child-care observation once the telephone interview was 
completed. Observations of center-based settings were completed within about 22 days, while 
those of relative care took about 25 days and nonrelative care took 17 days. 

Overall, it took between 5 and 7 weeks to complete the child-care provider telephone 
interview and observation. It took the least amount of time to complete the nonrelative care 
settings, with 34 days on average. It took the longest to complete center-based care settings, with 
51 days on average, which was not surprising given the multiple contacts at the center. Relative 
care settings took about 42 days. 

I would like to conclude with some of the challenges that we face with this particular compo- 
nent of the ECLS-B. Many of the challenges are common to all child-care studies, but some are a 





O 



OTHER FEDERAL PRESENTATIONS 



particular problem for ECLS-B. We can think about these challenges in terms of the child-care 
providers and the child-care observers, starting first with the providers. First, we have to secure 
the mother's permission to contact the caregiver, and this happens during our parent in-home 
interview. Once a parent tells us that their child is receiving care on a regular basis from some- 
one other than his or her parents, we ask the parent to give us permission to contact the pro- 
vider. We also need the parent to give us the information that is required to contact the 
caregiver. At this point, it is important that the field staff member has established a good rapport 
with the parent so that she will let us talk to the child-care provider, and in some cases visit and 
observe the child's care setting. 

Parents are asked to sign a permission form that gives us permission to contact the provider. 
This permission form is sent along to the provider, so they can see that we have the permission 
of the parent to contact them. In the field test, we also ask parents to contact the provider to tell 
them to expect our call. An introductory letter and a packet of information about the study are 
also sent to the provider. In the national study, we are going to provide a more complete packet 
to the parent to give to the provider, so that they can get the information more quiddy. One of 
the problems that we have with locating providers is that mothers know where they take their 
children, but they do not necessarily know the address or the last names of the providers. So by 
giving them a packet in advance, we hope to correct what we experienced in the field test; we 
were running into situations where we had called and sent the letter, but the provider had not 
received the letter because of incorrect address information provided by the parent. Then they 
wanted to see the letter before agreeing to participate, which slowed us down. 

That brings us to the second challenge, which is convincing caregivers to participate. Like 
many other studies before us, we had to respond to provider concerns and suspicions about 
who we were and why we were asking these questions. In some cases, we had to assure providers 
of our intentions and that we were not representing a licensing agency, checking up on them, or 
doing anything that could potentially harm them. Another challenge was scheduling. Child care 
providers are busy people, especially the better ones, and they want to be with the children all 
day long. They are taking care of children, which is their first responsibility. It is sometimes 
difficult to get in touch with these people and schedule a time when they can do a 30- to 
40-minute interview. 

In some cases, particularly in some of the center-based settings, we ran into situations where 
they were interested in participating but wanted to check first with the corporate office. In other 
cases, they wanted to check with other officials or organizations that were providing them 
research monies or operating funds, to ask if their participation would be acceptable. One last 
challenge, as I mentioned earlier, is changes in the child-care arrangements. Children stop 
arrangements and providers leave, so we need to get to them as quickly as possible before all 
these changes occur. 

Now for the challenges associated with the child-care observers. There are many benefits 
associated with the ECLS-B being a nationally representative study of children. However, this 
feature of the design presents some challenges to training and to maintaining the skills and 
reliability of the child-care observers. Many child-care studies are located at a limited number of 
sites. Observers have a local home base and other people that they interact with, and from 
whom they can learn. The child-care observers in the ECLS-B, like the cases they will work, are 
not highly clustered. Thus, in the absence of the types of supports just mentioned, much care 
and attention must be given to keeping their skills sharp and their motivation high over a long 
field period. 

The size of the ECLS-B study and the dispersion of cases across the country makes it more 
difficult to find the right balance between a workload for a given area that keeps travel costs 
down, and one that provides enough work to keep each staff member active and productive. No 
one wants to work just 3 hours each month. They want more hours and a consistent amount of 
work and income. There are also limits to the travel budget. 



ERIC 



215 



209 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



One final challenge pertains to the language of the child-care providers. In the field test, we 
had bilingual child-care observers and bilingual telephone interviewers to conduct interviews 
and observations in both English and Spanish. The demands for these types of resources will be 
even greater in the national study. The oversample of Asian and Chinese children requires other 
resources. 

We have a difficult task ahead of us, but we are cautiously optimistic and look forward to the 
start of the 24-month data collection in January of 2003 with the first child-care provider 
interviews and observations. 

Cohen: 1 would like to thank the presenters and the audience for their interest in the study and 
for coming to hear the speakers and their presentations. 

West: If anyone wants more information about the ECLS-K and the ECLS-B,' please email us at 
ecls@ed.gov or visit our website at http://nces.ed.gov/ecls. 




210 



216 



Child Development 



The First 3 Years of Life: What Is Known 
and Where Is Research Needed? 

CHAIR: Lonnie Sherrod 

PRESENTERS: Marc Bomstein, Robert N. Emde, Judith Jerald, Deborah Phillips 

Lonnie Sherrod: This will be a combination of a symposium and a conversation hour in that 
we have four panelists who will discuss what is known and where research is needed. Then we 
are going to open it up to questions and audience participation. We are quite privileged to have 
four eminent panelists who have been involved in research on the early years of life throughout 
their professional careers. We have an ideal panel, from both the perspective of their own past 

research as well as from a science policy perspective, for addressing this kind of research agenda 
in the first years. 

Our first panelist is Deborah Phillips, Professor and Chair of the Psychology Department at 
Georgetown University. She was Study Director of the National Academy and Institute of 
Medicine Commission that produced the report From Neurons to Neighborhoods, and has been 
active throughout her career in promoting the research agenda on the early years of life from a 
science policy perspective. 

Deborah Phillips: 1 am going to share with you today the research recommendations from the 
Neurons to Neighborhoods report. It is important to recognize that the report's advisory committee 
IS not one that just offers advice to a group of people who then mn off and write a report. This is 
a consensus document. Every individual on the committee signed onto the review of the science 
and the recommendations that came out of this report. After there was consensus from the 
committee, it went out to a series of reviewers. In this case, 12 reviewers combed through the 
report. We responded to every single comment from every single reviewer, revised the report, 
and then sent it back to the committee for a final sign-off. 

It was an extremely rigorous process. The reviewers, as well as the committee members, were 
asked to review the report for its scientific integrity. At the point that one leaps from reviewing 
the saentific literature to making recommendations for either policy or research, there is a 
rigorous test to see that one does not depart very far from the research reviewed. That is part of 
what lends tremendous credibility to reports from the National Academy of Sciences 

The report arose at a moment when "science" was being applied to early childhood practice 
m ways that were making many individuals in the scientific community nervous When scien- 
tists get nervous, they tend to come to the National Academy of Sciences and say, "Sort through 
the science and tell us what it says, and, just as importantly, what it does not say." Fundamen- 
tally, much of what we were dealing with is the nature/nurture debate, and our first conclusion 
in this report is that portraying this debate as nature versus nurture, and partitioning the 
variances, is overly simplistic and scientifically obsolete. The conclusion was that looking at 0 to 
3 IS too late, because the prenatal period is cmcial,and there are still important developments 



SYMPOSIA/ROUND TABLES/ CONVERSATION HOURS 



occurring after age 3. There is nothing magical that happens on a child's third birthday where 
growth somehow stop/ as if environmental mental influences do not matter anymore. 

We also dealt with another debate at the time: parents do not matter at all versus parents 
determine who we are. For the committee, it is a matter of reflecting the science. The science is of 
course at neither one of these extremes,’ it is a very intricate, fascinating middle ground. That is 
what we were trying to portray. One of the most important things these reports do is try to 
distinguish the boundaries. 

We discussed three broad directions. The first was to integrate research on child development, 
social development, cognitive development, neuroscience, and molecular genetics. It is at that 
intersection that we were going to learn about how to increase the odds of both favorable birth 
outcomes and adaptive development over the early years of life. We need to understand how the 
biogenetic and environmental factors interact in a reciprocal fashion to influence developmental 
pathways. That is the broad theme of the program of research going on at the National Institutes 
of Health (NIH). 

Second, the committee stated that there is a pressing need to integrate basic research, which is 
aimed at understanding developmental processes, with intervention research, which assesses 
efforts to affect those processes and thereby affect developmental outcomes. Evidence from the 
basic sciences on factors that shift developmental trajectories toward adaptive or maladaptive 
outcomes is, at best, haphazardly translated into the design and evaluation of initiatives aimed 
at changing the course of development. 

Similarly, those who study interventions lack systematic opportunities to feed back what they 
are learning into the basic science enterprise. There is a big gulf here. This conference is one of 
the few to deliberately bridge that gulf, and it is quite remarkable in that sense. Finally, the 
committee was hard on the early childhood enterprise and called for a major overhaul of how 
we go about evaluating early childhood interventions. 

In terms of the first goal, integrating child development research, neuroscience, and 
molecular genetics, there is actually little research on early environments and experiences that 
are incorporated into the developing nervous system. Moreover, only a handful of investigators 
actually have the necessary skills to assess the effects of early interventions on various indicators 
of neurological functioning. However, this area of intervention is essential to tease apart the 
threshold below which development is compromised, and above which development is 
probably on a good track. It is a thorny question, since development is likely to vary for differ- 
ent children. 

Second, there is growing agreement among scientists and clinicians that the underlying roots 
of attention problems, learning difficulties, and conduct disorders are actually found in the 
interactions between biological vulnerabilities and environmental demands. Further research in 
this area is likely to affect both the development of interventions aimed at children with impair- 
ments and the development trajectories of children who are relatively free of problems. The 
growing appreciation of individual differences and similarities to environmental risks has galva- 
nized both the behavior scientist and geneticists, yet researchers trained in these 
two impressible traditions rarely work collaboratively. That is only beginning to change now. 

Collaborative endeavors between these two groups could more fruitfully explore important 
concerns such as differential birth outcomes associated with exposure to seemingly similar 
prenatal hazards— such as malnutrition, infection, and drug exposure— and the emergence of 
adverse outcomes ranging from conduct disorders to pathology. The increasingly sophisticated 
tools of molecular genetics and neurobiology, combined with our growing capacity to assess 
developmental outcomes in young children, offer the potential for important insights into the 
processes that lead to a range of developmental vulnerabilities and diagnosed disabilities. 

I will try to pull together the basic science of human development and intervention sciences 
on early childhood programs. Research on early childhood pathways toward psychopathology. 



ERIC 



212 



218 



CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



which bring together those who study social/ emotional development from a variety of disci- 
plines and those involved in the design and implementation of both preventive and therapeutic 
interventions, hold the potential to accomplish at least three things that are highlighted in From 
Neurons to Neighborhoods: 

1 . Elucidate the pathways toward psychopathology, and identify the factors that leave some 
children, over time, at continuing risk and that steer other children toward more adaptive 
outcomes; 

2. Distinguish early clinical patterns that are indicative of serious emerging disorders as 
compared to those that are more targeted and that, in some ways, we do not have to 
worry as much about; and 

3. Support the efforts from such evidence into initially small-scale interventions designed to 
go from understanding to trying to affect development. 

Toward this end, we call attention to the importance of thinking about interventions, geared 
toward preschool classrooms, that offer a promising avenue for advancing the detection and 
identification of problems that often emerge when children are first thmst into a peer group — a 
situation where they have to comply with less individually tailored adult demands. 

Research that focuses on how early biological insults, such as iron deficiency anemia, lead 
ingestion, and adverse environmental conditions, interfere with healthy prenatal and postnatal 
development, combined with efforts to design both preventive and emulative interventions for 
women and children exposed to such stress, could address significant issues. The issues include 
trying to understand the timing and duration of exposures, and how those exposures affect the 
timing and duration of their consequences. What can be learned about the capacity for recovery, 
and individual difference in the capacity to recover from exposure to these threats? What does it 
take to produce improved outcomes for children who are exposed to different timing, different 
dc«ages, and different qualities of risk factors? What are the factors that contribute to individual 
differences and outcomes? 

The committee reached strong agreement that there is little scientific merit in research that 
simply reconfirms that poverty is bad for children. We know that poverty is bad for children; we 
do not need to show it repeatedly. What we need at this point is to understand the mechanics 
mat account for that link. We have an entire chapter in the report devoted to the world culture 
in early development. This is an area in great need of additional high quality research, blending 
quantitative and qualitative methods. While there has been much discussion about it as a 

critical need, we still have not seen the kind of research effort mounted that our social trends 
demand. 

For example, we have basically concluded that we do not need yet another study showing 
that higher quality care is better for children than lower quality care. The people who believe the 
evidence do not need another study to show it to them again. The people who do not believe 
that evidence, and there are many, are not going to be convinced by another correlation study 
that quality matters for child development. 

Hence we suggest pushing the child care research field more toward the early intervention 
research field. Looking at quality as a complete continuum, from the best early intervention 
program to the worst child care program, is a false dichotomy although we think that the 
distributions of quality align themselves that way, based on prior evidence. Perhaps using 
experimental designs to study child care quality would finally convince people that it is a 
continuum, and it does matter. 

One of the thorniest dilemmas from the report is that parents matter a great deal. It is 
chfficult to change parenting. On the one hand, basic science says to intervene with parents. On 
the other hand, intervention science says it is hard to (a) change parenting, and (b) change it 
enough to actually affect the child. This is another area where we need to put these two research 
literatures together and do a better job of understanding what it takes to influence parenting 
enough to influence children. 




213 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



We were hard on the early evaluation enterprise. We call for several things in this area. First, 
we give much greater attention to studying program implementation as a first step in evaluation 
signs, and as an ongoing part of looking at whether a program works. It is absolutely critical to 
being able to interpret the results of a "does it work" type of design, and to understand the 
processes underlying positive or negative program results. This has been put forth repeatedly, 
and it still has not been taken seriously. In Early Head Start, we plunged right into "Did it 
work?" because of political pressures. At least for that program, we are trying to get the imple- 
mentation data at the same time. 

Second, we feel that much of the evaluation research in this field is not providing credible 
answers to the questions that need answering, especially the questions about whether it works. 
One should use the most strident design possible. It would be good to use a randomized trial, 
or as close to it as possible, because that is the only way to get a credible answer to questions. It 
cannot be found in other ways. We also call for the need to synthesize evidence across studies 
repeatedly. We have seen this with Early Head Start. A particular finding from a particular report 
on a particular program is highlighted but is rarely embedded in a broader synthesis about that 
domain of activity. We actually charge NIH with doing that type of activity through a variety of 
consensus conference mechanisms it has in place. They are very credible. They tend to be used 
for medical research, and we think they should also be used for social science research. 

Our final recommendation is to make sure that child developmental outcomes are included 
in interventions that are often not thought of as childhood interventions. That is actually now 
happening. Examples we give in the report are welfare reform initiatives, and we are conducting 
a huge amount of scientific work which looks at the developmental consequences of welfare 
reform. The other example we use is housing interventions. There are some exciting interven- 
tions going on with housing, and the Moving to Opportunity program is including child 
outcome data in their evaluations. 

SheiTodt Our second panelist is Marc Bornstein, who is Head of Child and Family Research at 
the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD). For the past 6 years, 
Bornstein has been Editor of Society for Research in Child Development's (SRCD) preeminent 
journal Child Development, and he has just started a new journal entitled Parenting. 

Marc Bornstein: The second half of the 20th century, roughly 1950 to 2000, witnessed the 
success of 0 to 3 infancy studies in terms of our understanding the capacities and competencies, 
as well as the limitations, of young infants. Michael Lamb and 1 just published a fourth edition 
of Development in Infancy, which reviews what we think is validly known about infancy studies. 

However, 1 would like to turn to the task of raising three burning issues in infancy studies. 
They represent rather simplistic versions of the incredibly rich text that Phillips has just rendered 
for us. The three issues are (a) specificity, (b) parenting, and (c) ethnic and cross-cultural 
variability associated with the first years of life. 

On the issue of specificity, early in development of infancy studies, one looked at the general 
phenomenon either on the input side, experience, or on the infant development output side. 
Sometimes there were predicted results; sometimes there were not. One of the reasons there was 
a degree of haphazardness to the literature resulting from infancy studies was the failure to 
specify what domains of competence one would be looking for in the infant; and what environ- 
ments or experiences one would be looking for. 

Rather than these universal experiences, there may be related developments in infancy, and 
more specific linkages. We needed to define how responsiveness in the language domain was 
related to specific language developments as opposed to general responsiveness for the Bayley, 
which was the outcome of interest at the time. 

In looking at the relative importance of 0 to 3 years of age for later development, one needs 
to have in the back of one's mind the issue of specificity. That normally concerns what the 





214 



CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



dependent variables are, as well as the types of models one is adopting to 

one looldng forThT^T^' f t at the role of early experience for later development? Is 

or^e looking for the role of contemporary experience in later development? Is one looldng at the 

nnr^ experience for later development? When one is looking at the role of c^tem- 

factoring out the role of early experience? 

^cerLp r experience, is one factoring out the role of contemporary experi- 

ence m order to pen the phenomenon down to early experience? That type of model is not used 
much m the development of literature, and it merits more attention 

Moreover, those influences of early experience, whether it is parenting or structure of the 

separated from the role of the child and what lie child is bringing to 
There are'iT O^e must look at early experience, factoring out later experieLe. 

thini We n^pd?"*?' to structure equation modeling, that allow us to do such 

fomgs. We need to look at the actual expenences and outcomes in a much more specific way, 

f tlomains in which those experiences are operating. That will tell 

us more about speafic pathways of development in terms of understanding whether there is a 
significant importance in the 0 to 3 range. 

This does not mean that later development is unimportant; we all know that it is. However a 
concern of 0 to 3 interests is whether there is something special about that period. Therhar 

ThereTs Mfll^aTh of thinking that has put special emphasis on infancy, 

hnn^ ll ‘ n that rears its head periodically with the publication of 

ackc Lewis, and Three Seductive Ideas, by Jerry Kagan, which 

asks whether there is something special about infancy. Although one m^^^ criHdze th- nosi-o" 

the question m many cases is still open, because the nature oflhe parid“e; appmachtgSr' 
not yet reached the crescendo they need to. ^duiing ii nave 

If we want to look at pathways and longitudinal studies, as well as the aggregation of earlv 
^periences, we want to look at how early experiences through, for example, some butterfly 

effecL have unanticipated long term outcome effects. One needs to submit them to experimental 
pannes such as I have just described. t:xpenmemai 

The second issue I want to discuss is the issue of parenting. A book such as The Nurture 

tlTTl ^ ^ '"i^ds in a direction that 

rn parents niatter. Many people can see that parents matter in terms of their genetic 

contribution to the child, but do the experiences which parents provide matter? Again we are 

S colbml";h P--‘-P™vided experiences® of whatever 

genetic contnbution there may be, matter to which infant competencies? 

Even after all this tim^ there is an incredible amount of work to do in understanding the 
meAanisms of acuon and pinning down which domains of child development are affelted by 
Sw f When do they have their effect? Are those effects transitory or long- 

snrTal the 0 to 3 year range when the preponderance of children's experiences, both 

ocial and en^nronmental-that is, m the structure of the local physical environment— is within 
the purview of parental responsibility. How do those decisions on the part of parents conscious 
or unconscious, influence their children's development? We still have a number of specific 
questions to answer about parenting effects. ^ 

^ird is the issue of ethnic and cross-cultural perspectives. From the point of view of infancv 
studies, there are some universals, in terms of the developmental tasks, which infants are 

whir^f*^ u universal tasks of parenting 

hich m mteracuon with those developmental tasks of infants, foster optimal developmelt or 

at least survival into adulthood and reproduction. We also are aware from cross-cultural cross- 

ii?p tremendous variability both in the quantita- 

parentfog"*^ approaches that different people take to these developmental tasks of 

Further specification of that ethnic or cultured variability is necessary to understand more 



ERIC 



221 



215 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



fully the scope of experience in the first several years of life and how we as adults come to be 
unique individuals. Imagine what 1 would be saying and what this would be like if this meeting 
were being held in Uganda or Japan. Would we be talking about the same things? Would the 
burning issues be mostly the same? Some of them would be. Would some of them be different? 
By all means. The cultural, ethnic, and racial kinds of variability in understanding the first 3 
years of life, and how we become who we are, are a third burning issue. 

Sherrod: Our next panelist is Robert Emde, who is Professor in the Program for Early Develop- 
mental Studies in the Department of Psychology at the University of Colorado, and is also 
currently a visiting professor at University College in London. Emde was also .a leader for one of 
the first MacArthur Foundation networks on the transition from infancy to toddlerhood. These 
groups have a very important influence on research during the early years. 

Robert Emde: 1 am going to talk about two things. First, 1 am going to discuss Early Head Start, 
whether it works, and, if so, how. The second topic regards a diagnosis: Does the Diagnostic 
Classification of Mental Health and Developmental Disorders of Infancy and Early Childhood 
(DC: 0-3), our new diagnostic system, work? How? These are areas of needed research. 

We now have the results of our national randomized trial. Many of us were concerned about 
the premature application of an experimental design to a brand new program, but Early Head 
Start works. The results of impacts at 24 and 36 months show that Early Head Start works for 1 7 
sites. There were enhancements at 2 and 3 years in these areas. 1 am not going to review the 
findings; there is an Executive Summary, which documents the impacts of cognitive develop- 
ment, language development, and social/emotional development with multiple measures. There 
are direct assessments of cognitive development with the Bayley, language development with the 
Peabody, and social/emotional development with the MacArthur Communicative Development 
Inventories (CDl). The data collectors and researchers who collected the information showed 
advances in the child's engagement of the parent, and also in attentiveness on objects in a 
semistructured play task. Additionally, observations were made as part of the home instrument 
during a home visit. 

There were enhancements in aspects of parenting. Parents were shown to be more emotion- 
ally supportive in observed play on those videotapes, and supportive of language learning 
observed in the home on the home instmment. There was progress towards self-sufficiency, as 
one would hope. To make all these results more meaningful, the programs were able to demon- 
suate these findings as compared with usual community comparison control groups, using 
random assignment. There was also less negative behavior in fathers. 

The impacts were significant, and they occurred across domains, which impressed our 
conservative researchers. However, the effect sizes were what we call modest. They were in the 
range of 10-20% of the standard deviation. Although the impacts occurred across demographic 
groups and program approaches, there was considerable variation. All of these were new 
programs, and they were responding to different community needs, as they are supposed to do. 
There was much variation. The standards, even as they were evolving for Early Head Start, only 
came online after the programs, the research, and evaluation at these 17 Early Way sites were 
underway. 

There was much evolution, and, although the evidence suggested that the degree of program 
implementation, which was independently evaluated in our research design, made a difference 
for impacts, that is, for those programs that were implemented in accordance with the standards 
as they evolved. The Head Start standards had more of an effect across these domains. That was 
also reassuring and contributed to the pattern of belief for these impacts. My impression in 
talking with different program directors, and experiencing the two programs in which we were 
immersed in Colorado, is that the programs did not feel that they were underway in any full 
sense. It took a couple of years, and we took advantage of the variability to show the findings 
were related to the impact of program. 



O 

ERIC 



216 



CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



What is the needed research in this area? First, we need research on mature programs, not 
only to get more of a gauge on effect sizes, but also because now that we know early interven- 
tion programs work, we need to how they work. We desperately need another phase of the 
research to understand mature programs that are up and running, what works under what 
circumstances, and for whom. What we need for mature programs is targeted or value-added 
interventions with different curricula, to see what will provide enhancements and move us 
forward, as well as research that is targeted for particular subgroups of individuals with particu- 
lar needs and resources. 

I would like to talk briefly about value-added interventions. We could talk about the logical 
two domains of Early Head Start, one having to do with the readiness to learn issue, preliteracy 
curricula. This involves cognitive language and fundamentally interactive components, because 
all of the learning takes place through interactions with parents and other caregivers in the 
caregiving settings. The other domain would be the social competence curricula which are 
equally important in Early Head Start. Many of us think they are equally important to the 
preliteracy curricula, and they are only separable conceptually here. These would be the social 
competence curricula which involve social skills, emotional regulation, and conduct and morale 
skills, such as turn taking, empathy, sensitivity, and children's adherence to rules, and internaliz- 
ing them and feeling distress if they are not carried out. These are all intertwined, of course, but 
there are different curricula that emphasize different aspects of these features. I am pleased to 
say that there is an initiative underway by the Administration for Children and Families (ACF) 
and The National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) planning to do 
just this type of thing. 

We also need to look at knowledge about individuals with particular needs. We need to look 
at what works for children with identified disabilities. We are learning more and more about the 
genetic and child features of the disabilities everyday, about which we can be specific. Regarding 
parental depression, we have some evidence from the early trial that this group was helped in 
particular across our 17 sites in the randomized trial. In Colorado, we had very specific informa- 
tion of larger impacts. For teenage parents, we have some evidence that it may help, in particular 
from our randomized national trial. 

Parents identified at the outset with psychological needs of different types are particularly 
helped by the interventions. We would like to know more about how that happens in parents 
with low mastery. Kevin Everhart has designed a program to specifically look at that and see 
what ways we can help those particular parents, as well as with other identified cognitive 
problems. There are two areas that have not yet been addressed, but which are highlighted in 
Neurons to Neighborhoods as areas of major mental health problems: family substance abuse and 
family violence. They are major mental health problems in the early years, and we need to look 
at those as particular targets. 

Finally, we need to look at individuals with particular resources and strengths. It is unclear to 
what extent we help people with more resources coming into Early Head Start. We need to know 
more about that and not just how we are helping them, but also making use of their strengths 
for helping with the interventions with others as well as themselves. The strengths include not 
only skills and attitudes, but also connections to community and cultural resources as Bornstein 
illustrated. For those designs, we need specified interventions and curricula. We need assessment 
in baseline characteristics of participants, if we are going to use random assignment designs. 

Prior to random assignment, we need implementation study at the individual level. In our 
first wave randomized trial, we had evidence at the program level. Programs that are imple- 
mented closer to the standards have all done better and had greater impact. We need it at the 
individual level, and we need specified outcomes in advance. Documentation of context is very 
important, because the cultural and community context varies greatly. It is going to have much 
to do with curricula and what should be done as they evolve. 

We need longitudinal studies, particularly in schools. We know school readiness has to do 
with interaction of the school and the child, so the child needs to be followed into school. One 




223 



217 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



cannot talk about school readiness until there are data of the child in the school. We also need 
multiple cohorts. It is expensive and hard to do, but times change. Welfare reform started just 
after we started our randomized trial, and we are trying to understand how that happened. We 
have some leads, but things change with time. 

Briefly, 1 just wanted to review the new DC; 0-3. The new DC: 0-3 diagnostic classification 
system for assessing mental health in this age group came into being because there was not 
coverage from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) system of what 
clinicians were dealing with everyday. As a result, a group of clinicians got together and com- 
posed a system. What is it? Does it work? What evidence do we have? First, one has to think 
about the diagnosis. It is an ongoing process with two aspects: (a) the assessment of individuals, 
and (b) the classification of disorders. 

It is important to appreciate that. The purpose of diagnostic classification is to communicate 
among professionals and to link with knowledge and services. It is a guide for clinical formula- 
tion, and we have lost track of that in the DSM and, to some extent, in the DC: 0-3. Out of that 
recognition, both of these systems have a mixture of the multiaxis systems that have evolved, or 
classification of disorder in which one is linking to a map of knowledge of categories. One is not 
classifying individuals; one is classifying disorders. It is a mixture of the first three axes, and 
assessments of individuals, which are the axes four and five. I am going to propose a sixth for 
research. 

We have added a relationship disorder classification. There is a medical condition, which is 
similar to DSM, but we have added developmental and psychosocial stress areas and compe- 
tence that are also reflected in the DC; 0-3, as they are in axes four and five. We have added 
functional/developmental level to it. In our coverage, we include traumatic stress disorder, 
disorders of affect, adjustment disorder, and regulatory disorders, which are so important in our 0 
to 3 work. We separate out sleep and eating behavior disorders. There are also regulatory disorders, 
but they separated out for practical reasons, and disorders of relating and communicating. 

What do we know? Key features of evaluating a diagnostic system involve coverage, useful- 
ness, reliability, and validity. We do not have much information, and I am encouraging more 
clinical trials. This is the most recent information from 0 to 3 from the manual. It is used in 26 
different countries and is used widely in the different regions of the United States. There are 
recent trials of DC: 0-3, two of which have been published. Trials from Paris, Lisbon, and 
Topeka, Kansas as well as an update of the Tel Aviv trial are in press and will be published in the 
Infant Mental Health Journal. 

The relationship disorder is the new axis. People are using it and find it extremely useful. Two 
centers had reliability estimates where they showed that they could judge it reliably. These are 
the different sites, and one can see that the regulatory disorders are quite preeminent, as are the 
affect disorders. Adjustment disorders are a small part— these depend highly on referral sources 
and so they are not epidemiological in any sense. 

What are the research needs? We desperately need more trials of the DC 0 to 3 systems, 
especially in the United States, where there is only one of these five trials. We need more 
reliability specifications. We need much more information on validity links to other assess- 
ments, such as Carter's Infant Toddler Social-Emotional Assessment (ITSEA) and other features 
of assessment instruments that are underway. We need longitudinal data to find out the links to 
the DSM later age disorders, which is a question we are always asked. Research is needed for Axis 
Six, dealing with the family. It is logically important and totally necessary in DC: 0-3 and in 
DSM. There are research needs pertaining to the family, particularly in light of newer genetic 
information. We need to know the history of mental disorder in the family. We need to know 
what family supports are available because we are going to make use of that in our interven- 
tions. Regarding cultural factors, we have a cultural formulation guide for DSM. We are propos- 
ing one for DC: 0-3, and it could be under this axis. 




218 






CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



Finally, we have been involved for over a decade in research on social referencing, which is a 
form of emotional signaling. This is important in infancy around 9 months of age, where in 
conditions of uncertainty, we seek out emotional signals of others in order to resolve the 
uncertainty and to guide behavior. 

Sherrod: Our final panelist is Judith Jerald, who is the Early Head Start National Coordinator at 
the Head Start Bureau. She was on the design team that created Head Start. In fact, most of our 
panelists were involved in either writing the guidelines for Early Head Start, or they have been 
involved in the evaluation of our national effort in the Head Start area. 

Judith Jerald: Can I get away with just saying "ditto?" As I sit here and listen, I get excited about 
what it means, certainly for us at the Head Start Bureau in terms of the knowledge that we need 
in order to set policy. What does it mean for the programs? That is the perspective I will be 
speaking from today. Most importantly, what does it means for children? 

Briefly, I would like to discuss, from the program perspective, what we already know from 
research and what we in Early Head Start have taken to heart. Future research may teach us 
differently, but we have accepted certain things in terms of how we have developed this pro- 
gram. Research tells us that one of the characteristics of an effective program is to begin prena- 
tally, and that has already been discussed here. We also believe strongly, despite the questions 
about the effect parents have on children, in a two generation focus. We also focus in a family- 
centered way, not just on the parent-child relationship — although that is one of our major 
foci— but also on parent education, social ser\nces, and so forth. Those types of things seem to 
be important in terms of parental development, which also impact the child. Quality child 
development is what Early Head Start is all about. 

We also believe, based on research, that a continuity of services over time is important. That is 
why Early Head Start started out focused on the prenatal period and continued for 3 years. What 
is enough? What should the dosage be? We still need to learn more about that. Research has also 
taught us the importance of a continuity of caregivers. This is a huge challenge for Early Head 
Start given the salaries people receive. 

The intensity of services is also important. In addition, one must consider the importance of 
the community within the whole program and within the services. That is important when we 
think about children transitioning into other programs, and so forth. What I have seen in some 
of the Early Head Start studies is that the community is indeed an important part of what 
happens here, and there is research to back that up. 

I want to mention just two things from the Early Head Start National Study. First, the fact that 
quality makes a difference is important news for us at the Head Start Bureau. Implementation 
also makes a difference. The effort that we put into the performance standards and into moni- 
toring the programs is important, and can change the types of services that children in Early 
Head Start receive. The other thing that is near and dear to my heart, in terms of the study, has 
to do with different approaches, mixed models. Flexibility in a program also seems to have a 
difference in the outcomes. 

Are we meeting the needs of the families with the programs that we are providing — home- 
based, center-based, or a mixture of those programs? When are the services available? How does 
this relate to welfare reform? What more do we need to know? I would like to know more about 
management, leadership, and the role that it plays. We know it plays an important role, but I 
would like us to take a closer look at comprehensiveness. These are some sophisticated pro- 
grams. What do the leaders know, and what makes a difference in terms of what they know? I 
hope we can learn more about program options, dosage, impacting more communities, and 
impact at the management and community level. 

Regarding staffing, what kinds of qualifications make a difference? Should we send in 
someone with a Master of Social Work (MSW) degree? We already know that is not necessarily 




225 



219 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



the case. What types of staffing, staff development, and training make a difference for children? 
We are struggling in the field of mental health for children and parents. It is from the programs 
that we are getting the questions: What is infant/toddler mental health? How do we know it 
when we see it? What about prevention, promotion, and intervention? We need to know more 
about all of these things and about maternal mental health. Depression was mentioned. 1 also 
want to include anger as another subset we should look at. 

Regarding infant/ toddler assessments, we do not have enough of them. We are in this 
outcome-based world, and yet for infants and toddlers, we are not there in terms of assess- 
ments — not just assessments of the child, but also of the parent/ child relationship, health, 
nutrition, family functioning, and the management of programs. How do we even assess those 
areas? More needs to be learned about hard-to-engage families. What is that all about? Can we 
make a difference? How long should we be holding onto those families? Are they ready to be in 
a program? Should they receive a different type of service? What about teenagers? They are a very 
special population needing special kinds of services. What do we know about that? Fathers are 
an important issue for this current administration. Can we study more about fathers? 

Cultural groups were already mentioned. Phillips mentioned that we do not need another 
study about quality child care versus nonquality child care, and she is absolutely right. However, 
what are those ingredients that make for that quality child care? That is what we still need more of 

1 would like to end by talking about the process of gathering and using information. 1 am 
speaking from what was an absolutely wonderful experience working with Early Head Start, 
both the National and Local Research Teams. When the study began, 1 was a Program Director 
of one of these programs, and the partnership process of those 5 years was one of the most 
wonderful things that could happen for programs. When we are doing studies, some of the 
things that are the most important are involving programs in the design and involving them in 
the implementation. There was much training and technical assistance from our local partners, 
who could come and work with staff on various topics. 

I would like to see us go even further. This is a challenge. 1 have always had a dream of having 
the parents sit up here, telling us about their own research about themselves. That is another 
direction that we can follow. In my program, we did quite a few case studies in which parents, 
over time, could look at where they have come from and where they have gone. 1 know others 
have done this as well. The next step is having them actually talk about it. 

Sherrod: Jerald ideally set the stage for the next phase of our session, which is audience 
participation. What should be on the agenda for the next phase of research on early develop- 
ment? 

Marilyn Arons: I have a question regarding a Mathematica study. When looking at the results, 
specifically the Part C recommendations, given the fact that at least 10% of Early Head Start 
children are disabled, per statute, how did the researchers factor out the services they were 
getting through Part C with Early Head Start, measuring Early Head Start and not Part C? 

Comment: The design of the study, in terms of it being an impact study where you have a 
community comparison group, helps with the question of that potential contact. In other 
words, participants agreed to be in the study, and then they were randomly assigned. They either 
had a 50% chance of getting in a program or being gauged in the usual community services. 
There were an equal number of children who were identified for Part C in the comparison group 
as in the program group. 

Arons: That is my problem with the study. When I read the report, it seemed that data was 
collected from 17 sites, but when the Executive Summary was released, it only contained 
information on the parents who were interviewed as to Part C, and there was no information 



O 

ERIC 



220 




CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



about the actual sites themselves. 1 was curious why this shift from reporting the direct informa- 
tion of Part C from the sites did not appear in the final publication of the report. 1 am trying to 
inquire what happened to the data on Part C that was published in 2000, where there were 
percentages in the three volumes that the program went by. 

Rachel Cohen: Are you referring to the implementation study data, where we went into each 
program and described the services that they were providing? That was a separate path of 
research. We did the implementation study first, then the impact study. Down the road, we will 
bnng some of the strings together more specifically of the different characteristics of specific 
programs and specific outcomes. We had certain deadlines to meet and could not include 
everything in the report. We also cannot do everything within the experimental design of the 
program control comparison, so we are going to need to do different kinds of analyses. The 
report will come out later this summer focusing on health, including disabilities issues. 

Question: In a session yesterday, I heard a researcher say we do not know if Head Start families 
are disorganized, or the people making home visits cannot discern their organization. As a 
person who grew up in a family that needed Head Start before there was any, I can answer that 
question. Many people among us, and many people in our programs, have been Head Start 
children and Head Start parents. They can answer many of the questions that we have about 

what life is like in those families. It is time to start asking them to tell us what some of these 
things mean. 

Bornstein: There are some developments along that way. I happen to be a member of a group 
called the Parenting Network, in which Bob Bradley is also a member. It is associated with a 
group called the Ceriter for Child Well-being, which is a break off of the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC). We are developing a curriculum which would be Early Head 
Start-based, but it is in its initial stages and taking a bottom up approach like you are describing. 
We will go around to different sites around the country and involve parents, who are otherwise 
eligible or in Early Head Start, in interviews and focus groups. We will ask how they interpret 
their stresses and how they see their problems. What is the lingo that they use? What are the 
barriers they see to overcoming any issues in parenting they may have? How do they solicit 
social supports? What social supports are lacking? We will do this in order to develop a program 

that comes from the bottom up and that is culturally appropriate, in the way that you are 
describing. 



Comment: Also ask those adults working in Head Start who grew up in Head Start not to 
answer your questions, but to tell you what they know. 

Karen Piper: I have been evaluating a program in California. It is called the Prenatal to Three 
Program, and is not affiliated with Head Start or Early Head Start. We know that there are some 
children that cross over, and we have been collecting data for the last 4 years on the planning 
and the implementation. We offered this program and what I am finding, even though I have a 
wea th of data, is that most of the frmding that I am looking for is categorical. It says frmding is 
available to research a specific piece, as opposed to looking at the whole picture. The panel is 
saying that we need to look at the whole picture from the prenatal period through school age to 
^ to see what differences these things make. I am collecting data on what that process looks 
like. I have no funding for that project. I am just doing it because the county is interested and 
willing to support the project. Funding sources are still very categorical. Will the Requests for 
Proposals (REP) process change? 




O O ^ 

(o' % 



221 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



) 



Comment: It is happening, and we will see how it affects the RFP process, but inherent in many 
of the recommendations that the committee made is the need for the programmatic agencies, 
which are categorically or programmatically organized, to get together and jointly write RFPs. 
That probably has happened. It means getting the research agencies and the program agencies 
together, thinking creatively about that integrated bridge between them. It is "programmatically 
driven science," looking more broadly at the issues that one is undertaking. It is a hard bridge 
to build. 

Comment: I have worked closely with teachers and home visitors. It seems that the tremendous 
amount of stress that workers go through comes from the community and from not being 
compensated at a credible level. Issues of staff turnover and compensation need to be studied. 

Comment: That is an important area to study, and it is not just about compensation. It is also 
about building a workforce. We do not have an infant/toddler workforce out there, and it is a 
"catch-22." How can we build it, when we are not going to pay them, if we are not going to 
value them? Some current projects are trying to get universities to have more infant/ toddler 
curricula. They have fiscal problems as well, and they do not want to add curricula that nobody 
is going to take, because it will not pay them enough, and so forth. It is not just something to 
study — it is also a huge advocacy issue that we must address. 

Comment: Part of the advocacy issue relates to the session yesterday morning that focused on 
human capital. Anne Peterson, a researcher of adolescent development, went to the National 
Science Foundation in an attempt to build the concept of human capital into the national 
priorities, the way that the environment or space travel are national priorities. In a capitalist 
economy like ours, people are paid who generate revenue. Making the point that one gets to 
economic growth by building human capital is the only way one is going to create the value for 
early child care workers and make them valued and paid the way they should be. That is a hard 
argument, but that is where we have to go. 

Question: The need for new assessments on infant/toddlers and parenting was described. What 
work is being done to modify the way we measure parenting? Is there work being done to look 
at typical or traditional parenting methods? 

Bornstein: Not much has actually been done, but we are at the beginning of revisiting that 
issue. We know, from various components of the literature, that there is interest in different 
kinds of critical beliefs in terms of knowledge of childhood development, attributions, views of 
success and failures in parenting, attitudes toward children and parenting, and so forth. We 
know that there is literature that has looked at actual behaviors, and they show variable results. 
There is a dearth of studies linking the two. No one has worked through, from the social/ 
psychological literature to the parenting literature, how attitudes or beliefs link up to actions 
and behaviors. There are, of course, frontiers with respect to problem solving abilities that are 
not necessarily within the beliefs or behavioral domains, but certainly are issues of thought 
process, emotional self-regulation, and parenting. 

Up until the last couple of years, no research about parenting was being published. There was 
basic research on child development, but nothing focused on parenting. There has been, 
however, an attempt to isolate and then raise parenting as a field. There are more books now 
about parenting, and there is also a parenting journal. Once something like that happens, the 
critical mass begins to develop so that intelligent minds apply themselves to the problems, the 
questions, and the issues of parenting themselves. This may begin in local groups, but will 
quickly spread to the cultural variability that you are talking about. Then we begin to under- 
stand parenting as a phenomenon in and of itself, how it is affected by various factors, and how 
it affects various outcomes in children and in society at large. 



O 

ERIC 



222 



228 



CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



th^YhiM H been thinking about parenting in that way. The focus has been, as it is here, on 

wh '^bo he is, or the way the adolescent gets to be 

who she IS, has some dependence on who makes the decisions in rearing them. More attention 
has to be paid to that topic. 

Bob Bradley: I would like to follow up on that and return to a somewhat hopeflil move in a 
producuve direction. We are seeing far more bottom-up approaches. In fact, researchers and 
people at the program site level begin to get together where they have common interests and 
common concerns. We rieed to go back out into the field, such as we have done with Early Head 

.hn^.r r. helping to reformulate some of our ideas 

developments in research are going to emerge 

out of this type of effort to have parents help us reformulate some of the issues and concerns I 
see that actually beginning to emerge. Part of it is stimulated by some of these reports, but also 
by the national efforts like Early Head Start. 

Caroline Kaufean: My training is in anthropology, not in the field of child development In 
terms of three broad direcuons for research, one thing that was mentioned was integrating 
psychosocial and biological lines of research. What about the sociological, economic, political 
and program contms? What about the cultural context? We need to be careftil not to collapse ' 
^ ure into just ethnicity. Culture is a web of meaning. How do people see the world? How do 
parents see the world? How are children beginning to see the world? We need to have more 
conscious understandings and agendas that incorporate other perspectives. 

Phillips: 1 agree with that. In fact, we need something on the order of a National Academy 
Commission to address that issue, because we are dangerously close in the field to culture and 

ethnicity. We have tned to address this issue indirectly in From Neurons to Neighborhoods We did 
try to span that spectmm. 

^mment: Did any of you see the piece on spanking in the Washington Post earlier this week? 

TTte article desmbed a study finding that spanking was not bad for Afncan Americans; just for 
^ite people. Harsh parenUng does not predicate trajectories towards problematic behavior for 
Afhcan Amencan families. It is that kind of evidence, in the kind of work we are discussing that 

people are finding where the field is now. Now we have to backtrack and think about the 
cultural and context specificity. 

Comment: It is the context of our measures. Now, where do we go with it? 

Sherrod: Phillips mentioned that in the evaluations of programs such as Early Head Start, we 
need randomized clinical trials. Almost all the research summarized in the report is not experi- 
mental but is m fact quasi-experimental. Children are not randomly assigned to good andLd 
parents, yet we think we know something about what makes for effective parenting Random- 
ized dmg trials work very well if one has ftill control over what participants are getting The 
intervenuons we want to evaluate are much more complicated. How did we get into Ais mt 
where we have to have an experiment using a scientific technique to assign causality? Why is it 
that we need an experimental design to understand how an intervention works, but we can 
understand parenting with quasi-experimental studies? 



Comment: VVe had a rigorous set of debates about that issue among the Neurons to Neighbor- 
hoo^ group^I started out strongly objecting to the so-called gold standard. 1 was part of the 
methods subgroup, and we wrote a chapter on causal inference in which we try to separate 
some of these issues, that is to be clear about what the experimental design is useful for. 




223 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Comment: And what it is not. 

Comment: It is used for causal inference. Then we devised a phase guideline for when random- 
ized trials are used. By the way, our Early Head Start design did not conform to that guideline. It 
was forced upon us and was mandated by congressional pressures. Most of us involved were 
quite skeptical as to whether we were going to get results of any kind. With mature programs, we 
should have even stronger effects, and we need to learn all we can about that. We were lucky 
because there were a whole set of guidelines about when experimental designs are used. 

You are right—it is very expensive. It is an experiment in which one is isolating things, 
eliminating a lot of complexity. So, we had a mixed model for Early Head Start because we kept 
much of the complexity and still used the randomized design. 

Comment: The issue of meaning comes up. However, if one can show that participation in the 
program explains as much variance as the other aspects of the children's environment that is 
much more powerful. 

Phillips: There is a misunderstanding and fear of randomized trials, and people are worried that 
perhaps their programs do not work. However, I remember saying, "Let them do it. Let them do 
the randomized experiment on Head Start." I believe these programs work. There is a political 
piece to it as well, because this is what decision makers will pay attention to. Why do we have 
performance standards on Head Start? If one mentions regulation of child care on Capitol Hill, 
one gets laughed out of the room. We do have good studies in child care regulation that are high 
quality in terms of methods. Is it what they will believe? That is not an inconsequential matter 
when one is trying to make sure we are providing the right kinds of interventions for young 
children and sustaining them over time. 

Sherrod: That gets to another question. What will they believe? The pendulum swings back and 
forth between viewing early development as a first step versus early development as determining 
one's future life course. Up until the 1970s, we had a much more deterministic view. Then the 
life span/life course orientation came in that talked about plasticity and change throughout all 
adulthood as well as adolescence. Then it swung back, and now with the new research on brain 
development, it has swung back a little bit more toward early development being all-determin- 
ing. The answer to that is that one has to pay attention to specific domains. For example, I am 
increasingly interested in children's development in citizenship. One would not expect the first 
3 or 5 years to be especially important in that domain althou^ early prosocial development 
could be relevant to that. 

Question: What domains of development are most important to look at in early development? 

Comment: The whole area of conduct and early morale development has been neglected in our 
theories. Recently, we have learned that there is much that goes on that we have overlooked. 

Comment: In a structured, regular environment, children learn to internalize rules and expecta- 
tions. If they become violated, even in 0 to 3, they become distressed and want to set things 
right, so they internalize standards. 

Emde: Empathy develops in toddlerhood, and there is variation according to experience in that 
area as well. At 3 or 4 months of age, children are turn taking in terms of very complex inter- 
changes of focalization and games behavior. Turn taking is a major feature of moral standards. 





CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



Comment: We need much more of that kind of thinking, which is that one looks at the abilities 
or competency that one wants older children or adults to have and questions what could be the 
early developmental precursors. Everything mentioned there is relevant to the micro interest in 
citizenship. 

Comment: Intergroup attitudes is another area. Years ago, there was a study in which children 
were given dolls. One set of dolls had suspenders and the others did not. The point was the 
children put the dolls who looked alike together and the ones who looked different, they put in 
separate groups indicating this early tendency to categorize the world based on appearance, 
which has its upside and its downside. 

Comment: Those of us who are in class see that every day. 

Comment: The issue becomes, for both research on early development and for programs like 
Head Start, how does one take that tendency and turn it into something that grows in a healthy 
direction rather than an unhealthy direction? 

Comment: Jerald had a key insight, and it was an important modification to what 1 said about 
quality of care and what the ingredients are. Some of my colleagues and 1 on the NICHD study 
of early child care are beginning to ponder whether our assessments of quality child care are 
capturing the facets of caregiving that foster exactly these capacities. In a way, we think we are 
doing a rather inadequate job. 

Comment: However, they have not been designed with those outcomes in mind. 

Sherrod: Those issues, to some extent, get to our national values because those speak into 
occupations' career success. One of the reasons 1 have become interested in citizenship is 
because that is something as a nation one can create some concern about. One wants people to 
vote. One wants them to participate in our democracy, so that then provides justification for 
becoming interested in things such as prosocial development and cognition. 




231 



225 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Innovations in the Study of Self-Regulation: 

New Methods, Ecologically Valid Contexts, 
and Diverse Populations 

CHAIR: Lisa A. McCabe 
DISCUSSANT: JoAnn L. Robinson 

PRESENTERS: Lisa A. McCabe, Laura D. Pittman, Christine P. Li-Grining 

llie study of self-regulatory abilities has a long tradition in the field of developmental psychol- 
ogy. Researchers have found that challenges in early self-regulation predict externalizing symp- 
toms in middle childhood (Bates, Pettit, Dodge, & Ridge, 1998), adolescence (Hart, Hofmann, 
Edelstein, & Keller, 1997), and young adulthood (Newman, Caspi, Moffitt, & Silva, 1997). Self- 
regulatory capacities have also been implicated in the development of a variety of constructs, 
including conscience, aggression, academic achievement, and substance abuse (Kochanska, 
Murray, Jacques, Koenig, & Vandegeest, 1996; Block, Block, & Keyes, 1988; Shoda, Mischel, & 
Peake, 1990). 

While theoretical and analytical approaches to the study of self-regulation have evolved in 
sophistication and breadth, the methodologies used to assess self-regulatory capacities have 
remained relatively consistent. Typically, children are brought into a university lab where they 
perform a task that requires the inhibition of a dominant response, delaying their waiting time 
for an M&M candy or sorting a deck of cards, for example. Historically, most of these studies 
have been conducted with middle -class White children (Mischel & Patterson, 1979; Shoda, 
Mischel, & Peake, 1990). 

Recently, however, several studies have begun to examine self-regulation among more diverse 
groups of children (both in terms of socioeconomic status and race/ethnicity) in more ecologi- 
cally valid settings, such as homes and classrooms. Two of these studies are presented here. The 
first presents data from the Welfare, Children and Families; A Three-City Study. Working with a 
sample of poor, primarily African American and Latino children, these researchers determined 
that traditional laboratory assessments could be validly used in home settings. In addition, 
results suggest that self-regulatory abilities tend to be associated with child characteristics and 
ecological contexts. 

The second paper presents data from the Games As Measurement for Early Self-Control 
(GAMES) study, a project which also focuses on adapting and developing self-regulation 
assessments for a diverse sample of 3- to 5-year-old children. In this project, not only were 
children assessed individually, but they also participated in measures adapted for use with 
groups of familiar peers. Thus, this project represents one of the first attempts to examine 
children's self-regulatory capacities in the presence of peers (a context that better matches 
children's typical experience in early childhood programs, such as Head Start). Results from this 
project indicate that laboratory self-regulation tasks can also be successfully implemented in the 
more ecologically valid setting of the classroom. Further, these assessments can be adapted for 
use with small groups of preschoolers in order to explore how group influences may affect self- 
regulatory behaviors. 

Each of these papers presents information critical to the early childhood field. Not only 
might the work presented be of interest to researchers exploring the development of children's 
self-regulation, but it could also potentially benefit practitioners in the field of early childhood 
education. Simple and valid assessments of children's self-regulatory capacities could be used as 
assessment or screening tools in order to identify children in need of special services, as well as 
to track normative development over time. 





226 



CHILD development 



References 

mntrnl f • ^ ' of temperamental resistance to 

3J(“ "sTw"''"® '" of “■'"’allying behavior. Develep«l 

“■' y Longitudinally foretelling dmg usage in adolescence: Early 

childhood personality and environmental precursors. Child Development, 59, 336-355 

To “''Ta"' T' * “■ < ff'o '0'““°" of childhood personality types 

development: A longitudinal study of Icelandic children. Deve%m™ntl 

KoAanska, G, Murray, K. T, lacques, T. Y., Koenig A. L, S Vendegeest, K. ( 1996). Inhibitoiy control 
^d• children and its role m emerging internalization. Child Development, 67, 490-507 

Missel, W.r & Patterson, C. J. ( 1 979). Effective plans for self-control in children. In A. Collins fEd ) 

Minnesota Symposium on Child Psychology (Vol 12 ) Hillsdale, Nf: Erlbaum. . ^ ' 

Newman, D.L., Caspi, A Moffitt, T. E., & Silva, RA. (1997). Antecedents of adult interpersonal 
Js"?) 206?2ir'^* ^8^ 3 temperament. Developmental Psychology, 

Shoda, Y., Mischel W., & Peake, P. K. (1990). Predicting adolescent cognitive and self-regulatory 



■ Self-Regulation Tasks for Preschool Children: Addressing Issues 
to Valid Assessment in Less "Regulated" Environments 

Lisa A. McCabe, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn 



Extensive research has shown the importance of self-regulatory capacities for future social and 
cognitive development (Eisenberg et. al., 2000; Mischel, Shoda, & Peake, 1988). It is important 
o note, however, that most of our knowledge comes from studies using individual assessments 
in laboratory or dinical settings. Yet, the environment and presence of others can have signifi- 
cant effects on individual performance (Bond & Titus, 1983; Bronfenbrenner, 1986) In this 
study, therefore, we examine the feasibility of administering laboratory, clinical, and newly 
dewloped self-regulation measures in group and individual contexts in diverse settings. 

n from the Games as Measurement for Early Self -Control (GAMES) study. A 

total of 116 3- to 5->jar-old (M = 51 months) children (47% boys), primarily from low-income 

aft ^ of one-on-one assessments in homes or classrooms. A subset 

(n - 44) also participated in group classroom assessments. English- and Spanish-speaking 

ZZT?'" ""T "" ' ethnic backgrounds. This paper focuL on four 

tasks that are administered both individually and in a group; Gift Wrap and Snack Delay (two 
rneasures of delay of gratification adapted from Kochanska, Murray, Jacques, Koenig & 
Vendegeest, 1996), Walk-a-Line (an assessment of motor control adapted from Maccoby 

Dowley, Hagen, & Degerman, 1965), and Head and Feet (a newly developed measure of 
cognitive control). ^ 

piloted measures worked well in homes and classrooms in terms of portability, 
p a 1 ity, and ease of administration. Preliminary analyses of the new Head and Feet task 
however, raised^some questions about its validity as a measure of cognitive control A significant 
percen«ge of d. Idren 44% and 64% in individual and group asseasmenK reapmWy dM not 
pass practice Urals. Either this game is too difficult for young children, or cognitive conuol is a 
sophisticated skill that may not be frilly developed in young preschoolers. In ftjture work we 
plan to investigate this issue in more detail. 

Findings also revealed that, across measures, more children were able to demonstrate 




227 

233 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



regulatory behavior in one-on-one situations than in a group. This was especially true for older, 

4- and 5-year-old, preschoolers. In general, 3-year-olds seemed to have difficulty regulating, 
regardless of context. 

Preliminary findings of peer influence on self-regulation did not reveal any clear patterns. 
Self-regulation was not related to whether or not children initiated their own, or imitated their 
peer's self-regulation strategies (i.e., behaviors such as distraction, to help delay gratification). 
Similarly, those who followed rule-breaking behaviors (i.e., they imitated their friends who did 
not delay gratification) were not more or less likely to violate rules when assessed on their own. 
Finally, no significant relationship was found between giving rule reminders (e.g., peers remind- 
ing each other to follow the rules of the game) and regulatory behaviors. Future development of 
peer influence codes and studies involving larger samples will further tease apart the complex 
nature of self-regulatory behaviors in a group context. 

References 

Bond, C. F., Ir. & Titus, L. I. (1983). Social facilitation; A meta-analysis of 241 studies. Psychological 
Bulletin, 94, 264-292. 

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1986). Ecology of the family as a context for human development: Research 
perspectives. Developmental Psychology, 22, 723-742. 

Eisenberg, N., Guthrie, I. K., Fabes, R. A., Shepard, S., Losoya, S., Murphy, B. C., lones, S., et al. (2000). 
Prediction of elementary school children's externalizing problem behaviors from attentional and 
behavioral regulation and negative emotionality. Child Development, 71(5), 1367-1382. 

Kochanska, G., Murray, K. T, lacques, T. Y., Koenig, A. L., & Vendegeest, K. (1996). Inhibitory control 
in young children and its role in emerging internalization. Child Development, 67, 490-507. 
Maccoby, E. E., Dowley, E. M., Hagen, I. W., & Degerman, R. (1965). Activity level and intellectual 
functioning in normal preschool children. Child Development, 36, 761-770. 

Mischel, W., Shoda, Y, & Peake, P. (1988). The nature of adolescent competencies predicted by 
preschool delay of gratification. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 687-696. 



■ Self-Regulation of Economically Disadvantaged Children:, 

The Challenges and Triumphs of Measurement in the Home 

Laura D. Pittman, Christine P. Li-Grining, P. Lindsay Chase-Lansdale 

Self- regulation in young children has been identified as an important element in the develop- 
ment of socialization skills, school-readiness, and positive behavioral outcomes (Kochanska, 
Murray, Jacques, Koenig, & Vandegeest, 1996; Kochanska, Murray, & Harlan, 2000; National 
Research Council and Institute of Medicine, 2000). However, much of the research on children's 
self-regulation has been focused on a white, middle-class population, with data collected in the 
laboratory setting. This paper reports on a study in which laboratory self-regulation tasks were 
adapted for use in the home, with low-income, primarily African American and Latino children. 
Methodological issues related to in-home instrument administration, and associations found 
between self-regulation and contextual factors are discussed. 

Data were collected as part of the Welfare, Children and Families: A Three-City Study. In this 
study, a random sample of 2402 poor and near-poor families living in low-income, urban 
neighborhoods participated. An in-home, two-hour interview was administered to collect 
information about families' backgrounds and economic conditions, as well as perceptions of 
home environment, parenting, and children's characteristics. All families in this larger 
sample who had a child 2 to 4 years old were asked to participate in the Embedded Develop- 
mental Study (EDS), which included a second interview and videotaped administration of 3 





228 



CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



self-regulation assessment tasks (Snack Delay, Whisper, and Gift Wrap; Kochanska, Murray, 
Jacques, Koenig, & Vandegeest, 1996; N = 562). 

Seven trained coders scored children's behaviors on the self-regulation tasks. Preliminary 
analysis found that children had not responded to the Whisper Task in expected ways, but that 
scores on the other two tasks were promising. Approximately 25% of the videotapes were 
double-coded, with an average kappa of 0.69 and 0.62 for the behavior codes of Snack Delay 
and Gift Wrap, respectively. The average intra-class correlation coefficient on latency scores 
ranged between 0.80 and 0.99 for these two tasks. Given the anticipated problems with home 
administrations, coders systematically noted when things within the home environment might 
have interfered with children's performances (e.g., coaching by a sibling). A comparison be- 
tween cases, both with and without such administration issues, determined that the measure- 
ment of children was not unduly influenced by in-home test administration. Associations 
between our measures of self-regulation and children's characteristics also provided support for 
the validity of our measurement. Children who were more self-regulated tended to be older, 
female, and more persistent. In addition, self-regulation seemed to be specific in its association 
with temperament and had a significant correlation with impulsivity, but not emotionality or 
sociability. 

Further analyses were done to explore whether the ecological contexts of these low-income 
children would influence self-regulation. Neither economic status of the family, nor race of child 
was associated with self-regulation. After controlling for children's age and gender, some small 
but significant associations were found between children's self-regulation and mothers' observed 
and reported parenting practices, as well as the level of cognitive stimulation in the home. 
Overall, this study supports the extension of the study of self-regulation to more diverse'popula- 
tions through the use of in-home assessments. 

References 

Kochanska, G., Murray, K. T, & Harlan, E. T. (2000). Effortful control in early childhood: Continuity 
and change, antecedents, and implications for social development. Developmental Psychology, 36, 
220-232. 

Kochanska, G., Murray, K., Jacques, T. Y., Koenig, A. L., & Vandegeest, K. (1996). Inhibitory control in 
young children and its role in emerging internalization. Child Development, 67, 490-507. 

National Research Council and Institute of Medicine (2000). From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The 
Science of Early Childhood Development. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 




235 



229 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



Bringing the Study of Emotion to the Head Start 
Classroom: Methodological Approaches, 

Clinical Applications, and Research Partnerships 

CHAIR: Ronald Seifer 

DISCUSSANT: Alice S. Carter 

PRESENTERS: Kathleen Kiely Gouley, Alison L. Miller 

Social and emotional competence is critical for child development. Emotions function to 
regulate social behavior within different relationships and across different social settings. 
Therefore, it is vital to understand children's emotional development in thexontext of important 
social relationships (e.g., parents, teachers, peers). In addition, it is important to understand 
how emotional competence (c.g., regulating emotions, understanding emotions in self and 
others) helps children successfully negotiate salient developmental tasks during the preschool 
period (e.g., transition to school). The study of emotional competence among children living in 
poverty is particularly essential because the multiple environmental risks these children face 
pose a challenge to healthy emotional functioning. 

This symposium highlights a collaboration between university-based researchers and Head 
Start, and is designed to integrate clinical consultation, program evaluation, and research. This 
work is guided by a systems-focused, culturally sensitive, developmental psychopathology model 
of child development and adaptive functioning, with a particular focus on emotional develop- 
ment and mental health. Research efforts both inform and are informed by clinical consultation 
and program evaluation, creating a system that links basic behavioral research, applied research, 
and service delivery. 

Given our interest in emotion regulation and emotional competence in high-risk children, 
this symposium presents the results of two studies that use different methodological approaches 
and multiple informants to study Head Start children's emotional competence. The first presen- 
tation describes results from four years of an ongoing study of children s emotional competence, 
focusing on interview-derived measures of social-cognitive ability, teacher ratings of emotion 
regulation, and child adjustment. The student-teacher relationship is highlighted as serving an 
essential regulatory function for children and as a target of intervention. Offering a different 
perspective on children's emotional competence, the second presentation reports findings from 
a study using unique observational methodology to examine emotional competence in the 
context of peer interaction and to measure affective displays and social engagement. Specifically, 
data are presented on the real-time coding of children's observed behavior with peers in the 
preschool classroom. Results are discussed with regard to measuring emotional and social 
competence in an ecologically valid, innovative manner within the Head Start context. 

Common themes include: (a) developmental psychopathology theoretical orientation, 

(b) focus on methodology, (c) assessment of the different contexts and relationships in which 
children develop, specifically with peers and teachers, and (d) collaborative partnerships with 
Head Start families and staff that are necessary for conducting research. Presenters will discuss 
results in light of their relevance for clinical consultation and program evaluation within Head 
Start. Results suggest that the teacher-child relationship may be an important focus of clinical 
consultation and that the emotional quality of peer interaction may be a target for intervention 
and a marker of competence in program evaluation. Furthermore, discussion will include the 
relevance of this work for policy. For example, literacy and school readiness are important goals 
for Head Start that may be enhanced by understanding the social and emotional precursors to 
academic achievement among low-income children. 




o o ^ 



230 



CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



■ Emotional Development of Preschoolers at Risk: Social-Cognitive 
Abilities, Student-Teacher Relationships, and Classroom Adjustment 

Kathleen K. Gouley, Ann Shields, Alison L. Miller, Carolyn Brennan, Susan Dickstein, 
Ronald Seifer, Karin Dodge-Magee 

Preschool is an important time for emotional development. During this period, children are 
increasingly able to identify emotions, read emotional cues, and identify situational causes and 
consequences of emotions. These skills foster children's ability to regulate emotions and 
behavior and are critical during the transition to school (Saarni, 1999). Children who fail to 
demonstrate emotionally competent behavior are at risk for negative outcomes including 
disruptive behaviors, impaired social functioning, and poor school adjustment. The study of 
emotions may help to explain the difficulties impoverished children have functioning adaptively 
in academic settings (McLoyd, 1998). 

This project is an extension of the work of Shields et al. (2001). Participants were 159 Head 
Start children. Our goals were to describe how emotional competence is related to school 
adjustment in children at risk and to examine the influence of the teacher relationship on child 
emotional competence. 

Emotional competence was measured by using interview-derived emotion understanding 
(recognition, affective perspective taking, social reasoning; Denham, 1986; Garner, Jones, & 
Miner, 1994) and teacher-rated regulation, lability, and dysregulation techniques from the 
Emotion Regulation Checklist (ERG; Shields & Cicchetti, 1997). Teachers also completed the 
Student-Teacher Relationship Scale (STRS; Pianta, 1988) and School Adjustment Questionnaire 
(Shields et al., 2001). 

Age and verbal abilities were positively correlated with teacher-rated regulation, all emotion 
understanding skills, and school adjustment. Age was negatively correlated with teacher-rated 
lability. One sex difference was observed: Boys were rated higher on teacher-rated dysregulation. 
After controlling for age and verbal abilities, school adjustment was significantly related to 
teacher ratings of emotion regulation, lability, and dysregulation, and to interview-derived 
affective perspective taking and social reasoning. Children rated by teachers as "more well 
regulated," "less labile," or "dysregulated" were rated as well adjusted to the classroom. Those 
who were more competent at understanding the emotions of others and the situational determi- 
nants of emotions were more likely to show adaptive behaviors at school. After controlling for 
age and verbal abilities, children rated as sharing a close relationship with their teacher were 
more likely to be rated as well regulated, less labile, and less dysregulated. There were strong 
associations between conflict in the relationship and a higher likelihood of the child being rated 
as less regulated, more labile, and more dysregulated. Also, dependence was correlated with 
higher ratings of lability. Lastly, closeness in the student-teacher relationship was positively 
correlated with interview-derived social reasoning skills. 

Studying the emotional development of at-risk preschoolers is an important endeavor. 
Emotional competencies are important skills for children at this age as Aey enable an adaptive 
transition to the preschool setting and signal adaptive self-regulation, a critical factor for success 
in several domains. As a factor related to classroom adjustment, the acquisition of social- 
cognitive skills (e.g., affective perspective taking and social reasoning) may be a potential goal of 
preventive interventions. Associations between aspects of the student-teacher relationship and 
emotional competence suggest other potential points of intervention to enhance the emotional 
development of impoverished children. 

References ^ 

Denham, S. A. (1986). Social cognition, prosocial behavior, and emotion in preschoolers: Contextual 

validation. Child Development, 57, 194-201. 




237 



231 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Gamer, P. W., Jones, D. C., & Miner, J. L (1994). Social competence among low-income preschoolers: 
Emotion socialization practices and social cognitive correlates. Child Development, 65, 622-637. 

McLoyd, V. C. (1998). Socioeconomic disadvantage and child development. American Psychologist, 
53(2), 185-204. 

Pianta, R. C. (1988). The Student-Teacher Relationship Scale. Charlottesville, VA: Curry School of 
Education, University of Virginia. 

Saami, C. (1999). The development of emotional competence. New York: The Guilford Press. 

Shields, A., & Cicchetti, D. (1997). Emotion regulation among school-age children: The development 
and validation of a new criterion Q-sort scale. Developmental Psychology, 33(6), 906-916. 

Shields, A., Dickstein, S., Seifer, R., Giusti, L, Dodge Magee, K., & Spritz, B. (2001). Emotional 
competence and early school adjustments: A study of preschoolers at risk. Early Education and 
Development, 12(1), 73-96. 



■ Children's Emotional and Social Competence in 
Head Start Classrooms: Observational Methods 

Alison L. Miller, Kathleen K. Gouley, Ann Shields, Ronald Seifer, Susan Dickstein, 

Christina Fox, Heather Radke 

Emotional and social competence with peers is crucial for early school adjustment (Denham, 
1998). Although low-income children are at risk for early school difficulties, we lack rich 
descriptive information about their emotional and social competence in school settings. 
Classroom rules typically require that preschool children control emotions in order to engage in 
productive peer social interactions and academic activities. Naturalistic observations were used 
to assess the ways in which emotional and social competence in the classroom relates to child 
outcomes important for early school adjustment. 

The project's goals were: (a) determine the feasibility of using handheld technology to 
conduct classroom observations at Head Start, (b) describe emotional and social competence in 
classroom settings, and (c) examine associations among observed behavior, emotion under- 
standing, and teacher- rated social and emotional competence. Participants were 31 Head Start 
children (42% Caucasian, 19% African American, 19% Latino, 19% mixed race/ethnicity). 
Children were observed in their classrooms for 30 minutes (3 different days). Two time-based 
behavior states (emotion expression/regulation, social engagement) and three events (aggres- 
sion, mild antagonism, pro-sociality) were coded live, using handheld computers (intraclass 
correlations > 0.80 for each code; data reduction yielded mean proportion scores). 

Child emotion understanding (recognition, situation knowledge, perspective taking) was 
assessed via interview (Denham, 1986; Garner et al., 1994). Teachers completed questionnaires 
about emotion regulation (Shields & Cicchetti, 1997), social skills (Gresham & Elliott, 1990), 
and behavior problems (Behar & Stringfield, 1974). We successfully used handheld computers 
to document child behavior in real time, avoiding the intrusion of videotaping class activities. 
This efficient, unobtrusive means of collecting data allowed assessment of dynamic behavioral 
processes not possible through other live observation methods (e.g., interval behavior sampling). 

Children displayed mostly neutral (89% of the time) or positive (8%) affect, spending an 
average of only 3% of each 10-minute period displaying negative affect or hyperactive 
dysregulation. They spent time predominantly involved with solitary constructive (31%), social 
attentive (29%), or interactive (28%) play, and little time engaged in conflict, collaboration, or 
nonplay. Although rare, negative affect was associated with more conflict and aggression; 
hyperactive dysregulation with more mild antagonism, nonplay and interactive play, and less- 
solitary constructive play. 



CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



The project noted certain associations aaoss observed behaviors, emotion understanding, 
and competence, as rated by teachers. Emotion recognition skills were associated with less 
conflict, and situation knowledge with less social attention and more interactive play. Mean- 
while, teacher-rated emotion regulation skills were negatively related to conflict and negative 
affect; social skills ratings (assertion, self-control) were related to more collaborative play and 
less negative affect; and problem behavior ratings (anxiety, h)T 5 eractivity) were related to more 
conflict and interactive play. 

Our unique methodological approach allowed observation of low-income preschoolers' 
emotional and social behaviors in an ecologically valid setting. Using multiple methods and 
informants revealed how different aspects of emotional and social competence were interre- 
lated. For example, although children spent little time in negative emotional states or conflict, 
these behaviors were related to emotion understanding and teacher-rated competence, under- 
scoring their salience in the classroom setting. Reviewing such findings with Head Start teachers 
may encourage them to use common emotion-laden classroom interactions as didactic opportu- 
nities for enhancing children's social and emotional competence. 

References 

Behar, L, & Stringfield, S. (1974). A behavior rating scale for the preschool child. Developmental 
Psychology, 10, 601-610. 

Denham, S. A. (1986). Social cognition, prosocial behavior, and emotion in preschoolers: Contextual 
validation. Child Development, 57, 194-201. 

Denham, S. A. (1998). Emotional development in young children. New York: Guilford Press. 

Gamer, P. W., Jones, D. C., & Miner, J. L. (1994). Social competence among low-income preschoolers: 
Emotion socialization practices and social cognitive correlates. Child Development, 65, 622-637. 
Gresham, F. M., & Elliott, S. N. (1990). Social skills rating system manual. Circle Pines, MN: American 
Guidance Services. 

Shields, A., & Cicchetti, D. (1997). Emotion regulation among school-age children: The development 
and validation of a new criterion Q-sort scale. Developmental Psychology, 33(6), 906-916. 




239 



233 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



The Beginnings of Prosocial Behavior 

CHAIR: Lonnie Sherrod 
DISCUSSANT: Veronica Klujsza 

PRESENTERS: Susanne Denham, Carroll Izard, C. Cybele Raver 

■ Emotion Knowledge and Prosocial Behavior 

Caroll Izard 

■ Dealing With Feelings: Road to Social Success for Preschoolers 

Susanne Denham 

■ Emotions Matter: Recent Lessons Learned 
From Early Childhood Interventions 

C. Cybele Raver 

Lonnie Sherrod: This is the session titled, "The Beginnings of Prosocial Behavior." I am pleased 
to have a distinguished panel of presenters. I have been delighted throughout this meeting that 
early prosocial behavior, emotional development, and the development of emotional regulation 
has been a consistent theme. I will introduce all four speakers in the order of their presentations. 

Susanne Denham is a professor of psychology at George Mason University. She received her 
Ph.D. from the University of Maryland at Baltimore after working as a school psychologist for 11 
years. Her programmatic research is on social/emotional development particularly in young 
children with funding from the William T. Grant Foundation. She is following a longitudinal 
sample that she has had contact with since age 3 and examining their emohonal competence, its 
socialization, and its contribution to social competence. She also has funding from the John 
Templeton Foundation on a little studied aspect of children's development, forgiveness. 

The second presenter is Carroll Izard, who is trustees professor in the department of psychol- 
ogy at the University of Delaware. He studies emotions, emotional development, and the 
translation of emotional theory in research into preventive interventions. Currently, he is 
focusing on the development of emotional knowledge and emotional regulation in Head Start 
children. He is also interested in ways of utilizing emotions to enhance individual and social 
functioning and prevent mental health problems. 

Next we have Cybele Raver, who is associate professor at the Harris School of Public Policy at 
the University of Chicago and she is Director of the University Center for Human Potential and 
Public Policy. She is also a William T. Grant Scholar, an honor given to distinguished junior 
investigators. 

The discussant is Veronica Klujsza, who is a Head Start director in Brooklyn, New York. There 
are 210 children at her center. They have a partnership with the public school, connecting with 
universal pre-kindergarten, and they also work with a program on relationships for growth as a 
mental health initiative. Veronica will bring her hands-on experience with children in Head Start 
to address the research presentations. 

Susanne Denham: Our project at George Mason examines the emotional competence of 
preschoolers. We define emotional competence as a child's substantial ability to express their 
emotions, to understand their emotions, and how they regulate their emotions. 

I believe thalt emotions are central to children's growth and development especially in the 
first 5 years, regarding how children will develop social competence. During preschool emotions 
are ubiquitous. They are being expressed often and what children learn, both about themselves 




234 



CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



and about other people, vis-a-vis emotions, is important. When an individual exhibits an 
emotion there is much information. 

Emotions can grease the cogs of social interactions or sometimes stop up the cogs. A focus on 
emotion is crucial because another aspect of emotional competence is the understanding of 
emotion and that is a hallmark of the usefulness of emotional competence to social compe- 
tence. Being able to understand one^s own and other^s emotions as they are displayed helps one 
to be effective in social interaaion. And last, but not least, being able to regulate those emotions 
that you experience and then express is important. 

These are the aspects of emotional competence that will be discussed today. What about 
emotional expressiveness? By preschool age children are capable of expressing and experiencing 
the basic emotions such as happiness, sadness, anger, fear, and interest. The child has been in 
more complex social interactions that result in complicated emotions. At the same time, during 
the preschool period there is evidence of an outward expression of some of the more social 
emotions, such as guilt or shame. Stability of emotional styles also starts to coalesce more during 
the preschool period. Children start to be capable of voluntary management of their expression of 
emotions. These are complex developments of expressiveness. 

In early studies of emotion, researchers asked children of this age to tell stories and describe 
how they felt. There is nothing wrong with that but anybody who has worked with a 
preschooler knows they are not always going to be capable of telling you verbally. I decided that 
the study of children s emotions should be more contexualized. There should be more fiin and 
cues to help children show us what they understand. 

When I was school psychologist with the Zero to Five Program, I developed a puppet measure 
and there has been success with it. We have the children tell us (in our one verbal piece of it) the 
four different phases of basic emotions— happy, sad, angry, and scared. Then, we talk to them 
about certain situations of emotion where everyone would feel the same way. We have a puppet 
enacting the emotions so we show behavioral, facial, and some vocal cues of emotions; we 
contextualize emotions in a situation. Then we ask the children if they know what is occurring 
emotionally. 

We found that they are good at telling us about emotions. We have children as young as 
2 V 2 years who are capable of answering a fair number of questions correctly. We have another 
puppet measure where we talk more about causes of emotions. On this measure we ask the 
children to talk to older children. If you stop and listen to the naturalistic conversations of the 
younger children, you will often hear them using language about the causes of emotion. With 
our puppet measure, we try to have the children identify with the puppet. The puppet is either 
themselves or their best friend. They say amazing things to us like "Well, that puppet is happy 
because it has a really messy toy room and the sister puppet loves it, too. But the mommie 
puppet is very unhappy about it." They begin to understand and talk about some of the situ- 
ational causes of emotion. 

They also begin to acquire some more sophisticated emotion knowledge. I observe many 
children thinking about emotional situations where people could easily feel different, because it 
is a part of the puppet measure. Most children say, "I got ice cream and that made me happy." 

But not everybody would say a big dog came running up to me today and I was happy. Some 
children would say it really scared them. We find out from parents how their child would react 
in a number of situations. Then we have the puppets act out the scenarios but act the opposite 
way. You can almost see the little gears in the mind going. 

One of my favorite items is to ask the favorite food of the child and the least favorite food of 
another child. We have the puppet loving the mother puppet for having oatmeal for breakfast. 
The other child cannot believe it. This is impossible. This could never happen. The child thinks 
it is impossible but gingerly picks up the happy face and puts it on the puppet. Then the child 
starts wagging his finger and begins to lecture the puppet about demerits of oatmeal. 





.1 



235 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/ CONVERSATION HOURS 



Some issues of emotion and understanding are more difficult for preschoolers, especially 
understanding that two feelings can occur at the same time. 

In terms of emotion regulation, part of the problem is defining it. It is both a process and a 
product. Therefore it is necessary to figure out how to define it and how to measure it. The 
process of having a strong, or not strong enough, emotion depends on one's goals. The process 
of figuring out how to either dampen it or boost it is important. How long does it take to get 
over a strong emotion? Do you go right up to 100% angry and then it takes a long time to taper 
off? Those are important issues but in our research we have been more likely to discuss some 
emotion regulation outcomes since we are interested in outcomes of social competence. Are 
there ways in which children who are placed in emotionally difficult situations react, either 
regulated or disregulated? 

The socialization of emotion and independent emotion regulation is important. At first, 
much adult support is needed to show both of these aspects of emotional regulation. Children 
increasingly use some independent emotion regulation strategies during the preschool period 
and they realize, when they try them, whether or not they work. Some of them use self-distrac- 
tion by approaching or retreating from a situation and others use symbolic play to work through 
the situation. 

Social competence is another construct that needs fairly clear definitions and 1 would take 
from a review article by Linda Rose-Krasnor. The construct is "Are we effective in social interac- 
tion?" If you use that construct definition you have to think that it might depend on whose 
goals we are talking about. My goal as a little child trying to get into a play situation might be 
different from the other child's goal. It might be my assessment of whether 1 am successful by 
knocking somebody down. It might be quite different from the person who gets knocked down. 
It might be different from the teacher's. When we look at social competence it should be from 
people's points of view. At a more micro-analytic level there are specific skills, such as coopera- 
tion and being able to resolve conflicts, that are important. 

All aspects at the bottom of the slide of emotional competence should be related to social 
competence. We continue to know more about the importance of social competence for well- 
being at the time and also for well-being in mental health in the future. We know children who 
are having difficulties with peers in preschool and moving into grade school are at higher risk 
for psychopathology later in life. In addition, we can now say that social competence is also 
related to school readiness. 

We studied the relationship between social competence and school readiness in a longitudi- 
nal study of 143 children. We started working with them when they were 3 years old and we 
followed them into kindergarten. We examined the children's emotional competence and social 
competence. For emotional competence we observed emotions. We went into the classrooms 
with laptops and coded their emotions observationally and how they reacted to other children s 
emotions. 

We observed their emotional displays and their reactions to friends' emotional displays 
during free play throughout the year. Children participated in the puppet measure of under- 
standing emotions and we also examined emotion regulation. Another index was mothers' 
reports of their children's behavior with questionnaires. We also gathered data using a parallel 
observational style where children were confronted with peer anger. We noted when they 
responded, either in-kind with anger or with antisocial behavior. 

Peter LaFreniere and John Dumas' social competence/social behavioral evaluation has been 
receiving much attention with Head Start and NICHD. There is a sensitive-cooperative subscale, 
an anxious-withdrawn subscale, and an oppositional subscale. We used all the items that are 
emotions from their subscales in our study, although there are some other items like how often 
the child is angry. 

If we observed an angry child and the teacher said they were angry, well so what? An emotion 
is not only about social competence. We pulled out some of those items and made an aggregate 



O 

ERIC 



236 



242 



CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



that assessed how socially sensitive and cooperative they were minus how anxious and with- 
drawn and oppositional they were. Peers completed a sociometric assessment with a picture 
sociometric rating. Young children do know who they like and who they dislike. These are 
preschoolers so there are changeable ideas but I learned about 10-15 years ago that sociometric 
assessments can be done rather reliably. There is not perfect reliability but they can give you 
reason as to why they do not like another child. 

There were some reliable and significant results from chi-square analyses. We studied emo- 
tional competence including expression, knowledge, and regulation at 3-4 years of age. We were 
interested in the relations across these aspects of emotional competence. We found that children 
who had more negative emotion had more trouble regulating it and were more likely to vent it. 
Children who were less negative scored higher on our emotion knowledge measures. We 
assessed social competence at ages 3 to 4 with a teacher questionnaire and in kindergarten with 
the sociometrics. Both measures at the two ages were related. 

Even though there were different teachers and different children in each year there was some 
continuity and stability in social competence. Children who were better at regulating, who 
showed less venting, were seen by teachers and peers as more socially competent. There might 
be gender differences for boys and girls, and for children who were relatively younger or older in 
their classrooms. We examined whether regulation was more important a predictor for boys 
than girls. It was more important for boys at ages 3 to 4. 

We found that younger children may stand out more than older children because of their age; 
their teachers and friends recognize that they are more put together. They may have more time 
to practice and consolidate their emotional competence skills leading to later emotional 
competence. In terms of predicting their competence in kindergarten, we found that the children 
who understood and were emotionally positive on the puppet measure at ages 3 to 4 were rated 
as more socially competent in kindergarten. They appeared socially competent to the teachers 
and their peers. 

The children who were angrier, vented more, and had less knowledge, looked worse in 
kindergarten. The younger children who regulated well at 3-4 years looked more socially 
competent in kindergarten and the children who had a lot of anger and did not regulate their 
emotions well looked worse in kindergarten. The results supported that emotional competence 
is consistent with other people's views of these children and their social success in the classroom. 

In closing, if emotional competence is this important, what can adults do? We have to think 
about what we are expressing if children are learning so much about expressions. If we are 
prominently negative, they may develop a completely different understanding and view of their 
world emotionally than if we are predominantly positive. How do we react to their emotions? 

Do we minimize them? Are we upset and uncomfortable with them? Do we try to show them 
ways of regulating emotions either by solving the problem or by helping them feel better? Is 
being a good emotion coach part of our role as adults? 

In terms of coaching, I use that term a couple of different ways. Here I mean that we can talk 
to our children about emotions. We can talk to them about regulating emotions. We can talk 
about our emotions. All the talking seems to be important to children's emotional development. 

In regards to Head Start and this topic, we need an emotion-centered curriculum. We must 
think about understanding emotion regulation, both at school and at home. 

Carroll Izard: I will start by acknowledging the wonderful assistance of some 500 Head Start 
families and Head Start systems, teachers, and staff who incorporated this research, as well as 
graduate students and our colleagues. I will discuss modular systems, or emotion systems and 
cognitive systems as independently ftmctioning systems. I will talk about the implications of the 
systems and then talk about the nature of emotion knowledge. Another way to conceive of my 
presentation is why should children acquire emotion knowledge? What difference does it make? 





237 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Emotion knowledge provides a powerful set of tools for emotion regulation. It makes a 
difference because it is a determinant or mediator of negative or positive behavioral outcomes. If 
you do not develop emotion perception or attribution bias it leads to many negative conse- 
quences, including depression. Emotion knowledge, emotion regulation, and empathy, as far as 
social behavior goes, are pieces of a puzzle. The combination of emotion knowledge and 
emotion regulation is absolutely essential for the development of empathy, which is the gateway 
to prosocial behavior. 

If emotion knowledge does not develop properly, there is maladaptive behavior. I studied 
infants, the mother-infant relationship, and erections for a long time and I learned that emo- 
tions can operate with some independence of cognition. If you put an infant in front of the 
mother and instruct her to smile at the baby, the baby will inevitably smile in return. If you tell 
the mother to look sad or have no expression, the infont (as early as 3 months of age) will have 
an emotion/expression dialogue with the mother to try to reengage her. 

By the age of 7 months, an infant can show an important kind of emotion regulation. They 
can shut off the emergency cry for help following the acute pain of inoculation or turn on a 
more specific, more adaptive, and more limited emotion expression. They can regulate their 
emotion responses to this stress. Infants can express a certain capacity to carry on emotional 
communication with the mother and regulate their own emotions. I wondered why there is 
trouble with it in preschool and later childhood when it is so effectively expressed in infancy. 

The reason is the relative simplicity of the child-parent interaction or the infant-parent 
interaction in comparison with a great complexity of child-peer interactions and the child- 
adult interactions that occur in preschool and elementary school. It is important for us to 
understand that the emotion systems and the cognitive system have a certain degree of indepen- 
dence. In early infancy we might find some rudimentary connections between emotion s^^tems, 
perception, and cognition. As the infant grows and becomes a child, there are more emotions 
and complex emotions emerge. As a result, the business of making connections between the 
emotion systems and the cognitive systems becomes greater. That task involves, in part, acquir- 
ing emotion knowledge. 

The infant starts in the world with some sort of preadapted emotion system that can do 
wonderful things in the fairly simple environment of infant-parent or infant-family interaction. 
They acquire more systems when they enter the complex world of 15 or 17 peers and a number 
of teachers. But what is implied by the fact that the infant comes into the world with modular 
systems that can operate independently is that forming connections between these systems 
becomes extremely important. Feeling-thought connections are the source of emotion knowledge. 

They do not grow automatically. They require some nurturance and some social interaction, 
and the different range of emotions facilitate specific developmental tasks differentially. Emo- 
tions serve certain purposes during the toddler years and serve another purpose in later develop- 
fQefit There may be critical periods for connecting certain emotions and appropriate thoughts. 

At the age of 9 years, children still have not reached a plateau; there is still room to grow. The 
growth has been gradual but it takes a long time, that is the understanding of emotion expres- 
sions, understanding of emotion labeling from 2 to 9 years of age. It grows even more slowly 
and they still have not acquired anything close to adult levels in this by the time they are 9 years 
of age. 

For the rest of my presentation I will focus on the three facets of emotion knowledge. 

(a) emotion expression recognition, (b) emotion expression labeling, and (c) detecting and 
understanding emotion information in language and context. One of the most important things 
about this last aspect of emotion knowledge is that the infant can detect emotion cues in 
language and life vignettes. In language, the infant can predict what the protagonist will feel 
when an event occurs and that means they are learning to anticipate emotion. By seeing and 
hearing the vignette or by vicariously experiencing this event, they may anticipate an emotion, 
which happens to be an important part of the life experiences of a child. 




238 



O 



CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



What are we learning about emotion knowledge? We found that one of the least studied 
antecedents to emotion knowledge is the child's emotionality and temperament. One of the 
most important things we learned was that after we control for verbal ability and particular 
facets of temperament, emotion knowledge is still an important predictor of social skills, of 
academic competence, and of social problems. 

We measured the control variables, verbal ability, and temperament and measured the predic- 
tor in Head Start. We were measuring the outcomes in third grade. We followed these children 
from Head Start systems into 42 different public schools in order to do the follow-up research. We 
found that emotion knowledge predicts academic competence. You might wonder, as we did, how 
that happens. We conducted an analysis and the results showed that if you take out the effects of 
emotion knowledge, verbal ability does not truly predict academic competence. 

We thought this was counterintuitive so we ran a separate analysis, a path analysis, using all 
of the same variables at both time (age) intervals and there was no significant connection 
between emotion knowledge and academic competence. The process is from verbal ability 
tftrough emotion knowledge to predict academic competence. We have other evidence to 
indicate that emotion knowledge somehow is the medianism whereby children achieve, at least 
in the eyes of their teacher, academic competence. 

In this study, we examined clinically significant social withdrawal and social problems. The 
clinical significance was measured by the Child Behavior Checklist-Teacher(CBCL-T). The quick 
picture is that children who were poor in understanding emotion cues, situations, and contexts 
were the children who were socially withdrawn and had social problems. Some of them had 
clinically significant social withdrawal and social problems. In another study following these 
same children from third to fifth grade, after measuring expressible vocabulary and emotion 
knowledge in first grade, and then measuring internalizing and externalizing in third grade, we 
found that emotion knowledge was a significant predictor of self-reported internalizing behav- 
ior. The important finding is that emotion knowledge predicted social skills and social skills, in 
turn, mediated the effects of emotion knowledge on peer acceptance. 

Emotion knowledge becomes an important cog in the causal process of peer preference or 
peer rejection, which is important in the life of the child. The social skills mediated the effect of 
social knowledge on peer acceptance. Social skills provide the mechanism for a child to utilize 
emotion understanding and motivation in personal relationships. The other side of the coin is 
what happens if we do not have development of good emotion understanding and the develop- 
ment of accurate perception of emotion cues? 

One thing that can happen is the development of emotion perception bias or emotion 
attribution bias. We are not certain yet because I do not think we have the measures that are 
precise enough to distinguish between emotion perception bias and emotion attribution bias. 
The child either misperceives an emotion cue or the child sees an emotion cue and misinterprets 
it. For example, he sees a sad cue, a cue that represents sadness really does signal sadness but the 
child interprets it as anger. We would call this anger attribution bias. 

We measured anger attribution bias by counting the number of times that the child perceived 
anger signals where none existed. The child saw an anger signal or an anger cue in a neutral 
stimulus or in a nrotonmircji ^xprescicn cf :cmc cmuLiuii. In one study m wnicn we 
measured emotion attribution bias, we found that for boys, high attribution bias was greatly 
correlated with high aggression and aggressiveness. We did not find that in girls but it may be 
because we did not have a measure of relational aggression and the aggression we were measur- 
ing was more physical aggression. 

In a somewhat similar study, we showed that children who are likely to become externalizers 
or and hyperactive are children who are low in emotion knowledge, emotion percep- 

tion accuracy, and high in emotion perception bias. This study has not been replicated so there 
needs to be more research examination. In a current study with David Schultz at Johns Hopkins 
we are examining the relationship between emotionality, emotion information processing, and 
aggression. 





239 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



We asked teachers and peers to rate the frequency with which children expressed some of the 
hasic emotions such as anger and sadness. AVe found that the teacher s ratings of the frequency 
with which children expressed anger and sadness correlated rather well with the frequency rated 
by their peers. In essence we are conceiving emotion information processing in terms of the 
child's ability to empathize and in terms of anger bias. The composite teacher and peer ratings 
on emotionality accounted for 53% of the variance in aggression as measured by teachers 
ratings. 

The variance accounted for by the emotion information processing variables was a modpt 
8% but still highly significant. Even with a powerful predictor like emotionality measured in 
terms of, for example, frequency with which teachers and peers observe aggressive behavior, we 
can still account for some of the variance on the basis of a child's ability to understand, detect, 
and appropriately interpret emotion expressions of other children. 

To sum up the findings, emotion knowledge provides powerful tools for the regulation of 
emotion. The work that we have done, Denham has done, and Nancy Eisenberg and others have 
done, show that if you cannot detect the cues in the face of the other person, if you cannot 
properly regulate or modulate your own emotion, you cannot be empathic. It is the only way to 
get there. Through detection of the emotion and signals of others, and through the regulation of 
one's own emotion you can be empathic. This opens the doorway to adaptive prosocial behavior. 

Cybele Raver: Years ago, as a junior investigator in the field, 1 was struggling to make headway 
with research in children's emotion regulation and emotional climates in families. One thing 
that gave me hope was this profoundly good research that helped me make the case for both the 
excellent ways of measuring emotion, and the significance and importance of emotion in 
children's lives, largely because of the work of both of Denham and Izard. 

This paper is entitled Emotions Matter and it came from my effort to think broadly and 
convince groups of social scientists, such as economists, why we should care about emotions; 
their interest in early childhood extends usually only to children s school achievements. I 
wondered if there were data that showed clearly why we should all care about emotions. If there 
were data, were there corresponding data to suggest that emotional development is malleable, 
that we can actually foster children's emotional development through intervention, particularly 
for low-income children who may be at increased risk for having emotional difficulty? 

1 want to acknowledge the William T. Grant Foundation, the McCormick Tribune Founda- 
tion, Irving Harris, and a research fellowship from the National Center for Children in Poverty at 
Columbia where 1 did much of the research for this paper. What do we know about young 
children's school readiness? 

Kindergarten teachers are concerned about the emotional development and emotional 
adjustment of the children that enter their classrooms in the fall each year. From a recent 
national survey, 30% of kindergarten teachers reported that at least half of the children in their 
class had difficulty following directions and working as part of a group. Twenty percent reported 
that at least half the class had problems with social skills. You may think that 1 am being deeply 
alarmed and most preschool children have trouble with those skills. 

Does this suggest that teachers are more concerned with social and emotional components of 
children's readiness than they are with children's letter identification, for example? This is a 
primary concern for teachers who manage classrooms and attempt to make the space conducive 
to learning. How does emotional adjustment fit with broader educational goals? Emergent 
literacy and cognitive development are important for early success in the school context. 1 do 
not want to draw attention away from those but children's emotional and behavioral adjust- 
ment serves as a key foundation for those other domains of competence. 

1 would argue that schools are profoundly social spaces where children build relationships 
and reputations, with both their peers and teachers, that either help or hurt their chancp of 
succeeding academically. There are data that suggest the long-term importance of emotional 
adjustment for later school success. 



240 



248 



CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



Children s ability to regulate their emotions come in a package, or style of handling emotion- 
ally intense situations, that teachers view as either primarily prosocial or primarily aggressive in 
terms of how children deal with the social world. Recent research by Gary Ladd and his col- 
leagues studies kindergartners as they move into first grade. It has been convincing to many of 
us that children with more emotional competence enter the classroom better able to handle the 
social demands that the classroom poses and that they are more successful in first grade. 

The data are longitudinal from the beginning of kindergarten all the way through first grade. 
We would like to have these kinds of data for earlier years in Head Start and in preschool age. 
More poignantly aggressive children are repeatedly found to be tougher to teach. Teachers and 
peers choose to spend less time with those children. As a result, they learn less from their peers 
and it translates into these children having fewer opportunities for learning and for seeing 
school as a fun place. 

Those children who are aggressive report liking school less and missing more days of school. 
We can think of the cost of those behavioral difficulties for children but also the cost of those 
behavioral difficulties to the classroom. Teachers devote less time to teaching when they have to 
devote more time to classroom management. I am particularly concerned about teacher burn- 
out. Throughout the thread of these talks there is some emphasis on how teachers are regulating 
their emotions and how they are handling their stresses. I also recognize that many Head Start 
teachers are working long days and handling much stress. 

The long-term costs of children who exhibit predominantly aggressive and emotionally 
neptive profiles early on have been established by research. A substantial proportion of these 
children are at grave risk for lower academic achievement, greater likelihood of grade retention 
(being "held back"), greater likelihood of dropping out of school, and greater risk of delin- 
quency and of committing criminal juvenile offenses in adolescence. I am only focusing here on 
externalizing behavioral problems. I was unable to clearly locate the evidence for the costs of 
being quiet and withdrawn. 

There is evidence to support that it is costly to be aggressive, out of control, and disruptive. 
That is the reason for the focus. I am not suggesting that there should be ho focus on with- 
drawal, sadness, or other dimensions of emotional difficulty among young children. I am a big 
proponent in most of my research in looking at resilience and positive outcomes in children 
although you will notice this paper focuses quite a bit on the negative side. I want to highlight 
that we need to deliver services to the children who are in greatest need of those services without 
resorting to a deficit-oriented perspective. I want to find a way to target these children who are 
having the most behavioral difficulty in ways that do not stigmatize them and instead provide 
them with the most services possible. 

There are a number of different ways that we can address the prevalence of this issue. The first 
is a clinical definition of prevalence, where the children who would be at sucli a severe level of 
acting out or having difficulty, emotionally or behaviorally, that they would be eligible for a 
DSM IV diagnosis. The data suggest that 2% to 7% of preschoolers struggle with clinical levels of 
oppositional defiant behavior. Using a more broad-based and flexible definition of elevated 
levels of behavioral problems (the not yet diagnosable), it has been estimated that between 10% 
to 33% of Head Start preschoolers demonstrate such levels of problem behaviors. That would be 
about two to five children per classroom. 

A third definition uses a public health model of risk prevention. For example, if we think 
about heart disease, we are not concerned only with the individuals who have heart disease. We 
want to identify those factors that are risks for heart disease and inform those individuals that 
there are behavioral steps they can take to reduce their risks, so we never have to treat them for 
the problem. That model is helpful for specifically externalizing behavior problems. 

What do we know about young children who are exposed to multiple risks such as 
homelessness, violence, parental substance abuse, and depression? Specifically it is the accumu- 
lation of these risks that best predicts children's likelihood of developing long-term emotional 
behavioral problems. 



ERIC 




241 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



In fact we are really interested in those children who do not end up hitting those hard 
outcomes. We know that it increases the likelihood of having those negative outcomes if one 
faces multiple risks such as homelessness, violence, parental substance abuse, and depression. 
Specifically it is the accumulation of these risks that best predicts children s likelihood of 
developing long-term emotional behavioral problems. Who faces those risks? Between one 
quarter and one half of children in a given Head Start classroom face at least four of those risks 
using the early childhood longitudinal survey of 23,000 kindergarten-age children. The FACES 
data report that 17% of the children have been exposed to a violent event either within their 
home or outside the home in the past year. 

There are considerable amounts of cumulative risk that children face in any given morning 
before they arrive at school. With that grim story having been told, what can I say that is more 
optimistic? I will focus our attention now to the fact that children s chances for success can be 
substantially improved. I will discuss some rigorous intervention studies that suggest that 
children's behavioral problems are identifiable early, amenable to change, and can be reduced 
over time. I am learning from a policy perspective that this is necessary in order to convince 
people to leverage time and effort to affect an outcome. 

Increasing the number of children who are ready for school is possible by encouraging 
families and teachers to support children s emotional adjustment. What do those programs look 
like? I will focus on classroom-level approaches given the context of this presentation. Higher 
quality care with better teacher/child ratios have been found in longitudinal data to lead to 
more positive relationships between teachers and students and to lower levels of behavioral 
problems in classrooms and for individual children. 

Teachers may inadvertently exacerbate children s behavioral problems. By no means am I 
trying to fault teachers, but rather to say that teachers could probably use support in figuring out 
ways to avoid the cycle where both teachers and parents have been found to sometimes ignore 
children's low-level disruptive behavior. As a result, they tend to overreact to higher intensity 
levels of acting out. I am guilty of this as well. I think many of us have encountered this (as 
parents). The problem is that it ends up negatively reinforcing aggressive, adversative behavior 
because children get attention when they are explosive. 

As for universal approaches, how could we help teachers to maintain a more positive class- 
room climate? I will start with the most expensive solution first because I believe that in our 
effort to implement ideas we often opt for less expensive solutions. I want to highlight the more 
expensive solution: staffing. Staffing means improving quality and lowering teacher/ child ratios. 
Would we see a substantial reduction in behavioral problems? Not by implementing any 
particular curricula but by hiring additional adults who are competent in the room. Random 
designed evaluations of child-care quality may give us better answers to that question. 

Training should help teachers in classrooms to maintain an atmosphere conducive to 
learning. There are some data from studies that surest randomized evaluations are successful. 
Teachers should have a curriculum where children in classrooms learn about emotions and 
about positive behavior leading to more positive outcomes. Then we can consider targeted 
approaches for children who show elevated risk for behavioral problems and that would involve 
linking home and school. The recent research from Family Emotional Socialization on how 
families socialize their children about emotions suggest that families play a significant role in 
children's ability to handle their emotions. 

Most families, particularly low-income families, use optimal strategies or no-nonsense 
parenting. Jean Brodie in her work with low- income, African American two -parent families in 
the South defined no-nonsense parenting as the right combination of firmness, consistency, and 
warmth. That is the prevailing approach among most families but families that are highly 
stressed may resort to inconsistent and coercive parenting. That particular parenting style puts 
children at greater risk for developing these behavioral problems for the same reason that I 
discussed earlier, the idea of negatively reinforcing aggressive and disregulated behavior. 



ERIC 



242 



248 



CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



How do we handle that? Some interesting programs have been developed. There is one 
program by Webster-Stratton and colleagues called The Incredible Years, for Head Start families. 
This program involves groups of parents and teachers (separately) who meet in a supportive 
environment to watch videos and take a 12- to 16-week course using group dialogue to learn to 
handle problems and set firm limits. This intervention has shown remarkable reductions in 
children's beha^noral problems. 

Another option that has not been tested through randomized trials is clinical consultation 
linking mental health providers and classrooms. Earlier research found that pull-out programs 
are not so successful in Head Start with children who have emotional behavioral problems. I 
read a paper from Yoshikawa, Cauthen, and Knitzer and from anecdotal reports that teachers do 
not trust the community mental health referral system for dealing with emotional problems. 

First, they do not know whether these emotional problems are transitory or developmentally 
normative. You could be a 3-year-old who is just throwing a tantrum because you are a 3-year- 
old and that is typical. The other problem is that it is a lengthy process to have a child identified 
as having special needs. In this area there is litde faith that a pull-out program will remedy that 
problem. Parents and teachers are wary of having children placed in special education or pulled 
out because they are fearful of the stigma that is associated with that diagnosis. 

One alternative is to have on-site clinical social workers work individually with children in 
the classroom context. I heard somebody from Syracuse talking about push-in programs where 
clinicians come into classrooms and work in that sphere trying to help children function in the 
context they have to deal with all the time. Working with families, particularly those facing 
severe crises — economic crises as well as emotional crises — and training and supporting teachers 
is a way to deal with classroom-based and classroom-level behavioral difficulties. 

There are innovative things that we can say about these different approaches. We could 
combine universal and targeted approaches as many have done with older children, specifically 
thinking about interventions that target both emergent literacy and emotional behavioral 
adjustment. Are they cross-domain-influenced? Are children who are emotionally and behavior- 
ally disorganized more able to listen and learn about literacy outcomes once they address these 
issues? Are children who are having trouble with literacy and are having trouble with phonetic 
awareness starting to act out because they are bored and restless in a task that is pushing them 
past their limits? 

We can combine curricula, staff training, and mental health approaches for children facing 
varying levels of risk so that there is not an either/or way of looking at this, but, in fact, a 
both/and one, which is more expensive but likely to have a bigger impact. The Head Start 
Quality Research Centers are currendy tesdng the effectiveness of these approaches in muldple 
sites using randomized designs starting next year. We may have answers for the questions from 
their studies: What is the magnitude of impact in choosing a literacy-focused approach versus a 
mental health consultadon approach versus a curricula approach? What different approaches 
work best for different sites? 

Which type of program should we invest in? My argument is that we should make a range of 
investments. Low-cost investments to the least troubled children may be one opdon, but it may 
actually have a smaller return. It sdll may not reach the children who are in greatest need while 
larger, more comprehensive investments will likely reach more children and have a greater 
impact on the children who face the most serious emodonal hurdles. More or equally impor- 
tant, we should constandy monitor our progress in terms of what is implemented in the site and 
whether it works in the long term by evaluating our efforts. 

How would we do that? Indicators for benchmarks of success are something I am particularly 
interested in, especially in terms of assessments, broad-based and fine-grained ones of how 
children are doing on social and emodonal fronts. The most common way that I have found 
researchers examining this is by lower Child Behavior Checklist scores or lower rates of behav- 
ioral problems in the classroom context, a shift for example from higher to lower risk. Or to 



ERIC 



249 



243 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



look at the percentage of children who were in a clinical range but are now in a normal range of 
behavioral problems. 

I would be pleased to see more measures of increased social and emotional competence 
rather than the more difficult measures of emotional adjustment such as LaFreniere and Dumas' 
Social Competence and Behavior Evaluation measure. We could look directly at whether 
children exhibit greater inhibitory control and whether they have fewer conflictiial relationships 
with teachers and peers across the school year compared to a control group that did not receive 
this treatment. This crossed domain emphasis, where the children have had emotional and 
behavioral intervention, shows better learning outcomes. 

In addition, we could look at school-based outcomes at the level of classrooms. Are class- 
room climates less chaotic? Are teachers less stressed? Are there fewer children going to the 
principal's office or being sent fewer times? Are there fewer fights on playgrounds and lunch- 
rooms? Answers to these issues will provide us with an insight into school climate and class- 
room climate as a structural context that supports or hinders children's emotional development. 
Are there things that can happen at a structural level, not just at an individual or child level, so 
that we cannot always identify specific children as having problems and target only Aose 
children, but think about fo* tering environments that are productive for everybody in that 
environment? 

We often misdiagnd^tsyor misidentify children with trouble and I believe that if we were less 
targeted and more universal in our approaches, we might be able to prevent behavioral prob- 
lems among children that we would not necessarily have identified early. I know that is a little 
weird and complicated but I think you all get my point. Other things that should be addressed 
are teacher confidence in handling disruptive students, teacher stress, and teacher turnover. Can 
we make veteran teachers earlier and make them feel there is support in their contexts, their 
Head Start administrations? 

In summary, how do we identify and support emotional and behavioral development? I 
would say that we should identify and support it as a school readiness activity. We should 
specify emotional and behavioral adjustment as a goal, both in performance standards and in 
concrete terms of what is implemented each year. We should monitor fidelity of the implemen- 
tation of our programs and assure quality. I noticed that the programs that cannot show sub- 
stantial impact often report that they were not able to reach many families most of the time. We 
should make a sufficient investment in the program to give it a reasonable chance for success. In 
addition, we want to monitor both the cost and the outcomes so that we can explain to funders 
what they received in return for their investment. 

I want to give a few words of caution. I believe it is inappropriate (and I have learned this 
from Edward Zigler) to expect that short-term programs will "inoculate" children from the 
debilitating consequences and material hardships such as deep poverty, inadequate housing, 
and certain surroundings; that without economic security many families and children are hard 
pressed to be emotionally healthy, well regulated, and ready for school no matter what curricu- 
lum is implemented. Programs that target economic self-sufficiency should be coordinated with 
early educational programs in a cohesive way. For example, programs in communities that 
expect parents to work longer hours should be aware of Head Start/Head Strong mandates for 
family involvement. 

It is Head Start's effort to include parents in parent involvement pieces or in these emotiori- 
based parent curricula, to be aware of and sensitive to parents' increased work mandates that is 
influenced by the TANF office. I want to argue that those systems need to be more coordinated 
in order for parents and children to be more emotionally well-adjusted. 

Lastly, the glass is half full. There have been improvements in frmily income, in neighbor- 
hood safety, and in residential stability in terms of structural interventions. For example, there is 
a program where families were allowed to use their Section 8 vouchers only in higher income 
neighborhoods and were randomly assigned to mixed-income neighborhoods. This opportunity 



O 

ERIC 



244 



250 



CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



may have significant effects on children's emotional and behavioral well-being if there are 
researchers to measure it. We should remind those programs that emotions matter and are 
affected by residential interventions and interventions to family income. We should tell provid- 
ers in education and child care they can make a significant and lasting impact on young 
children s emotional and behavioral development as a school readiness activity. 

Veronica Klujsza: I am a Head Start director, not a researcher. What can we do in Head Start 
with all this information starting from the day when the children enter the program? You have 
to make the child and parent feel welcome in their language. You have to be aware of the child's 
behavior and the reaction of the other children to that child. It is going back to the basics; if 
children enjoy school, they will want to learn. If children like their teacher, then they will be 
motivated to learn. If you get the child turned on to school, they will be turned on to learning. 

The same concept works with the teachers. Head Start has an advantage because parent 
involvement is a mandate of the program. Home visits are made so that the child sees the 
teacher as a friend of the family. We ask the parents to volunteer in the classroom so they can 
begin to understand that children are different. 

On the other side there are many difficulties in Head Start that surpass the basics involving 
children and parents. Recently, there is the pressure of the literacy initiative. We tell parents to 
work and to volunteer at the program, when they cannot be in two places at once. Therefore we 
should not focus solely on the child. We want to work with the parents to meet their needs, 
whether it is English as a second language, or receiving a GED, or providing parents with job 
training. We cannot ignore that because if the parents are under tremendous stress, it is not 
enough to tell them to pay attention to their child or read to them. These parents have to deal 
with survival issues first. 

The director, administration, and the education director need to work with teachers to 
understand the problems as well as the basics of teaching children and working with parents. 
The research is now supporting what we know in practice. We cannot lose sight of that fact. I 
want to stress that the situation is complicated because we will not get to the child if we do not 
reach the parents. 

What can we do? We can create an atmosphere in the school where children are happy to be 
there, parents are happy to be there, and the program is supportive of teachers. If the teachers do 
not want to be there, the children will not enjoy school. The staff should feel supportive of each 
other and feel that the work they are doing is important. It sounds simple but it still needs to be 
done in Head Start and we are capable of having these qualities in the program. 

Sherrod: We now have the opportunity for questions or comments. 



Question: Dr. Izard, you spoke about a quasi-typical description regarding the attribution bias 
and anger attribution. Can you comment on whether there are additional opportunities to 
examine how children perceive mixed emotions in other children? I was not sure whether you 
dealt with it, or if it is an issue you are currently studying, or if it is an issue you may have 
already examined. How are mixed emotions perceived in other children? 

Izard: Are you asking if they have mixed emotion signals on their face? 



Comment: Yes. 

Izard: This is certainly a source of the possibility for misperception or misattribution because it 
is a greater challenge for the child's emotion processing systems to detect what is happening. 
Also, the child may have a slight proclivity to respond to one type of emotion more than to 
another because of their particular experience in the family or with their peers. We did use 

251 

er|c 



245 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



ambiguous pictures or mixed signals as a way of measuring emotion attribution bias. It is clearly 
a potential source and I think they may need a special training or a special tuition in order for 
them to compensate for that. 

Question: I would like to know more about mixed emotions in children and how they have a 
sense of them. Are they able to talk about the mix of emotions? 

Denham: Susan Harter also talks about how children older than preschool age who would be 
able to understand that you could feel two different emotions at the same time. I think that it 
puts a big burden on a preschooler's ability to process information and also flies in the face o 
their developing theory of mind. If you are telling yourself well here is how a person feels and, 
then, you have to overlay that, they could feel two ways at the same time. That is against one of 
the first mles I discovered about the theory of mind. It is like standing on its head. 

I do not think it takes as long as Susan Harter suggests for children to understand that. At 
least there is the possibility of feeling two different ways at one time. We began to see it in e 
kindergartners and that was under conditions where they were given cues and they were able to 
indicate that two emotions were being felt by a protagonist, not by themselves. That is another 
layer of complexity to be added. 

Kirk Crosby: I am from Texas Tech University. My question is about the modular systems. There 
is a separation between the toddler and the emotional system, and later, the cognitive system 
becomes more integrated with that and probably has more control over certain emotional 
responses. Are there dual components in older diildren so that there still maintains some 
separateness? Or do you see it as the one overlaying the other completely? 

Izard: I do not believe that they ever become integrated in the sense of becoming one. They 
become more closely interrelated and more highly interactive with the developrrrent of greater 
cognitive capacities and with the development of the emotion system. Now this is debatable 
because some people will talk about the wonders of integrated emotion and cognition. I do not 
support that is the way it works. Neuroscience is uncovering evidence which shows that the 
emotions can do things of which the mind knows nothing. Sometimes we make decisions 
based on how we feel even after we have made a long list of pros and cons regarding potential 
consequences. 

Denham: There are also situational and individual differences. I know of children who are 1 2 
years old, or in one case, a 22-year-old, who have more trouble in integrating those two. If you 
ask him how he feels, he will say, "fine." If you probe and pry as mothers do sometimes, you 
will get more information out of him. Context is also an important factor. If you are extremely 
upset about something, it is harder for the cognitive integration to occur. 

Raver: I want to add that it is important to distinguish between modular systems and paths of 
influence in development. I would completely agree that there is strong evidence for modular 
and cognitive emotional systems in a human's biocycle and social functioning. In terms of paths 
or influence I think you are starting to find evidence for the social and emotional context of 
learning. For example, whether your teacher likes you or whether you have a bad reputation as 
an aggressive child. 

Question: I wonder if you could tell us about cultural barriers during emotional reactions. How 
does that impact emotional bonds? 




)c:9 



0 



246 



CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



Raver: There are a series of papers that have been published called Model Equivalents Across 
Cultural Groups. They address issues of parenting and children's understanding of emotions, 
children s expressiveness of emotions, children s regulation of emotions, and children's ability 
to get along with peers. Ellen Pinderhughes is the lead author on one of the papers, so are Nixon 
and Watson. These articles discuss the issue of whether models fit equivalently across racial and 
cultural groups or whether there are different ways in which models fit across and cultural 
groups, particularly when we talk about issues of socialization, parenting style, and emotional 
expressiveness of parents. 

Our past and ongoing work with some different cultural groups suggests that some of the 
parental values about what they should be imparting in terms of expressiveness, understanding, 
and regulating of emotion will differ across different cultural/sub-cultural groups. The outcomes 
work that Pamela Garner and others have done suggests that, no matter the pathway, if you have 
appropriate levels of culture emotional competence, then it is related in the same meaningful 
ways as social competence. In other words, the richness of the pathways gets one to the same 
level of competency. 

Question: In your model they are saying 53% of aggression with accountable bias emotionality 
and 8% even in that model was coming from this information processing. Before we were 
talking about how automatic the nature of it was, and now it is adjusting to more about 
schemas, critical schemas where the way we learn emotion is often very much embedded in 
particular situations. 

These types of models do not provide enough theoretical richness to perhaps distinguish 
which one is operating. In some cases where we perhaps are out of control because of a whole 
scenario, it gets triggered where the cognition part in the schema is all there together and it all 
goes as a package. We cannot desegregate at certain times, though in some circumstances we 
cannot get out of the old habits so easily. And for young children I guess they are much more 
caught up in the context. If there is a comfortable context to what happens at home, then, it gets 
treated at preschool. Perhaps we should look more carefully at context, how they fit into 
models, and how children learn things in the home. 

Izard: I quite agree with that. I would add that from my perspective the schemas that you talk 
about are not pure cognition. 

Comment: No, they are not. 

Izard: Almost nothing is. 

Comment: Emotions are all there together. 

Izard: By the time you get the kind of schema you are talking about you probably have a 
corriplex series of emotion cognition connections. If they are bad connections, what you are 
calling a schema is going to be problematic for the child and you need to consider these. You 
need to consider the context in which they were learned because some contexts are more likely 
to give rise to poor connections or maladapted connections and bring about schemas that are 
not favorable for social/emotional confidence. 

Denham: I have talked about contexts, about how the kinds of contexts in which parents show 
emotions, and about how teachers tell children when it is appropriate to show those emotions. 
Part of the problem I think in our research is that it is complicated enough already. 

If we broke it down by what contexts the anger was shown in, what context it was learned in, 
and then we tried to make predictions, we would probably mn into difficulties. But then, I think 




253 



247 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



about the child who learns that it is okay to be angry when they see their father knock a hole in 
the wall. 1 mean he is stressed out and he punches a hole in the wall. 

If that child's schema for anger, when to use it, how to use it, and when and when not to 
regulate it are different from the child who experiences familial anger in other ways in similar 
situations, then understanding those levels is really important. 

Question: Is it possible that the complexity of emotional knowledge is because there are many 
sources from which the child draws emotion knowledge? They are conflicting for a long time. 

For example, "In Johnny's home his mother attends to his needs in certain contexts and he 
draws attention to this in school. He then cries that a teacher said no to him." That inconsis- 
tency in different contexts in which the child is exposed shows the complexity of emotional 
knowledge. Which part should I label appropriate and in what context? The cognition and the 
feelings are difficult to bring together wi^in the complexity of it. 

Izard: You have outlined a great rationale for preventive intervention to include parents, 
families, teachers, and staff as well as the children because there is a need for some common 
language and some common ground to be laid for all parties involved in the child's development. 

Comment: From my observations in working with children in Head Start, teachers must accept 
the importance of the concept of social and emotional competence, because in the communities 
they are going into the programs to help coach emotional competence and social competence. 

They are the ones who help train parents. All systems should come together to form a 
consistent way to communicate with the child. 

Denham: There is another strong factor that we have not mentioned that influences children 
and it is the media, the movies, television, or the video games. Ask any teacher and they will tell 
you that these are prominent influences on children. 

Comment: I wonder if children's emotion knowledge and their behavior are learned from those 
people that matter the most to them. 

Denham: Absolutely. 

Comment: If they have an intense relationship with parents, then the knowledge will come 
better from the parents and less from the teacher because the teacher sees them at age 3 or 4 and 
starts building a relationship from that point. Children already have a significant relationship 
with their parents. Children may act out scenes from movies that I would not watch, but 
perhaps there has been too much said about learning trends. There has to be a relationship for 
any kind of learning, whether it is cognitive or emotional, and that relationship is with a parent 
or a significant other. 

Denham: You have to deal with the quantity of time children are spending as well as the 
quality. If a significant amount of their day is spent watching these movies and playing these 
video games, that must have an impact. 

Saline Dietrich: I am from North Carolina University and I am involved in developing some 
social/emotional curriculums to implement in a Head Start classroom. I am interested in Dr. 
Raver's work on interventions as a member of a faculty who can influence the quality of inter- 
ventions. Are researchers measuring or developing ways to tap into alternative interventions? 





248 



CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



interventionists who went in to the classroom and tried to 
thprr,c as a group to police themselves or to monitor themselves and to regulate 

tailed to fall apart, they did not get their rewards and this was for older children The longterm 

thP are profound. Children in those classrooms have substantially reduced 

th ° out, sucking teeth, and so forth many years down the line. His argument is that 

Aey learn key self-regulatory skills so that in a chaotic context those children wouW Hble to 

upon ose resources they learned as a group in an early educational context That was 

tTnT cognitively-mediated piece of informa- 

ka^n. a k'" ^ ^ame was more influential than 

learning a lesson plan about regulation. 



Comment: There is probably a process going on beyond the individual if you 
peer dynamic influence with rewards and entire group benefits. 



capitalize on the 



^ver: Yes, I agree. Some good data just came in on teachers regarding classroom climate One 
researcher is finding impressive results for the child/family as well as teacher component of the 
intervention, specifically about trying to provide teachers with additional support^so that they 

XToTo&pirs'”" 

Shereod: Although the focus here has appropriately been on school readiness and prevention of 
problem behaviors, I think the impact of this work is more profound and fong term “l 

Development Commission in New York City set up by then 
ay r Dinkins. The idea was that we would be moving ffom a manufacturing to a service 
emnln""^ and what would be the demands on foe workforce in this new service economy? The 
employers and foe businesses were quite clear that they needed workers who could communi- 

and ^ individuals who have foe emotional knowledge 

and skills we have addressed today. rvnuwicuge 

Currently, tmly Head Start teachers are taking foe bull by foe horns and asking how to 

foe development of these skills is left to chance, or to good families if 
fonh^W^? whatever children receive from foe media and video games, and so 

orfo. We should be more strategic and proactive about asking how, throughout an individual's 
educauonal careers he/she can be helped with developing emotional knowledge, emornar 

regulation, and foe other skills we have discussed. This kind of training continues at least up 
through early adolescence and onward . 6 ai leasi up 

It has been difficult to sell this to foe commission where foe employers and business people 

doTh t^W programs and school systems quite adamantly said, "No, we do not 

do that. We teafo reading, writing, and arithmetic. That is for parent and families." We n^ed a 
evolution and Head Start can be foe dnving force because they are doing it first. 




puf psr 

^5o 



249 



Children With Special Needs 
and Disabilities 



MASTER LECTURE 

Early Assessment and Treatment for 

Young Children With Autistic Spectrum Disorder 

CHAIR: Harry Wright 
LECTURER: Catherine Lord 

Harry Wright: Catherine Lord is one of the premier persons in the field of autism, particularly 
for early treatment assessment and diagnosis. Dr. Lord is Professor of Psychology at the Univer- 
sity of Michigan and Director of the University of Michigan Autism and Comnaunications 
Disorder Center. This center is involved in direct assessment of families and children with 
autism spectrum disorder and in consultations to schools and early childhood programs around 
issues of autism spectmm disorder. She is a clinical psychologist with interests iri autism 
diagnosis, associate communicative disorders, development, and intervention with children who 
have autistic spectrum disorders. Dr. Lord is well known for her longitudinal studies of children 
and adults with autism and also in the development of the measures that almost all of us use in 
research and clinical practice, the Autism Diagnostic Interview (ADI) and the Autism Diagnostic 
Observation Schedule (ADOS). 

Catherine Lord: I will talk first about early assessment and then about some treatment issues. I 
am not going to present a great deal of data, but I will present conclusions. It is important to 
realize that autism is a neurological-based, organic disorder with a strong genetic component. 

We do not know what causes it, but it probably begins before children are bom. If a family has 
one child with autism, their chances increase of having a second child with autism, up to maybe 
one in five or one in ten. 

On the other hand, we do not know where autism is caused in the brain. There is not an 
autism gene, but there are some places on different chromosomes that seem to contribute. Still, 
there is not a blood test for diagnosis of autism or a specific abnormality in die brain to confirm 
a doctor’s diagnosis based on behavior. The most common definition of autism involves a 
fimstrating Chinese menu approach, which is a little bit of this and little bit of that and a little 
bit more of that. In order to be diagnosed as autistic, a child must show very basic social 
abnormalities. There are four examples of these kinds of abnormalities, and a child has to 
demonstrate two of them for an autism diagnosis. The four different abnormalities include 
difficulties with nonverbal behavior such as eye contact, failure to develop peer relationships, 
failure to seek to share pleasure with others, and a lack of social emotional reciprocity. 

For example, a little boy we tested for autism had a blue drum mallet and was going around 
the room tapping the drum mallet on different things, tapping it on the table, drum, chair, and 
wall. When he came to the therapist, he tapped the mallet on her nose and then continued on 
to the wall. He is different from other children in that if another child taps someone on the 
nose, he would probably look sheepish or look back at his mother. Most children would not tap 
a stranger on the nose the first time they met anyway. This autistic child is not unfriendly, nor is 



250 



256 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



he trying to hurt her. In fact, he does not acknowledge in any way that tapping her on the nose 
is different from tapping on the table. 

Besides social development, communication is the second area that defines autism. A range 
of behaviors serves as examples of how communication is different in children with autism. First 
of all, many children with autism are language-delayed. This failure to speak by 1 or 2 years of 
age is the most common way that autistic children are identified. However, there are children 
with autism who speak, and some will talk your ear off, even if they often have difficulties 
carrying on a conversation with give and take. For example, I watched one of the therapists in 
our clinic work with a boy yesterday trying to prompt him to ask her some questions. 

She began, "Do you have any pets?" He said, "Yes." She asked, "Oh, what kind of pets do you 
have?" He replied, "I have a dog." She said, "Oh, what kind of dog?" He said, "A black lab." She 
asked, "Well, what is his name?" He answered, "Charcoal." Then she said, "Well, hmm, I wonder 
what I have at home. After a few moments, she said, "Do you want to ask me any questions 
about my pets? He said. Okay. Do you have a lawn mower?" Most children would know that if 
you are on the topic of pets, it is probably good to stick with the topic of pets. This boy did 
understand that the therapist wanted him to ask her something, but he instead chose the topic 
most relevant to him, which is typical of children with autism. 

In addition, many children with autism have stereotyped and repetitive use of language, 
which seems to stem from learning language through memorization. I once saw a little boy with 
autism who, when he called for his mother in another room, called, "Mommy, I'm coming, 
honey! He had memorized the words as a unit and was communicative in his attempts to get 
his point across. While this kind of behavior can be charming for adults, it can be confusing to 
other children and does not help in establishing friendships or general peer relationships. 

A final area of communication issues involves make-believe play. Many children with autism 
have difficulty with social imitation, shifting gears, and playing with others. Many children with 
autism can learn to imitate, but it is not an automatic trait. 

Another example is of a child with autism who is communicating, but in a different way than 
most other children. He wants to put a ball with Velcro on a figure on the wall, so he leads the 
therapist with the ball in her hand to put it on even though he can reach there by himself. In 
this way he is using someone else's body to accomplish a purpose, typical of children with 
autism, whereas most children would first try more efficient methods of communication 
involving eye contact and vocalization. 

The last area of autistic behavior is restricted and repetitive behaviors. Most autistic children 
have one or two behaviors that serve as preoccupations and specific rituals. Children will see 
routines in something, even when there are not necessarily routines. Repetitive movements are a 
third characteristic that is very common for autistic children, especially for those between the 
ages of 3 and 8 or 9 years. These movements often involve the hands or fingers, often in periph- 
eral vision, although not always. These actions may include children looking at or flicking their 
fingers, twisting their hands, or flapping when they become excited. 

The last category involves sensory abnormalities, including an acute sense of smell, an 
enjoyment of spinning things, looking at visual patterns out of the comer of their eye, and 
playing with light. Often, young autistic children like the same things as other children; but to 
some degree, these interests in such normal things as dinosaurs and dump tricks tend to be 
more all-consuming preoccupations. There was a boy whom we tested who was hard to settle 
down, so we took him to the bathroom. On the way back, he saw a young graduate student, 
climbed into her lap, and nestled in. He was as happy as a clam working with her. After lunch 
we came back and again he looked unsettled until one of our other therapists walked in, at 
which point he began to smile. His mother said, "I know what this is, he loves women with long 
straight, fine hair. He is too shy to do it, but what he likes to do is climb up and sort of smell it 
and stick his head under the hair and get it to go on his face." Again, that small children like 
certain sensations is not particularly abnormal, but with strangers it is unusual behavior. 




257 



251 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Another example is of an autistic boy who is smelling a toy telephone that has no particular 
odor. This little boy smells what is handed to him even if we cannot discern a smell. When we 
first saw him at the age of 2 years, we did not realize that he was flapping a fair amount. At 2 
years old, acting in an excited manner and flapping about something can be normal, and this 
behavior in itself certainly does not mean autism. If 6 months later a child is still doing this to 
show excitement, and then 6 months after that, and even at 9 years of it looks Quite abnormal. 

The final criteria for autism is that a child needs to show abnormalities in one of the areas of 
social interaction, language or communication, and then symbolic or imaginative play prior to 3 
years of age. In addition, there is an order of diagnosis, as other conditions may have some 
similar characteristics of autism. There is a rare condition called Childhood Disintegrative 
Disorder that is very rare, occurring in less than 1 child per 100,000. These children seem to have 
normal development, at least up to 2 years of age, and then they lose skills, either gradually or 
rapidly, and look very much like autistic children within a matter of weeks or months. 

Childhood Disintegrative Disorder is also different from autism in that often those children 
lose motor and adaptive skills. If they were toilet-trained previously, they lose the toilet training; 
or if they were able to stack blocks, do puzzles, or hold a spoon they may lose those skills. In 
autism, there is often a regression, but the children generally lose only a few words and there is 
not a massive pattern of loss. Childhood disintegrative disorders are associated with some kind 
of progressive brain disease about half the time, as shown in medical testing. But in the other 
half of cases, we cannot find any cause, and we are unsure whether or not it is an unusual form 
of autism. 

In addition, many of you have likely heard about Asberger s Disorder, which is right now the 
"syndrome of the year." Children or adults with Asberger s Disorder have social deficits and 
circumscribed interests that look very much like autism. Rather than an acute interest in odd 
things, these children are overly interested in normal things, such as books, dinosaurs, or Disney 
videos. But in order to meet the technical criteria for Asberger s, a child should not have autism. 

A diagnosis of autism should be made first if you can do it. If you cannot make that diagno- 
sis, there may instead be a possibility of Asberger s. Overall, children with Asberger s Disorder 
are not cognitively normal, but they are not mentally retarded or language delayed. However, 
there is one child psychiatrist who has a separate theory, which sees Asberger s Disorder as a 
milder version of autism across the IQ range. 

One must be careful these days because a diagnosis of Asberger s Disorder is used in practice 
to mean many things, including mild autism, autism in a person who is quite bright, a child 
with major unexplained social problems, and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) 
plus social deficits. Parents seem to prefer this diagnosis because we know less about it and there 
are implications that there is more help for it. It also seems less complicated than having a child 
with a severe conduct disorder, learning disabilities, and language problems. 

There is also atypical autism, or what is called Pervasive Developmental Disorder Not 
Otherwise Specified (PDD-NOS), and it describes children or adults who have social deficits like 
autism. They may have milder problems, along with either communication problems or 
restricted and repetitive behaviors. They could experience all three issues, or they may have a 
later onset. What is difficult here is that we talk about these children as if they were a diagnosis, 
but what they have is not quite autism, and we do not know why. There are many more children 
with these issues than children with autism. One of the things you will hear me advocate is that 
there is the same need for these children to have treatment as children with classic autism. We 
do have a responsibility to help them, but we do not know if they all have the same problem or 
if there is a mixture of problems that are similar to autism. 

Autism is a good example of a developmental disorder, and I mean that in two different ways. 
First, how a child has autism is affected by his or her development. A 2-year-old with autism 
does not do the same autistic things that a 30-year-old with autism will do; however, many of 
the formal diagnostic categories were written mostly for school age children between the ages of 
5 and 7 years. On the other hand, autism affects development. An autistic child will engage in 




252 



258 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



fewer social interactions and will spend one-tenth the amount of time looking at other people 
and interacting with other children as their nonautistic peers. The kinds of information available 
to them and the experiences that they have are radically different than other children. 

One example of developmental differences in autism is a litde boy with Fragile X syndrome 
and autism. Not all children and probably not most children with Fragile X have autism, but 
there certainly are some. As part of our diagnostic assessment a therapist is having a birthday 
party. She has taken some Play Dough and some plastic dowels and is singing Happy Birthday. 
The little boy is looking at her quizzically, wondering why she is singing to the Play Dough. At 
least he is paying attention to her, but he does not understand what she is doing. 

Another example is a little boy with autism, a little boy who is quite bright and at age level in 
nonverbal skills and close to age level in language. He was able to whip through that birthday 
party, tell the examiner to sing Happy Birthday, ask where the presents are and is putting the 
baby to bed after the birthday party. While he understands that level of pretense, we would not 
want to say that he is not autistic, because he cannot add much more than that. He understands 
the routine, but he does not do it in an interactive fashion. 

Then there is the example of a little girl who does not have autism. The difference is that she 
can add her own ideas to this birthday party. She has decided to feed the examiner, who is 
obviously not keen to have Play Dough in her mouth. This litde girl understands the framework 
of what is going on and participates in a way that the autistic child cannot. 

In an example from a summer day camp we ran, we are able to show how autism affects 
experiences. A little boy with autism had never been in a day camp because his mother was 
concerned about the number of outside acdvides, oversight by young counselors, and the fear of 
her son running off. But we wanted to give him experiences that were like those of other 
children, not that all children with autism have to learn how to jump across a field in a plasdc 
garbage bag. However, just having to do that helps a child develop a different set of skills than if 
he or she merely sits at a table being taught by the teacher. The litde boy might not look happy 
but he was not complaining. He was ecstadc when he got across the field. This is an example of 
the kind of experience that many children with audsm do not have because they do not under- 
stand different situadons, and responsive parents figure that out and can only handle so much 
in terms of what they ask of their child. 

I saw a child the other day who was profoundly retarded and audstic and I was talking to her 
parents about things they could do. I conducted a home and school visit, and realized that at 
school her teachers had set up a litde cubbyhole for her. They put activities on the left side of a 
bookshelf, and she would take those down, complete them, and put them back on the right side 
of the bookshelf. At home, she basically wandered. She had nice parents who loved her dearly 
and thousands of toys that she would not go near during the two hours we watched her. She 
simply wandered around the house. I offered to set something up for the parents to use at 
home, and I thought the mother acted strangely about whether the items would be delivered or 
whether they would have to be picked up. I realized that her reaction was based on the fact that 
her daughter was a large girl of 7 years, functioning mentally at a 12- to 13-month range, and 
the mother did not like to drive and take this girl to unfamiliar or busy places. We negotiated 
that she could park in the handicapped slot and someone would come out and meet her. It 
made me realize that this child, to some degree, is a prisoner in her own home for perfectly 
understandable reasons. Still, it is something that we want to change, but it is not simple. 

There are a number of new things that have happened in the last 5 years that are relevant to 
those of us in the field of autism. We have realized that autism can be reliably diagnosed down 
to 2 years of age, and we can make guesses at even younger ages although we do not know as 
much about what we are doing with these younger children. When I began in this field during 
the 1960s and 1970s, most children with autism were identified at 6 or 7 years old. Parents 
would bring the children to kindergarten, and at that point a problem would be identified. 
However, an experienced person who has seen many autistic Aildren can now t 3 q>ically give a 
diagnosis when a child is 2 years of age. 



O 

ERIC 



259 



253 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



We also have a better idea of a whole spectrum of disorders, with a prototype model of 
children that we know about most. Discriminating autistic spectrum disorders (ASD) from other 
disorders is easiest for school-age children with some language, who are not fluent speakers. As 
we move up and down the age span, and up and down levels of mental retardation and lan- 
guage delay, discriminations become more difficult. The autism we understand best occurs 
among children who have difficulties in all the three areas described earlier. We have a much 
more difficult time with diagnosing children who are brighter or who have more language skills, 
or children with a lower IQ. In other words, as we move either up in terms of children who are 
brighter or have more language, or down in terms of lower IQ, or out from the PDD-NOS, we have 
a harder time knowing exactly what to do and what to call the disorder. If you ask professionals to 
diagnose a child who is in the middle of that circle, 1 think that you would get 100% agreement. 

But as you move out of that center, children would start being diagnosed with different disorders, 
such as ADHD, Pragmatic Disorder, or specific language impairment with behavior problems. In 
terms of making a diagnosis, it is easier when symptoms fall in the center of a circle and much 
more difficult when they fall on the outside. We are not as good at deciding where autism stops 
and PDD-NOS starts, or where autism stops and Asberger s Disorder starts. This problem does 
not make a great deal of difference or at least it should not because, in terms of services, the 
children are diverse and the services should be tied to the child s characteristics rather than the 
specific diagnosis. 

The old epidemiological studies conducted in the United Kingdom, the United States, and 
Canada suggested that two thirds to three fourths or more of autistic children were truly men- 
tally retarded; meaning that the best things that they did were still significantly below their age 
level. Other people like Leo Kanner suggested that autistic children were intelligent because they 
looked intelligent. Other people proposed that autistic children were functionally mentally 
retarded, meaning that if they snapped out of the autism, they would be smart. There was a 
realization in the late 1960s and early 1970s that these theories were not true, and that even 
children whose social deficits improved still remained behind overall. 

In the last 3 or 4 years, people have found more children with autistic characteristics who are 
not mentally retarded. Similarly, it once was said that half of all children with autism would not 
have functional language, but just in the last 2 or 3 years we have estimated that a much higher 
proportion of autistic children do indeed speak, using language as a primary method of com- 
munication. The language may not be fluent or carry on a whole conversation, but its use is 
primary. It would be nice if these findings were based on the effect of early intervention, and 
people with good early intervention programs have used that success to highlight their pro- 
grams. It also may be that we are finding more children with less severe deficits. 

When 1 first began to look at the prevalence of autism using numbers from several studies 
over the years, the rate of autism up until the mid-1980s was about 4 to 5 persons per 10,000. In 
the mid-1980s, the rate increased to 10 to 15 persons per 10,000, and people associated ^at 
increase with changes in the diagnostic framework. According to the criteria in the American 
Psychiatric Associations Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-Fourth Revision (DSM-IV), the 
definition of autistic disorder involves abnormal or impaired development prior to age 3 years 
and manifested by delays or abnormal functioning in at least one of the following areas: (a) 
social interaction, (b) language as used in social communication, or (c) symbolic or imaginative 
play. In DSM-lllR the criteria became broader, so some say that the increase from 1985 was due 
to broader diagnosis criteria, not that there were more children with autism. In the late 1990s, 
there were sporadic accounts of many more diagnosed children, to numbers as high as 45 per 
10,000, or even one study that found 72 per 10,000. 

Initially, people discounted those results and assumed they stemmed from very small 
samples or cluster studies. For example, in 1998 the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) conducted a study in Brick Township, New Jersey, where families recorded a high 
prevalence of autism that they thought was associated with a toxic waste dump. However, in the 



ERIC 



254 



260 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



last few years more studies have shown higher prevalence of autism, so it does seem the case 
that the prevalence of autism, broadly defined, is much higher than we previously thought. 

We need to ask, what is happening here? Part of the answer is that the concept of autism has 
broadened to include milder cases like atypical autism and PDD-'NOS. We may also be identify- 
ing kids whom we knew had autism, but were not formally counted. People are now more on 
the ball in terms of knowing these children need services. It also may be that we are better at 
testing these children and are therefore able to realize that some of these children are smarter 
than one might think if given a language-based test. We do not know why more children are 
being diagnosed with autism, and these numbers can make parents afraid that autism is caused 
by the Measles, Mumps, and Rubella (MMR) vaccine, something in the water, or various envi- 
ronmental abnormalities for which we have no evidence. It is understandable why people might 
be worried. Whatever the case, it is clear that there are more children who need these services 
than we had originally thought, which has ramifications for early interventions and schools. 

We also have to hone our diagnostic tools. We used to think we could diagnose autism using 
a list of odd behaviors, so we would look at a child and ask, "Does he flap, smell things, look at 
lines, or say strange things?" Yet, like other psychiatric disorders, a better prediction of who will 
have difficulties is the absence of normal behaviors, rather than the presence of abnormal 
behaviors. Both positive (abnormal) behaviors and negative (the absence of normal) behaviors 
are required to make a diagnosis of ASD. 

Therefore, we need people who know about normal behavior and about how to maximize 
normal behavior. It makes diagnosis much more complicated because it means that in order to 
make a diagnosis, one must see a child in a context where he or she would act normally. The 
developmental level and contextual effects can both have significant effects on diagnostic 
judgments. Often, for example, physician s visits are not the ideal time to view a child having a 
normal social interaction. When you are looking in the ears of a feverish child, it is not the time 
to look at their reciprocal social interaction. Unfortunately, our medical system and mental 
health systems are often geared towards briefer visits, in contexts that are not very normal. In 
these situations, abnormal markers may be more apparent than fairly subtle differences in 
normal behavior. 

It also means that developmental levels must be taken into account. For example, young 
children with autism often smile a lot. The fact that they are smiling does not mean that they are 
not autistic. Perhaps they are happy. Often, when they smile other people smile too. If you have 
a beautiful 2-year-old that is glowing with excitement, you do not tend to look at them straight- 
faced. We must be careful not to make simple statements about why this child does or does not 
have autism. 

I spoke earlier about changes in referrals. During the last couple of years, our model age for 
first referral has been 2 years of age. However, there are incredible social cliass effects in that 
referral process, and children with parents who are aware of autism or who have contact with 
professionals are identified at younger ages. 

When we first began looking at young children with autism, we found different information 
from different treatment studies. There were behavioral studies that said if a group of autistic 2- 
year-olds were provided intensive treatment, half of them would look indistinguishable from 
other children at 7 years of age. It was an exciting finding at the time, but it has not held up. On 
the other hand, longitudinal studies of clinicians' reports said that most children with autism 
become adults with autism. Some of them improve and learn amazing things, but no one could 
say that they were indistinguishable from normal. 

Many wondered if there is a type of autism that children grow out of, one that may be 
affected by early interventions starting at 2 years of age? In addition, there are empirical studies 
of preschool children with autism that have shown consistent results. Young children with 
autism have much more difficulty with joint attention, in knowing what other people are 
talking about, and having an automatic response to someone else's shift in attention. Autistic 
children may also have difficulty directing someone else's attention and sharing with others. 



er|c 



261 



255 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Children with autism spend less time looking at faces, and many, even at the end of the first 
year of life, spend less time looking at people's faces compared to other children. At 12 months 
of age, another of the best identifiers of a child with autism is a failure to respond to his or her 
name. Another thing autistic children have difficulty with is pretending. Children with autism 
tend to spend much less time pretending, even in a small fashion. 

We found that a while ago, when I was in the Department of Pediatrics, that many children 
were referred to me at age 3, and the parents were telling us that they had been talking to their 
pediatrician about the condition for a year beforehand. They claimed that the pediatricians were 
suggesting to wait, come back for further visits, and not to worry. I went around to the pediatri- 
cians in our hospital and those who referred to our hospital, and said. Please, if you see any of 
these issues, or if a parent brings these things up, refer them right way, and I promise I will not 
scare the parents half to death. I will help these parents get started in treatment, then we will see 
what happens to these children." 

In one year, I was able to see 30 referred children who possibly had autism at 2 years of age. 
Later on, when we looked at those children at age 3 and 4 years, the two things that best 
discriminated the children who had autism were, based on a parent interview, the following: (a) 
spontaneously directing someone else's attention whether through pointing, saying a word, or 
through gazing; and (b) response to a neutral question. A neutral question is something the 
child might understand that is not very important, like a comment on the weather. The child's 
lack of response is one of the best identifiers at 2 years of age, based on parent reporting. For 
example, the parent does not say something of interest like "Let's go get ice cream" or "What a 
mess, dean up" but something like "I cannot believe that it snowed again." What does the child 
do? Would he or she look at you because you just spoke to them? 

One thing we must be careful about is how parents characterize the child's answer to his or 
her own name; some parents will say no, the child does not respond, while other parents will 
say yes. If you ask parents to imitate how they do this, some parents go up to their child's face 
and say, "Jimmy, Jimmy, Jimmy" and of course litde Jimmy responds. The parents are correct in 
noticing Jimmy's response, but they are not answering the question that you have posed. So, we 
felt that this neutral question approach was a better indicator when asking parents. 

Interestingly when the child is 3 years old, we have moved from just social communication 
items to other behaviors. By age 3, the four items that best predicted which children would later 
be diagnosed with autism were attention to voice (but still not name), pointing to express 
interest, hand and finger mannerisms, and use of another person's body as a tool. Before 3 years 
of age, pointing did not make a big difference because there are many reasons why children do 
not point, including general delays and communication delays. 

What is important here is that if we go back to 2 years old and if you think back to the DSM- 
IV criteria — social reciprocity, communication, and restricted repetitive interest — the 2-year-olds 
are clearly showing these difficulties that fall between social deficits in communication. One 
could not use restricted and competitive behaviors to diagnose the 2-year-olds, whereas by age 3 
one could use it, although still not as well as with older children. We then decided to do a study 
that not only looked at parent report but also tried to develop a way to assess children's social 
behavior in a short time of 20 or 30 minutes. That goes back to what I had said about the need to 
have context where one would expect children to be social and to want interaction before judg- 
ments are made about their interaction. Out of that, we developed something called the ADOS. 

Question: Am I right that you are listing some responses "yes, it should be there, and other 
responses "no, it should not be there?" 

Lord: They are all things to be aware of, including the absence of attention to voice and the 
presence of motor mannerisms. I will now describe ADOS in four different children. These are 
small descriptive excerpts from a 30-minute observation. The first child turns out to have autism 
and is also quite mentally retarded. He does not look that bad; he is just not doing much. He is 



256 



262 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



in a room with an examiner and his mother, and he is organized about what he is doing. By 
making a bunny go, he can shift attention, even though he is not paying attention to his mother 
behind him, so he smiled. We are interested in whether he will try to get anybody to get this 
bunny to go again. What is important is not what he is doing but what he is not doing, and that 
is what is hard. 

A 1 -year-old on the edge of autism, is looking in the wrong direction. He knows that he is 
supposed to do something with the car in front of him, and then because his finger was on it, he 
ended up seeing it. However, he did not know what the therapist wanted from him, and he did 
not particularly like the car. The therapist is trying to get him to ask to be tickled, and she is 
waiting. Instead, he just tickled himself a litde bit, and said, "Play tickle." He has the words, but 
he cannot look at her even though she is right in front of him. 

Another child looked at his mother, who is across the room. He has a bunny that is just 
about to fall off the chair, and he looks at her as if to say, "What did you just do to that bunny?" 
He directs her attention and then takes it to his mother, which he has not been told to do. He 
also signed more. 

The other thing to make clear is that the children with autism do not look radically abnor- 
mal. It is often not what they are doing that is so odd, but rather there is so much that they are 
not doing. They would not look at an adult or parent who is present and use them as a source of 
information or as someone with whom to share positive things. If we were interactive with these 
children, we might be able to make them look a lot better. For example, we might pick them up 
and throw them in the air and they will smile. They do not have a sense of automatic reciprocity. 

Trying to predict the amount of change in children with autism between the ages of 2 and 5 
years old, we looked at a measure of adaptive functioning. How well can a child do the kinds of 
things that other children do at 5 years old? Can they cross the street? Do they answer the 
telephone? Are they toilet trained? Do they know that part of having a bath is using a little soap? 
Cognitive variables, such as level of language at age 2, were by far the greater predictor of who 
would make the largest gains. Even subde differences had effects, and most of the children in 
these studies at that age who were referred to us for possible autism did not have words or had 
very few words. 

Having one word, or understanding a few words out of context, was much better than having 
no words. They had to be words where you could say "Grandma is coming" without hearing 
Grandma enter the driveway; or, "Let's go find your shoes" without the child being barefoot, 
headed out the door. Also on this topic, understanding a few words out of context was also 
much better Aan having none. If language was not put into the equation, then nonverbal 
communication and problem solving was also a good predictor and accounted for about 32% 
of the outcome variance at age 5. However, if a child has language skills, then the nonverbal 
problem did not matter. 

In addition to cognitive variables, we also found a measure of the severity of autism useful, 
particularly social deficits, which are primarily the absence of normal behaviors rather than the 
presence of odd things. Here we had three different variables, and the first one — a best estimate 
diagnosis taking all the information from both the observation and the parent interview— was 
the strongest of these predictors. If you could not use that, the second-best predictor was the 
parent s report of social skills on a diagnostic interview. The third was a measure called the 
Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS), which teachers can use or you can use in an assessment. 
'Hiose things together accounted for more than 60% of the variance of outcome, which is a lot 
in terms of trying to predict who will be able to make the most change. It is important to 
remember that these are quite subtle differences. 

In terms of expressive language, there are some children who make dramatic progress in 
expressive language while other children make almost no progress. There are children who are 
all starting at very close to the same point, which is often having no words at age 2. By the time 
they are age 5, there are incredible differences, with some children talking fluently and others 
who still cannot say even a single word. 



O 

ERIC 



263 



257 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



From this research, we were able to see what one would look for in an 18- to 24-month-old 
child that would predict an autistic spectrum disorder. This includes not just classically autistic 
children, but children who were anywhere in that area. From parents' descriptions, the things 
that predicted this outcome of having an autistic spectrum disorder included not understanding 
words out of context, not responding to name or the social comments that we talked about 
previously, and poor eye contact. One of the best predictors was a parents spontaneous com- 
ment that "There is something not quite right about this child. It feels like he is in a world of his 
own," or "He just does not feel like other children." 

Some parents have not had enough experience with children to know, but we found that 
when a parent spontaneously brought this up, it was often related to these kinds of difficulties. 
However, we must be careful, because when we asked parents in another study. Do you have 
any social concerns about your child?" 70% of all parents responded. Oh, yes, I think that my 
15-month-old is a bully," or "I think he is tactless," or "He is shy." If you ask parents, many can 
tell you something that is not perfect socially, which is quite different from a parent who says 
there is something wrong. Again, this is something that we have stressed with pediatricians 
because many parents feel like they bring this up and are not taken seriously. 

Additional red flags that we identified included the following behaviors. First is if you could 
not interest a child in a game without tickling them, as many autistic children love to be tickled. 
Many children with autism like to be chased, and they like games with physical contact. A good 
question is whether they will play a similar game if it does not involve physical contact or 
tickling, which is a quantum leap for many children with autism. Another red flag involves 
limited vocalization, meaning a child who does not make many sounds. Many autistic children, 
particularly when they are young, are incredibly silent, or they act as if they are deaf. Therefore, 
one of the problems parents first report as a concern is if their child does not hear. Often they 
will admit that the thought crossed their mind, but they will say that onCe a McDonald's commer- 
cial came on television, the child would hear it from across the house and run into the room. 

Unusual eye contact is another red flag that appears, even with people the child knows well. 
Eye contact is often better with parents, but still not flexible, and does not often involve a third 
object that might lead to looking at something else and then looking back to the parent. Other 
red flags we discussed are failure to respond to their name and then repetitive behaviors. In this 
age range, the repetitive behaviors are mostly important if they are also associated with a 
language delay or social abnormalities. Many children at 18 months old can line things up or 
can spend more time than we can believe dropping something into a container, but we are more 
concerned with that behavior coupled with these other things. 

The other interesting red flag is when a behavior that is very unusual becomes almost 
normalized as a family ritual. Some examples are a child who loves the bottoms of garbage cans 
or one who likes to look at how the rim of a garbage can fits into a well in the park, despite 
family disapproval. This behavior is unusual, as most children would realize that this is not 
something that other people want them to do, and most parents would stop the behavior by 
saying "no." The fact that the parent is reluctant to intervene suggests something about that 
child as well because parents tend to be quite sensitive to what they can interfere with and what 
they cannot. Overall, it is likely that many children with autism can be identified at 2 years of 
age, but we cannot use those criteria just described at the very beginning, because many children 
with autism do not have restricted and repetitive behaviors. 

Additionally, most children with autism are not aloof, and many do not show odd behaviors 
when they are 2 years old. We tried doing an Answorth attachment sequence to see if children 
with autism acted differently upon separation than other children, but it did not work. The 
children with autism were just as likely to be upset when they are separated from their parents, 
and they were definitely happy to see their parents at reunion. What made them different was 
that once they got the parent back in the room, the first and most common strategy for the 
autistic children was to try and leave. Secondly, once the parent was back, the child would ignore 
them and move back to whatever they were doing. It is almost as though the child felt that once 




258 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



the parent was back, he could move on with life free of any particular wariness or a desire to 

f 2 ^ildren later diagnosed as 

auu^ic fail to respond to someone speaking to them in a neutral fashion and do not try to 
direct others attention in ordinary; unstructured situations. 

It is important to remember that small differences in developmental level can seriously affect 
how auusm is manifested in the preschool years. There is not any one behavior where one can 
say, Okay, this child imitated, so he cannot be autistic." A bright child with autism at 2 years of 

age might imitate some or might do a little bit of pretend play, so one must be careful in 
diagnosis. 

The last thing 1 want to say about assessment is that often what is more important than the 
actual diagnosis is the pr^ess of working with the families, trying to figure out what is going on 
and what to do about it. The formal process of thinking with parents about a child's cognitive 
an an^age evels is very helpful, but it is not the end. The whole purpose of assessment and 
and^IlJShodr children and families to intervention programs with appropriate goals 

1 will summarize the report on educational interventions that 1 was involved in for the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Research Council. This report can be down- 
loaded from the National Academy of Sciences Press website at www.nap.edu, or it can be 
ordered from them. This was a committee that 1 chaired with people from other disciplines, 
including educators, pediatricians, psychiatrists, psychologists, and speech and language 
pathologists. We were asked to address our selection of the most appropriate interventions for 
young children with autism, those from birth to 8 years of age. We were then asked how 
^idehnes were set for decisions related to public policy. This committee was convened because 
there was a great deal of concern about frequent lawsuits, primarily against school systems, 
brought by parents wlm felt that their children required special services that were unavailable in 
® °° systems. There was also the question of what to do in even earlier interventions for 

S resXdT'" ° ^ separate the common beliefs from those supported 

1 must present a few caveats about the research. First of all, it is important to recognize that 
there are virtually no comparisons across different treatments for autism. Some treatments for 
autism have had a great deal of media attention and some treatments have been heavily mar- 
keted or promoted by fine educational institutions, while other treatments are promoted by 
ose w o earn their income from them. It is difficult for parents to sort out what is true and 

Tf from some group studies comparing small sample sizes 

ol children can be of poor quality and are mainly done by people who are very committed to 
their mteryenuons and kind of tacked on an outcome study. We should not blame them, but it 
IS hard to love your intervention and then fairly analyze what it does or does not do. We have 

fi T of research done using single-subject designs, which are 

^emely helpfiil and fiill of information. However, these designs are limited in interpretability, 
since It IS hard to go from the individual level to judging which program is best and what a ^ 
school system or county should do. It is not possible to give each county a list of 500 things to 
know in terms of what to do with autistic children. 

In this report, we summarized what could be concluded from the existing scientific literature 
m order to find some basis m published research. On those premises, we were able to make 
recommendations. One of the first recommendations is that local educational and intervention 
programs should provide families the opportunity to learn techniques for teaching new skills 
and reduang behawor problems of children with autism. Families have different resources and 
different pnoriues, but there are often beneficial things they can learn, and there is evidence that 
families benefit from strategies that include them in their children's early intervention. 

1 he second recommendation is that communication should be the focus of early interven- 
tion. If one thing is going to be done, it should be to help children communicate, particularly 
spontaneous communication that they must engage in during regular, ordinary life. In addition. 



O 

ERIC 



265 



259 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



given the new d 3 t 3 and everything that we know about communication, the assumption for 
young children is that they will be verbal. Some children with autism may never learn to speak, 
but everything suggests that most of them will, so the assumption should be that they will learn 
to speak. This should not stop you from doing other things too, such as using pictures and 
object systems. Effective teaching techniques for both verbal language and alternative modes of 
functional communication should be vigorously applied across settings. 

Sign language should not be used. Speech is faster, more flexible, and a critical part of our 
social interaction, even if we may want to use alternatives. 1 am not saying to not do those other 
things, but they should all be aimed toward language. There is evidence that if a certain strategy 
will work with a young child, it will work in 2 or 3 months. There is no evidence that a child 
will suddenly pop out normal after an intervention of 1 year. One should be able to increase 
how much they vocalize, and one should be able to show that they can recognize a word. Also, 
one should be able to show that they put their arm out when they want something. If your goal 
is to get a child to speak, they may not speak in 3 months, but one should continue using 
incremental steps. If there is no progress toward a particular goal by 2 or 3 months, something 
needs to be done differently. Therefore, measurement of a child's progress should be frequent. 

Our major emphasis on social behavior is that it needs to be taught in the context of the real 
world with different people who are important to the child, including parents, siblings, teachers, 
typically developing children, and classmates. There is no sense in thinking a child s social 
behavior will improve if they are taken off into a room and then returned. For problem behav- 
iors, the primary goal should be to replace behaviors that are problematic with something else. 
For example, if a child has tantrums, we want to figure out when those tantrums occur and why 
and what else the child could do to accomplish the same purpose. 

It is important to recognize that there are some things that do bother children with autism. 
For a child to whom social skills do not make much sense, being around other people is not 
always a positive experience. We assume that if children are doing a boring activity, it will be ^ 
more fun if they do it with other children. For a child with autism, if you pair something boring 
with other children, you are pairing two things that are hard. An example would be if you are 
partially fluent in a foreign language, and then you are put in a situation where you have to pay 
attention. I used to attend grant panels in Canada where one third of what went on was in 
French. Even with my high school French and prior reading of those proposals, I would leave 
the panel feeling overloaded, like a person with autism. We need to remember that children 
with autism may have this same reaction. We want to do is minimize their stress levels so they 
can go out when they have to and be as happy as possible doing that. 

Many early interventions exist, and on the whole, most of them seem to be effective if done 
by a well-trained person. There are reasons to believe that specific aspects of the interventions 
may be related to effectiveness. One of the things that we suggested is that the intervention 
should not be an "either/or" proposition, like choosing which cult to belong to. Which types of 
interventions make the most sense for a family and make them the most comfortable should be 
easy to identify. It is also important to know to add more things to help them move a bit in 
their efforts. 

Characteristics of effective interventions involve different strategies, including discrete trials, 
incidental teaching, structured teaching, "floor time," and individualized modifications of the 
environment. It is important to start the intervention as soon as someone is concerned about 
the child, to minimize potential waiting periods. Six months or 1 year should not go by, waiting 
to see if the child will change. The intervention also needs to involve active engagement for a 
substantial part of the week, and we recommended 25 hours a week, 12 months a year. 

We are not advocating that parents should drop off an 1 8-month-old child at school for 6- 
hour days the minute they are concerned. However, we need to identify a substantial part of the 
day where someone is thinking about what the child is getting out of the activity. It is fine if a 
mother wants to be at home, doing laundry and going around the community, and the child 
participates in that. But if there is not such a situation or if the child cannot handle it and 



O 

ERIC 



260 



266 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



instead spends time at home watching television, it is important to come up with substantial 
intewentions, even for young children. Children with autism interact and engage less than other 
* providing an intervention for a child with autism is like providing a hearing aid for 

a child who cannot hear. That engagement is important, and the only reason to keep it down is 
to not exhaust the people and wear out the people who have to promote that engagement 
In terms of public policy recommendations, states should have clearly defined minimum 
standards for personnel in educational settings for children with ASD. States should also 
eye op a systematic strategy to fund the interventions that are necessary for children with ASD 
m local schools, so that the cost is not home primarily by the parents or local school systems. 

unning Aemes include the fact that there is a huge range of children with autism. There are 
childre^ith autism who are profoundly retarded, who have IQs of 20, and are developing 
slowly. There are children with autism who are mildly retarded, who have words, and are likely 
to be able to hold jobs; but they will need special help in school. There are also children with 
autism who are probably smarter than any of us, and who may have strong skills in a particular 
area, but who still need social support. Other running themes are that we want to start early. It is 
better to start an intervention and then discover that a child's problems are mild and that he or 
she can go into a regular kindergarten rather than not starting due to hopes for miraculous 
change. This training must be ongoing. 

This committee also felt that new laws are unnecessary. The issue is not laws, but rather 
making things happen such as early intervention. Unfortunately, funding does not match the 
laws that parantee help for families. The place to start is with a family working with agencies to 
set goals. We also need multidisciplinary teams who work together across a whole range of 
disciplines m order to make this all happen. There is also a need for minimal standards, integra- 
tiM across perspectives, and different approaches in research. Because these children are 
different in some ways, tried and true tricks with other children will not always work The simple 
contrasts between "pure" treatments are obsolete. The point is to match treatments with’ chil- 
dren and families to find an effective solution. The reality is that none of this will happen 
instantaneously or for free. If you are trying to treat children in context and substantially change 
tneir amount of engagement, money is necessary. 

The last thing that I want to say is just that this is an incredibly interesting area where there 
ave been major improvements and shifts in understanding in the last few years In 1960 
people still bought that children with autism were driven into their autistic world by uncaring 
parents. We had no understanding of the biology of autism, the trajectories of these children's 
deficits, or the fact fiiat they can learn in many different environments. On the other hand, 
auusuc spectrum disorders involve complex problems that affect children and families in 
ditterent ways. Solutions to these problems will mirror this complexity and the need for indi- 



Marilyn Arons: What has been your experience with 
autistic children? 



using Head Start as a placement for 



*'®*’‘*’ incredibly variable, and we find pockets of areas. I just 
moved from Chicago to MiAigan and the same thing has happened. We have certain programs 
fiiat will refer children quickly and appropriately and then other places that you never hear 
from. There IS very muA a phenomenon of word of mouth among the difference places, and I 
do not think that people over-refer. It is hard, because people feel that telling parents something 
sermus is happening to their children and causing worry can be potentially damaging. 

There are ways to deal with that, in part by saying that our working hypothesis is that it could 
be autism, but that we will focus on communication and not get carried away. If the problem is 
communication an it gets better, that is great, but if it is autism, we have questioned the other 
things that might have been related to it. North Carolina had the best community-based 
program that I have been involved in. There is a teach center that focuses on autism within one 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



hour's drive of every area in North Carolina, providing free community service. There was a lot 
of involvement in Head Start because there were people who could go back and forth. 

In Chicago, I was part of the medical system, whidi is fee for service. We would agree to do 5 
hours of consultation, but basically that was not part of our job. A big issue for many autism 
centers is that they are funded through medical resources. It can be done, but the hard thing is 
that it has to be done on an individual basis because the children are so different. You can bring 
in a group of people who are running Head Start classrooms or early intervention programs, 
give them a lecture, and get started; but then you have to follow it up by asking "What is this 
child doing? What is your center like? What are we going to change?" There is a lot of room in 
working from that model. 

The other thing that has happened is that there is more awareness in using multiple place- 
ments. For example, it is not an unreasonable combination for a child to be enrolled in Head 
Start, receive speech therapy and occupational therapy, and go to a special education autism 
classroom. For working parents it is very hard to manage. You almost need a full-time chauffeur 
to make this happen. We have not been very good at figuring out how to get the resources so 
that the burden on parents is lessened. 

Cornelia Taylor: Can you improve a child's ability to perceive social cues and reduce mental 
retardation? 

Lord: When you have a 3-year-old functioning at a 12-month-old level, we cannot pull them 
out of mental retardation; but there are children who might function in a range of mild retarda- 
tion who do make substantial improvements. 

For example, one of the things that we found is that we have these longitudinal studies where 
we took groups of children referred at age 2. If we used Bayley scores, the average child im- 
proved about 20 points. You could have a child with a Bayley of 65 who improved by 20 to 85 
or 90 and was in an average range. You can change cognitive ability, and you are giving the child 
a different world than what they would have had. However, these children make so little sense 
out of social awareness that not only do you have less social input, but you have a child that 
needs more to make more sense. 

Terry Frankovich: In North Carolina, in the centers, are the diagnostic teams trained? 

Lord: Yes, an important aspect of that program is training of the people in the centers. Another 
aspect is training community supports, so there is a nice infrastructure where things begin with 
the centers, but the idea is to train more and more people. When we did a study taking all of the 
referrals to these autism centers of children under 2 years old, we thought that maybe 50% of 
the children would end up being diagnosed autistic, and the other 50% would have other kinds 
of problems, which is what I had found in Canada. In fact, we found that 80% were autistic, and 
it is because the community-based networks and publicity about free services meant that 
everyone was more aware of autism and the kinds of children who could be helped. It is a good 
model. 

Question: Who did the funding? 

Lord: There is state funding through the University of North Carolina, but they have a line in 
the state budget. Michigan is wonderful in many ways, but state support for special education 
services is just grim. One of the reasons I moved there was that at least there is some university 
funding. We do not have state government funding, but it is through the university. If we can 
somehow rationalize it, if this is a good experience for the students or this will result in genetic 
research, we are going to work hard to do that rationalization. 



O 

ERIC 



262 



268 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



Jeffrey Seltzer: I read developmental histories where children seem to be developing typically; 
including their language abilities. Then there seems to be a regression in language. I often think 
it is harder to know at 1 8 months of age what parents are seeing, but I believe a lot of these 
descriptions are accurate. They can tell me the child^s use of language or where the child is 
heading, and then at 18 months of age there is a steep regression. Is that something you see? 

Lord: Yes, and I am glad that you brought it up because it is common. We used to think that 
perhaps these parents did not know what they had until they see it. With videotape (parents 
bring in these videotapes), we can see their child doing something at 13 months of age that one 
cannot get them to do at 20 months old even if you stood on your head. We are involved in a 
big study looking at children who were reported to have regressions, like our early diagnosis 
sample. We have interviews at 2 years old. The regressions generally occur around 18 months 
old. It is pretty good, at least for retrospective data. 

We are finding a couple of different things. First, that this phenomenon does seem to be 
unique to autism. Children with various forms of mental retardation generally do not follow 
that pattern of having some words that later fade out. Sometimes parents report that it happens 
overnight or that they went on a trip or they had another baby. More commonly, the words just 
disappear. They are usually not many words, it is often under 10 words, and the words are pretty 
normal words, such as mine and baby and bottle and their sister s name. 

Of interest is that most of the children are probably plateauing and then losing. If we look at 
that, most of the children are losing skills at about 18 months old and they have had, at least in 
our group, a mean of four or five words. This is low, they should have more, and they have 
started at 12 or 13 months of age. If a child starts talking at this age, he or she should have many 
more than four or five words by 18 months. It looks as if they are getting a few words, hanging 
on to them for several months, and then fading out. 

Even more parents report loss of social behavior than word loss; and with videos, I do believe 
parents. If they say that he played peek-a-boo, I believe that he played peek-a-boo. It may be that 
parents had to work harder to make that happen, especially as the children get older. We tend to 
forget how hard we work with a small child. I do also think that the children are losing things, 
and that is partly why there has been so much concern about vaccinations, because it is a high 
vaccination time. 

Our study is supposed to look at that. We felt like basically that is what the data suggested, 
but parents are so worried about it so it is important to do a more careful study than has been 
done. On the whole, the evidence for vaccination causing autism is not at all strong, but these 
patterns are complicated. There is the issue of social behaviors fading out, as well as the issue of 
talking and stopping talking, which occurs with a smaller number of children. 

As far as we can tell in Down Syndrome, Fragile X, William Syndrome, and Idiopathic Mental 
Retardation, one sees children who start babbling, but not children who get words and lose 
them without their being replaced by anything else. Many normal children will say one word 
and stop saying that word and say another one. 

Sally Townsend: I work in the public school system in a first grade classroom, and one child 
has autism. The other children are uncomfortable with this child. Are there resources for help? 



Lord: The Michigan Autism Society and the North Carolina Autism Society have web pages, and 
they also have bookstores. They have lists of books and suggestions that might be relevant. You 
may want to find someone experienced with autism to talk to your teachers. There are many 
things that you can do. You want to give the child an alternative behavior and some other way of 
making contact. You must also give the other children something positive to do with that child, 
but that does not involve being hugged. 



ERIC 



269 



263 



SYMPOSIA/ROUND TABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



The Multimodal Treatment of ADHD: 

An Overview of the NIMH Study 

CHAIR: John Pascoe 
DISCUSSANT: Judith Bloch 

PRESENTERS: L. Eugene Arnold, Benedetto Vitiello 

■ Effectiveness of Different Treatment Approaches 
to ADHD: The MTA Outcomes 

L. Eugene Arnold 

■ MTA Study: Implications for Clinical Care and Further Research 

Benedetto Vitiello 

Jack Pascoe: Dr. Gene Arnold is Professor Emeritus of Psychiatry at Ohio State. He was execu- 
tive secretary of the steering committee for the Multimodal Treatment Study and is currently 
chair of the committee. Dr. Ben Vitiello is Chief of Child and Adolescent Treatment and Preven- 
tive Intervention Research at NIH. Ben was a coinvestigator on the study. Judith Bloch is the 
founder and CEO of Variety Child Learning Center. It is a center in New York for children with, 
and who are at risk for, developmental disabilities. The center serves children from 2 to 7 years 
of age. 

L. Eugene Arnold: The Multimodal Treatment Study of children with ADHD, or the MTA, as it 
is affectionately known by those of us who realize that after 10 years we still cannot get off it, is 
currently doing a 6-year and 8-year follow-up study. We hope to do a 10-year assessment to 
follow the subjects through adolescence. The MTA was the largest study and clinical trial done 
by NIMH up to that time and the first one with children. It was a real team effort, involving a 
dozen universities as well as NIMH staff. 

For those who may not be completely familiar with ADHD, I will quickly run through the 
fact that there are several criteria— and having the symptoms by themselves is not enough. It is 
true that to have combined-type ADHD, which is what we were studying, you must have six of 
nine symptoms of inattention, distractability, disorganization,and so forth, and you also must 
have six of nine symptoms of overactivity and impulsiveness, such as blurting out answers, not 
being able to wait your turn, restless climbing and running, and so forth. The behaviors have to 
be inappropriate for the developmental level and mental age. They also have to be a chronic 
problem over a long period of time, with impairment dating from prior to age 7. The impair- 
ment has to occur in more than one setting. More importantly, it cannot be explained better by 
some other mental disorder like autism, schizophrenia, or bipolar disorder. 

The MTA was designed to answer two primary questions. It is important to keep these in 
mind while evaluating the results. One of the things you will notice is that the study was not 
developed to test whether a treatment is effective or not. All four treatment conditions we 
studied were established as effective treatments. We were merely comparing the relative effective- 
ness of them. 

The first question was to compare the two major, well-documented treatment modalities — 
behavioral treatment and stimulant medication — to compare them to each other and to 
compare each one to the combination of the two. The hypothesis is that the combination of 
behavioral treatment and medication would be better than either modality alone. We had no a 
priori hypothesis as to which one of the two single modalities would be better. The second 
question was to compare good state-of-the-art intense treatments in each of these three strategies 
to the way treatment was delivered routinely in the community. 





264 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



The sample was 579 children, ages 7 to 9 in first through fourth grades. Eighty percent of the 
children were male, which is what you would expect with ADHD. All of the participants had 
categorical and dimensional diagnoses of ADHD. There was a lot of comorbidity, that is, other 
mental disorders besides ADHD. One third of the sample had an anxiety disorder; about one 
half had either oppositional defiant disorder or conduct disorder, one of the aggressive conduct 
problems. The average impairment score of 22 on the Columbia Impairment Scale (CIS) was 
fairly high; 16 is considered the threshold for clinical impairment. In order to keep a widely 
representative sample, the only exclusionary criteria were factors that would interfere with 
participating in the treatments or assessments. 

The children were randomly assigned to four treatment conditions over a period of 14 
months. These were actually treatment strategies, not just single treatments. There was medica- 
tion management alone, behavioral treatment alone, the combination, and then the community 
comparison group that received no treatment by the study but found treatment in the commu- 
nity and was assessed at the same time points— baseline, 3, 9, 14, and 24 months— as were the 
MTA-treated groups. 

The medication strategy started out with a placebo-controlled crossover tiu-ation of meth- 
ylphenidate (MPH), which was chosen because it is the most studied dmg for ADHD. A kind of 
priority list was compiled from a number of controlled studies that showed efficacy and safety 
of medications that had been tested. The first one was methylphenidate; this had a placebo- 
controlled trial. The others were open trials titrated to a standard of no room for improvement 
or a clinical global impression (CGI) of 1 or 2, which is normal or minimal impairment. In 
other words, we were aiming to normalize the function of the children. 

The behavioral treatment was intense. The continuity was provided by 35 sessions of parent 
training, 27 group and 8 individual. That was linked by a daily report card to teachers, who 
received behavioral consultation, which occurred twice monthly throughout the first school year 
and for 10 sessions of the second year. The recruitment was in the spring of one school year, and 
the study extended through the following school year. In the summer the counselors filled out 
daily report cards at an all-day treatment program. The summer program was an 8-week, 9- 
hours-a-day behavioral treatment with a staff to child ratio of 2: 1 . The counselors were u-ained 
m the classrooms of the same children during the spring, then they followed the children into 
the fall classrooms as paraprofessional aides. One aide was assigned half-time to each of the 
subjects in the study, worked with the teacher and the child, and were available to help with 
general classroom activities. 

All the treatments began simultaneously, but in the combination strategy both the behavioral 
treatrnent and medication strategy were used together. There was an adaptation with the 
combination strategy because you could not have two different therapists to manipulate two 
different treatment strategies independently. The algorithm was that the behavioral treatment 
took primacy. If a problem developed, there was an adjustment in the behavioral treatment first. 
On the medication strategy, the only thing you could do was adjust the medication. 

For the 289 children assigned to one of the MTA medication groups — either combination or 
medication management — 198, something like 65 %, had a good enough response to meth- 
ylphenidate to keep them on it and not try any other dmg. There were 26 children who had a 
poor enough response that they were immediately shunted over to try the next dmg on the list, 
which was dextroamphetamine. Interestingly, 32 children had a good enough response to 
placebo that they were started into the 13-month maintenance period on no medication. This 
included children who were not receiving any behavioral treatment, but they were monitored 
and had monthly visits. Most of them ended up needing medication later on, but there was this 
initial placebo response. Seventeen refused to take medication, and there were some who had 
problems with the titration. 

I want to mention methylphenidate's side effects because of an interesting finding. As 
expected appetite, insomnia, and blunting of affect tended to be dose-dependent. Irritability, 




271 



265 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



however, actually decreased with rising dose. The same results were found with teacher ratings of ■ 
irritability. I think this is because irritability is part of the ADHD syndrome, even though it is not 
an official diagnostic criterion. 

During the first month of titration, the teacher ratings showed a dramatic effect, while parent 
ratings did not. Teachers were blind as to whether the medication was placebo or not, but the 
children's behavior may have been a little worse than at home due to the difference in setting. 

The demands in school generally bring out problems. One thing you can see is that with the 
high dose, teachers and parents are kind of equalized. Even the improvement on parent ratings 
was highly significant. 

The important data on the whole sample of 579 children come from the outcomes at 14 
months. Many different domains of outcome were examined. The parent inattention ratings on 
the Swanson, Nolan, and Pelham (SNAP) rating scale, which includes the 18 DSM-IV symp- 
toms, showed that there was most improvement in the combination group. All groups im- 
proved, but the combination and medication management groups improved significantly more 
than the behavioral treatment and community comparison groups. Although combination 
treatment consistently came out best, the difference from medication management is not 
significant. Similarly, the difference between community comparison and behavior alone is not 
significant, even though intensive behavioral treatment seems consistently slightly better than 
usual community care. 

The same pattern not only showed up on the parent ratings of inattention but also the 
teacher ratings of inattention. It also showed up on parent ratings of hyperactivity/impulsivity, 
the other major domain for ADHD symptoms. On the teacher ratings, the behavioral treatment 
group separates a little bit from the community comparison group and is no longer significantly 
inferior to the two MTA-medicated groups. However, behavioral treatment is still not signifi- 
candy better than the community comparison. Statistically the two MTA-medicated groups are 

better than the community comparison group. 

Again, I need to point out that the community comparison group is not a control group; it is 
not an untreated control. Two-thirds of the community comparison group sought out medica- 
tion from their own physicians, so they were medicated and generally used the same drugs as 
the MTA-treated medication and combination groups. This means that the outcome was not 
only dependent on whether the child received medication, but the overall treatment plan includ- 
ing the care, consistency, and attention to the psychosocial aspects of psychopharmacology. 

On the oppositional-defiant-aggressive spectrum, there was a similar pattern. An interesting 
surprise was that on internalizing symptoms (anxiety and depression) on the social skills rating 
system, even though one would not expect these factors to improve from a stimulant medica- 
tion, there was a significant effect. The children in the MTA-medicated algorithm have more 
improvement in internalizing symptoms than those with behavioral treatment alone or in the 
community comparison group. Both the combination and medication management groups are 
significantly better than the community comparison group for social skills as well. The behav- 
ioral group is not significantly different from any of the others as it falls in between the MTA- 
medicated groups and the community comparison. 

We had a number of measures for family functioning, one of which was parent-child arguing. 
All three of the MTA-treated groups were significantly better than the community comparison on 
this measure of parent-child conflict. Behavioral alone was almost congruent with the medica- 
tion alone group on the measure, while combination was a tad better than the two, though this 
difference is not significant. Interestingly, the medication management group had a significantly 
higher dose of medication over the 14 months than did the combination group. 

There was a signification effect on reading with the combination group, better than either the 
community comparison or the behavioral alone group. The combination group showed 
significantly more improvement than the community comparison group in all domains of 




266 



272 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



function whereas medication alone or behavioral alone were not consistently superior to 
community comparison. 

For just ADHD alone at this age without co-morbidity well-delivered medication seems 
superior to behavioral treatment and may be enough for the ADHD symptoms by itself. Behav- 
ioral management is an acceptable treatment for those preferring not to use medication. Three 
fourths of the sample could be maintained for 14 months with no medication. One fourth 
supplemented with medication, and that was a protocol violation. They either got it on their 
own or we were forced to let them have it for ethical reasons. The other three-fourths were able 
to manage without it. 

The combination group had the biggest decrease, that is improvement in comorbidity. The 
community comparison had the least improvement in comorbidity, and the other two groups 
fell in between. 

One of the striking differences between the behavioral treatment and medication manage- 
ment was a kind of crisscross in terms of nonacceptance. The psychosocial, behavioral treatment 
was very well accepted, while medication management was actually declined by 21 participants 
even though they had agreed to accept whatever treatment they were assigned. On the other 
hand, only 3 of the children who used medication had to supplement it with behavioral 
treatment, but 38 out of 144 — about 26% of the behavioral group — had to supplement behav- 
ioral treatment with medication. 

On a composite score of all the measures in the study, combination was significantly better 
than medication management alone. Both of them were significantly better than the community 
comparison and better than behavioral treatment alone. 

The local normative comparison group came from the same classrooms as the other children. 
The four treatment groups were fairly congruent at baseline on the total of ADHD and OCD 
symptoms as rated by parents and teachers. All four groups moved toward the normal group 
with treatment but the combination group moved the most, with 68% having a SNAP item 
mean of "just a little" or less. 

Secondary analyses showed that children with both ADHD and anxiety but not other 
disorders improved the most and about equally well with combination, medication manage- 
ment alone, or behavioral treatment alone. Those with oppositional-defiant or conduct disorder 
require medication for optimal benefit, and those with both anxiety and oppositional or 
conduct disorder (besides ADHD) need combination treatment for optimal care. 1 do not have 
time to go into the 24-month data. If it comes up during questions, then maybe we can discuss it. 

Question: Could you clarify who was in the community group? You alluded to the fact that 
some children used medication and others did not. It would give me a better understanding of 
the difference for that group compared to the combination group. 

Arnold: The groups were evenly matched on all sociodemographic variables. There was a 
statistically significant difference in age. If you listed all 20 variables, there was one that hap- 
pened to be statistically significant. It was a difference of 3 months in age, which we thought 
was clinically meaningless. There was random assignment to the four groups, so they should 
have been similar. 

Question: What percentage of the community group was already on medication? 

Arnold: Thirty-one percent of the entire sample was already on medication. I do not know 
offhand what the numbers were for each of the groups, but by random assignment, you would 
expect some spread. I suppose somewhere between 25 and 35% in each group had taken medica- 
tion before. Two-thirds took it after being randomly assigned to community comparison. Two- 
thirds sought out medication at that point, even though only 31% had been taking it prior to that. 



O 

ERIC 



273 



267 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Question: You talked about medication levels, and there seemed to be quite a bit more medica- 
tion given to the medication only group versus the combination? 

Arnold: The difference was 31 mg a day for the combination group and 38mg for the medication 
only. The difference of about 20% was statistically significant. 

Question: When you were monitoring side effects, was there a difference? 

Benedetto Vitiello: There was more loss of appetite; for instance, the impact on weight is dose- 
related. The group that received a higher dose of medication had lower growth in weight, and I 
believe also in height, compared to the other group. 

Comment: I think these are important issues to bring out in discussion— time, dose, and so on. 
Question: Why did you choose 14 months? 

Arnold: The 14-month period was a compromise between what we should have done and what 
we could afford to do. We wanted to conduct a 2-year study based on the previous work by 
Cantwell and Satterfield. When we tried to fit the study into the budget, completed the power 
analyses, and realized how many subjects were needed, we could only afford 14 months of 
treatment. That was the end of the treatment phase. 

Question: Have you conducted any subsequent analysis of the period before the 14 months 
ended? 

Arnold: The chosen endpoint in the design of the study was 14 months. We decided that we 
would not peek at the data prior to that. However, because of questions that have been raised 
about the fading of the behavioral treatment, we recently analyzed the 9-month data and 
compared it to the 14-month data. I am leading that paper, and it is almost ready to submit. I 
can tell you that there is no striking difference in the results at 9 versus 14 months. For the most 
part, the changes occurred early in the treatment and then continued through the treatment 
period. In fact, by 3 months, most of changes were obvious. 

Vitiello: My task now is to discuss the implications for clinical care and research. The MTA has 
contributed a lot to what we know about attention deficit disorder. I will try to integrate a little 
bit of what we know without the pretense of being comprehensive. Basically, I'll try to address 
what we know about the treatment of children with attention deficit disorder and what we do 
not know but still need to learn in order to eventually have a more rational approach to this 
condition. 

It is clear that there are effective treatments that are able to decrease symptoms of attention 
deficit disorder; they are able to improve other behavioral components such as being opposi- 
tional, being defiant, conduct disorder in general, and aggression. We have treatments that are 
able to improve school performance in terms of completion and accuracy. We also know that 
behavioral, pharmacological, and combined treatment are all efficacious in some way, even 
though medication is more effective than behavioral treatment on most of these targets. For 
medication, the effect size is large, with a difference of about 1 standard deviation between 
stimulant treatment and placebo. This translates into the so-called number needed to treat of 
1.5. The number needed to treat is used a lot now in evidence-based medicine and is the 
number a clinician needs to treat in order to add 1 more improved subject to those improved 
regardless of treatment. So if you treat 1.5 children, you will add 1 subject to the half that would 
improve regardless of treatment. This is an extremely high number to treat. For instance, if you 



O 

ERIC 



268 



274 



children with special needs and disabilities 



want to consider treatment of ear infection in pediatrics, how many ear infections would 
improve spontaneously versus how many would improve with antibiotic treatment? You 
compare antibiotic treatment with no treatment; the number needed to treat is about 7, because 
about 80% of children would improve in their otitis media regardless of treatment. The success- 
ful rate of treatment will be about 95% with the use of antibiotics, but the difference between 95 
and 80% is fairly small, so the number needed to treat is high. What all this means is that 
stimulants are very powerful, effective treatments. The efficacy has been consistent and repli- 
cated across treatments. 

We also know that treatment not only improves behavior, but can also normalize it. This 
means that the behavior of ADHD children can become indistinguishable to that of children 
who are non-ADD. The percentage of normalization is higher (68%) for combined treatment 
that includes medication and psychosocial intervention or behavioral therapy. The percentage is 
56% for medication alone and is lower with just behavioral treatment. If you use a community 
control, which is not optimal treatment, the improvement is much lower in terms of normaliza- 
tion rate. What is important is the type of treatment. When there is a stimulant medication 
involved, the success rate is greater. The quality of treatment is also important, because we know 
that community control uses medication, but they use doses and levels of monitoring that are 
inferior to the MTA trial. We believe that for such reasons there was less improvement. 

I want to say that Ritalin was optimal treatment for about two thirds of the treatment groups. 
There was no head-to-head comparison between Ritalin and Adderall or dextroamphetamine. It 
just happened that we selected Ritalin as the first stimulant. The conclusion here is that if you 
try one stimulant on a child, the probable chances of success are about two thirds or 65%. Only 
4 children or 1% out of the 289 children had prohibitive side effects such as skin picking, big 
mood changes, or loss of appetite that prevented the continued use of treatment. 

What is important also is the comorbidity. For the children in the MTA trial who had either 
attention deficit disorder alone or attention deficit disorder with another behavioral problem, 
like oppositional defiant disorder or conduct disorder, behavioral therapy was not terribly 
effective. It was actually the same as community control. On the contrary, medication manage- 
ment and combined treatment resulted in better response rates. However, for the children who 
also have anxiety disorder or anxiety symptoms in addition to attention deficit disorder, behav- 
ioral treatment was quite effective. I would say it is almost as effective as combined and a little 
inore effective than medication management, even though the difference is not statistically 
significant. 

The conclusion from the secondary analyses for these subgroups must be taken with some 
caution because it was not predicted when the study was launched. The conclusion is that if 
there is coexistence of attention deficit disorder and many internalizing symptoms such as 
anxiety or mood changes, behavioral intervention may be the most appropriate or, at the least, 
an appropriate treatment and likely to be as effective as stimulant medication. 

We also know that the treatment remains effective over time and is not just a short-term 
effect. Eugene has already pointed out the difference in medication dosage between medication 
alone arid combined. Combined treatment was associated with lower average dose of stimulant 
medication, so that is a potential benefit of combining behavioral therapy and medication. The 
finding needs to be retested in a separate study, because this was a serendipitous finding and 
there were potential confounders. 

Targets such as social skills, cognitive performance, interpersonal interaction, and internaliz- 
ing sjmiptoms can be improved by treatment including stimulant medication. These have been 
traditionally targets of psychotherapy, but can be improved also by stimulant medication based 
on the MTA data. However, we do not have enough data to conclude that treatment improves 
acadenaic achievement other than it helps with the completion of schoolwork. The existing data, 
including the MTA trial, do not seem to suggest that the grades of these children improve more ' 
with a specific treatment. We still do not know whether later psychopathology — meaning 





269 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



incidents of depression, antisocial behavior, or substance abuse-can be ameliorated in some 
way by earlier treatment of AJDHD. Also, we suppose that treatment will lead to a better out- 
come for social achievement but there is no empirical support of that yet. 

We know quite a bit now about the safety of stimulants. Most children will present with 
sonig side effects, but will be able to live with them and tolerate treatment. There are no cardio- 
vascular side effects or seizures, so the heart or blood pressure is usually not affected with 
stimulant treatment. Tics can be a problem, but they are much less of a problem than originally 
suspected. Years ago, the presence of tics was an absolute contraindication for treatment of 
stimulants. For the last 4-5 years now, it has become a relative contraindication, meaning you 
need to be careful and monitor the child. In most cases, even if they get tics, they will be able to 
handle the medication and the tics will not get worse. Sometimes, strangely enough, the tics get 
better with treatment of ADHD. 

There is a delay in physical growth, both in weight and height that is statistically significant 
with time. This is dose-related; the delay is greater with the higher dose of stimulant. "Drug 
holidays" can help minimize delay on growth, but the MTA data show that intensive treatment 
without drug holidays translated into a better treatment of ADHD symptoms. The family needs 
to be aware that this is sort of a tradeoff at the moment until we have better medication that is 
as powerful without the side effects. 

Another important question from a clinician s point of view is whether the stimulants induce 
mania in children who are predisposed to mania in some way. The little data that we have does 
not seem to support that, but it is too early to draw a conclusion. A major concern that has 
come up is do stimulants encourage substance abuse in some children later on since they are 
drugs with abuse potential? There is little evidence of that. Most of the data suggests that, if 
anything, there is a negative association between treatment with stimulants and substance abuse 
later on. The reverse aspect of that question is whether treatment with stimulants protects 
children from later developing substance abuse problems. Again, there is limited evidence. 

If we see the phases of research on ADHD as different chapters. Chapter 1 would be whether 
there are effective, short-term treatments. I think it has been settled that there are such treat- 
ments. The second question would be whether the treatment remains effective for long-term, 
chronic use. I would say yes, it does. The third important question that deserves a chapter is 
whether treatment leads to distal benefits, whether it really improves the lives of these children 
as they become young adults. 

Current research is moving in this direction. There is the extended follow-up of the MTA 
trials. Another approach would be to use a prospective study of naturalistically treated samples. 
The advantages are that they are easier to recruit and likely to be representative of usual patients 
in clinical practice. However, there is no experimental control/ which is the major limitation of 
this approach. So, at the moment our best hope to contribute data for this important question is 
to have a systematic follow-up of the MTA trial. The retention rate is high. We are focusing on 
major outcomes such as psychopathology, function in several domains, and substance abuse. 
This extended follow-up is ongoing at the seven sites. 

In spite of such extensive studies, attention deficit disorder remains a major area of research. 
Attention deficit disorder remains third in terms of the amount of funds spent in that area. One 
currently ongoing study is examining the efficacy and safety of stimulant medication in 
preschoolers. The rationale for this study is that attention deficit disorder typically starts in 
preschool years. Retrospectively, for all the children who are typically diagnosed in elementary 
school, one can actually trace back the beginning of their disorder to ages 3 and 4. 

Typically this is the classic story of attention deficit disorder: The child enters preschool. The 
teacher complains a lot but is still able to handle the situation. Sometimes the parents say that 
preschool is too early for him and keep him at home. Basically that is a period where there is 
already a signal of the problem, but it is not recognized or treated. When the child starts 
elementary school, he/she is unable to function. At that point, the diagnosis is made, but it may 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



be too late. It would be desirable to make the diagnosis early in an attempt to prevent complica- 
tions and comorbidity. In practice, many clinicians are already using medications in preschool 
children, even though they are not FDA-approved. As a result of that, about 2 years ago we 
launched a study called PATS (Preschoolers with Attention Deficit Disorder Treatment Study). 
This study examines children with severe attention deficit disorder and functional impairment at 
home and at preschool. The children must first be treated with behavioral therapy by the 
parents for 8 weeks under the direction of an expert. After that, if they are still impaired, then 
they enter the medication phase, so it is a complicated study where the approach to medication 
is administered conservatively to protect the child and not begin medication too early. The study 
is in progress and being run at six sites. Larry Greenhill is the major coordinator of this with 
NIMH. I do not think we will have results for a couple of years. 

Another study that we are funding through a grant involves psychosocial treatment designed 
for preschool children. So far all the behavioral therapy manuals have been done for school-age 
children, but certainly this can also be applied to preschoolers. George DuPaul is conducting 
this study at Lehigh University. 

Pelham at Buffalo is looking at the interaction between behavioral therapy and medication 
affects, meaning the different doses of medications and different levels of intensity of behavioral 
therapy. The purpose is to see what happens when you combine these different degrees of 
intensity of treatments. 

Arnold is involved with a study at Ohio State University in the RUPP (Research Unit of 
Pediatric Psychopharmacology) network that is trying to test the efficacy and safety of stimulant 
medication in children with pervasive developmental disorders that include autism, Asperger^s 
syndrome, and other types of pervasive developmental disorders. These children may benefit 
from stimulants but can also have side effects; we want to do a systematic study to give some 
directions to clinicians. 

There is a study that attempts to develop treatment for a combination of attention deficit 
disorder and anxiety disorder that is run at five sites. There is also one small study that is 
focusing on attention deficit disorder inattentive type. Arnold pointed out at that the MTA 
sample was a combined type of either hyperactive or combined types of attention deficit 
disorder. There are children who have only inattention, and they were not included in the MTA 
study. The inattentive type was left out in some way and has not been studied quite as well as 
the group with hyperactivity, so we need to catch up on that particular subtype of attention 
deficit disorder. I do not have time to go into the details of each study, but I wanted to give you 
an idea of how much interest and research is taking place in this area. 

Pascoe: Are there any questions or clarifications for Ben? 

Young )uhn: In the combined group and the medication group, do we know what proportions 
of the children were not responders to the medication? Somehow, if we have some kind of 
demographic or clinical characteristics to identify those children, it might be yery useful in terms 
of knowing when the medication would be effective. 

Vitiello: The question is about whether it is possible to identify characteristics of nonresponders 
to medication. I think it is an important issue. We are trying to focus particularly on the children 
with autism and pervasive developmental disorder, because the percentage of children who do 
not respond to medication is small among the children with normal IQ and attention deficit 
disorder. Some people estimate that it is less than 10%, which cannot be dismissed, but certainly 
it is a small number. On the contrary, pervasive developmental disorder can be as high as 30%. 
We have more chances to detect possible moderators of nontreatment or treatment failure, 
including pharmacogenetics components. 




277 



271 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Judith Bloch: I am not a physician. I come to this issue from a different perspective. For more 
than 30 years, I have spent my professional life working with young children who are at risk and 
those with developmental disabilities. 1 am by training a social worker, an educator, and the 
founder of a program that has worked with thousands of young children both in what we call 
self-contained classrooms and in integrated and inclusionary programs. All of the children at the 
center in a self-contained program are classified between the ages of 2 and 7 . They have at least a 
3373% delay in one domain of development or a 25% delay in two domains of development. 

The MTA study examined children ages 7 to 9. My area is for children under 7, which 1 
assume many of you are concerned about in Head Start and in the field. Believe it or not, there 
are still many parents and other significant people in the lives of children under 5 who question 
the evidence that a child as young as 2, 3, or 4 can have some kind of a neurological disorder 
based on behavior alone. There is no blood test or “real test. The media does it all the time, so 
those of us who work with young children need to be able to say that there has been a major 
study funded by NIMH. The study found that there is indeed a neurological disorder and that 
these children can be identified by ages 3 and 4. It is not that the child is bad or disobedient; 
this is a driven child, who often cannot control a motor that is running. Some parents believe 
that their child got the wrong genetic loading. We need to remember that they themselves often 
may be struggling with some of this disability and now, at the same time, have a child to 
manage. So there is the importance of informing adults involved in children's lives about the 
nature and validity of this disability. 

The MTA study identified the effective interventions. What we take from the study is that it is 
not only what we do with young children but the quality of how well we do it that makes much 
of the difference. The community care, which was the control group, showed that professionals 
in the mental health clinics and private practice share the same ideas. Perhaps the links between 
home, school, the teams, and the monitoring of medication was not always at the same effective 
level that the experts in the field have learned needs to exist. 1 wondered whether medication 
alone is just that, because the child and mother were seen monthly by a well-informed and 
knowledgeable professional who provided not only care for the monitoring of medication but 
also information, support, and readings. 

1 recently received some information on demographics of children with ADHD. The children 
who are classified at the ages of 3 or 4 more typically tend to come from families of privilege 
and education. What does that tell us? It tells us that a well-informed parent is more likely to be 
familiar with the early child developmental sequence and more likely to seek out help early on. 

I think that a great deal of what we now know about behavioral intervention and praising and 
rewarding is almost common knowledge; it is no longer limited to those of us who have been 
trained. 

The study identified what they called the core behaviors and separated out what they thought 
were secondary problems. This may be true with 7-9 year olds, but 1 have not seen children 
between the ages of 2-7 who have only had core disabilities. This disability affects the child's 
total social functioning. It affects the relationship with their parents, family life, and their ability 
to interact with children of their age. At school, it affects their relationship with the teacher and 
their sense of self and self-esteem when they realize that they either cannot control how they 
behave or that Johnny next to them is getting compliments and approval in ways that they 
cannot expect to receive. Issues of self-esteem begin as early as 3-4 years old. 

1 think there is a potential for harm if we overlook the effectiveness of behavioral interven- 
tion in that we can rely too heavily on medication. Maybe there are opportunities that we would 
be using as we move away from the area of highly qualified, well-trained professional people 
and move into a more general insurance-favored modality of "a pill will fix it all." 1 know from 
both professional and some personal experience that there is never 100% improvement with 
medication. The practical problems emerge during early morning when there is no medication. 
If the child wakes up before mom does, it can be a disaster with who should be coming down- 




272 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



stairs, getting ready for school, getting dressed — it does not happen. There are problems in the 
early morning and after dinner, all of which go on to affect a child's relationship with their 
parents. As a result, I would say that behavioral intervention is even more important. There is a 
rationale to why parents prefer behavioral interventions. They feel desperate that they cannot 
control their children and comfort their children when they misbehave. They have not found a 
way to anticipate, avoid, or deal with the impending disaster. The critical advantages of behav- 
ioral intervention is that parents learn the skills to deal with behavior and anticipate experiences 
that may overstimulate a child or that a child may not be ready for. 

Let us consider why behavioral intervention may be more beneficial in children under 7 years 
of age. Everybody talks about the plasticity of brain development, the window of opportunity. 
Although medication is now used with children this age, in our program none of the children 5 
years or younger is on medication. There are concerns about safety. We have children who were 
started on medication, and their parents became frantic because of the side effects in some of 
the children; maybe the dosage is an issue. The question is whether the intervention equips 
parents and teachers with the skills to deal with behavior. 

The severity of the disorder is also an issue and that it is on a continuum. I may have missed 
a component in the MTA study that identified where children were in the continuum. At the 
center we look at that in the young child, because there is a range and there is a difference. We 
start by preparing an assessment with an instrument we have been working on for about 25 
years called The Five P's. It is the Parent/Professional Preschool Performance Profile that is a 
shared assessment for children 2-5 years of age where parents and teachers rate the child on 458 
developmental skills and interfering behaviors. I mainly speak to the early childhood crowd, so I 
publish and write for a magazine that's read by early childhood educators. I have one article on 
troubled children, "Preschoolers Could Cause Trouble Later," which talks about interventions 
and another article on approaching and informing parents about the possibility of disability. 
What we monitor over time is the state of the disability, the intensity, and then we look at the 
frequency, intensity, and duration in the way in which we can measure or see changes over time. 
If there is a child who has five temper tantrums in a half hour because he cannot wait, and those 
temper tantrums each last 10 minutes, we may see in 2 months that the number, length, or the 
intensity of those tantrums decreases. The child can begin to self-comfort and turn around; that 
is progress. 

We also conducted an outcome study in conjunction with Hicks at Fordham that examined 
results at the end of 15 months. We thought we could expect change after 6 months just from 
maturation. Children get better; they learn; they improve. We used the same instruments to 
review and look at the behavior after 6 months, but the place in which the water started boil- 
ing — this is what I tell parents when something is happening, you have the fire under the pot, 
you do not see it, but something is going to happen— was with our 2- and 3-year-olds who had 
begun in the program. We are trying to write that up and get the paper out into the field. It did 
lead to a designation by New York State Education Department so that we became a validated 
model; we had to demonstrate that we had an outcome. 

Head Start centers can be pivotal because they can identify and intervene. I work with Dylan, 
who says a good teacher is worth 10 milligrams. I would say that a good mother is worth 
another 10 and would conclude by saying that when all of the stakeholders and all of the parties 
to the issue collaborate and work well together, maybe for the younger children we do not need 
medication all the time. 

Linda Scheer: I am from the New York University Quality Improvement Center for Disabilities 
Services. Thank you for your concerns about medications for the preschoolers because the 
behaviors we have seen in children of that age have origins in many different places. I think that 
too often we like to jump to the conclusion that they have ADHD or disorders that need to be 
treated with medication, especially with children who are so vulnerable and challenging as our 




0 



79 



273 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



own at some times, who may just be responding to their environments. We need to be careful 
about how we determine how to handle them, plus the fact that expectations are raised in how 
we approach children and the environments we have them in. 

Roslyn Galligan: Tm from Svinbume University in Australia. 1 am interested to know how tightly 
you apply the diagnostic criteria of ADHD across two contexts. How did you manage that? 

Arnold: The question was regarding how it was determined that there were symptoms or 
impairment in both settings. There was a dimensional criterion that they had to be 1.5 standard 
deviations above the norm on the inattention overactivity factor of the IOWA Conners scale 
rated by teacher and 1.0 standard deviation above norm on the same scale by parent. They also 
had to meet DSM-IV categorical diagnostic criteria by parent report on a standardized interview, 
the Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children. 

Robin Vander Grocf: I am from New Jersey. One of my concerns is that many of our children 
are put on medication based upon the parent telling their pediatrician. This is the behavior. I 
feel my child should be on Ritalin." Is there a protocol that should take place? Should a pedia> 
trician put a child on this medication or should the child's neurological history be addressed 
before a child starts on such medication? 

Arnold: First of all and particularly for preschoolers, there should be a reasonably complete 
physical exam and medical history. There are medical conditions that can mimic ADHD 
symptoms, such as thyroid abnormality, lead poisoning, and a number of other things. Even 
though these are low percents of all those who would otherwise meet diagnostic criteria for 
ADHD, you might have 2% for each of these, these are still important things not to miss. They 
are real medical problems and should be treated; to just treat the symptoms with a stimulant or 
even behavioral treatment without addressing the cause would be certainly wrong. In addition, 
there needs to be a psychiatric or psychological evaluation to rule out better explanations of it, 
such as early bipolar disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, and other severe problems that 
require a different kind of treatment. There should also be direct communication of some kind 
from someone other than the parent such as the teacher. This does not necessarily have to be 
person-to-person or even on the phone; it can be a note from the teacher. Typically before I 
evaluate a child for ADHD, I will send the parent a rating scale for the teacher to fill out. It has 
a space on it to make any additional narrative comments. By assessing the child from different 
informants, you are sure it is not just a parent-child problem. There is a good chance you are 
not going to miss something else if it is coupled with a good medical history and psychiatric 
evaluation. 

Bloch: You have to look at children s behavior over an extended period of time at multiple sites 
with multiple observers. We all know that an office visit alone gets children to behave with 
strangers in different ways due to the unfamiliar setting. As Arnold says, all of the information 
that you gather should come with checklists and observational scales. There are many of them 
out there. In our program we use one in which parents and teachers observe and rate the child 
on the same behavior — social, emotional, relationship to adults — and share and compare so 
they can see how the child is the same or different. 

Arnold: Incidentally, there is a low correlation between parent and teacher ratings of the same 
child in terms of comparing individual items on the questionnaire. However, there is high 
correlation in terms of the rating of changes with an intervention. The explanation is that each 
setting brings out different symptoms that are observed. It is not the case that there are basic 
disagreements in the informants. 



er|c 



274 



280 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



Bloch: Let me add to that. It is interesting that we find differences in the share and compare 
initially. There are 458 observed items, and there is increased congruence over time as the center 
becomes a more familiar setting. As the parents trust us more, they can tolerate identifying more 
difficulties than they might have been comfortable identifying initially, so we see the ratings 
come together after at least 6 months. 

Vitiello: The only thing to add is that we do not need to reinvent anything here, because there 
are accurate practice parameters and guidelines for making diagnoses of attention deficit 
disorder. The American Academy of Pediatrics published one a number of years ago that has 
been revised. The American Academy of Child Psychiatry also has practice parameters, so there 
are guidelines. There are situations that are clinically ambiguous, but there is clear guidance 
about the steps for arriving at a diagnosis. 

Pascoe: The practical question is with a prevalence rate of maybe 1 in 20 children, do we have 
enough resources and people in the field to do the kind of assessment we are talking about right 
now? Any comments on that other than we need more? 

Arnold: I think that is a question that answers itself. It is pretty self-evident that the majority of 
children are not receiving optimal care. I think that was shown in the comparison group in the 
MTA; you could see the difference between the optimal treatment and the way it was being done 
at that time in the community. 

Lynn Brown: I am from Florida. You mentioned the difference between children who were 
treated in the community and the MTA treatment. I thought what I heard you say was that a lot 
of times, the children who were treated in the community had a dosage that tended to be low or 
inadequate? 

Arnold: She was asking what the differences were between the treatment in the community and 
the MTA. One of the things was dose. The average dose in the community is 23 milligrams a day; 
in the MTA-treated ones, it was 31 milligrams for the combination subjects and 38 for the 
medication management subjects. The number of times per day it was administered averaged 
2.3 in the community and 3 in the MTA. The frequency of visits were monthly in the MTA 
algorithm, but we actually allowed some of them to go 2 months if they were stabilized, doing 
well, and wished to cut down to every 2 months. About half of those who were eligible opted to 
do that, and it did not make any obvious difference. If they deteriorated, we brought them back 
to monthly visits until they were stabilized again. In the community, it was an average of 4 visits 
over 13 months compared to 10 visits in the MTA-treated group. The number of days they 
actually took medication was about half; in other words, they would start it, mn out, and not 
return to refill the prescription. There was all this inconsistency and no titration to an optimal 
dose; all these factors contributed to the differences. We currendy have a paper in preparation 
Aat is teasing this apart, doing a propensity analysis for the propensity to seek out medication 
in the community for a better comparison to the MTA-treated subjects. 

Bloch: I was wondering also whether the community-based group had the same connection to 
the school that the other group did because I feel that is a very significant variable. 

Arnold: The combination-treated group and the behavioral group had an improved relationship 
with the school. The teacher and parent were required by the treatment protocol to be involved 
with each other. 

Bloch: But what about the community-based group? That is the issue. 





275 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Arnold: The community comparison group had nothing done treatment-wise by the MTA, 
nothing other than assessments. The school was involved at the beginning, because we had to 
have agreement of the principal and the child's teacher to cooperate with the study before they 
could be randomized. However, one fourth were randomized to community comparison where 
the only further involvement was ratings by the teacher. 

Jane Goldman: I am from Connecticut. Did any of these treatment programs consider intense 
physical exercise for the children? There is some debate in the literature about it. We know now 
children are not getting recess, and they are so sedentary compared to how they used to be. 
Although I do not see that as the cause, I am wondering what your opinions are on increased 
exercise as one piece of treatment. 

Arnold: The question has to do with increased exercise and other treatments, particularly 
controversial treatments. A cooperative agreement like this, by definition, has to take treatments 
that are already established as efficacious. It is not a place where you test out unproven treat- 
ments. You have to assume that you are comparing the relative value of established treatments. I 
did a recent review of alternative treatments for ADHD, and there are over 24 with very widely 
divergent evidence bases ranging from some reasonably well-controlled studies that show effect 
in a small subgroup to some that just have no data at all. 

Kathleen Flanagan: I am from New York state. I am thrilled that with the little amount of 
money you get, you are able to study this. I am a mental health specialist for Head Start, and I 
wondered if you could tell us more about the PATS study that sounded right up our alley. 

Vitiello: It is a multisite trial that is currently mnning at sbc universities. The purpose is to see 
whether Ritalin is an effective and safe treatment for children ages 3 to 6 that have a severe form 
of attention deficit disorder that does not seem to improve with behavioral therapy alone. The 
study is in progress; I would say that roughly half the sample has been recmited. We project that 
the results will be available probably in a couple of years. 

Jefiffey Seitzer: I am from Maryland. I am also a mental health consultant. To follow up on 
that, we work with preschoolers, and alarmingly so many children are already on medication. 

Are there any clinical studies available for us to look at right now to give us some information 
about that? 

Vitiello: The question has to do with what data are available now on the efficacy and safety of 
stimulant medication like Ritalin for preschoolers. The answer is that there are eight published 
control studies over the last 20 years. These are small studies, so they do not really settle the 
issue. From the results of the studies, we can glean basically that Ritalin does seem to be effica- 
cious for some children, but there also seems to be greater incidence of adverse events than you 
may expect. It is not that the adverse events are qualitatively different, but their rate is different 
rate. The younger children appear to be more prone to develop some of these side effects, 
particularly the changes in mood. If you give a high dose of stimulants to a child, you will get a 
zombie-like feature; they will become lisdess and blunted. You get those more easily in children, 
but again this is just an impression; it is too early to really draw conclusions. 

Pascoe: I have read repeatedly without seeing any data that dextroamphetamine works better in 
preschoolers than methylphenidate. Any comments on that? 

Arnold: I recendy did a meta-analysis of the studies that directly compared amphetamine and 
methylphenidate in the same study. They were all in school-age children, I believe, although a 




276 



282 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



few of the studies may have included some preschoolers in the sample. In general the differ- 
ences between the drugs were not significant; however, the trends tended to favor amphetamine 
over methylphenidate. For example, the response rate to methylphenidate was something like 
60% and for dextramphetamine 70-some %. If you put the two together, the overall response 
rate was close to 90%; if you tried them in succession, one or the other would work. It is 
noteworthy though, that amphetamine is approved by the FDA for use in children under 6 years 
of age and methylphenidate is not. I think it is a historical accident that dextramphetamine land 
of got grandfathered in; it was an earlier drug. When methylphenidate came along, they did not 
bother to get the indication for it, but it is probably used more than amphetamine in 
preschoolers regardless of that. 

Cheryl Marsh: I am from Batavia, Illinois. I am a social worker who provides mental health 
consultation services. I have a comment in reference to the question about physical activity. It 
was interpreted by the panel as a form of treatment or intervention. I feel a need to say some- 
thing about developmentally appropriate practice, particularly in addressing preschoolers and 
what we know about children from lower socioeconomic groups. Outdoor play particularly 
seems to facilitate creative expression, creative play, let alone just physically getting out. When 
you couple this with the inability of these children to be outside and to have safe neighbor- 
hoods, I want to emphasize that you need to look at that environment as well and not minimize 
this. I have children that have definitely needed medication, but I think you need to look at that 
developmentally appropriate practice with these younger children. 

Bloch: I want to make a comment about the way in which we evaluate behavioral intervention 
in preschoolers. Often the skill level and training in the preschool system is of concern. There is 
sometimes a great deal of turnover, of underpaid and inadequately prepared staff, and behav- 
ioral intervention is a much more complicated land of intervention to clarify, design, imple- 
ment, and monitor than medication. On the other hand, when how we do the work is done in 
the way it needs to be done, it can in fact have an important impact. The question would be how 
much time do we leave or allocate for behavioral intervention? I thought I heard something like 
8 weeks for parent training, then if that does not work, we move to medication. Some of us 
might wonder about that study design. 

Cornelia Taylon I am Cornelia Taylor from the Kennedy Krieger Institute at Johns Hopkins in 
Baltimore, Maryland. I just wondered what methodology you are using to evaluate the safety of 
drugs in the PATS study. 

Vitiello: It is a traditional approach of gathering routine lab tests and a careful collection of 
adverse events that may emerge such as stomachaches, headaches, anything. It involves monitor- 
ing the height and the weight at different times periodically. 

Question: Do you have a checklist? 

Vitiello: Yes, there is a checklist. 




277 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Ethnic Psychopharmacology: 

Focus on Young Children 

CHAIR; Harry Wright 

PRESENTERS: Keh-Ming Lin, Lima Rao 

■ Ethnic Psychopharmalogy: General Issues 

Keh-Ming Lin 

■ Pharmacogenetics of Childhood Psychiatric Disorders 

Lima Rao 

Harry Wright; The issue of ethnopsychopharmacology, or pharmacology in general for a 
younger population, is becoming increasingly important, because in practice many young 
children are now being prescribed psychopharmacological agents. Without much evidence and 
research in this area, how to prescribe and the actions of these psychopharmacological agents 
are of great interest. 

The first presenter is Keh-Ming Lin from California. He is a professor of psychiatry at the 
University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) and director of a research center on psychobiol- 
ogy of ethnicity. He is the premier person in this area and started research around 
ethnopsychopharmacology. 

Keh-Ming Lin; There is an impression among the public of widespread use of medication in 
many child and adolescent patients. However, there are questions about the right medicine, the 
right dosage, potential side effects, and whether the problem confronting the use of medicine 
for children may be different from those that we are more familiar with for adults. This is an 
emergent field, and numerous questions have not been clearly resolved. I am not a child 
psychiatrist, so I will present more of the general principles. 

In some ways, there is a commonality when treating patients of different ethnic and age 
groups, in that such factors influence what kind of medication may work and what may be the 
right dosage. The problem is our general tendency to want to prescribe the same medicine and 
the same dosage for all patients. In reality, there is a wide variation in terms of how individual 
patients respond to medication. If one looks at the dosage used for any particular medication in 
a group of patients, there is up to a 40-fold difference, or sometimes even higher. On top of that, 
there are group differences. The magnitude of these differences is quite large. These two things 
are superimposed on each other, along with developmental stages, which also make a difference. 

It becomes clear that these variations should be expected when looking at all the factors that 
influence how people respond to medication. They include genetics and all the environmental 
factors. The environmental factors are interwoven with cultural factors. Even if identical twins 
with the same genetic background— which controls drug metabolism and how receptors, 
transporters, and the target organ respond to medication — are exposed to different environ- 
ments or have different lifestyles, certain genes may be turned on or off. This will cause distinct 
drug responses. Culture and psychological factors will also influence factors that are not imme- 
diately biological in nature, including medication adherence or compliance, placebo response, 
and many other psychosocial factors. Numerous factors make the treatment response complex; 
it should not be viewed simplistically. 

According to the most recent census survey, more than 25% of the United States population 
are now classified as ethnic minorities, so it is important for us to pay attention to ethnic 
variations. Only about 70% of the population are classically called the Caucasian group. This 



O 

ERIC 



278 



284 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



diversity will continue to expand, so that in 50 years, less than 50% of the population will be 
Caucasian. Other groups will be more prominently represented, which is already the case in 
California. There is no majority group; actually the Latinos are the largest group in the state of 
California, even more so in Los Angeles County. 

The Caucasian group only represents 20% of the entire world population. The issue that has 
not received attention until recently is that most of what we know about how medication works 
is based on clinical and research experiences with this small Caucasian group. This is even more 
prominent in the traditional clinical trials; they use young White males. The applicability of the 
findings to other groups is extremely limited. 

This is also the case in terms of practice with children. We have information about how drugs 
work with adults, but the information about how drugs work with children is limited to clinical 
experience. It could be completely erroneous to base the information on a small group of 
people and then assume that it might apply to most of the world. Many drugs have not been 
tried with children, and questions remain. 

In terms of evidence of ethnic differences in dosage and treatment response, a study con- 
ducted 20 years ago looked at the neuroleptic dose that was needed for patients to bring their 
psychotic symptoms under control. This study found that the maximal dosage for Asians 
necessary when the patients were in the hospital, as well as the stabilized dosage when they were 
ready to be discharged from the hospital, was less than one third of the dosage given to Cauca- 
sians. Yet they responded about as well as the higher dosages that were needed for the Caucasians. 

The question is why, and the next step is looking at whether these drugs were metabolized 
differently. For that study, we used a small amount of Haloperidol and gave it to a group of 
Caucasian volunteers and a group of Asian volunteers, then looked at their blood levels of the 
Halperidol over time. We found that most of the Asian subjects metabolized Haloperidol 
significantly slower than the Caucasian subjects, such that their blood level was significantly 
higher than the blood level of the Caucasian subjects. 

Although the two groups were significantly different, there is overlap in terms of the average. 
This means that not all Asians are slow metabolizers, and not all Caucasians are fast 
metabolizers. There is a danger in stereotyping and simply saying that one group would always 
be more sensitive to one drug as compared to the other. Within each group, the variation is also 
substantial. Therefore, we need to pay more attention to individual variation in treatment 
response. 

Other studies have repeatedly shown that ethnicity makes a difference in dosages. The 
literature is now huge, and the message is that we cannot ignore ethnicity or cultural differences 
in treatment response. This is true with lithium as well, where studies of how lithium is used in 
different countries have consistently shown that the blood level of lithium needed for the 
European and North American patients is quite different from the optimal treatment response 
for patients in Asian countries. In different parts of China and Japan, the therapeutic level of 
lithium is about two thirds of what is used in this country. 

Outside of psychiatry, cardiovascular medicines have also been shown to have differences in 
effects across ethnic groups. One study showed that Chinese patients with hypertension only 
require about one third of the blood level of Propranolol to achieve the same target clinical 
response as Caucasians. Chinese patients often need almost one tenth of the dosage that is 
commonly prescribed in the United States. 

Clinically, we have seen Chinese patients who were visiting the United States. They came to 
Los Angeles and ran out of Propranolol, so they went to a physician for a refill prescription. 
Typically, patients did not know the strength of their pills. The doctors asked how much they 
were taking, and the patient would say that he took the lowest dosage, so the doctor would 
prescribe the lowest dosage. However, the lowest unit dose in the United States is about three 
times as much as the lowest dose in China or Taiwan. Quite a few of those patients went into 
hypotensive shock. 



O 

ERIC 



285 



279 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



This is a summary of why there are individual differences: ethnic, gender, and age in terms of 
treatment response. Basically, there are two processes. One is pharmacokinetics, which is what 
happens to the dmg or what the body does to the drug. Our body does not recognize dmgs as 
dmgs; we recognize dmgs as foreign substances, which are potentially dangerous. The body has 
a system of enzymes to try to rid itself of these foreign substances. Commonly, about 99% of the 
dmg disappears and does not make it to the brain; it is destroyed in the gastrointestinal system. 

It could be different depending on how much enzymes one has. 

The other process is pharmacodynamics, which simply means what the dmg does to the 
target organ, to the body, or the brain. There are also variations with this process. Genetic and 
environmental factors determine both processes that lead to different clinical responses. 

Jon Korfmachcr: Do any environmental factors operate through the genotype, or could 
environmental factors have a direct effect on the pharmacokinetic system? 

Lin: Environmental factors often influence whether a gene is turned on or off, but that is only 
one factor. The pharmacokinetics system is made up of four processes: (a) how it is absorbed, 

(b) how it is distributed throughout the body, (c) how it is metabolized, and (d) how it is 
excreted from the body. For example, at least the absorption part does not depend on a change 
in one's genetic expression. Whether one eats more food or not could direct or influence how 
dmgs are absorbed. 

Of course, there are things we do not know about these factors that influence kinetics and 
dynamics completely. One area that is emerging, and that we have information about, is a group 
of enzymes called Cytochrome P450. These enzymes seem to be important in terms of deter- 
mining how fast one metabolizes dmgs. They may represent a limited step in terms of how 
dmgs are metabolized, which is why people focus their research on these enzymes. We have 
information about some of the most important Cytochrome P450 enzymes, including the CYP 
2D6, CYP3A4, CYP1A2 and CYP2C19, and I think also CYP2C9, which is not as important in 
psychiatry or mental health but is important in other medical fields. 

The interesting thing here is that there is huge individual variation in terms of how much of 
the enzyme one has in the body, and it is superimposed by clear ethnic variations. These 
variations are partly determined by one's genetic endowments but are also influenced by 
environmental factors. Some of these enzymes can be induced or inhibited. 

If a dmg is not metabolized by one enzyme, another metabolizes it, so there is no escape 
from enzymes for most dmgs. It is also tme for antidepressants that one enzyme may be more 
important for a certain dmg, and a different enzyme may metabolize another dmg. They all 
have to go through these metabolic processes. By knowing how much of the enzyme one has in 
the body, we have some understanding about whether a patient will need larger or smaller 
dosages of the medication. 

The most thoroughly studied of these enzymes is the CYP2D6. The way it was discovered is 
actually an interesting story. The field identified this enzyme through clinical trials about 30 
years ago. A new compound was tested, and they went through the Phase I and Phase II trials. A 
new compound is first tried out with volunteers, to find out how the dmg is metabolized and 
whether there are side effects. Then one looks at the dosage that is best for physiological effect. 

When looking for volunteers, a researcher usually volunteers himself or herself A pharmacol- 
ogy professor conducted a study, tested a compound on himself, and almost died. He recovered, 
and the compound was tested on about 100 people; he found out that only a few of them had a 
severe response or reaction to the dmg. He looked into it and found that this dmg, 
Debrisoquine, which is useful for treating hypertension, was metabolized by an enzyme that he 
was lacking. About 7% of Caucasians do not have the enzyme; the other 93% have the enzyme. 
Even with people who have the enzymes, the activity varies about 100-fold. 




280 



286 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



The next question is why people are different in terms of enzyme activity. It turns out that 
most of the Caucasians who lack the enzyme have mutations in the gene that control the 
expression of this enzyme. The mutation inactivates the gene so that the gene does not produce 
enzymes, or they produce enzymes that are not effective. The so-called extensive metabolizers 
who have the enzyme have the normal gene that leads to the production of the enzyme. 

Across ethnic groups, the difference in terms of the enzyme activity is interesting in that few 
of the non-Caucasian groups are poor metabolizers, so most of the Asians and African Ameri- 
cans have enzyme activity. The maturity of Asians and African Americans is slower in terms of 
their enzyme activities compared to Caucasians. What are the reasons? After 20 years, it is 
evident that most of the non-Caucasians are slow in CYP2D6 activity because they have muta- 
tions. It only takes one point of mutation to change the activity of the enzyme and make it less 
effective. For Asians and African Americans, the responsible allele is different. For Asians, it is 

10, and for African Americans it is * 1 7. This gets technical, but the point is that now we have a 
way to easily identify what kind of alleles an individual has. Then we know whether one has the 
enzyme or not, and how much of the enzyme one has in their body. We also know now that the 
alleles that should be tested are different depending upon the ethnic group. 

Basically, any population can be divided into four groups in terms of the CYP2D6 activity. We 
start from those without enzymes— they are poor metabolizers— to those who have the alleles 
that make the enzyme less effective — those are slow metabolizers. Then there are extensive 
metabolizers, who are the "wild types" without the mutations. Finally, the ulu-a-rapid 
metabolizers are those who are highly effective in metabolizing drugs. It now becomes clear that 
these people who are efficient in metabolizing enzymes actually have more than two copies of 
the gene. In our chromosomes, humans usually have two copies, one from the father and one 
from the mother. Sometimes, the gene gets duplicated, and instead of two copies there will be 
three copies. Some people have 13 copies. 

Thirty years ago, a professor at a Swedish university had a depressed wife. She was referred to 
a psychiatrist who treated her with antidepressants. No matter how much medication she 
received, she did not respond. A few years later, they started studying the blood level of the 
antidepressant. They looked at her blood level, and it turned out that her blood level was zero 
for the medication. At that point, the psychiatrist suggested that the professor's wife was not 
compliant, and that she had not been taking the medication. It almost led to divorce, because 
she was accused of being uncooperative. Ten years later, they looked at the genotype. To their 
surprise, they found that she artually had 13 copies of the enzyme. That is why it did not matter 
how much medicine she took. It all disappeared right away. 

The ethnic variation in the metabolization of enzymes is clear. We talk about European and 
East Asian differences. East Asians are most likely to be slow metabolizers. Afiican Americans are 
also slow metabolizers, but again there is danger in stereotyping. We need to pay more attention 
to intragroup variation. We often lump all people from Afnca into the same group, but actually 
Ethiopians are different from those from South or West Africa. Most of the African American 
ancestors can be traced back to people who came from West Africa, so they are different from 
those with Ethiopian origin. Up to 30% of Ethiopians have ultra-rapid metabolizers; they have 
gene duplications or multiplications. As a result, they will probably need much larger dosages of 

neuroleptics and antidepressants for the same effects, whereas for the African Americans, often it 
is the reverse. 

Diet and environmental fartors can influence drug metabolism. For example, Sudanese 
people living in Sudan are slower in metabolizing a drug called Antipyrine. When they move to 
England, their metabolic profile becomes more similar to British Whites, because of diet change. 

^ *8 'Protein diet induces enzyme activities. In this case, it is another enzyme called CYP1A2. 

It is the same situation with South Asians: The Indians and Pakistanis have a changed metabolic 
profile when they move to England. They are slow metabolizers of the drug Clomipramine 
compared to the British Whites, but when they adopt the British diet, their metabolizing profile 
becomes more like the British. 




O Q n 
0 i 



281 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



The influence of environmental dietary factors on drug metabolism is also important for 
psychotropics. There are three individual and ethnic differences in how much CYP3A4 Asian 
Indians, Pakistanis, and British Whites have. Again, there is overlap. Nifedipine is an antihyper- 
tensive drug metabolized by CYP3A4. The Asian Indians and Pakistanis are slow in metabolizing 
Nifedipine compared to British Whites. We do not know why yet, but it is likely that dietary 
differences may be responsible. 

Aside from dietary differences in terms of food intake, herbal supplements also have an 
effect. For 2 years, we have known that St. John's Wort profoundly induces CYP3A4, which is 
involved in metabolizing many drugs in the treatment of HIV infection and cancer. The problem 
is that if one takes some of these drugs or psychiatric medications, they are metabolized by 3A4. 
If one takes St. John s Wort with the medications, there will be much more enzymes; the other 
drugs will be metabolized and will disappear. This could be dangerous because if you are 
adequately treated with HIV medication, are in remission, and take St. John's Wort, you could 
go into relapse. 

We conducted another study showing that St. John's Wort significantly induces the enzyme 
Nifedipine. The blood level after taking St. John's Wort for 2 weeks drops more than 50% 
compared to the baseline. In this study, ginseng and gingko were also used. Both of them have 
the opposite effect and inhibit the enzyme so that the blood level of Nifedipine goes up. The 
blood levels were much higher than the baseline. We tested three herbs, and all of them have 
significant effects on the enzyme's production. Essentially 90% of the herbs we take modify our 
enzyme activities. Individual and genetic variation is important and may be responsible for a 
risk of psychiatric problems. Of more importance is that they determine pharmacological 
treatment response. 

Hopefully, in the next 5 or 10 years, these procedures will become clinically available, and we 
can test just once to know what Wnd of genotype an individual has forr these drug metabolizing 
enzymes as well as any other genes that may determine treatment response. This knowledge, in 
combination with the patient's behavior, will make treatment more rationally based and 
individualized. 

I have entirely focused on the technical side, but the psychosocial side is even more impor- 
tant. If the patient does not take the medication, then there is no way to benefit from the 
treatment effect of the medication. There is a need for more research in this area. The under- 
standing of cultural and psychosocial factors should not be limited to the patients, because 
many of these factors also impinge on the clinician's behavior and prescription patterns that 
again also determine the treatment. 

We have a golden opportunity for research now with the technical advances available. 
Numerous techniques are available to enable us to make treatment planning more precise, but 
we need to couple that with research in the clinical side to make it easier for us to understand 
the patient's lifestyle, behavior patterns, and how they impinge on treatment response. We hope 
to make treatment more individually tailored and more effective. 

Susan Longcor: Have your studies looked at the differences with children? 

Lin: Rao will review that. From my understanding, little has been done with children, both in 
general and in terms of ethnic comparison. We do not have enough information. 

Wright: Uma Rao is an associate professor of psychiatry at the University of California at Los 
Angeles (UCLA), School of Medicine. For a number of years, she has been involved in studies of 
mood disorders, particularly in the adolescent population. She will add to Lin's presentation 
with a focus on research with children. Hopefully, there will be more information forthcoming 
as a result of her work. She has grants froni the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the 
National Alliance for Research on Schizophrenia and Depression (NARSAD) and has won 
several awards over the years. 



ERIC 



282 



O 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



Rao: Lin mentioned that there has been little research in child populations. I hope to offer more 
of the general trends on what has been done with children so far and then discuss what we can 
do in the future. The questions raised in the beginning are basic questions that we are all trying 
to grapple with in child psychiatry. 

Lin described how various ethnic groups are becoming a larger proportion of the population 
in the United States and in the world. I tried to break down the 2000 census in the United States 
based on age groups. Over 25% of the population are under 18 years of age, and 12% of the 
population are people over 65. Scarce resources have been extended for this young population, 
in terms of research at the federal level and by private foundations and the pharmaceutical 
industry. The geriatric population is less than half the size of the child and adolescent popula- 
tion. Extensive resources are spent on geriatrics, knowing that age plays a significant role in 
metabolism and dmg response; both the pharmaceutical industry and NIH have spent signifi- 
cant amounts of money on this smaller percentage of the population. Unfortunately, children 
cannot advocate for themselves. For example, the American Association of Retired Persons 
(AARP) is a big advocate for the older population. In the end, it is up to parents to advocate for 
their children. 

Some questions arose about who is prescribing the medications and about recent patterns. 
Again, little work has been done to truly understand what we call pharmaco-epidemiology. The 
major data sets that have been completed by Julie M. Zito from the University of Maryland and 
Daniel J. Safer from Johns Hopkins University have examined large populations. Their sample 
included Medicaid populations in mid-Atlantic and midwestem states. They also studied an 
HMO population in the northwestern region. Over the past decade, they have found patterns of 
how psychotropic medications are prescribed for children and teenagers. 

Who is prescribing these medications? Pediatricians primarily prescribe these medications for 
the population of children seen in clinics. I believe that they do not want to prescribe these 
medications, but unless they work in a large metropolitan area, there are few child psychiatrists. 
In Los Angeles, people come to me from 150 miles away for an evaluation. They cannot make 
appointments on a regular basis for medication, so we end up sending them back to their 
pediatricians. 

Dodds: We see that in some of our mral areas, it is not even a pediatrician whom the children 
see; it may be a physician's assistant or a nurse practitioner. Frequendy the physician's assistant 
prescribes medications. We even have a retired surgeon who seems to be the doctor of choice for 
the people who shop around for medications. 

Rao: In some areas, adult psychiatrists are prescribing medication for children. As Lin men- 
tioned, one size does not fit all. In some sense, adult psychiatrists see children as mini-adults, 
and they are not. There is variation among ethnic groups, and there should be a case-by-case 
evaluation. Sometimes, children even need more medication than one can calculate on a dose 
per kilogram basis, and in some cases they need less. 

Zito and Safer found a 65% increase in the number of prescriptions written per year within a 
5-year period. They have no control data for preschool children. Right now, there is a multisite 
study funded by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) with control data. For the past 
3 to 4 decades, there have been no control studies for medication, even though there has been a 
three-fold increase in prescription rates. 

Part of it is probably recognition of these disorders, but another factor is the services available 
for these children, such as psychosocial or behavioral interventions. When the treatments are 
not available, either because there is no insurance coverage or a shortage of patients participat- 
ing in such interventions, then medication becomes a quick fix. I am not saying that medication 
cannot be used in these children, but the assessment needs to be made carefully. 



ERIC 



289 



283 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



The types of medications being used for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) are 
mostly stimulants and antidepressant medication. Zito and Safer found that pediatricians are 
significantly more likely to prescribe an antidepressant drug for ADHD than a psychiatrist. The 
main reason is that some of these stimulants are controlled substances requiring a special 
prescription packet and close monitoring. Sometimes people tend to think more about prescrip- 
tions that are not controlled, and antidepressants are the logical answer. It is not that antidepres- 
sants cannot be used for ADHD. Studies suggest that if a child does not respond to a stimulant 
or has significant side effects as a result of taking them, the next line of medication can be an 
antidepressant. Tricyclic antidepressants have been tested for ADHD. 

The current plan for prescribing antidepressants is called serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) 
such as Prozac, Zoloft, and Paxil. People are really not prescribing tricyclic antidepressants, 
which have their own problems in terms of side effects and safety, although they have been best 
tested in children, particularly for ADHD. Pediatricians tend to use antidepressants in the SSRI 
class where they have not been tested. 

Another issue is the use of a newer, less established agent, or off-label indications of these 
medications, rather than using medications where data are available. For example, tricyclics 
among antidepressants and Ritalin among stimulants have been best studied in children. One of 
the prescribing factors nowadays is the SSRIs. To some extent there are data for depression and 
anxiety disorders, but not for other conditions of ADHD and newer stimulants such as Adderol. 
We are collecting more data, but they are not as established as Ritalin. This is unfortunate, since 
the newer agents are more frequently prescribed than the older medications. 

Korfmacher: Do you think that one of the reasons antidepressants work with children who are 
not responding to stimulant medication for ADHD is because of misdiagnosis, or is there some 
common denominator? 

Rao: This is not because of misdiagnosis. These are well-categorized children with ADHD. The 
reason is that most of these medications do not act on a single specific receptor; they are broad- 
spectrum antibiotics. For example, Baceptron, one of the broad-spectrum antibiotics, can also be 
used for pneumonia, urinary tract infections, or a variety of disorders. One particular medication 
that has been tested for ADHD is Desipramine. 

Antidepressants are not as effective as stimulants; about 70% of children respond to stimu- 
lants or do not have significant side effects. The remaining 30% either do not respond ad- 
equately enough or have significant side effects. Another medication that has been helpful, 
Clonidine, you again have the same issue. It is not as effective as stimulants. Stimulants work in 
a different manner; that is, there is a quick response. One knows whether they are acting or not, 
whereas other medications such as tricyclics or SSRIs need to build up in the blood system 
before the action is apparent. 

Korfmacher: Is there any research right now about the use of SSRIs on ADHD patients? 

Rao: There are no placebo control studies, but some case studies indicate that they can be of 
some benefit, whereas for the tricyclics, there have been placebo control studies. 

These days, patients use multiple medications at the same time. This is a common clinical 
practice in adult psychiatry, and it has been studied to some extent. For example, people have 
looked at one medication versus two or three medications and antidepressants used in what 
they call treatment-resistant depression. These have never been studied in children but have 
been commonly used in them — not just specific classes of medication but various classes of 
stimulants with antidepressants, or Clonidine with antidepressants, or Clonidine with stimu- 
lants. Some case studies have resulted in deaths from the combined use of stimulants and 
Clonidine. 



er|c 



284 



290 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



Lin focused on how ethnic or cultural factors influence metabolism or drug response. There 
have been numerous studies during the infancy period; actually not the entire infancy period, 
just particularly newborns. We learned that drug metabolism differs compared to adults. We 
know little past the neonatal period to mid- or late-adolescence. The research goes from the 
postnatal period straight into adult life. The little that we do know is that there are significant 
developmental differences in the capacity of children to dispose or absorb drugs. One difference 
is the liver capacity in children compared to adults. The enzyme activity is more efficient in 
children compared to adults, so for certain drugs that are metabolized by the liver, children may 
need a higher dosage than adults on a weight per dose basis. 

There are also other differences in the volume of distribution, depending upon the amount 
of water in the body. Certain medications that are cleared by the kidney, such as lithium, may 
need to be given in higher dosages to children compared to adults. There is deposition of 
medications in the fat tissue. Usually, there is an initial increase in fat tissue from newborns up 
to 1 year of age. Then there is a decrease. After puberty, there is a rapid increase again. When 
thinking about children and adolescents, they are not just one age group; they are subsets that 
we have to study in the same way as various ethnic groups. There are wide differences in how 
children and adolescents dispose or absorb drugs. Overall, children tend to absorb drugs faster 
than adults. The blood levels of children peak faster. As a result, they may sometimes have more 
side effects. These are all necessary factors to take into account. 

There has been some data to indicate how neuro transmitter systems change with age. These 
systems are still developing into late adolescence and early adult life. When thinking of what Lin 
described as what the drug is doing to the body or to the brain, we know that most of these 
medications act on the still-developing brain. In a way, we have little knowledge of how the 
drugs are acting and how the systems are maturing. We only know that there are many matura- 
tion changes, based oh animal studies. 

Other factors that are not well studied are the early experiences themselves. The experiences 
that occur at these various developmental levels can significantly affect the child in terms of 
clinical course. For example, child abuse or child trauma can have significant influence on the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal system, which is a neuroendocrine system. Research on adults 
with major depression shows that those with early experiences of child abuse have an increased 
risk of depression in adult life. 

Charlie Nemeroff and his group have shown that people who have major depression can be 
separated into two groups: those who have major depression due to a history of sexual abuse, 
and those without sexual abuse. They have shown altered hypothalamic pituitary activity, which 
shows that one way these antidepressants work is through these endocrine systems. In animal 
studies, early exposure to trauma, even during prenatal life, can influence this activity into adult 
life indicating the drug response in adult life. 

We conducted human studies that examined sleep responses and how the serotoneurgic 
system responds to Buspirone, which is a medication that is a serotoneurgic agonist. We found 
that adolescents produce a significant response at REM latency with a very low dose of 
Buspirone compared to the adults. 

Tricyclics have proven ineffective in children compared to the placebo, whereas in adults they 
are effective. We completed a study, in collaboration with Mike Stoba, on adolescents suffering 
from depression and their response to various medications. He compared those who had been 
given Fluoxetine or Prozac to those who received Imipramine, the another medication known as 
Toflanol. Adolescents who were given Fluoxetine responded better than those who were given 
Imipramine. This was also found in another large multisite study sponsored by SmithKline 
Beecham, where Paroxetine, or Paxil, was more effective than placebo, but Imipramine was not 
significantly more effective than placebo. With adults, they have shown to be equally efficacious. 
My point is that adolescents may respond differently to certain classes of medications than 
adults, so we cannot extrapolate the data. There have been similar findings for side effects. 



■291 



285 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



We know little about ethnic factors and how they influence treatment or services with 
adolescents versus adults. We are aware that ethnic minority groups tend to use mental health 
services less frequently and also tend to terminate treatment more rapidly than Caucasians. It is 
possible that they have had bad experiences in terms of how they have been treated, and there 
may be other cultural factors. 

In most cases, children are referred for services by clinicians, schools, and other community 
agencies. There have been some studies on whether youth from ethnic minority groups are 
pushed for treatment. They found that African American youth with less clinical severity were 
pushed for treatment more than Caucasians. We may use a lower threshold of severity to 
identify a minority child who shows overactivity or aggressive behavior, and, as a result, refer 
them to treatment more quickly. Is the issue here age (child vs. adult) or ethnicity? It is not 
sufficiently apparent. This differential treatment threshold may explain why people with less 
severe disorders have more side effects when given the same dosage as Caucasians. Also, they 
may stop medication more frequently than Caucasians because of the side effects. 

Studies have also found biases in how ethnic groups receive treatment. When one objectively 
assesses the severity of aggressive behavior and the service provided, it has been shown that 
African American youth with aggressive behavior are more frequently incarcerated than Cauca- 
sian youth. Caucasian youth showing the same severity of behavior more often receive mental 
health services. 

Melissa Del Bello at the University of Cincinnati School of Medicine compared African 
Americans and Caucasians with bipolar disorder. All of them were given mood stabilizers such 
as Depakote and lithium, but she also examined the neuroleptic use. For the same severity of 
psychotic symptoms, the Caucasians and African Americans did not differ in terms of their 
treatment, but African Americans were more likely to be given a neuroleptic in addition to the 
mood stabilizer. I am only describing African Americans because this is the only ethnic group of 
youth who have been studied. Other ethnic minority groups such as Asians and Latinos have 
not been studied at this level. 

When clinicians, or even the lay public, are asked whether, in their perception, ethnic 
minority groups are prescribed drugs more frequently than Caucasians, they answer is "more 
frequently." However, the data for prescribing medication by ethnic group show the opposite. 
This is true for psychotropic medications, as well as for all sorts of medications, including those 
for asthma, cardiovascular disorders, and even commonly used medications in the pediatric age 
group. Specifically, they find that African Americans receive fewer prescriptions compared to 
Caucasians. There is a much wider gap for the discrepancy in psychotropic medications com- 
pared to the nonpsychotropic medications. On the one hand, they may not be prescribed 
because they do not need it, but it can go both ways; underprescribing and overprescribing are 
both a disservice to the patient. 

One thing that happens in clinical trials is that the participants do not represent the individu- 
als receiving the medication in the community. In California, Latinos and Caucasians are 
present in almost equal proportions, but Caucasians are more commonly enrolled than ethnic 
minority groups into the clinical trials conducted by pharmaceutical companies and federally- 
funded programs. A number of reasons could explain why these ethnic minority groups may not 
want to participate in trials, but again we have not focused on recruiting those populations. 

Another diference is that participants in clinical trials are from homogeneous populations. 
They are more typical within the clinical population as opposed to those who receive medica- 
tion in the community. For example, they have less comorbidity and are therefore excluded from 
the studies. 

There are other factors, such as sociodemographic characteristics or psychosocial factors. 
People from lower socioeconomic conditions have more life events. When these people in the 
community are eventually treated, they may respond differently from what we know from the 
studies. We say that this percentage of the population will probably have side effects, but it may 
not be true. 



ERIC 



292 



286 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



The primary topic is what we know about pharmacogenetic studies. There have been studies 
both with dopamine receptors and dopamine transporters. They have been studied specifically 
in association with ADHD, and studies that have been replicated suggest that there is an 
association of these factors with ADHD. These studies have been done on Caucasians, so results 
may vary with minority groups. 

There has been one study on African American youth and stimulants that are affected by the 
dopamine transporter system. They found that a higher proportion of African American children 
with ADHD who respond poorly to Ritalin have 10 copies of this dopamine transporter system 
compared to those who are responders to this medication. This suggests that pharmacogenetic 
factors are important, not just for understanding the pathophysiology of the disorder but also 
the drug response. There is no data yet, but some multisite studies are examining whether 
the 5HT2A genotype shows a differential response to Clozapine in youth with autism and 
schizophrenia. 

Although there have been few studies, initial data suggest that these factors may be impor- 
tant. We have to remember that the results found in adults cannot be extrapolated to youth. Just 
as ethnic factors can influence genotype, we know that early developmental factors, traumatic 
events, and even psychopathology also are important. Studies have shown this in adults. Early 
onset of depression is different in terms of clinical cause and comorbidity factors. 

What are future directions in pediatric psychopharmacology research? At the more basic level, 
we need more efficacy and safety studies in children before we prescribe these medications. There 
has been some advocacy on this part, both from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and 
the field of child psychiatry. More studies are emerging, but unfortunately, most of the pharma- 
ceutical industries now do not want to conduct them. They label medications for adults and know 
that child psychiatrists and pediatricians will prescribe these medications in children anyway. 

There needs to be more advocacy to say that we cannot put out any medication that is used both 
for adults and children. There need to be control studies before the drug is even approved. 

The second thing is that we need to increase efforts to recruit youth from ethnic minority 
groups for studies. Lin mentioned how genetic factors can immensely contribute and help us 
understand drug response and side effects. Children are the best population to study genetic 
factors. The child groups have both parents and are optimal for transmission or linkage studies. 
One needs the parents on both sides to find which genes are transmitted, and we have the 
capacity to do that more easily with children. This is a promising area, and there should be 
more efforts to combine pharmacological and genetic studies. We also have to think about 
ethical factors and how to protect confidentiality, even though these are not invasive studies. All 
that is necessary to study these factors is a blood sample from the parents and the child. 

Multiple genes affect psychiatric disorders and drug responses. Therefore, large populations 
are needed, and that is why multisite studies are important. The studies should use standardized 
instruments, systematic assessments, and systematic doses of medications across multiple sites. 

Only a small subset of the population actually participates in clinical trials. Control studies 
use efficacy trials. The effectiveness trials should be used in the wider population among the 
various ethnic groups. There need to be studies at a larger scale in the community after the drug 
is marketed. 

Steve Forness: Everyone on the panel alluded to the issue of treating minorities in research 
studies. Obviously, we need to get the Invitation for Bids (IFBs) revamped to include children 
and minorities. Can that leverage be brought to bear in terms of industry studies? Is there any 
way they can be brought on board to include minorities within their area? Has anyone had 
success in doing that or seen a way to make that happen? 

Rao: For adults, as well as youth, NIH no longer funds efficacy studies unless they have some 
novel or genetic factors in association with efficacy studies. They are all straight clinical trials. 





287 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



because many of the pharmaceutical industries are funding these studies. NIH has moved away 
from that because they want to put their dollars on things that private industry does not 
support. In the past 6 years, there has been an effort to include children. A number of child 
psychiatrists were involved in a conference at NIH from the NIMH and FDA levels, and since 
then, some studies have included youth within the pharmaceutical clinical trials. When one 
receives an NIH grant, one must document that special efforts will be made to recruit ethnic 
minority groups. These groups should at least represent the community. If one third of the 
population in California is Latino, one third of the study population recruited should be Latino. 
This is not happening when pharmaceutical industries conduct studies. It should come from the 
investigators who initiate these studies. 

In the larger community of child psychiatry, we have not paid enough attention to ethnic 
diversity. In general, we do what is necessary to get NIH funding, but more education is needed 
on this level, particularly in how what has been studied in adults applies to youth. A large 
proportion of child psychiatrists do not have much information about how these genetic factors 
contribute. 

Longcor: Is there any future in educating the private practitioner, pediatrician, or physician's 
assistant on this topic? The child psychiatrists need that type of education, but so do the people 
on the front line who see our children. 

Rao: That is true, and it is a big issue. A conference by the Manic Depressive Association a 
couple years ago specifically looked at depression, how it is recognized, and who is treating it in 
youth. Pediatricians or family practitioners are treating 85% of the youth, so there was a recom- 
mendation to educate the people who are involved in primary care. Unfortunately, this has to 
come at the policy level and the federal government level. There was a consensus that federal 
funding is needed to educate them. 

There have been studies on how family practitioners and internists recognize and treat 
depression in adults. The data suggest that training these primary care people will improve the 
recognition and treatment of depression in adults. These studies have been conducted in 
multiple communities of adults, so we want to advocate the same principle for children. To my 
knowledge, nothing has been put into practice yet. 

Question: Is it voluntary? 

Rao: Yes. Sometimes, pharmaceutical companies do it for marketing purposes. They will host 
Continuing Medical Education (CME) courses. What is of more importance is how to recognize 
depression, and that basic level is not being taught. When pharmaceutical companies fund CME 
classes, they only talk about their drugs. For example, now there is talk that Prozac and Paxil 
have been shown to be effective in adolescent depression, but there is little detail about how we 
first need to recognize depression and treat it. Then there are questions about what is the first 
level of drugs versus the next level? None of these things are taught. 




288 



294 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



What's Happening With Children With Disabilities 
and Their Families in Early Head Start? 

CHAIR: Judith J. Carta 

PRESENTERS: Martha Jane Buell, Ellen Eliason Kisker, Jim O'Brien, Carla A. Peterson 

Judith Carta: I am from the University of Kansas. I have had the privilege of being the research 
partner of one of the Early Head Start programs that were part of the national evaluation of 
Early Head Start in Kansas City, Kansas, called Project Eagle. 

Our first two presenters will discuss data from the national evaluation of Early Head Start and 
what we have learned about children with disabilities from that study. Ellen Eliason Kisker has 
been part of the national evaluation team led by Mathematica Policy Research. She has been 
doing all the hard data analysis work regarding children with disabilities. Carla Peterson is from 
Iowa State University. She has been one of the local university research partners partnering with 
the Early Head Start program in Marshalltown, Iowa. Martha Buell is an Early Head Start pro- 
gram director in Delaware. She will reflect on her experiences as a program director and on how 
Early Head Start and Part C are working together on some of the challenges. Finally, we will hear 
the national policy perspective from Jim O'Brien, who is the Health and Disability specialist with 
the Head Start Bureau. Overall, we have pulled together people from many different perspectives 
who can reflect on all we know so far about children with disabilities in Early Head Start. 

1 will introduce the topic and give you some context for the national study of Early Head 
Start. Head Start has had a policy for many years of including children with disabilities in its 
programs. When Early Head Start began in 1994, it surprised no one that there was also a 
mandate with Early Head Start to include children with disabilities. 

When the national evaluation of Early Head Start was launched soon after the Early Head 
Start programs began with the very first wave of programs, it was established that that national 
study would investigate what happens with children with disabilities who are in Early Head 
Start. That has provided an excellent opportunity to do an investigation and to research what 
happens with children with disabilities in natural environments. Early Head Start is a wonderful 
natural environment for children with disabilities. 

We know children with disabilities are in Early Head Start, but we know litde about what 
happens to those children, and the types of services that children with disabilities receive when 
they are in Early Head Start programs, how Part C and Early Head Start work together, and so 
forth. We also know very little about who those children are, their family characteristics, and 
what their development looks like over time. The national evaluation has tried to shed light on 
some of those questions. 

The national evaluation began with the first wave of Early Head Start programs in 17 differ- 
ent places around the country. Across those 17 sites, 3,000 children were randomly assigned to 
either the Early Head Start program in their community or to a control group who were free to 
receive whatever services were available in the community. Among those 3,000 families were 
children who naturally had disabilities or who were at risk for developmental delays. 

1 should also mention that those 3,000 families were recruited during the time window 
between the mother's pregnancy or up to the point of the child's first birthday. At the point of 
recruitment, we did not know much about whether or not children had disabilities. It is usually 
hard to know during a woman's pregnancy whether the child will have a disability or not. 

As those children have grown older, and as we followed them over time to their third birth- 
day, we have seen some disabilities emerge. We have also seen risks for disabilities emerge. 

Across this longitudinal study, we have followed children to find out who might be considered 
as having a disability based on several things: their assessment scores at 14-, 24-, and 36- 
months; whether or not they get Part C services, and whether their parents have reported a 
medical diagnosis of some type of developmental delay. 




295 



289 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Kisker will share some of the general impacts found in the national evaluation. This report is 
"hot off the press;" it came out 3 weeks ago, so what she will report on are some of the national 
findings, and specifically what we have learned about children who were receiving different 
kinds of services who might have had a disability. Peterson will describe some of the challenges 
in figuring out who has a disability in this national set. She will also reflect on how hard it is to 
get clear answers about children with disabilities. 

Ellen Eliason Kisker: I am going to share some of the findings so far from the national 
evaluation. We have just begun to scratch the surface of what we can do with this data set, so I 
think our discussion today about the interesting research questions will be helpful as we go 
forward. I will start by providing a brief sense of the overall impact findings from the Early Head 
Start evaluation as a context to focus on what we learned about the incidence of disabilities. 

We looked carefully at the services Early Head Start families received throughout the evalua- 
tion period. We found that the programs in the evaluation delivered some services to almost all 
of the families who enrolled. The extent of those services varied among the families, and the 
pattern of implementation of services across the programs varied. Nearly all of the families 
received some services. 

In terms of the impact, we found that the programs make a modest difference for the chil- 
dren and families they serve. A very notable aspect of those findings is that even though any 
individual impact may be small, the breadth of impact across a broad range of child and 
parenting outcomes is potentially very important. We did find significant impact across a large 
number of areas. We also found that the impacts we saw when children were 2 years old largely 
persisted when they were 3 years old, and even became larger in a few cases. We also found that 
most groups of families whom we looked at benefited from program participation. 

It might be worth noting the data that we had to draw on in our analyses. We collected 
information on children and families when children were 14, 24 and 36 months old. We used 
multiple measurement strategies to collect information, including parent interviews and direct 
assessments of the children. We also collected detailed service information. We did that by 
interviewing parents approximately 6, 15, and 26 months after they enrolled in the program. 

One of the things that we looked at was the extent to which children in our Early Head Start 
program sample were eligible for early intervention services. As Judy mentioned, programs are 
required to use 10% of their spaces for children with disabilities and to actively try to recruit 
families with children who have disabilities. In Early Head Start, that is very challenging because 
the children are enrolled so young, in some cases before they are born. 

In terms of what parents told us in the services interviews, approximately 2 years after they 
enrolled, 8% of the children were reportedly eligible for early intervention services. There was 
variability in that across the programs participating in the research, there was a range from a low 
of 2% all the way up to 22%. That was at the time when children were between 2 and 3 years 
old. In 5 of the 17 programs, that percentage was at least 10%. 

It is possible that parents did not necessarily know about their eligibility for early interven- 
tion services. We did collect a lot of information about other diagnosed problems or functional 
limitations that their children had. We looked at that information to get an indication about to 
what extent children might have been eligible for early intervention services even though their 
parents did not report that directly. We found that 14% of children either were reported to be 
eligible for early intervention services or had a diagnosed medical problem that probably made 
them eligible for early intervention services. The most common of those were a diagnosed 
speech problem, difficulty hearing or deafness, or difficulty seeing or blindness. 

We also went to another level where it is less certain that the children would have been 
eligible for early intervention services but had either diagnosed problems or functional limita- 
tions that may have made them eligible for early intervention. This included things ranging 
from nearsightedness, epilepsy, developmental delay, or functional limitations related to vision 





290 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



problems, hearing problems, or a problem with an arm or leg. Eighteen percent of parents 
reported that their child had one of those conditions or limitations. 

We also asked the Early Head Start staff in the research programs about which children had 
been identified as eligible for Part C services. We asked them that when most of the children had 
left the program or were near the time when families left the program. They told us that on 
average, 12% of the children had been identified as eligible for Early Head Start services. Like 
parents' reports, there was quite a bit of variation across the programs, from 4% to 30%. In 9 of 
the 17 programs, that percentage was at least 10%. It looks as though the parents' reports of 
eligibility underreported the actual eligibility. 

We also asked about receipt of early intervention services. On average, 6% of children were 
reported to have received early intervention services by 2 years after enrollment. Like parents' 
reports of eligibility, that also varied across the programs from 0 to 16%. Most of those, or 4% 
overall, received early intervention services that were coordinated with Early Head Start services. 

Now I would like to shift from just looking at the Early Head Start children to looking at the 
program's impact on eligibility and receipt of services. In general, what we see is that the 
programs increased identified eligibility for early intervention and receipt of services, but the 
impacts were small. They are significant at the 10% level, which some researchers would 
consider significant and others would not. It is on the margin, but it is consistent across the 
different measures that we looked at. The reported incidence of functional limitations and some 
of those other diagnosed problems were greater in the control group than in the Early Head 
Start children. The Early Head Start program may have helped families address some of those 
functional limitations, and it actually had a favorable impact on the children's conditions. 

We also looked at these items for some of the subgroups of families in our sample. There 
were slighdy larger impacts in a few of the groups, including African American families, for 
whom we generally found larger impacts on almost all of the outcolmes; families with fewer 
demographic risk factors, like being a teenage parent, being a single parent, receiving welfare, 
being neither employed nor in school or training, and not having a high school diploma; and 
also families who enrolled with older children. That may be related to the effect that disabilities 
emerge over time as children get older; there may have been more opportunity to identify and 
have an impact on that. 

I will conclude by sharing the impacts on the Bayley Mental Development Index (MDI) 
scores, in particular the portions of children who scored below certain cutoffs that are used in 
looking at the extent to which children may have disabilities. There was a reduction in the 
proportion of children with low Bayley scores, according to that cutoff. That is significant at the 
10% level. Then we move to a cutoff of 77, which is 1.5 standard deviations below the mean. 
That difference is in the same direction but not significant. When we go to Bayley under 70, the 
difference is relatively larger. The incidence of children scoring under 70 at age 3 years is of 
course much lower, but it almost halved the proportion of children with the very low Bayley 
scores. 

In conclusion, we saw a general pattern of modest positive impact on eligibility for and 
receipt of early intervention services. We also saw some modest reductions in functional impair- 
ments and low Bayley scores. This is going to be the jumping-off point for more analyses of the 
characteristics of children in certain groups and for understanding more of what goes behind 
those numbers. 

Question: Did all of these programs have access to the Hilton project? 

^ Kisker: Yes, I believe so. 

Question: Could we assume that they probably would do better with that level of support than 
those who have not had that opportunity? Do we have any way to prove that? 




297 



291 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Kisker: These data were collected over a period of time when we enrolled families. This was 
anchored to their enrollment time. The Hilton program came in midstream when these pro- 
grams were in the middle of serving the research families, so it did not cover the full time that 
they had these children. 

Cornelia Taylor: How do you define early intervention? 

Kisker: When we asked parents about that, we asked them if their child was eligible, and then 
we filled in the specific name of the intervention services in their community. We said, "or other 
early intervention programs in your community." We tried to target it to the language that they 
would use in their community. 

Carla A. Peterson: The data that Kisker shared highlight that we in the Early Head Start 
Research Consortium are seeing it as a success, when it actually appears that Early Head Start has 
helped to enhance the overall development of the children who were participating. Hopefully, 
that reduces the need for them to receive or participate in early intervention services as delivered 
by Part C; but if there is a need for such services, we also see it as a success that in fact they are 
more likely to be referred to and actually participate in those services. 

A point that 1 wanted to make is that both Early Head Start and Part C are mandated, or are 
very strongly encouraged, to work in collaboration with each other and with other agencies and 
services in their community. That is actually what 1 want to talk about here. 

One of the reasons why it is such a challenge to identify the children who are eligible for Part 
C services, and those who actually receive Part C services is the following. We asked parents 
these questions at various points in time, and there was quite a difference in terms of the 
responses. These data were collected earlier on in the study than the data that Kisker is reporting. 
Hopefully, as families are participating in services over a longer period of time, they come to 
understand those services better and have more "accurate" reports. 1 put accurate in quotes 
because 1 want to think about the question, "Is it important for families to understand that they 
are receiving services from multiple agencies? If that is important, is it important to the family or 
is it important to us that they know that? What are the reasons that this is important?" 

Kisker also shared some data relating to this, but it is another illustration about how some of 
these reports that parents give us are moving targets. This represents families' answers to ques- 
tions regarding whether or not they have ever been told that their child has some kind of a 
diagnosed condition that might be indicative of a developmental delay. The response to that 
varies in terms of the numbers of families that report that. 

Almost a quarter of the families that were participating in Early Head Start and in the 
research project reported that at some point in time, they had heard or been told that their child 
had some type of a developmental concern. A competent pediatrician may have reported this, it 
might have been the Early Head Start provider, it might have been the grandma, it might have 
been "fill in the blank." It might have been lots of different people, but it is helpful for us to 
think about the fact that a quarter of the families that were participating in this had reason at 
some point in time to be concerned about the development of their children. These are families 
who are living in poverty, who are already facing a large number of risks. 1 would assume that 
this is fairly scary for them to think about. We might think about how to support those families 
and the kinds of questions that they might have. 

Of those families who reported these various things to us during the process of the first 2 
years of research, how many of those families reported receiving Part C services or early interven- 
tion services? It is about 8% of the families who were participating in Early Head Start. It 
increased if they reported their child as having one type of a diagnosed condition. If they had 
multiple conditions, it increased again. 

It is interesting that the children who had Bayley scores even below 70 at 2 years of age did 
not receive Part C services, or at least not a very high percentage of those children received Part C 



O 



292 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



services. Kisker also described children whose parents reported conditions that might make us 
wonder if they would be at risk for developmental delays; or might make them eligible but were 
much less certain if they would automatically be eligible for Part C services. One can see across 
those various reports that parents make that there is quite a range in terms of whether or not the 
parents report any of those kinds of concerns or conditions, and whether or not the family is 
actually participating in Part C services. 

I would like to set up another issue as a discussion point. I have already set up the issue that 
it is very challenging to define who is eligible for and who should receive early intervention Part 
C services within that Early Head Start population. In addition to that, there are a number of 
reasons why we might want to identify children as being eligible for Part C services. One of 
those purposes would be to communicate with the scientific community and to have appropri- 
ate classifications. A lot of us in this room either have a history with and/or are working in the 
trenches everyday. We are doing programs and serving children and families. I would argue that 
if one important purpose for identification is to arrange the most appropriate, enhancing, and 
supportive set of interventions for a child and his or her family, we need to start looking at the 
challenges that keep Part C and EHS programs from collaborating well together, and at some of 
the things we are doing to overcome those barriers. 

I would like to talk about a study that we did at five sites in collaboration with this larger 
Early Head Start study that was mentioned earlier. This study was done at five different sites, and 
we called it a collaboration study. In terms of design, we identified families who were receiving 
both Early Head Start services and Part C services. We talked with the parents, their direct service 
providers from both sides of that fence, the local supervisors of those direct service providers, 
agency supervisors, and the state level administrators in all of those programs. We got data from 
all of these various perspectives. We asked these people about a number of different things. We 
asked them about the referral process, assessment, actual service delivery, administrative sup- 
ports, collaboration, and policies. 

I want to talk mosdy about what we learned about the referral process. There certainly were 
referrals made from Early Head Start to Part C and the other way around. However, the two 
programs reported making referrals in somewhat different ways and for different reasons. In 
Early Head Start programs, all of the programs reported that they had regular schedules for 
periodic use of assessments, and that they kept track of this on a regular basis. They also had 
specific procedures in place that they would follow if there was a developmental concern 
identified with a child. They also said that they had procedures in place for supervisors to refer, 
consult, and discuss with the front-line staff before referrals were actually made to Part C. 

However, the Early Head Start staff also reported informal processes in place to support 
families. They talked about persuading families to consider referral to Part C, helping Early Head 
Start parents negotiate the Part C system, and helping build rapport between the family and the 
Part C agency that would serve them. 

Here is a quote from an Early Head Start provider who talked about persuading parents to 
consider Part C. "It took a while for us to get him into Child Find, and they were very scared 
because one of the relatives in the father's family was mentally ill. One of the cousins was 
autistic. Many different people in the family have issues— on both the mothef s side and father's 
side. To the mother, who confided in me, what she said was, 'I do not want my child to have 
those problems' and 'I do not want to know that he has those problems."' That helps us under- 
stand some of the emotions and feelings that were expressed by the families as well as the 
service providers. 

I also want to offer more insight about Part C early interventionists making referrals to Early 
Head Start. As I said, there were also referrals from Part C to Early Head Start, although overall, 
it seemed as though Part C providers were somewhat more reluctant to make referrals to Early 
Head Start. Their reasons seemed to be associated with judgments that the Part C provider and/ 
or supervisor made about the family needs for a particular child. 





293 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOU RS 



When a Part C provider was working with a family, it did not appear that he or she would 
automatically assume that if this is a family living in poverty Early Head Start is an additional 
resource that might be available to this family and that a referral should be made. Rather, they 
tended to make referrals if they saw that the family had a need beyond the child's needs — if the 
child needed socialization of some kind, if they were worried that the child might later have 
developmental delays, or if the child was at risk but the family did not qualify for Part C 
services. Early Head Start, as one Part C provider stated, was seen as an "at-risk" referral agency. 
"The referrals that I have made to Early Head Start have primarily been for children who have 
been at risk, but who do not need special education services at this point." That seemed to be a 
pervasive attitude. 

On the other hand. Part C providers often said that Early Head Start catches children first, 
that is the agency that sees children and families who are at risk, so it is more appropriate for 
them to make referrals to Part C. In addition. Part C providers sometimes expressed reluctance 
to overwhelm families with multiple providers. These did seem to have some misunderstanding 
about what the eligibility requirements were for Early Head Start; they often saw it as a family 
support project. 

When families were dually served by Early Head Start and Part C, this study found that 
families tended to be in a two-track system; we had not reached the point where the two 
programs were collaborating. The earlier question about the Hilton project may have some 
bearing on that, because these data also were collected right before and right at the beginning of 
the training that staff received from the Hilton project. We did see families as part of a two-track 
system. It makes sense that Part C people did not want to overwhelm families with two systems 
to deal with. 

If we see referral and identification as the door for getting the most supportive set of services, 
what does that mean for collaboration on the ground? One final thing about this study is that 
we did not find that it was the state or local administrators or policies that created this conflict. 
In fact, at the administrative and the policy level, there had been efforts to put policies and staff 
descriptions on paper to help collaboration; but people had not necessarily learned how to do it 
on the ground. 

What are some of the things that are in place now to enhance collaboration and help support 
the service arrangements that we wish to see? There are many local efforts underway. I hear 
anecdotal stories all the time about Early Head Start and early intervention staff collaborating 
and providing very good services for families. Some of that is happening because local people 
are arranging shared training sessions. They are getting to know each other. Early Head Start has 
been around long enough that trust has built up, and some families have had successful 
experiences. 

We are making efforts at universities to integrate or unify training programs. At Iowa State 
University, for example, our undergraduate training program is now a unified early childhood 
education program so that we are not training general educators and special educators; but we 
are training people to serve children and their families with the needs that they have. We work 
hard to deliver the kind of training we would like students to have, and to provide them with 
the practicum experiences that will help them be better collaborators in the future. It is an 
adventure and a journey, and naturally we still have some improvements to make. 

Several of us have referred to the Hilton project, which is a project that is funded at the 
national level to provide training, teaming, and collaboration for both Early Head Start and 
early intervention staff. The project has been ongoing for 5 years. 

Martha Buell: O'Brien's project does this part of that; it is also referred to as Special Quest. 

Question: In your exploration of the collaboration between Early Head Start and Part C, did 
you have an opportunity to interview the interagency coordinating council member? Did they 
have input into this information gathering? 



ERIC 



294 



300 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



Peterson: Across the board, they did not. We were not able to interview those people in every 
state. In some states, we may have interviewed some of those people, but systematically we were 
not able to. 

Question: Do you have any idea whether staff in Early Head Start are seeing the disabilities and 
are not making referrals; or whether they are, but families are not following through? Do you 
have numbers on that? 

Peterson: We do not have numbers on that, and I am sure that it is a combination of those 
issues. It would be interesting to know where to start in terms of training and technical assis- 
tance. 

Buell: 1 am the director of an Early Head Start program in Delaware. We serve two of our three 
counties; it is a small state. We have been around since 1997, and our project runs out of the 
Center for Disability Studies at the University of Delaware. From the beginning, we thought that 
working with children with special needs was going to be one of our strengths, like we had that 
in the bag. Well, that is not true. 

We have spent more time with training on how to work with children who have special 
needs, because it has always been so front and center for us; but as much training as we do, we 
could always do more. When we bring in staff to do services and talk about Early Head Start and 
early intervention, the issue always arises that they thought this was early intervention. So, 
talking about those definitions and working with the staff is important. 

We are working all the time. The Special Quest-Hilton project has been helpful, especially in 
bringing the Part C staff to the table. Since we have been worldng with our Part C coordinator 
and our staff on training, we have been able to do things and increase overall understanding of 
Part C definitions. They get frustrated because they say that they tried to refer somebody to us. 
There are also income guidelines that we have to meet, and once we are over our 10%, we 
cannot accept any more children. One influential Part C provider may have a bad experience 
trying to refer a family, and it is a real political piece as well as a training piece. Building those 
relationships is incredibly important. 

Because we are a small state, we work in and do training for Region III. Some of our families 
have come from other states. There is a whole issue of them being eligible for Part C services in 
one state but not in that state. Staff can be from different states with different eligibility require- 
ments. I was once on a panel with a speaker from Washington, DC. I was talking about how easy 
it was to get our 10% enrollment of children with disabilities in our Early Head Start Program, 
and she was saying how horrible it was. For them, the state criterion for defining a child with a 
disability was evidence of 50% delay in two areas of development, while for us in Delaware, it is 
25% in one area of development. 

A couple of the children we have served in the past had disabilities to the extent that it was 
questionable whether they would live long enough to enter Early Head Start. So, our staff 
training has included things like grief counseling and the whole issue of chronic conditions 
versus the medically fragile children who may not survive. 

These families from birth to 3 go through so many transitions, including the transition to a 
new baby. If the child has a special need during that transition, even if we have our feet on the 
ground and the family knows what they are doing, we still may need to build the transition plan 
to Part B. The family who has gone to hell and back now has to learn a new system. Our Part B 
system is quite different from our Part C system in how service providers interact with families 
and what they can expect. It is hard for our staff to turn over families when they finally feel like 
they are helping them. These staff issues come up all the time. 

We serve families using three distinct models. We provide home-based services. We also do 
center-based services, where it is just an Early Head Start center, and then we have many child 




295 



ERIC 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLE S/C ON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



care partnerships. We partner with both community-based child care centers and also with 
family day-care centers. We are all over the map, mnning around doing all this work. We again 
found that all of the families we served, to the extent they can, want to be in a home-based 
option for as long as they can. By the time the children are 18 months to 2 years of age, how- 
ever, they are more than ready to get a referral to a center-based program. So, even when the 
mother is working or furthering her education, the family figures out ways, when they can, to 
keep that child at home. That is not tme for everybody; we could fill center-based slots any day 
of the week. There is a significant effort made on the part of many families to have their child 
stay at home; but after 18 months, they are ready for the transition. 

For the children with significant disabilities, families try to keep them at home even longer. 
We have issues with the family about resource allocation, because they want to stay at home 
with their child longer in the home-based option. We then work with the family to figure out 
how they can make that choice work. If they choose to place their child in out-of-home care, we 
figure out a way to shore up the receiving center, so it is a transition within our little Early Head 
Start program from home-based to center-based care. 

In our child-care partnerships, we first have to get the Early Head Start piece and then the 
inclusion piece. It is way too much to do both at the same time, particularly in family child-care 
providers' homes. We are asking to have a family service worker come in, but if it is also Part C, 
their personnel come too. Even though we need to work with the center-based care, this is more 
important with the family child care. We have found that we need to work with them on 
defining what Early Head Start is in the first place, and then figuring out with them how they 
will serve a child with a special need in that setting. 

Family child care is where we would like to continue to build capacity in our community, 
because we see that as meeting the needs of many families in a way that the families seem to 
prefer for their younger children. Then again, when the child turns 2 years of age, it seems that 
families want a more structured day. We have been challenged with all of those transitions. 

Especially for our community-based partners, so many of these systems are new systems, and 
the language is new language. It can be overwhelming for staff. We have been challenged with 
that issue over and over again. Conflicting results from the research studies of what the parents 
say, what the staff say, and what the early interventionists say makes perfect sense to me. 

Jim O'Brien: I am from the Head Start Bureau. The complexity of life for families also makes 
life hard for researchers. With all those differences, it can be hard for policy makers too, but they 
tend to just jump in. Whenever I hear a description of such enthusiastic and complex work 
based upon a few sentences of regulation and lines in an act of Congress, I am reminded of a 
cartoon of a beaver and a duck at the base of the Hoover Dam. The beaver is telling the duck, 
"You know, I did the design work on that." 

When we look at some of the basics from the Early Head Start request for applications, we 
assumed that the reference to the 10% of enrollment opportunities for children would apply to 
infants and toddlers as well. I do not think much reflection went into the real fact. We know 
more about the different definitions states use. When one looks at the actual identification, it 
ranges from maybe 1% to up to 4% of children who would be identified out of a larger popula- 
tion as having an Individual Family Service Plan (IFSP) and being included under Part C. 

The decision was the right one and was consistent with other aspects of the program, in that 
the intent was to make this service available to an appreciable number of children. The Head 
Start Act — especially after Public Law 99-457, which is the Education of the Handicapped Act 
Amendment of 1986, the revisions that created the 3 to 5 and the infant-toddler programs— 
describes the efforts of Head Start to coordinate with and complement the efforts to implement 
the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) in the states. We were wedded, as some 
of the speakers have said, and it continues to be in our policies. This 10% requirement predates 
IDEA; it goes back to the early 1970s, so we were doing this before Individualized Education 



O 

ERIC 



296 



302 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



Plans (lEPs) were required. Certainly, our more recent history carried the expectation that we 
would work together. 

We know about how many children were supposed to count, and that is what we are sup- 
posed to report to Congress. We do have records from our program's annual information report. 
We have seen a steady progress nationwide in terms of the grantees' reports. If I could start in 
1998, when we served about 35,000 children in Early Head Start, about 3.5% of those were 
identified as children with disabilities. The next year, we moved up to 6.1%; the last 2 years, 

2000 and 2001, we have been at 9.6% nationwide. We know that a range of distribution exists in 
different communities and programs, and those that have been at it for a while are more likely 
to be able to reach the 10% requirement. 

Some grantees have been frustrated at times when they have asked whether they should 
count a child as disabled whom their related service provider has said would qualify, if the 
parent would agree to the service. But the parent believes, and the related service provider may 
be convinced as well, that the parent is making sense in their judgment that they are not sure of 
the added value in going through the IFSP process. They feel like they are receiving an early 
intervention that is appropriate. Jokingly, we have said that this child will count for them in 
Head Start heaven. Seriously, we know that efforts are underway. The research is showing that we 
are working with many families, engaging them in conversations to say that children's develop- 
ment is under surveillance. Under IDEA, the parent has decision-making power that is respected, 
and which will continue to develop as their child reaches school age. That parent's decision 
might not be to include that child in the Part C program or an IFSP. 

We have been pleased with the development of our technical assistance providers. The Hilton 
project has given us an opportunity to intensively focus on the relationship with Part C agencies 
and parents. That project is in its 5th year, and we are hopeful about the possibility that we will 
be able to enter into another 5-year cycle and do this with the Early Head Start programs that 
came on after Wave 5. An additional 400 programs could participate in this model. 

It brings people together for training in one place over several days, but then goes back into 
the community to follow up with coaches on objectives that those teams set for themselves on 
improving their recruitment and inclusion of children with more significant disabilities. We 
have had honest conversations from program staff who get there, when it is obvious that they 
really have not spent much time with people. We understand the tremendous amount of work 
in starting an Early Head Start program. Here is an opportunity in a nice location with facilita- 
tors, an objective, and a contract to follow up on for the program and for the community. 

Some of the measures used by the Hilton project have been ongoing ratings of the Part C 
agencies, confidence in and opinion of the placement, or Head Start as a natural environment 
for children with different types of disabilities. They have seen steady gro^A^th in that, but we 
need improved measures. We have talked about things like scenarios, case examples of children 
or families presenting with certain kinds of concerns, and the Part C agency's confidence that 
Early Head Start might be a good placement. Most programs say that "you never know until you 
do it, and no program can wait until they are fully trained and knowledgeable before they say 
they are ready. We have to work and build the muscles as we are serving the children. 

The project has been helpful, and all of our technical assistance efforts have understood that 
Early Head Start really had to go from zero to 60 in a year or 2. It took time for many systems to 
become more established, for staff to appreciate the complexity of moving from that design to 
that huge structure of a fully competent and excellent program. We are pleased but would like to 
go beyond some of the moderate gains we are seeing. We do believe that the Early Head Start 
program now has imprinted upon it the view that Head Start is a natural environment where 
children with disabilities can and will be served, that families will be involved in that, and that 
Part C agencies will be partners. With all the blood, sweat, tears, bagels, and coffee that went 
into meetings and efforts to bring those groups together, we believe that has been imprinted on 
the design of the program and will be a continuing story for training, technical assistance, 
monitoring, and policy to reach its full potential. 



ERIC 



303 



297 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS AT ION HOURS 



Carta: As we have seen, Early Head Start has attempted to provide services to children with 
disabilities in their programs over the last several years. How has that changed over time? As 
O'Brien said, this was a small piece of regulation, and we were not sure what 10% of children 
with disabilities would really mean. For those of you in programs, how have you seen the 
characteristics of children you serve with disabilities change over time? Are you serving more 
children with severe needs or different kinds of special needs? 

Comment: 1 am a training and technical assistance provider. One of the things that many of us 
have noticed and feel has been our job's delight is that we are in Early Head Start serving more 
children with varied disabilities that may be more significant in Early Head Start than in Head 
Start. We are seeing children in the Early Head Start program that have more significant disabili- 
ties move into Head Start; then, the Head Starts are benefiting. 

Carta: One of the pieces of research that we are pursuing next is following the children who 
have been in Early Head Start into what we call Ae "prekindergarten phase." For all the children 
who were in the Early Head Start study, but particularly children whom we might have identi- 
fied as having a disability or were receiving Part C services, we are finding out what happens to 
them in that prekindergarten or Head Start period, and whether they are receiving Part B 
services. We will be able to look at those transitions. 

Buell: One of the things that we found is that there are a few children whom we refer for 
services, but then they are not eligible when they are not assessed at Part B. That can be some- 
what confusing to families. That often happens with our speech therapy cases. 

A major piece that we are dealing with in Delaware — and 1 think that everybody's dealing 
with across the country — is working with language-minority families. At this point in Delaware, 
we have one bilingual speech therapist in the whole state. Finding Part C staff who can work 
with language- minority families is hard. In fact, in some cases, we are called upon by them to be 
the translators for their IFSP meetings, to do what some people might consider their work. Our 
staff does a lot because they can speak the family's home language. 

A bigger issue for us, and one that we are finding to be a significant challenge, is the whole 
issue of disability and special needs being understood differently by dijfferent cultures, and 
working with the families around that issue. That transition sometimes looks very different for 
our families who have recently emigrated from Central America. That is a big issue for us as that 
group grows every year in our community. 

O'Brien: A desired outcome was that as Early Head Start programs served children with more 
significant disabilities, that these children and families would become familiar in settings 
including Head Start, and that they would become part of the Head Start family. It was hoped 
that people would be advocating for them. 

This notion of familiarity and reaching certain thresholds of what a program feels is possible 
to achieve happens over time. What could become routine, which 2 years ago seemed extremely 
frightening, unusual, and not within our scope of possibilities, is something that requires time. 
Those first steps are hard and benefit from good partners, early interventionists, and others who 
can invite the Early Head Start staff into other settings and increase their comfort level. Once it 
starts, it can catch hold and benefit children coming over time. 

Comment: One of the good things that 1 see happening is a therapeutic setting that is develop- 
mentally appropriate. It does not have to be exotic. As our staff see that, they feel more comfort- 
able talking about special needs and even talking about it with families. Families may wonder 
what will happen to their child if he or she gets identified. 



ERIC 



298 



304 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



Comment: I want to share a project that we have at Louisiana State University that speaks to 
several of these issues, including the therapeutic environment and identifying these children. It 
started out of a problem that was an unusual need for the university in the occupational therapy 
program and for Head Start. We developed a project where the students would go into the Head 
Start classrooms and work with the teachers who had identified children about whom they had 
special concerns. These were children who usually did not meet the disability criteria but were 
still falling between the cracks and not meeting the classroom standards. The students worked 
with the teachers to develop some strategies to help them meet the child's performance needs. 

It gave Head Start an extra discipline in the classroom and someone to role model for the 
teacher; and it gave the occupational therapy program an opportunity to have their students 
work with the community and identify a role in that setting. It also gave them practice with that 
child relationship. It was a win-win situation for both of us. 

Toni Ledet: I want to revisit the language issue about the barriers between how we collect our 
data, and how service providers and training and technical assistance providers define things 
compared to the parents. I am aware that parents do not care as much about decisions as long as 
their child is receiving care; they want the best for their children. We still need to do a better job 
of defining and collecting data, and figuring out how we count children who have disabilities 
and who are getting services. It is different in every state, and we need to come up with some 
generalized definitions so that we are almost on the same page. We try to work with service 
providers, but when we say "services," it could be talking about early intervention services, 
mental health services, and so on. We have tried to make it as standardized as possible and talk 
in terms of IFSPs, lEPs, Part B lEPs, and Head Start-managed lEPs. 

We need to try and gain consistency across our regions. When we collect information about a 
child who has been identified, it may mean different things to different people; but if they have 
an IFSP on file, that is at least real. We can then count it and say that we are counting that child 
with children in the program who have disabilities or lEPs by Head Start or Part B. It is not the 
perfect way to collect data, and we have to consider better ways. For example, our Program 
Information Report (PIR) data often conflict with other collected data. It is a big issue because 
we often talk apples and oranges among each other. We have to do a better job of that. 

Carta: I am glad you raised that point. When we first began thinking about examining children 
with disabilities in Early Head Start, we thought we were interested in the outcomes of children 
with disabilities in Early Head Start. Then we realized that we do not even know who they are. 
Putting that in a larger context, we all want to know about the outcomes for children with 
disabilities and the outcomes for children with disabilities in Early Head Start. Until we get a 
better idea of who they are, I do not know how we even get to that point of measuring outcomes. 

Question: I have a question relating to having a health diagnosis. My program deals with a large 
amount of significant disabilities in Early Head Start. Our Part C now trusts us and knows our 
center-based program, and there is more than adequate care for those children — a medical 
diagnosis along with disability. In your studies and other research, how many of those children 
with disabilities working with Part C and Early Head Start also have a medical diagnosis and are 
working with health professionals? We have a triangle for many of our children who have 
disabilities with our Part C, their health professional whom we work with, and who also have 
their goals checked as quality care. 

Kisker: We asked parents whether a doctor had ever told them that their child had a disability, 
and then went through a fairly long list of different kinds of medical conditions. We should 
look at that in conjunction with the questions that we also had about functional limitations and 
other disability-oriented things. We do not have enough information about the health services 




305 



299 



S YM PO SI A/ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATION HOURS 



themselves to know if there is a plan or ongoing care that could benefit from coordinating with 
Part C or Early Head Start. We may not have enough detail to go all the way with that We could 
look at how those things are combined and at the profiles of the children in terms of disabilities 
and medical conditions. 

Carta: That is also another area in which there is discrepancy in terms of how children with 
health problems are defined — when we look across different samples of children, what propor- 
tion of children have health problems? We were recently at a meeting in which someone from 
the Department of Education was aghast at a statistic that he had heard, that 17% of the 
children from birth to 3 years of age in this country had major health problems. He was sur- 
prised at that, because it does not come close to the percentage that Part C works with. Part C 
works with a much smaller percentage, so his question was about what was happening with 
these other children. The clarification behind the 17% is who that really includes. That percent- 
age included children with asthma, chronic ear infections, and other things; so again, definition 
played a role in the statistic. 

Comment: Both of those things can certainly end up contributing to disability. 

Comment: Another issue too is that it is a two-pronged test. Our health condition has to be 
negatively impacting development. The child could have major health issues, but for example, 
we have children with spina bifida who do not qualify for services because cognitively they are 
doing well. They manage to explore their environments. The issue of health was serious in my 
mind, but they do not qualify for Part C services. 

O'Brien: 1 had a question based on one of Kiskefs earlier slides. There was information about 
the MacArthur Communication Development Inventory scores of children who were under a 
standard score of 70, with the comparison group in the Early Head Start being almost double. 1 
know the definition of mental retardation is much more complex than just that one score, but 
from a policy maker's point of view, we were talking about effects of that or even half that size 
for child outcomes. What kind of conversations have you all had about that, and what are the 
caveats about overinterpreting that score? Are you excited about that? 

Kisker: 1 should ask these people too; they are the experts on that outcome. That is one of the 
most promising findings from this study in terms of the magnitude of the impacts, which in 
general are small but pervasive. 1 am not sure we have had the full discussions that you are 
implying we ought to have about that finding; we ought to further explore these data. We have 
been so focused on the overall findings that we are just now coming to some of these special 
populations and special topics. I do not have a good answer for that yet, but we should explore it. 

O'Brien: Children do not get sorted into either Box A or Box B for the rest of their life at age 3, 
but the trajectories may be really different that early on. When they are 6 years old or so, there is 
much less likelihood that they will have some of the social, school, and other problems that 
would be associated with that lower amount. It could be exciting and substantial in terms of 
policy, even if it were a 10% reduction. 

Comment: You hinted at something important. It is substantial in terms of the numbers of 
individuals who could be affected. When one thinks about each of those individual children, it 
is a substantial difference in the life of each individual. 

Carta: Reflecting upon our own local study and that question, the reason we see that effect 
nationally is that in many programs, the impact that we have on children and families is to pick 




300 



306 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



up the very bottom of children who have many environmental risks. The reason why I say that is 
because some of the local research we have added to the national assessments are in-home 
observations of parent--child interaction. We have distilled those highly engaged parents who do 
a lot of interacting in the Early Head Start program from those families who have been less 
in the Early Head Start program and have less interactive experiences with their chil- 
dren. The most interactive parents have really "gotten it" in terms of how the program can help 
and support them. We see big gains in the children from those families and the big changes over 
time as we follow them from 8 months old until they enter kindergarten. 

Question: In regard to referraf has there been any research on the ages of parents and the 
likeliness of being more willing to do a referral? For example^ adolescent parents sometimes 
seem more resistant to go further with assessment than older parents. Is there data on that? 

Kisker: It is less clear when focusing solely on the age of the mother. We looked at parents with 
a variety of potential demographic risk factors, such as being a teenage parent, a single parent, 
receiving public assistance, and so on. The families with fewer risks showed larger impacts on 
eligibility for and receipt of early intervention services. To the extent that teenage parenthood was 
contributing, it did look likely that the programs may have been having a larger effect for the older 
parents. If we just look at teenage parents versus older parents, the differences are not large. 



Carta: I thank everyone for their participation this afternoon. It has been a great discussion. If 
there are more suggestions for us as we keep mining this data set, and more questions about 
what happens with the children with disabilities as they approach school age, please contact us. 
We welcome your participation in this endeavor. 

Kisker: This information and the full evaluation report are on the ACF Core website at 
www.acfdhhs.gov/programs/core/ and on Mathematica Policy Research's website at 
www.mathematica-mpr.com. A paper from the national evaluation on health and disabilities 
will also come out this summer. 

Comment: Another large longitudinal study with 15,000 children may have data and informa- 
tion about disability services. It is on the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) 
website. Data are not out yet from that study, but it should have the 9-month data. They are 
going to go from birth through kindergarten, 9 months through kindergarten. 

Carta: That is a big study. Some of you might also be interested in knowing that there is a study 
being planned on 100,000 children going from birth to 20 years of age. It should start in a few 
years. 



307 



301 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Including Children With Special Needs and 
Their Families: Research, Practice, and Challenges 

COCHAIRS: Sharon E. Rosenkoetter, Mark S. Innocenti 

PRESENTERS: Marci J. Hanson, Judy Swett, Mary A. McEvoy, Korey Powell-Hensley 

Sharon E. Rosenkoetter: This session is jointly sponsored by two cooperating organizations: 
the Division for Early Childhood of the Council for Exceptional Children, and the National 
Head Start Association. We have been working together for more than 5 years to encourage 
research on inclusion and quality services for young children with disabilities and their families. 
This session is a part of that effort. There are two parts to this session. In the first part, a number 
of experts on early childhood inclusion will highlight recent findings. Some of the sites for 
inclusion are Early Head Start and Head Start. In fact. Early Head Start and Head Start are 
providing more inclusion sites that any other program in the United States. So, this is an 
appropriate setting in which to talk about this topic. In the second part, there will be an open 
discussion when we hope the audience will bring comments and questions to the group and 
share thoughts with one another and with the panel. 

Marci Hanson is a Professor of Special Education at San Francisco State University and a 
coprincipal investigator in the recent multisite, 5 -year. Early Childhood Research Institute study 
on inclusion. Mary McEvoy is the Director of the Center for Early Education and Development 
at the University of Minnesota and a widely published researcher on inclusion of young chil- 
dren with behavior disorders. Judy Swett is from the staff of the PACER (Parent Advocacy 
Coalition for Educational Rights) Center in Minneapolis. PACER sponsors projects in Minnesota 
and nationally to help family members understand their rights and advocate effectively to 
support their children s development. Swett is also the mother of two daughters, one of whom 
has Asbergef s Syndrome and some physical disabilities. 

Korey Powell-Hensley is the Director of Heartland Programs in Salina, Kansas, which has 
developed numerous innovative programs for young children and their families. Heardand was 
one of the original 68 Early Head Start programs and also sponsors a blended program of Head 
Start and early childhood special education that operates in multiple communities. Heartland 
also pioneered in establishing Head Start services within existing community child care pro- 
grams of quality. My cochair is Mark Innocenti, who is Codirector of the Early Childhood 
Research Institute at Utah State University and the past principal investigator of several Head 
Start grants on inclusion for children with disabilities. 

From the earliest days. Head Start included children with disabilities. In 1972, the regulations 
began to require that 10% of slots in Head Start and later Early Head Start be held for children 
with disabilities. Typically, that 10% has been exceeded. In 1975, the Education for Handi- 
capped Children Act was passed. This established free services and appropriate public education 
in the least restrictive environment for all children with disabilities as a civil right in this 
country. However, for children younger than kindergarten age, that was an iffy proposition, 
because there were some loopholes. 

In 1986, those loopholes began to close as the reauthorization of that law created services for 
infants and toddlers with disabilities or developmental delay and also preschool services. All of 
those programs became operational in every state by 1992. The final key date is 1990, when the 
Americans with Disabilities Act was passed, bringing inclusion to child care. Children in 
communities have rights to be included in child care programs. 

Over the course of history, we have seen a number of phrases: least restrictive environment, 
mainstreaming, integration, services for all children, program blending, natural environments, 
and inclusion. They are all in the same neighborhood but not in the same house. "Least restric- 
tive environment" focused on the child and what is most appropriate; with adequate supports 




302 



308 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



and services for that child in the least restrictive setting. "Mainstreaming" emphasized putting 
children together, initially, for parts of the day, although those parts might be playground time 
and riding the same school bus as opposed to what we tend to think of as inclusion. "Integra- 
tion came out of the civil rights movement. "Services for all children" continues to be used. 
"Program blending" came out of the fiscal and administrative combination setting. "Natural 
environments" came to the floor in 1986 with Part C, the Infant and Toddler Program for 
Children with Disabilities. "Natural environments" are services in places where children without 
disabilities would typically be served. Finally, "inclusion" has also had an evolution. In 2002, 
inclusion is thought of as planned participation between children with and without disabilities 
in early childhood development programs. In other words, children are not just colocated; active 
steps are taken to ensure that they will be included and benefit from being together. 

Who are we talking about? In 2000-2001, Head Start and Early Head Start enrolled more 
than 900,000 children, birth through 5 years of age. Thirteen percent of these children had 
identified disabilities. There is anecdotal evidence but not data to show that over time, since 
1965, an increasing number of these children have more severe disabilities. When I started in 
the field, the children with disabilities in Head Start typically had speech delays. Now we see a 
great variety of children being served. ' 

In 1999-2000, early intervention was started. That is the birth to 3 program under the 
Individuals with Disabilities Act, which has enrolled more than 205,000 infants and toddlers, 
all of whom have disabilities, such as developmental delay, or in a few states, major risk for 
disability. In the same year, the Preschool Grants Program, which is popularly called "Early 
Childhood Special Education," enrolled nearly 600,000 children with disabilities aged 3 to 5 
years. It is important to note that many of these children are the same children. Children in 
Head Start have Individual Education Plans (lEPs). Children in the Preschool Grants Program or 
early intervention may also participate in Early Head Start or Head Start. In fact, the Bureau has 
actively encouraged this participation in recent years. 

Another major thing to note is that Head Start and Early Head Start, through, their screening 
programs, are major participants in Child Find, which locates children with special needs who 
are attending those programs. To support inclusion, the Division for Early Childhood's position 
statement advocates the following points: supports, services, and systems of high quality 
preservice and inservice training to support inclusion, and collaboration for flexible fiscal and 
administrative procedures. Our emphasis here is research that contributes to recommended 
practice, restmcturing of social, educational, health, and intervention supports, so that they are 
responsive to all children and families. Finally, there is a focus on optimal developmental 
benefit for each individual child and family. We see quite an agenda that is not yet finished. The 
panel will talk about research questions — the whichs, hows, wheres, with whoms, and how 
effectively this planned participation will happen. 

Michael Guralnick sees four areas for research. The first area is access. How are children able 
to be involved in community programs that they would otherwise attend if they did not have a 
disability? The second area is feasibility. Are those community programs able to maintain their 
philosophy and approach and also provide the individualized program needed by children with 
disabilities? Third, what are the developmental and social outcomes of the inclusionary efforts? 
Fourth, what about social interaction and social integration? Are the children interacting? Are 
they forming friendships? That is a background of what we are going to discuss in this session. 
Hanson will begin by talking about the results from the Early Childhood Research Institute 
(ECRI) on Inclusion. 

Marci J. Hanson: I will begin by describing the results from the ECRI on Inclusion. Our website 
is located through the Frank Porter Graham Center at the University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill. We invite you to visit that site, because all the publications related to ECRI are on 
there, as well as practical handouts such as news briefs and our administrator's handbook. 



ERIC 




303 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Briefly, the goals of this 5-year institute were to identify barriers and facilitators to inclusion and 
to develop, test, and disseminate strategies for supporting the participation of young children 
with disabilities and their families in classrooms and in community programs. 

We did many studies over the 5-year period. Let me give you a taste of the type of research that 
we did. Our foundational study was an ecological analysis of intervention, and we lived in a 
number of classrooms aaoss the country. We interviewed and observed all the stakeholders, 
yielding a great amount of data on the children and their interactions with one another. We got to 
know the families of the children, their teachers, all the people affiliated with them in terms of 
related services, personnel, and so forth, as well as the local and state policy makers in those 
systems. All of those different perspectives informed our points of view in our research projert. We 
followed 112 children and attempted to look not just at children with disabilities, but also at a 
sample of typically developing children in those same classrooms as the children with disabilities, 
allowing us to compare and contrast the experiences of both children. We also looked at class- 
room interventions, professional collaboration, family perspectives, and social inclusion policy. 

As researchers, we needed to find a way to disseminate all of these findings, and we came up 
with eight synthesis points. The first synthesis point is that inclusion is about belonging and 
participation in a diverse society. That means that inclusion is not just a school issue. It is not 
just about being in an early childhood program, but about families and communities in which 
those children and families live. The other major issue that we found in our work is that 
inclusion is not just about disability. Inclusion is about the rights and participation of all 
children in a diverse society. We came to understand that disability is just one form of diversity. 
When programs started with that as a foundational concept, they tended to more fully embrace 
inclusion and have more successful long-term experiences in their community. 

The second point is that individuals define inclusion differently. In fact, we started our own 
institute writing our definition of inclusion. While there was a fair amount of overlap, there 
were differences. As we came to understand inclusion from the various points of view, we found 
that there were tremendous differences from school administrators or program managers. For 
example, inclusion was a particular program located in that district or that area. Families tended 
to see it differently— inclusion means their children's participation and being included as a 
community member. They defined it differently, and these definitions were often not in sync. 

The other issue was that depending on where one was in that ecological system, one's 
responsibilities and roles tended to make a difference in terms of how one defined inclusion. 

We also found that how people embraced having children of all different characteristics played 
out differently in different kinds of programs and experiences. For example, for some people 
there was the notion that we did not identify diverse characteristics in children. Rather, all 
children should blend together; whereas in other programs they tended to celebrate and 
emphasize differences along all the dimensions of children and families. 

The third synthesis point was that beliefs about inclusion influence how it happens. The 
perspective one holds has a tremendous impact on how those children will experience their 
early childhood experience. Some of the competing beliefs occur between professionals and 
families. Again, families tended to emphasize their children's acceptance and the ability to 
participate and be full members of that community; whereas the professionals tended to look at 
goals in terms of classrooms. 

We also found that families were often in a "catch-22" situation: families of children with 
disabilities had to choose between having their children socially integrated and able to partici- 
pate with a wide range of children, and having their special needs met. That is not in the spirit 
of the law, but that was what we found repeatedly. Parents had to make that decision one way or 
the other rather than having both co-occur in that same program or experience. We also found 
some conflicts between regular early childhood and more special education types in that they 
tended to overphilosophize how children grow and develop. In some cases, people said they 
should not intervene in any exceptional or specialized way, because children would just bloom 




304 



310 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



or outgrow characteristics like looking at themselves or rocking or whatever. In other cases, they 
thought it should be more active in terms of changing the behavior. 

The fourth synthesis point, and perhaps the central one, is that programs and not children 
have to be ready for inclusion. We found that children and families' access to programs had 
much to do with child characteristics. There is the view that some children are includable and 
others are not. You can probably guess the dimensions on which people discriminated. It has to 
do with behavior — child characteristics and the degree of severity. We found that programs that 
embraced this notion of diversity in general were able to include children with all levels of 
severity and that that was not a major factor. 

However, it is definitely a perceived factor out there, as people allow or do not allow children 
in their programs. Do they meet that milestone? Are they toilet trained? Are they ready? Are they 
includable? Needless to say, families had a different perspective on these issues. We also found 
that social status, culture, and language had a big impact on whether or not one was able to 
break through those barriers to get into inclusive environments. All families and children were 
not at all equal in terms of their access to services. We found that the most successful programs 
were those that started with diversity as an underlying foundation rather than this notion that 
children had to earn their way in. 

The fifth point is that collaboration is the cornerstone to effective inclusive programs. That 
involves a personal commitment on the part of the adults. We did several studies related to 
critical factors and key influences. One thing that comes out repeatedly is how important a 
single individual is, such as a teacher, program manager, or someone who believes in inclusion 
or believes in the right of children with disabilities to be there. One person can have a tremen- 
dous impact both as a barrier and, more often, as a person who is able to facilitate the inclusion 
of children with disabilities. 

The sixth point is often overlooked. It is that specialized instruction is an important compo- 
nent of inclusion. Participation or just placing children in experiences with other children is not 
enough. There are a variety of effective strategies that we can easily implement in settings and in 
curricula. Those strategies have to do with environmental supports, adapting materials, simplify- 
ing activities, looking at children's preferences, providing adult or peer support, and providing 
specialized equipment in some cases. We have created some publications that are aimed at 
helping teachers do this. One is a book called Building Blocks, published by Brooks Publishing. 
We have also done some litde booklets for parents called Me, Too. They are meant to facilitate 
the inclusion of children in early childhood programs. These materials should serve as some 
practical supports for people. 

The seventh point is that adequate support is necessary. By support I mean training, person- 
nel, materials, planning time, and ongoing consultation. Of course, all of these must be bud- 
geted and advocated for in programs for these circumstances to be effective. The last point is that 
inclusion can benefit children with and without disabilities. In the past, we had this notion that 
children without disabilities would somehow be harmed or negatively influenced by children 
with disabilities. Many studies have shown that that is not the case. There are no negative 
repercussions for typically developing children. In fact, our research found that many parents of 
children who were typically developing wanted their children in inclusive environments because 
they felt that it added to their children's self-esteem and their notions of diversity. 

As one parent said, "My child has to learn to live in the real world. This is what the world is 
like. We are all different on many dimensions, and this is a value that I want for my child." I 
would like to end with a quote from a principal who was a regular early childhood educator and 
felt that inclusion is important. She went about almost single handedly providing an inclusive 
experience in her community, which was opposed to it in the beginning. She said, "We seek to 
create a community in which all of us have a place and are valued." That is what full inclusion is 
all about. 



305 



ERIC 




SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Mary A. McEvoy: This entire presentation will be available on the Early Childhood Behavioral 
Project website. 1 am going to talk about challenging behavior. Our website is full of informa- 
tion about the last 8 years of research that we have been doing in the area of preschool challeng- 
ing behavior. It has a strong, proactive, applied, basic focus, so it contains much information 
that can be used readily. There are also links to other projects that are working with young 
children who have challenging behavior. 

One of the things that 1 gathered from Hanson s remarks was how those of us who actually 
started our careers in early childhood special education have evolved as professionals in both 
the area of inclusion and in preschool challenging behavior. 1 no longer think of that as a special 
education issue, because it affects all young children and their families. One of the reasons that 
inclusive programs do not work for children is because, in many instances, early childhood 
educators are not familiar with or not aware of procedures that they can use to manage challeng- 
ing behavior. 

The calls that 1 get about children in inclusive programs who are having problems are for 
those with challenging behavior. It is not only children with disabilities. We do not own 
challenging behavior. More and more, it is just the rank and file — any child in the classroom 
who is engaging in behavior that the classroom staff feels is detrimental to themselves and to 
the child. Unfortunately, 1 often find myself coming into programs when the only solution that 
seems to be workable and acceptable to the program is removing the child. In many instances, 
they are not wrong, because much of what we talk about when we talking about challenging 
behavior is relationships. Hanson talked about an advocate or someone who cares for the child. 
We spend much time talking about whether there is someone in this program who likes this 
child. In many instances, the behavior has gone on for a long time and the problem has been 
exacerbated; and the program and the teachers have been asking for assistance for a long time. 

Maybe the best intervention is a change of placement so that that child can be in a new 
setting, where a new relationship can develop. Unfortunately, that is often not a situation that is 
acceptable to families or to programs. There are not other places for the child to go and so the 
real solution is: How can we start to look at behavior early, before it gets to a point where the 
child is breaking one's back? Where can we intervene and actually prevent the challenging 
behavior from occurring in the first place? , 

1 am going to talk about challenging behavior and some of the interventions that we are 
using. 1 will provide some data from two studies that we have conducted that have looked at 
what teachers are using in classrooms to manage challenging behavior. One study that we did in 
Head Start looked at changing the teacher s attention to challenging behavior, and seeing if just 
changing when they attend to the child can influence the child's rate of challenging behavior. 
How do we define challenging behavior? It is defined as any behavior that is disruptive to the 
class and harmful to the child, the teacher, the other children. It can also mean being physically 
disruptive for the child or other children. Challenging behavior involves children who are 
disruptive, bite, scream, tantrum, kick, run out of the room, and do all kinds of things that 
immediately draw one's attention to them. It is noticeable, and it is probably something of 
concern to ^e teacher, the families, and the other children in the classroom. 

There is another part of challenging behavior that oftentimes we do not think about. That is, 
challenging behavior by children who are socially withdrawn. The issue is that those quiet 
children, in many instances because of all the other things one is dealing with, are children who 
are not drawing attention and are sometimes the least likely to get any kind of intervention. The 
more we know about social and emotional development and the more we know about the 
importance of interaction, the more important it will be that we notice and attend to those 
children. 

I am going to talk now about those children who act out more, the kinds of children who 
will do something and immediately draw one's attention. When we talk about challenging 
behavior, there are two things to think about. One is the form of the behavior. What is the 



ERIC 



306 



312 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND 



DISABILITIES 



beha^or? What is it that is of concern? When the form of the behavior is identified-crying 
bmng screaming, hcking, arid so forth-then one has to think about whether it is justTne^s 
^^blem as an adult and one's tolerance level, and if others in the classroom have a problem 

ne second thing to think about is the cultural relevance of the problem. Much challenging 
liveTs ^ 0 ^^"* ^ determined. What is appropriate in Nashville, Tennessee, where I used to 

dTff^Lf .1 '"T u' St. Paul, Minnesota, where I live now, for many 

iffor fo.s perspective is this a problem? Is it something that is not appropri- 

ate for this community? I have been called in on things and ask, "Is that a problem?" From mv 

^ classroorn program, it is a real problem. One has to think 
about what foe problem is, why it is a problem, and whether it is something that needs to be 

foe foild i.?"' ^ """"" ‘’^havior is known, one must ask why 

the child IS engaging in this behavior. ^ 

Oftentimes, teachers ga stuck at that pan because when they think about why; they start 

thmktng about th.ngs that surround the child-he is from a distupuve home, he h7s ft. s 

problem, ftrere are soaetal issues-and the problem just becomes bigger. The problern ,s that a 

Thar cannot do anything about all foe things that go on throughout foe child's day 

with npn^r collaboration and coordinated services because, hopefolly we are working 

with people who can address issues that surround foe child. woriuiig 

thp^" chifohood/Head Start classroom, that child is there for a small part of foe day so 

envi^rZmem" S'ZZ" nurturing^poTitive 

tiZZri P^>^*^*arly those of us who work with children with disabili- 

ties, that foildren thrive in those kinds of settings and that their behavior is different in those 

tL h T ** others. The child with whom I work starts foe day in family day care, gets on 
earlv foildhoZ^* Ae Head Start program for a short time, gets on foe bus and goes toZe 
Srhh^ ^ education program for a short time, gets on foe bus and goes to a 

atfokey, after-school program, and then goes home. The child makes more transftions than I 

Ta* of ZSTartS, «P<^aaftons irr 

I work with teachers who say that this child's challenging behavior is gone because they 
anged their behavior. The teachers have changed what they are doing with foe child and I will 
see that same child 4 hours later and it will be hell on wheels. Children do learn ^ut foe 

h th Z® ‘k -.Z h is clear why they are engaging in what they are doing, ask 

Tnp • ^ * K * in this behavior because she wants attention. Has she learned over 

geu[ quiddy?""^ attention and 

■^e child does not care if that attention is, "Stop it. Do not do that. I do not like that You 

alsZav "^'Wh.'f ?r dassroom." The teacher could 

Ch Idren do no care what your attention is. All they know is that they have your attention It is 
not wrong to ta k positively to children. Why not catch them when they are Lt engagingZfoe 
beha^or and ask them how they are doing? Say, "Come sit with me. Let's talk. Let's plaf tZefoZ 
nnP children engage in challenging behavior is because they wjnt fome- 

one to get away from them. They do not want to be in a group aaivity. They do not want Zbe 
n foe same activity every single day for 40 minutes. They may think, "Why are we dZg this 

thZldfZorZev foiZoVr^ ^ question, but they do not have 

me skills, or they do not feel comfortable raising their hands and saying, "Excuse me This is a 

tiZZZTr H they lash out, roll arou^nd^nd "art Zing^Zp- 

thnnlhf i dismpting us right now. You need to go sit, coUea yom 

Zth? h-M '^hen you are quiet, you can comZZ " 

So foe child walks away, sits down, is quiet, comes back, and foe teacher sa^, "I am glad you are 



er|c 



313 



307 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



back. You are welcome. You are a part of this. Come sit here." He sits down and a minute later, 
he is dismptive again. 

The intervention that many teachers use is an effective intervention called "time out," but the 
problem is that there are two other words that follow that term and they are "firm reinforce- 
ment." This child is in an activity that he does not like. In essence, what one does is send him to 
something he does like, taking him out of something he does not like and putting him in a 
place where he is cjuiet, sucking his thumb, or looking at a book. Then, when he is cjuiet, the 
teacher brings him back to something he does not like. He has figured out: "I can sit here and be 
bored or I can just hit somebody else and get to leave." What we want to do is not only think 
about what the behavior is, but also why they are doing it, and try to design interventions that 
teach children different ways of telling us that they want to leave the activity, without slapping 
someone. 

With this as a premise, we thought about all the different interventions that teachers could 
use. We were interested in how many of these intervention components they are using before or 
after challenging behavior occurs. One component is attention. How often do the teachers go up 
to children and talk to them? How much of that attention is dependent on something the child 
has done? How much of that is reprimand? We were interested in how many transition cues 
they give, such as, "That was a good job, you guys. Now you can go play somewhere else." How 
many times are children given choices? I mean choices before challenging behavior occurs, such 
as, "Do you want to clean up the block area or do you want to help me clean up the reading 
area?" Give two choices: "You can either clean up the block area or you can clean up the reading 
area, but you need to stop that behavior." 

Instructions that teachers give to children that can either have positive valance, such as, 

"Come here, hand me this," or they can be negative valance, such as, "Stop that. Do not do 
that." I have already mentioned time out. Another component is restitution or overcorrection, 
such as, "You knocked over all the blocks. You need to pick them up." I have been in classrooms 
where people have said, "Do you know what? If you want to build the tower up and tear it 
down, that is fine. We are going to build it up and, then, we are going to tear it down. Build it up 
and tear it down." They give them multiple opportunities to practice that because they do not 
want them to do that. That is an enigma to me. 

Physical guidance refers to moving children through activities, even holding their hands and 
moving them somewhere or physically guiding them or picking them up and moving them 
somewhere. Somebody told me the reason they liked to work with little children is because you 
could pick them up and move them. They have not seen some of the children I have worked 
with. Differential reinforcement is a powerful tool. It says, "Look at how nicely you are sitting. I 
like that. That is good. Whoa, look at you." Then the child who is not sitting appropriately picks 
up on that and soon they are sitting like one wants them to, hoping for some praise. 

There is also general information and talk. How much of a child’s day is just things such as, 
"The sun is shining outside," or "Today we are going to be playing with the play doh"— simply 
general talk? We were interested in those components. We observed seven early childhood 
education classrooms that had children with disabilities. Over a S'A-month period, we watched 
for 100 hours. We observed what the teachers did. Most of the classrooms had a lead teacher as 
well other support staff in the classroom. We coded those behaviors and whether they occurred 
before or after challenging behavior. The largest percentage of interventions had to do with 
talking, that is, the positive mans and the negative mans, the informational talk and the general 
talk. About 88% of the time, they are talking to children. With that whole menu of other 
interventions one might use, the intervention that teachers fall back on regardless of whether it 
is before or after challenging behavior is to talk a lot to children. 

I am not saying that talking is bad, but I am going to tell you about a policy implication. It 
does not matter how much experience one has. If one is a newly trained teacher who is in a 
professional development program and has picked up on using a variety of interventions, or if 




308 



314 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



one IS a seasoned teacher who has been there a long time, teachers talk to children. In our study, 
we found that in the absence of challenging behavior, almost all of the attention that children 
receive was positive verbal. There was a little bit of physical, and it was not negative physical 
Most of that was holding children by the hands and leading them places. Under the presence of 
challenging behavior, those are the interventions that teachers use. They use positive verbal and 
that meant that challenging behavior had occurred and that is when they attended to the child 
The one I love is when one child slaps another child and hurts them and a teacher tries to use 
that as a tea^able moment where he or she tries to get them to interact. The child who has just 
een s appe has no interest at all in being anything positive, but the teacher thinks that it is a 
teachable rnoment The teacher says, "Tell him you are sorry. Tell him you will not do it again. 
Shake hands Lets be friends." This would be a great thing to do when the children are not 
engaged m challenging behavior. Then there is negative verbal: "Stop that, do not do that— I do 
not like that, as well as physical. 

The implications of this are that teachers can use a variety of interventions, but they primarily 
m Unfortunately, the high rate of verbal behavior probably will not be what those 

1 ren will see m kindergarten programs, particularly children with disabilities. We need to 
figure out a way to get them on a leaner schedule of verbal behavior and use a variety ofinter- 
ventions. Despite the high rate of verbal behavior, there was a low rate of contingency Most of 
the verbal behavior was just thrown out for children to pick up on, and there was not much 
commenung on positive behavior, such as, "I like the way you are sitting," or "Wow, look how 
well you guys are playing together." It was not pointed out to the children unless they engaged 
m challenging behavior. So, the teachers need training. 

I warit to describe quickly the results of a study we did in a Head Start classroom. There were 
four children: Devon, Todd, Tom, and Quincy, all children with disabilities. However, none of 
mese children had severe challenging behaviors, although they were referred to the study 
because of their challenging behavior. How much attention did the teachers give the challenging 
behavior before we did an intervention? How much attention did they give to the challenging 
behavior after we did the intervention? There was a big difference. There was a lot of attenLn to 
challenging behavior before the intervention and little attention to challenging behavior after 
the mte^enuon. Before the intervention, there were high rates of challenging behavior for all 

four children; it was much more challenging before we did the intervention than after the 
mtervenuon. 

For the intervention we simply asked the teachers to stop attending to children when they 

engage m challenging behavior and boost their attention to what almost feels like an abnorrnal 

wait when they are not engaging in challenging behavior. Then we helped the teachers fade the 

attention. The last rime I presented this, someone in the audience raised a hand and said, "I 

have 25 children. Do you expect me to give that much attention to these children when they are 

not engaging m challenging behavior?" My response is that that much attention is given to ftiem 

when they do engage m challenging behavior. The only difference is that they are prompting the 
teacher for attenUon. ^ ^ •iHniig uic 

The difficulty for teachers in giving attention in the absence of challenging behavior is that 

J.Tnf f K to sleeping dogs lie 

olhefthlne^th f reminded to engage in challenging behavior, or one is so busy doing 

other things that one forgets to do it. It is a simple intervention of manipulating when one gives 
attention. The teacher has a bowl full of attention. Using that bowl full in the aLence of 
Aallengmg behavior, rather than attending to children when they are engaging in challenging 
behavior, will go a long way in helping to prevent challenging behavior. ^ 

I want to describe another intervention called "tolerance for delay." The child is in circle time 
He wants to leave the activity. One can predict that he will be gone after 1 minute. After the 
circle IS engaging arid doing all the good stuff, he comes to the circle. At about 30 seconds, one 
can turn to him and say he can leave. Let him go, because he is going to go anyway and all that 




315 



309 



SYMPOSIA/ROUND TABLES/CONVERS AT ION HOURS 



has changed is that the teacher has decided when he leaves rather than him. What about all 
those other children? Will they want to leave? While doing that activity every single child in that 
circle wants to leave anyway. Think about that. From that day forward, when the child comes, 
systematically increase the amount of time that he has to stay before being released. Release him 
and then invite him back, knowing he will come back. 

He never engages in challenging behavior, because he is always released before starting to 
engage in the challenging behavior. It is a slow process and it takes awhile. This child has been 
doing this behavior for a long time so any change is going to take some time. We have seen 
children that would not stay 1 minute in an activity now staying 4 or 5 minutes. What happens, 
oftentimes, is that once they stay in the activity, they realize they like it. They just have not 
experienced it before. 

Judy Swett: 1 am giving a parent perspective, not the parent perspective. 1 am very uncomfort- 
able speaking on behalf of all parents everywhere, and frequently 1 am put in that position. 1 
want to make it clear that 1 am speaking from my heart. 1 have a 16-year-old daughter who has 
developmental ataxia, Asberger's Syndrome, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), 
and a few other physical disabilities. Joanna was born 10 weeks premature, spent 5 weeks in the 
neonatal intensive care unit, and came home on a heart monitor. Needless to say, her first year 
of life was a challenge because at that time, no one offered me any information about the 
difference between preemies and typical full-term babies. 1 had already raised a daughter who 
was 4 years old. 1 figured 1 knew what 1 was doing. Guess what? 1 did not have a clue, and so that 
first year brought many challenges. 

Finally at 1 year old, she was identified as being in need of early intervention services. She 
was not sitting up, not doing most things that children do at 3, 4, or 5 months of age, so she 
entered the early invention system. When Joanna was 2 years of age, we received the diagnosis of 
damage in her cerebellum attributed to the developmental ataxia. When she was 3 and 4, she 
was put in a segregated classroom. However, Joanna had speech language goals. She was the 
only child in the classroom who spoke, and she was not real high on peer reaction; she never 
learned how to interact with children her own age. She could talk well with the adults in the 
classroom. In fact, that became her communication style, and it was reinforced because she was 
the only child in the classroom who communicated. 

Joanna was a boon to the morale of the teachers and aides in that classroom, because she 
could give them constant feedback. She was a smiling child who loved being there. They talked 
to her and she learned to talk to adults. Joanna was fully mainstreamed in kindergarten and 
throughout her school years. This year, she finished her sophomore year of high school. Joanna 
is a highly motivated child. When she was 15 years old, 1 was surprised to find out that her IQ 
was somewhere in the range of 78-80, because 1 thought she was average. When she started 
junior high, Joanna took higher-level advanced placement classes. 

With a lot of support, we do about 3-4 hours of homework a night. She is motivated to do 
that. Joanna cannot read for content and comprehension, although she can read to herself. It is 
not that she does not understand the words, but she cannot comprehend what she reads. So, 1 
do all of her reading for her. Joanna is a straight A+ student, and this year she was inducted into 
the National Honor Society. However, one of my crowning achievements for Joanna recently 
was when she was in a musical at our church. Three people from school came to watch her in 
that musical. Then, on the day after school was out, a friend came over and had lunch with her. 
Joanna's crowning achievement was that she finally had a friend whom she could identify as a 
friend. Believe me— all the high grades and all her successes in school were nothing compared 
to the fact that Joanna had a friend come over, have lunch, and spend the afternoon with her. 
Joanna can now identify her as a friend, and that is so important.. 

What do families with children with disabilities want for their children? The answer is 
simple. They want the same things that all parents want. They want the children to be loved and 




310 



316 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



to learn how to love. They want them to have friends and have opportunities to live, play, learn, 
and work in their communities. Without opportunities for inclusion at an early age, young 
children with disabilities will not become accepted members of their neighborhoods and their 
comrnunities. The central goal in early intervention services is to provide support and training to 
families, to show them how to provide learning opportunities for their children within the 
activities of daily life. 

The child s family is usually the primary supporter and nurturer for the child's growth and 
development. When Joanna was 1 and 2 years old, and therapists were coming into our home, if 
they had told me that I was now responsible for providing occupational, physical, and speech 
therapy to my daughter, I would have said, "No way. I was not trained to do that." They showed 
me how to do things in the normal context of my daily activities with her — dressing, changing, 
feeding, playing— how I could intervene to help improve her development and help her to 
strengthen her muscles and things like that. I felt competent to do that. I was now adding on 
2-3 hours of therapy into an already busy schedule. Oftentimes, when a child is placed in child 
care, the child care provider also provides cmcial support. 

Inclusion of the family demands that the team working with the family respect their values, 
beliefs, concerns, priorities, and routines; and that the services fit the needs of the family and 
not the other way around. I happened to be a stay-at-home mother, and I considered that a 
luxury at the time. We had made a conscious decision that we would exist on a lower household 
income. It was convenient for the therapist to come to my home during the daytime hours. I did 
not have to worry about taking time off from work to do that. For most families nowadays, it is 
not convenient to have daytime hours. 

The other thing that I will mention is that I felt I had to clean the house 3 days a week for the 
therapists visits. For many families, culturally, the need to entertain guests coming into the 
home gets in the way of these therapists coming into the home. When families seem reluctant to 
have all of these therapeutic services, oftentimes that is what they are looking at. They are 
ashamed or embarrassed about their living conditions, or they are overwhelmed by the idea of 
having to entertain people coming into their home. 

If families are indeed the primary caregivers of their children, then services must be delivered 
in a way that recognizes families as equal members of the team and involves their expertise as 
parents. Long after the professionals have gone, the family will be there caring for their children. 
Families are the experts when it comes to determining the needs of the child and the family. If 
one wants to understand and meet the educational and developmental needs of children with 
disabilities and their families, one needs to ask them about their experiences and their needs. 
Listen to what they have to say and act upon that information. 

If we tmly believe in inclusion, then we must support families in ways that recognize and 
encourage the development and use of natural supports in the family's cultural and social 
network. Obviously, we all know there are not financial resources and formal resources available 
to truly benefit families in all the ways they need support. So, recognizing and encouraging a 
family's natural supports, and allowing them to be part of the whole package, is beneficial to the 
family. We must give families the skills and knowledge necessary to allow their participation in 
community life. This means that family supports and services must always be individualized and 
based on each family's daily activities, strengths, resources, and needs. Each family has its own 
stmcture, roles, values, beliefs, and coping style. Successful inclusion is predicated on respect for 
and acceptance of this diversity. It must also include respect for the racial, ethnic, and cultural 
diversity of families. Families must be allowed to be the decision makers regarding services for 
their child. 

Successful inclusive practices should strengthen the competency of families and provide them 
with the necessary supports and resources to enhance their child's development. This should be 
done in a way that increases the family's feelings of competence, rather than making the family 
dependent on the professional. Professionals may have to change how they interact with 



O 

ERIC 



317 



311 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/C ON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



families. Rather than fixing the family or acting on behalf of the family we need to empower the 
family to act on their own behalf Building and maintaining collaborative partnerships between 
families and professionals are often considered the most important factor in successful inclusion 
of children with disabilities in community settings. This inclusion requires that trusting relation- 
ships be established between the families and professionals. 

Listening to the family and acknowledging and respecting their insights is critical to this trust 
relationship. Families should be given opportunities to be involved in all aspects of program 
development, service delivery and evaluation. It is critical to recognize that families can be 
involved in multiple ways, while the limitations of their involvements must be respected. Some 
families may be able to volunteer in programs during the day. Some may be available to serve 
on advisory boards or planning committees. Some may be overwhelmed and unable to do 
anything beyond making sure that their children come to school each day. 

Providing multiple ways for families to be involved honors them and demonstrates a desire 
to work collaboratively with them. It is important to get input from diverse groups of parents. It 
may be necessary to recruit parents using a variety of methods. It is important to find ways to 
identify and recruit families to various boards and committees. In order to make participation 
comfortable for families, always have more than one family involved. No token families, please. 
No family wants to be considered the token or placed in a position of speaking on behalf of all 
families in a program. 

It will be necessary to remove barriers to participation, such as providing transportation, 
child care, meals, or stipends. This is why I love to work collaboratively with Head Start, because 
they have it all. When we cosponsor an event with Head Start, the transportation, the child care, 
everything is there, and it works well. If one truly believes that parent participation is essential, 
then one will look for solutions to challenges that occur. Any program that serves young 
children with disabilities should include parent and professional collaboration in developing 
program philosophy and practices that work for both parents and professionals. If families are 
involved and policies and procedures are established, it is more likely that the program will be 
responsive to the needs of the families. Families are in the position to judge how services are 
delivered and the extent to which services address their priorities and concerns. They offer 
authentic experience and fresh insights about their children, and may help to identify inconsis- 
tencies in the program or service delivery system. 

Parents of young children with disabilities should also be involved in a preservice training. I 
had the exciting opportunity and honor of coteaching a class for 3 years with McEvoy. Parents 
can provide valuable insights to students who will be working with families, to help them 
understand the concerns and perspectives of families on how services should be delivered. 

Giving students the opportunity to interact with families in an informal way can help break 
down barriers that could exist when they begin working within programs. I have often experi- 
enced professionals acting in ways that are insensitive to the needs of families. They are usually 
acting out of fear and ignorance rather than intolerance. Including young children with disabili- 
ties in community-based programs is an exciting opportunity for the child and the family, as 
well as other children in the program. 

Young children with disabilities learn a great deal from their typically developing peers. 

Young children without disabilities learn a great deal about acceptance, compassion, and how to 
deal with differences and diversity of all kinds. Parents have the opportunity to be involved in 
their child's program, develop leadership skills, and interact with other parents. Professionals in 
community-based programs can also benefit from the opportunities for consultation with early 
childhood special education teachers and professionals. 

The Individuals with Disabilities Act requires that young children with disabilities be given 
opportunities to interact with typically developing peers. Additionally the act calls for services to 
be delivered in natural environments or the least restrictive environment. This means that young 
children with disabilities have the right to be included in community-based programs. However, 



312 



ERIC 




children with special needs and disabilities 



we philosophically believe that our discussion of inclusion has to go beyond what is simply 
required by law and what we know to be sound, developmentally appropriate practice 

Young children should not have to earn their way into inclusive programs. They should be 
n u e in community-based programs with all necessary supports and services to allow them 

placements. Inclusion is hard work. It requires the commitment of all 
mdmduals involved to make inclusion successful for young children with disabilities, their 
ami les, an the professionals who work with them. The long-term benefits for the child, the 
k happen‘d outweigh the cost of time and commitment required to make 

Korey Powell-Hensley: I have never met these other presenters before, and they just played 
ng into my hands We are doing everything in our program that they have talked about, and it 
works. I am from Salma, Kansas, a community of about 50,000 people. We also serve two other 
counties besides our main community. We are in a very mral area. 

First, I am going to talk to you about the "BI" period, that is, the period "before inclusion " 
Head Start m this community operated three different sites at elementary schools. Early child- 

two sites in elementary schools. Head Start was serving children 
with disabilities Of course, these had to be mild disabilities, because early childhood special 
educaUon people would not let us have anyone else. 

We have classrooms side by side. The early childhood special education programs said, "We 
are doing inclusion because our little children will walk over there and your little children will 

with their fhends who came over there with them; they were just playing beside each other They 
did not get to know each other. They segregated themselves. I started to feel badly about self- 
contamed classrooms and started to tell staff that I could no longer buy into this concept. How 

do children with language delays learn to talk, when the classroom is full of children with 
language delays? 

Finally, I went to the special education coordinators and asked if they had thought about 
omg something more. We talked and talked, and I would bring it up every time we got to- 
gether. Soon Aey started avoiding me. However, they finally got on board and thought, "Do you 
toow what? That might make sense. We should do this." We got together, went to the school 
board, and said. This is what we need to do; We need a building just for us, and put all the 

propms together." The school board listened and seemed relatively receptive. 

In 1994, the school board had to make some tough decisions. They had to close two schools 
because there was not enough operating capital to keep them open. When they closed those 

sdiools, we knew that the Head Start classrooms and the early childhood special education 
classrooms would disappear. 

However because we had planted the seed with the school board, they suggested putting all 
the early Childhood programs into one building. It worked out perfectly. It to?k 2-3 years of 
tallang about it and planting those seeds; it is not a fast process. We started out with the largest 
center in Salma, with six classrooms. We have three early childhood special education teachers 
and three Head Start teasers. In each classroom, we put in one early childhood special educa- 

paraprofessional. We purposely mixed up the staff so 
again ^ teacher had a paraprofessional, she would not have that same paraprofessional 

H T" "'k childhood special education director and suggested 

into dofrv were not sure about it, but eventually I talked them 

into domg that, too. In those centers, we have a Head Start teacher who is paid by Head Start 

education Paraprofessional, and one paraprofessional paid by early childhood special 




319 



313 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



At this point, since they are going to close down the self-contained classrooms, we had to 
come to an agreement — Head Start will take every child that qualifies for center-based services 
into the Head Start classrooms. One of the difficult things is that some of our centers have 
40-50% children with lEPs. That is not what we want, but we have true inclusion. We have 
children spread throughout all the centers. They have every disability one could think of, and it 
is working well. As we have been making the decisions to do this, the first thing in our minds, 
our vision, has always been what is best for children. We know that this is best for children. One 
initial problem is the public perspective. Will my child receive good services? A strong commu- 
nity leader, who had had a child in the special education self-contained classroom several years 
earlier, disagreed with what we did. He was opposed to this move, so we asked him to be on the 
policy council. Now he is our biggest advocate. One has to involve those people who do not 
agree with one's philosophy. Bring them in and they will buy into it. They will believe it. 

Another initial problem is space, primarily because of equipment. Some children with 
disabilities need lots of equipment. It is like a roller coaster. They all come at once, and then a 
couple of years later, there are not so many. Then they all come back again. There is always a lot 
of equipment. We also had play group space because now we had childreri with disabilities who 
only came once or twice a week for a couple of hours, and we needed to find space for that. 
There was also adaptive equipment. 

We also needed to address stigma. We would hear, "I do not want my children to be with all 
of those poor children. 1 do not want people to think my children are poor because they are in 
the Head Start classroom." Other initial problems are the fear of change and of the unknown. 
We had teachers who were afraid. First of all, they feared losing their identity. We came together 
and said we were not going to be called Head Start anymore and we were not going to be called 
the early childhood special education program, whose name was Kid Conne^ition. We talked 
about it as a large group and came up with a new name. We became Heartland Programs. We 
both lost identities. Teachers, especially special education teachers^_lost the idenUty of l^ing a 
special education teacher, because now they also had typically developing children in their 
classrooms. 

There were also feelings of inadequacy, especially among the Head Start teachers. The Head 
Start teachers have degrees, but they had not had children with significant disabilities in their 
classrooms up until now. There was also the initial problem of staff with new teams. We mixed 
them all up because we did not want the Head Start teacher and the Head Start paraprofessibnal 
ganging up on the early childhood special education paraprofessional or vice versa. Mixing it up 
was good. We were not too worried about the teams, because we knew that if they were not out 
there working hard, they would sink. They knew they could sink, so they worked hard in order 
to be successful. 

One early childhood special education teacher was the most vocally stubborn person we 
brought aboard. A year later, 1 videotaped her and asked her how inclusion was going. She 
responded that in the 15 years that she had taught special education in self-contained class- 
rooms, she had not realized that she was limiting her children. She continued by saying that 
now that she has had to teach typically developing children, she realizes that she has to chal- 
lenge her children with disabilities. Before that, she was not challenging them. Hearing that was 
powerful. 

Another issue was collaboration. In the classrooms, we had to work with leadership. One 
needs to work on building relationships. Once we get to know each other, if we step on each 
other's toes, we will not hurt each other's feelings. We met regularly and sometimes we did not 
have much to talk about, but we met anyway. Our purpose was building contact, not just 
content, relationships. One needs to have realistic expectations. Do not expect a partner to 
understand your viewpoint. They may not. Do not expect that your partner has the same 
standards as you. Head Start has very high standards. Do not expect your partners to convey to 
their staff what was decided. Make memos, take minutes, and make sure to distribute things to 



314 



320 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



Staff, so everybody knows what is going on. Keep a positive attitude. Inclusion takes a long time. 
It is best for children. 

Regarding training, staff must understand the mission. They must know special education 
regulations, policies, and procedures in order to advocate in the best way for families. Everybody 
needs to be on the same page. Some of the conflicting questions that we have now are: Where 
can this child best be served? We do not always agree. Do not expect them to think the way you 
think. Who is the best teacher for this child? What are the needs of the family? What is the best 
setting for this child and the family? Head Start makes decisions according to what the family 
and child needs. Special education works on the child's educational plan. 

One current problem is nursing services. We had three children come to one center this year 
with their own nurses. Midway through the year, they all lost their nurses and wanted Head Start 
to pick up the slack. We do not have the opportunity, the funds, or the people to pick up the 
slack. Another problem is language needs. We have a large influx of Latinos into our commu- 
nity. Guess what? We have fewer speech models, and it is difficult to identify children's disabili- 
ties when they speak English as a second language. Our special education program did not have 
interpreters. They always ask Head Start to pick that up as well. Our evaluation team has always 
tried to put children with significant disabilities in the early childhood special education 
teacher s classrooms. I am alwa)^ in there intervening and saying, "Let's talk about how we can 
spread them out in between all of the classrooms because, otherwise, those rooms will get 
overloaded with those significant disabilities." Our childhood special education teachers would 
take them all. 

Another current problem is that part-day preschool does not meet the needs of all the 
students. We have child-care partnerships, so now that is a new battle. We want to place some 
children with disabilities into our child-care partnerships, but special education does not think 
that they necessarily have the expertise and training to do that. Elementary settings* are not as 
family-friendly as Heartland. 

There was a child with significant disabilities in our program, named Anthony. .He is in a 
wheelchair. We do not know his cognitive ability. One day around Halloween, a typically 
developing child colored a pumpkin and asked the teacher to help her put it on Anthony's 
pump stand. The teacher wrapped a piece of tape around it and put it on Anthony's pump, 
facing out. The child said, "No. Turn it around so Anthony can see." This 4-year-old got it. Why 
is it so hard for us as adults to get it? After 8 years, we have made tremendous gains, but the work 
is not over. It is continual work to build bridges and relationships. One might think that the 
children are the key to inclusion, but they are not. It is all relationships. If we cannot talk about it 
and continually work on it, it will not work. However, it can work well, as it has in our program. 

Mark Innocenti: Let me start with a story. I was in graduate school during the late 1970s. I also 
worked in a totally segregated program for children with disabilities about 3 to 21 years of age. 

We were learning traditional special education at that point in time. In 1980 or so, a fellow by 
the name of Joseph Check was at a conference doing Early Head Start stuff. He came up to me 
and told me he had just received funding to do a project. He said, "We are going to take pre- 
school age children with disabilities and put them in day-care centers out in the community." At 
the time, I thought this was a crazy idea, taking children with disabilities and mixing them up 
with children who do not have disabilities and thinking it would work out just fine. However, I 
was in grad school and considered myself the budding researcher, so I said, "Sure. I will be on 
this project. That would be interesting." Sure enough, in some respects, that was one of those 
life-changing experiences. I got out of the segregated setting and into the regular preschool 
environment. I worked with regular preschool teachers. I got to see what happened in day care. I 
saw for myself that inclusion worked — I saw how children with disabilities and children without 
disabilities could get along and how people could learn in those kinds of settings. 




331 



315 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



This was the early 1980s. We have heard many good presentations today. Hanson talked 
about some of the current systematic issues and the complexity of the whole inclusion construct 
and implementation. McEvoy talked about some of these issues with children who have more 
challenging kinds of behavior, and I agree with her. When 1 was doing some of my projects in 
Head Start, it was more often the children without disabilities whom they came asking advice 
for regarding what to do with the challenging behaviors. We heard an impassioned plea from a 
parent perspective and heard how programs have been able to address this issue. I feel frustra- 
tion about the whole thing, because it still has not caught on. As Rosenkoetter pointed out 
earlier, we have officially been doing inclusion since 1972, 30 years ago. There is much frustra- 
tion from people out in the field who have been doing it for a long time, asking, "What is going 
on? Why isn't it working?" I am not sure if I know all the answers, but I am going to throw out a 
couple of ideas. Let me share another story. 

A colleague of mine teaches the introductory special education class at Utah State University. 
The students — juniors or seniors in the education program — will be regular education teachers 
who are about to go out and become teachers. They are relatively well trained in terms of what 
they are doing, as they have had practicum experiences. Before they graduate, they have to have a 
dose of special education, so that they know about children with disabilities. They did this class, 
with a heavy focus on inclusion across the age span. 

Where do we go with it? At the end of the class, my friend always asks the class, "Who thinks 
inclusion is a good thing? Who still has concerns about inclusion?" He says every time he does 
this, every semester, about half of the people still do not think inclusion is a good thing. People 
leave the supportive university environment, which is supposed to foster inclusion, and are sent 
out into the schools and the preschools, which tend not to be as inclusion-friendly overall. 

Think about how this progresses. 

One of the things we need to think about is the way that inclusion is being sold to the public 
in general. We need to change the minds of people beyond those who come to the conferences. 
Not that we do not need people to come to this conference to hear this information so they can 
implement it; but we need to think about how to change the general public's perception of 
inclusion. It has been done in many areas. For example, people in wheelchairs and with disabili- 
ties are now in K-Mart catalogs. There is closed captioning for the hearing impaired on our 
television sets that can be turned on and turned off. We accept that as the way things should be. 
How do we get people to accept the idea that inclusion is the way it should be and that people 
with disabilities deserve to be included in our society? 

At a recent Zero to Three scientific meeting, I heard a talk by Frank Gilliam on what he calls 
cognitive restructuring ideas, or Strategic Frame Analysis. He is looking at how people's opinions 
are changed from a political science perspective, so he is thinking in terms of major issues out 
there. He says that people have limited frameworks in terms of where they put information. As a 
group, we need to change people's frames so that they can see the inclusion. One of the things 
that we need to do in this area as a research community, and more generally, is see how one can 
plan. How does one change people's roles? What will make people say that all children should 
be included? 

Although I agree with the fact that we need to look at the best develop mentally enhancing 
experiences, we have to mix the people together before we can look at the developmentally 
enhancing aspects of it. It is okay in schools? It is okay in preschools? It is okay at the swimming 
pool. It is okay everywhere. Start focusing on that, or we are never going to get to this idea of 
how to do it best. How do we do it so that it enhances the developmental outcomes for all 
children who are involved in this process, which is where we need to be anyway. 

Mike Norelnick wrote a book giving an overview of inclusion that is full of information. 
Norelnick is clearly a leader in the field, and he has some good ideas. However, he has a whole 
chapter on recommendations that are very top down — things that would come down from a 
national panel and that we would impart on school districts, impart on people. It is almost 




316 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



orang peop e to get involved. There does need to be some of this upper level activity to supnort 
in usion. owever, there also needs to be bottom level activity to support inclusion. 

of rnine, Richard Roberts, does a lot of work integrating services within commu- 
ni es. ne of Ae things the research community has accepted is the fact that each community 
has Its own unique strengths and resources. Not all communities are alike. Some communities 
have good resources while others do not. Some communities have researchers who are willing to 

models and training 

ou there. There is help available. Each community needs to get together— not only the 
educational community but the rest of the community as well-to talk about how this is going 
to happen. What may work in one place may not work in another. 

need^ound-level involvement, and we need to support community empowerment. Once 
at gets started, we can look at some of the models of participatory research and other ap- 
proaches. We can look at how children with and without disabilities are getting together What 
lands of actmaes are they engaged in? What are our outcomes? What do we wlnt to look at? 
When we can get to that point, we will start seeing it happen more and more. I am going to end 

everybody m the audience to take any opportunity they can to support illusion . 
and to get some of these ideas going. Try to involve people who are potentially opposed to 
thinking about some of the positive aspects of inclusion, to move them in that direction. 

McEvoy: No matter how much one wants things to happen, oftentimes, the systems get in the 
way, such as the w^ services are reimbursed, people's philosophies, and so forth. Powell- 
hTh out m Kansas how to take binding streams from special education, from 

Head Start, and from child care-three different worlds with three different regulations We are 
going to do what is best for children and quit talking as adults about why we cannot. We are 
going to fi^re out why we cannot. We are going to roll up our sleeves and do it Oftentimes 
program administrators will say that they cannot do that, but they do not know that they can 

policies. They will hold that up L a 
reason men one actually finds out that it is just some urban myth about the fact that they 

cannot do this, challenge them. ^ 

th^t y!” outcomes-driven person. I believe child outcomes are important, but 1 totally agree 
Aat one cari do things that are not directly related to children that drive child outcomes ^ 

'• services, service planning, and prevention do not directly impact 

ren u intact children s outcomes. Policy makers are increasingly moving towards being 

many hours one is with children, what one is doing ^ 
with children, and they want to account for the dollars we are spending on direct services to 

childl-en X^d r support That is going in the wrong direction. I have a vision of 

loolang up and saying, "Can you just get us the service? Can you just help 
us. Meanwhile, we are all doing our programs and following our philosophies There are 

barriers, but they are not insurmountable. f k h meieare 

^ ^ program. With our 0 to 3 program 

there is an issue of reimbursability, and that is one of the problems they cite for nofdofng home 
visits as often as Aey should. Clients come into their center because travel time is not reimburs- 

communities around the 

ntty, called Communities Can. There are some excellent examples of how communities work 
ogether to change the system within the community. It is one of those that is going to come at 

^::.ryrft ^iiuot.?"^ " 



323 



317 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



McEvoy: We won that award last summer. 

Rosenkoetter; I want to add one more pitch. The Head Start Act is going to be reauthorized. 
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) is going to be reauthorized, and Temporary 
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) has been resolved in some form. So much is happening 
politically at the national and state levels. We need to have a voice individually, as programs, 
and through our professional organizations. We need to say what needs to happen. Get the ear 
of the people who are going to be making those decisions and make your voice heard. 

I lived in Kansas years ago when we had two prominent senators, including Bob Dole. At one 
point, there was some issue related to children with disabilities. A person from Senator Dole s 
office called the family center in the state. He said, '"Call off your people. I got the message. You 
want this course of action. I hear you. " The person there asked, just by chance. How many calls 
did you get before you got the message?'' He said, "Three." We think it has to be tens of thou- 
sands. Sometimes a few voices to the right people at the right time can make a difference. 

Comment: I have worked at the assessment of behavioral problems in children. I was struck by 
the number of children who have underlying communication problems. We have the research 
base and the knowledge base to go forward in assessing children on an individual basis. I do not 
follow a formula for assessment. Is there more acceptance that challenging behaviors may 
sometimes be typical childhood behavior? Where is that in addressing challenging behaviors? 

McEvoy: That is a great question. The research is there and while we know it, I am not sure that 
we do a good job imparting it as part of our professional programs. Maybe it is done in the areas 
of occupational therapy, particularly with the sensory integration, but not in the general early 
education field. Underlying challenging behavior is communication. It could be communicative 
intent where the child does not have the words or the process to communicate, or he or she has 
learned that challenging behavior is a way to communicate a want or a need. 

I also believe that one of the first interventions to look at for a child with challenging 
behavior is the sensory consequence of that behavior. Oftentimes, people will say it is a sensory 
issue and that nothing can be done about it. We have ways of determining whether or not it is 
sensory- motivated behavior or learned behavior. Even though they have been doing it for so 
long, the issue can be addressed. It is extremely difficult to deal with, since sensory-motivated 
behavior is hard. The interventions are difficult to implement and require expertise. Even after 
the sensory problem has been eliminated, the challenging behavior continues because while it 
perhaps started as a sensory issue, the behavior has now been used effectively so many times 
that the child continues to use it. 

I did not talk about sensory-motivated behavior. There is a portion of behavior that is that 
way for whatever reason; it is a sensory- processing issue where children do not have the underly- 
ing communication skills. It is true that that does happen. However, teachers often want to 
move to that instead of saying, "Wait a minute. Maybe there is something I can change in my ^^ 
behavior in order to change the child's behavior, instead of focusing specifically on the child." 
Those two things have to go hand-in-hand. 

Question: Would you address the difference in philosophies in education as a barrier? In our 
school system, we have some inclusive classes and some classes side by side. The barrier to 
combining the classes is not ours. We consider the special education class next door sterile and 
uninteresting. Likewise, they have certain ideas about our classroom and do not want anything 
to do with it. 

Powcll-Hcnslcy: The philosophical backgrounds certainly are different. We need to return to 
the universities and the 3 -hour course that is taught on the elementary years before early 




318 



324 



CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS AND DISABILITIES 



childhood teachers go out into the real world. States need to make some difficult changes. We 
probably need to have one certification for early childhood special education from 0 to 
8 years of age. Those are the types of differences that we have to make to ensure those things 
happen. 

In local areas where there are side-by-side classrooms and they are not working together or 
being included, it is important that those people who disagree with the philosophy start talking 
about it. If we talk about it repeatedly, eventually some ideas will be swayed and some people 
will change and be able to make some differences. In our case, it went from the top down. I do 
not know if that would happen in your case, but it can also go from the bottom up. There are 
teachers who believe strongly in this. If you are a coordinator or in a leadership position, make 
sure that your staff have opportunities to learn about inclusion, and visit programs where it is 
working successfully. Look at where the program is and start getting people to open their minds 
to see that self-contained classrooms are wrong. They are not best for any children — not best for 
typical children and not best for children with disabilities. If opportunities are given to them to 
see that, they will start changing some of their philosophies. 

Hanson: I agree. I also want to acknowledge that it is not easy. For those combined philoso- 
phies — the early childhood educators and the special educators — to come together, it takes a 
commitment to planning and co-ownership. We found that where there was a courageous 
person thinking outside the box, willing to put people together in both communities, there was 
the opportunity to make decisions about the goals for their programs. However, that collabora- 
tive, joint decision making and joint ownership of the children in those cases worked because 
they had a communal goal. It takes a commitment. It is not going to happen without the 
planning and administrative time to work together. 

Powell-Hensley: The federal government came together with the Hilton Corporation to create 
Special Quest, a 4-year program where five people from a community commit to participate for 
all 4 years. Early Head Start and Part C partners come together for a week-long training. That has 
made such a huge difference across the nation in those programs that were able to participate. 
We were fortunate when we started— at least we knew each other. I was amazed the first time we 
went. There were people that did not even know the Part C people and the Part C people did not 
know the people from Early Head Start. Or, we knew each other but came from different 
philosophical backgrounds. After 4 years, we have made wonderful strides. We do Individual 
Family Service Plans (IFSPs) together. We go on home visits together. We refer each other. We 
have made tremendous gains, and this was a planned situation in which to do it. If any one has 
any influence with the federal government, I suggest encouraging them to continue the Special 
Quest opportunity, because it made a huge difference. 

Comment: I wanted to comment on the training approach by the Hilton Corporation. People 
come together as teams. However, it is also structured to include planning time and time with a 
learning coach, to check in with people and see how they are moving along with the plan that 
they have made. It is a useful model, but it is not unique in terms of training and technical 
assistance. It certainly is a model that can be replicated whether or not we have special classes. 
They hope it gets funded, but that should not discourage the replication of that model. When 
one has an opportunity to think through change, one should ask who needs to be involved as 
well as how much time is needed before the change is implemented. Do we know exactly what 
works, what does not work, and what else needs to be done to keep moving forward? Again, 
an important component will be training, but I want to make clear that the model can be 
replicated. 





319 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Comment: It is important to support inclusion for research as well as developmental outcomes. 
There are many conflicting findings in the research. We surveyed 250 parents of preschoolers 
with and without disabilities. One key finding was that support for inclusion was overwhelm- 
ing. However, when we later asked whether their support depended on the severity of the 
children included — mild, moderate, or severe — inclusion was not strong for children with severe 
disabilities. The study support was overwhelming though, with 94% of parents saying that they 
would place their child into the inclusion program again. That was an interesting finding. A 
study is currently under review following 100 children over the course of 1 year in terms of their 
language development, social competencies, and problem behaviors. Most of the research since 
1985 has done that. However, there was an interesting finding regarding behavioral problems. 

Rosenkoetter: Was it linked to adequacy of services? 

Comment: They were smaller classes, more structured. Special education teachers started all the 
classes. 

Comment: In this particular analysis, children were evaluated according to Ridley's scores below 
a certain level. 

Comment: I wear a couple of hats. I am a professional, but I am also the parent of a child with 
a disability. Depending on the persons who come in contact with my daughter, they may see her 
as having a severe disability. She is an individual and has done well in an inclusive setting. My 
concern is that it could be used to individualize the issue and start looking at it by diagnosis as 
opposed to the individual child and what he or she brings to the table. 





320 



Consequences of Welfare Reform 



Welfare Reform and Its Impact on Families 

CHAIR: Gloria Johnson-Powell 

PRESENTERS: Barbara Wolfe, Kathy Thornburg, Constance Williams 

Gloria Johnson-Powell: Welcome to this afternoon's presentation on welfare reform and its 
impact on families. We will begin our panel with Barbara Wolfe. 

Barbara Wolfe: 1 am an economist from the University of Wisconsin at Madison. 1 recently 
served as Director of the Institute for Research on Poverty, so I have been involved in analyzing 
and evaluating welfare reform in the state of Wisconsin. We have long-term experience to aid 
evaluation of welfare reform. 

It would be useful to broadly describe welfare reform and how it was implemented in 
Wisconsin. In many ways, Wisconsin was the prototype for the broad scale Personal Responsi- 
bility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA), and Temporary Assistance for 
Needy Families (TANF) legislation in 1996. It was the first state to eliminate cash assistance 
before PRWORA was passed. 

Under welfare reform, states are able to design programs within broad boundaries. Aspects 
of welfare reform that are relevant to todays presentations include: elimination of entitlements 
to cash assistance, time limits on eligibility, eligibility for cash assistance not automatically 
linked to receipt of benefits in kind, such as food stamps and medical assistance, and an 
emphasis on encouraging work. 

Individuals are required to put in 30 to 35 hours per week in one of four tiers. The first tier is 
the private sector; the second is subsidized private sector work. The third tier is public employ- 
ment, which frequently means created jobs. The last tier, called "transitions", allows individuals 
who are unable to join the regular workforce, for example those with significant disability in 
the home, to fill their productive requirements. In the Aird and fourth tiers, individuals are still 
considered to be receiving assistance. Their income is viewed as a grant; earnings do not receive 
the earned income tax credit. 

There is extensive assistance to support individuals from welfare to work in the state of 
Wisconsin. A good deal is spent on child care and on counseling of individuals. Uniquely, the 
State Children s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) includes parents. There is an extensive 
child support experiment, taking place in Wisconsin, which is also relevant. Most individuals 
receive 100% of child support; the state does not take any, as is common in nearly all other states. 

VVe have been conducting an evaluation of what the receipt of child support means for the 
well-being of children, an issue I will cover later. 

The topic of this talk is the well-being of children whose mothers have been recipients of 
cash assistance but who have then left assistance. In cooperation with state officials we have 
gathered administrative data on virtually everyone. We have not analyzed a subsample of the 
individuals I am describing; we have data on everyone in these classes in the state. 




327 



321 



SYMPOSIA/ROUND TABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



The first cohort was identified using data from the summer of 1995. Using data from the next 
cjuarter, we identified anyone who did not receive cash assistance for 2 months and called them 
a "leaver", in the sense that they had left cash assistance for at least 2 months. We then followed 
them and their family members as far as we could. 

The second cohort was similar, but we found them in the summer of 1997. Again, 100% of this 
sample were people who had been on cash assistance in the summer and then left for at least 2 
months. We also had information on people who stayed, but they will not be discussed today. 

We collected administrative data on these individuals, including use of cash assistance and 
associated benefits: when they received food stamps, the value of the food stamps, when they 
were on medical assistance, and their actual use of medical assistance. We collected additional 
information, including where they lived, and the characteristics of their family units. We merged 
this data with information from the unemployment insurance system, so we also had individual 
earnings histories. We conducted a number of studies looking at their success in the labor market. 

Over time, there was increased dispersion in earnings. Some women started doing fairly well 
and improved over time. A relatively small proportion of people was doing extremely well. We 
also observed individuals who were not doing well. Under cash assistance, the amount that 
these families received depended on their family size. Now that their income depended prima- 
rily on their own earnings, there was increasing inequality among this population. Yet the 
average was not much different from what they were getting before we had this reform. 

The later cohort showed a similar pattern over 2 years. However, "leavers" in the second 
cohort had less education, so their average earnings were expectedly lower. 

With that background, 1 want to move to the main substance. We were interested in whether 
these families, with incomes low enough to make them eligible for food stamps, made use of 
the available in-kind benefits. Most families remained eligible for food stamps. Remember that 
these people left cash assistance. If they had a higher family income, because they were success- 
ful or got married, they would not be eligible. The vast majority of these families remained 
eligible. Some had increased employment success over time, but after 4 years more than 70% of 
these families remained eligible. 

Within that population we wanted to find the proportion receiving benefits for which they 
were eligible. 1 would suggest that a low proportion was receiving these benefits. Looking at the 
1995 cohort, by the third year, less than one third were receiving benefits. The majority of 
studies have looked at a whole cohort of people who have left welfare; they do not adjust for 
eligibility. We adjusted for eligibility, and the take-up rate was quite low. The take-up rate in 
Wisconsin was higher than most other states. Yet, many of these families were not taking 
advantage, or they were not been properly informed, or the transaction cost of all they were 
required to do to receive benefits was too high, so they did not go through the process. 

We did the same thing for each child in the family. Looking at Medicaid eligibility, we took 
into account the child's age, the family's income, and all the eligibility rolls. Once Badger Care 
(our SCHIP plan) began, nearly all these children became eligible, but how many received 
coverage? The 1995 cohort showed a pattern similar to that of food stamps. It was somewhat 
higher, but three years out, slightly more than 50% of children who were eligible for Medicaid 
were enrolled. The 1997 cohort appeared to have a higher proportion of individuals who took 
up the benefit to which they were entitled. However, even for this group, more than 20% of the 
families who were eligible were not covered by Medicaid. 

We did some analyses of when people discontinued receipt of Medicaid. Children were 
differentiated by various characteristics. For example, location characteristics showed that people 
in smaller cities were more likely to have exited, but there were not substantial differences. Race 
was probably the most interesting characteristic. In Wisconsin, Latino children were rnost likely 
to leave and least likely to receive Medicaid over time. Alternatively, the African American 
population of children was the most likely to continue to receive Medicaid. We considered why 
some children who were eligible received Medicaid, and others did not. 



322 



328 



CONSEQUENCES OF WELFARE REFORM 



Children less than 1 year old tended to always be enrolled because they were enrolled in the 
hospital at birth. There were two other items that were worthy of note. First, one would expect 
mothers who worked for a year at a firm that offered health insurance to be eligible for the 
insurance, but they were far more likely to have their children enrolled in Medicaid than other 
children. Also, families were sensitive to required co-payments or premium payments. They 
had children who were eligible, but were far less likely to receive it, perhaps because of these 
payments. 

One caveat: we are using administrative data to get income information. We believe that we 
capture most people in the household, but there are reasons we might miss income: someone 
we are unaware of could be earning for the household, or someone could be working ^^ofif the 
books." People could also be working in other states. In these cases, we would be underestimat- 
ing household income. However, we think we are accurate in our estimates. 



Constance Williams: I am an associate professor of social policy at the Heller School for Social 
Policy and Management at Brandeis University. I would like to introduce my colleague, Judy 
Francis, the director of the research project for which I am lead ethnographer. We had many 
collaborators on the study, including the principal investigators and the lead ethnographers. 

The Welfare Children and Families Study has three parts. There is a survey, of which one wave 
of data collection has been completed and anal)^ed, and a second wave completed but not yet 
analyzed. There is an imbedded study of cognitive development, observing a subset of families 
through home visits and videotapes. P Lindsay Chase-Lansdale at Northwestern University is 
heading up that part of the study. The final part is a neighborhood ethnography component that 
complements the family ethnography and was conducted in the same neighborhoods. 

For the family ethnography, about 21 5 African American, Mexican American, Puerto Rican 
and White families were interviewed over 18-24 months. The interviews were intensive, starting 
with questions regarding a typical day for the mother, the family's healthcare, their welfare 
experiences, family support, and so forth. We went back to see the family 6-8 months later, to 
see how they were doing, and what changes had taken place. We hope to return and do an 
additional follow-up with these families. 

All together, we had 2,400 families. In each of the cities, 15 families w;ith a disabled child 
were also.been followed. When we recruited the sample, half were on Temporary Assistance for 
Needy Families (TANF) and half were not. Our original idea was that the lives of families on 
TANF were similar to those of families in the low-income job market. However, we found that 
people who moved from welfare to work were changing categories entirely. 

You probably know that the lives of these families are anything but static. A family on TANF 
that we recmited might be off after 2 months and back on 6 months later. A person could have a 
job at one point, and shortly after not have a job. Ethnography is useful in this aspect because 
we can get a sense of the dynamic issues in the lives of the families; surveys cannot do this. 

The recmited families had to have a child between 2 and 4 years of age, or between 0 and 8 
years in the disability group. We wanted to include the three ethnic groups in all three cities. We 
had more success in recmiting Latino families than African American families, but we did well 
m including both groups. We had more difficulty in getting White families to participate. 

Caregivers in all three cities were analyzed. By caregiver, we mostly mean the mother, but it 
could be a grandmother, foster parent, or someone else. Of the primary caregivers, 43% had less 
than a high-school diploma. This impacts their skills and the kinds of jobs they can get A large 
proportion of caregivers, around 26%, had a GED. Of our sample, 31% had some college or 
trade school experience. 

In the Boston sample, we considered the number of children for whom caregivers were 
responsible. Many people think low-income families are huge. We know this is not tme; most of 
these families are similar to the rest of the population in terms of number of children. 



SYMPOSIA/ROUND TABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



The public transportation system, or the "T , in Boston is symbolic of a number of things. 
Family members take the "T" to a variety of jobs. Food service jobs are common among low- 
income families. Other jobs include child care (which is a low-income job even though it is an 
important responsibility), and housekeeping or cleaning. We also had individuals who were 
working as bank tellers, bookkeepers, and so forth. The range of hourly wages for the majority of 
our participants was $5.50-$9.25. Some families in our sample were doing better than that. 

Some people had moved up to $13 per hour after a couple of years on the job, or by changing 
jobs. Typically, these people were women with education beyond high school and they had only 
one child. 

Information about the typical day is important because one of the big issues for these 
families is time. People have to take time off work to have their eligibility determined. One of 
the reasons that take-up rates are low for food stamps, and other assistance, is that low-income 
people do not have much flexibility. Their days are packed. 

The kinds of work schedules people had are relevant for child care. Many of the child care 
centers did not operate in the off-hours, during weekends and evenings. We are learning a great 
deal about the daily lives of our families. Sleep takes a big hit. Time for parenting can be 
limited. Parents must cope with a variety of schedule conflicts, including illness, accidents, 
school schedules, and appointments. We are not implying that middle-income or upper-income 
families do not face these challenges, but lower-income families have less flexibility and fewer 
resources to cope with these sorts of issues, and these schedule conflicts may be barriers to 
keeping a job. 

Regarding the kinds of child care that our families depended upon, we found a large number 
of children in unregulated, unlicensed care, in part because the primary caregivers' jobs may 
have necessitated availability during off-hours. Participants sometimes provided care for other 
children as well as their own. Some sent their children to live with relatives, near or far. Some 
families in the Boston study sent their children to the Caribbean to be with the grandmother so 
that they could keep their jobs, housing, and make ends meet. It was not atypical for families to 
send their children south to their grandmothers. 

Kathy Thornburg: I am from the University of Missouri at Columbia. The research 1 will 
describe today was part of the Early Head Start Research Consortium. The study looked at 
various perspectives of welfare reform implementation. 1 will talk briefly about the full study, 
then about some of the services that the families and children use. 

Seven states were involved in the project. In each state, we purposefully studied at least one 
urban and one mral site, or one metro and one nonmetro site. In some states, we did a couple 
nonmetro sites, because the mral communities were so diverse. Over 600 interviews were 
conducted over a 2-year period. We started in late 1998 and early 1999, and went back approxi- 
mately 1 year later and interviewed either the same people or a person in the same position. 

We organized the study on five different levels. We wanted to look at families and their 
perspectives, but we also wanted to look at similarities or differences among state administra- 
tors. We often went to the top at the state level, to the person in charge of welfare reform. And 
we interviewed people in charge of child care subsidies, job training, or employment. We 
interviewed approximately 25 state administrators during each of the 2 time periods. 

We also looked at local administrators in both metro and nonmetro communities. We spoke 
with the local social services director, perhaps an economic development director, or a person 
providing child care or early childhood programs in the community. We also took referrals from 
the community, for experts in particular topics. 

In addition, we spoke to people working with families. We interviewed social services 
workers and in some cases, people in the field of Women, Infants and Children, public health, 
job training, and so forth. Approximately 40 professionals in this category were interviewed 
each year. 



ERIC 



324 



330 



CONSEQUENCES OF WELFARE REFORM 



Because it was part of Early Head Start and Head Start, we interviewed the professionals — 
home visitors or teachers — in the Early Head Start programs. Approximately 80 Early Head Start 
or Head Start professionals were interviewed each year. 

We interviewed approximately 120 parents each year. To find the parents, we used either Early 
Head Start or Head Start families with younger siblings. Each parent we interviewed had at least 
one child between 12 and 36 months of age. They each had the support of either Early Head 
Start or Head Start. 

Approximately half of the families were on cash assistance when we started, and half had 
been on but were off at the time of the first interview. We wanted to look at the community 
context, resources, and barriers, and understand the similarities or differences between metro 
and nonmetro areas. 

We encountered some people with positive changes in their lives, but this was not always the 
case. It was good for communities because there was increased collaboration between govern- 
ment and community agencies. For many of the families, there was a sense of hope and opti- 
mism. However, some of the people we interviewed described how, after welfare reform, their 
families were under more stress and put more demands on the system in their communities. In 
the nonmetro areas especially, where fewer services exist, it was more difficult for many families. 

Families held five subgroups of attitudes. Two subgroups belonged to people who were 
working— previous welfare recipients, if you will. One group we called "reform advocates." This 
group said. This was the thing to do, right on target." We called another group the "compas- 
sionate reformers." They felt that people with low incomes who made the effort to work should 
still receive some support, and not have to go on and off assistance so often, but in general they 
were supportive of the overall effort. 

Three of the subgroups belonged to people who were not working at the time of the inter- 
views. Some were optimistic, and we called these the "welfare planners." They said that they just 
needed enough time, but it was a good thing. In some of these states, July was the 5-year time 
limit. It would be interesting to go back; perhaps different attitudes would emerge. 

The two most worrisome groups we called the "demoralized participants", who had lost hope 
and felt defeated by the system, and the "systemic victims", who thought the system was unfair 
and in need of change. They saw reform as a personal attack; the system was out to get them. 
These two groups were smaller than the three groups with more optimistic views. Nonetheless, 
there were enough of them to form a group. They are the ones we worry about. Many people in 
these two groups will probably continue to get support. 

There were several broad research objectives, including analyzing the effects of welfare 
reform, and other policy changes, on children, families, and communities. 

Stable child care was a support in place for some families who were successful in making 
the transition to full-time employment. In some cases. Early Head Start was a home visiting 
program; other cases were associated with a good early childhood program. The Early Head Start 
and Head Start staff helped the families set goals, prioritize their needs, access resources, and 
stay connected to their children. They were a big support for these families. Trying to move 
families too quickly was a concern in the mral communities. The pressures on families encour- 
aged us to start looking at different ways to serve families. Some Early Head Starts, for example, 
needed to move from a home visiting model to a program model, partially because of welfare 
reform. 

Supportive and knowledgeable case workers helped link parents to education, and worked 
with them on life skills or soft skills training, GEDs, college or employment, and resources. 

When this approach worked, people responded positively to the local family service workers 
who provided strong support for these families. An Early Head Start home visitor in a metro- 
politan area said that she served a teenage mother in the welfare-to-work program, and it had 
been wonderful. The mother was great, had child care, was going to school for her GED, and 
was already taking a certified nursing assistant course so that she could get a decent job with 



O 

ERIC 



331 



325 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



benefits. One sees optimism in people at various levels. An Early Head Start specialist said that 
the emphasis on strengths and needs assessments made a great impact on her. 

Other important supports included mentoring, flexible work schedules, health insurance, and 
family-friendly environments. Many people in the system do not need much employment training 
and can get a fairly decent job with upward mobility available. Another state administrator 
commented that in many cases people are not ready for this. To throw them into just any job does 
not make sense. They cyde back into the welfare system or they get stuck in a dead-end job. 

Overall, we felt that people at all different levels, induding the state administrators, were 
concerned, and wanted to be supportive. It varied by state, but in general the state administra- 
tors interviewed were compassionate toward the recipients, and in some cases wanted better 
policies. We were not sure whether they were hiding behind some legislative requirements or 
current policies that they could not affect. Other support sj^tems came from faith-based 
organizations, treatment programs, domestic violence shelters, food pantries, and so forth. What 
was needed in many instances, as demonstrated by the families who successfully obtained full- 
time employment, was a year of preparation and work. Some of the programs did not give them 
that much. 

Informal supports such as relatives, neighbors, and friends were important. I could not 
complete this presentation without talking about the word (both public and private trans- 
portation). A lack of "T systems is influential in rural communities and urban areas. People 
also need stable housing arrangements, low rent, safe neighborhoods, job retention services, and 
jobs that pay above minimum wage. 

Most of the people are still eligible for, but do not get, food stamps, Medicaid, and other 
subsidies. It is something we must talk about on Capitol Hill to make sure that the re-authoriza- 
tion they are discussing today can deal with some of these issues. They need to balance work 
and parenting. In summary, we need to look at the transition into employment. So many of 
these states just say "Go to work." 

I have some final policy recommendations: Ensure the availability of job retention services 
and training. Reinvest TANF savings into these services, including transportation and child care. 
Help these families maintain services; even if they are not eligible for cash assistance, most are 
eligible for food stamps, Medicaid, child care subsidy and so forth — we need to support them in 
that effort. 

Anthony Salandy: I work for Congressman Charles Rangel, who is the ranking member of the 
Ways and Means Committee, one of the committees that oversees the TANF legislation. I wanted 
to talk about TANF, which was passed in 1996 but is due to expire September 30. That is one of 
the reasons why the House and Senate are marking up the bill. Congress is in the process of re- 
authorizing TANF. 

TANF eliminated entitlements and put in place a philosophy of welfare-to-work. A lot of 
people over the course of the past year have been up to Capitol Hill to talk about the success of 
welfare reform." The House passed the re- authorization bill sponsored by Representative Herger 
a couple months ago. There were three parts to the bill. One part came out of the Ways and 
Means Committee, re-authorizing the main money for TANF. The child care part came out of the 
Education and Workforce Committee. Energy and Commerce dealt with the abstinence educa- 
tion part in the marriage promotion. 

I want to talk about some of the issues and politics surrounding TANF legislation, the Herger 
bill in more detail, and the Democratic substitute, offered by Representative Cardin, which 
failed. We sit here saying "Put money into child care or helping low-income families, and it will 
get fixed." Unfortunately, there is a great deal of politics in policy. Finally, I want to talk about 
the Senate bill, offered by Senators Hatch, Breaux, and Jeffords. 

Basically, the Herger bill established level funding for the next 5 years, at $16.7 billion. Level 
funding presents some problems. In the out years, there will be increases in inflation, but this 



ERIC 



326 



332 



CONSEQUENCES OF WELFARE REFORM 



DemocTatTnu^^^^ in a decreased spending capacity of theTANF dollar. The 

uemocrat Dill asked for more money but it failed. 

24 nf changed the work requirement rules from 30 to 40 hours per week, with 

L r? on sp^nt in work-related activities. The Democrats wanted to keep 30 hours of 

Xa^^on and?r The Republican proposal excluded vocational 

2t Sod^nh. f work-related activities. TTiere is a difficulty in trying to 

get good pbs for people m poverty without providing educational opportunities. ^ ^ 

nrnhi^^ ^ maintained that legal immigrants are not eligible for TANF dollars, which is a huge 
problem, especially m New York, California, Texas, and Florida. They kept the transitional ^ 
medical assistance program for infants aged 6 to 12 months; the Democrats wanted to extend it 

Cuns andW^nm democratic substitute failed. 

The bad luA for TAMP , f” Congressman Rangel but as Anthony Salandy: 

1 he bad lu^ for TANF re-authonzation is that it came up during an election year People 

for Ihe Heror bTsft^^ “'TT" ™"“° Wear sift on wo* voted 

^ needed more money for child care but could 

not go on record voting for something that seemed tough on work. The Republican bill pro- 

^ ^ f ‘^hd care. When the bill was marked up in Wa^ Ind 
Means, many people were screaming that we needed more money for child caie. ^ 

inf^ ®. hiey created the rules they were going to put more monev 

into child care. They said that they increased it for $3 billion over the course of 5 vears- howevJr 
1 IS contingent on appropriations. That means that they have to wait for the budgL process to 

bottom line is that there is only $1 billion extra in the bill coming out, about $200 

wlr^iT Ih^O hour? care per year. The Congressional Budget Office said that over the next 5 
years, if the 40 hours per week rules were instituted, it would cost $8 to $11 billion dollars for 
Add care. Even without the 40 hours, if TANF were level-funded, it would cost $ 7 ffiffion if 

attadie^to ffie^hd? Ju^ instructive comments 

attached to the bill, and hopefully the Senate will pick that up. I've compared all of these- 

Tlerger bid, the Cardin proposal, the Carper-Bayh bid, and the Hatch Breaux 
and Jeffords position. The latter one should be voted out of committee today. 

Johnson-Powell: I want to identify myself as a former welfare Add. My family was nut on 

Greg Ebcrhart: Wl* regards to tbe dififerentiation of welfare recipients into categories of 
welfare planners demoralized participants,- and "systemic viaims," could you put those 

=e“„rtber hisZc7ra«tis- 

and ?hev?nt T f questions about everything. Some of these interviews lasted In hour 

^d they looked at supports, attitudes, and the way people were treated in a variety of plaL' 

The labels were created by looking at their general attitudes and responses to receiving welfare. 

a?d i?edkdd. ^ "" explanation of the relationship between private insurance 



ERIC 



333 



327 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Wolfe: There are reasons we see large numbers of women, whom one would expect to be 
eligible for private insurance, with children enrolled in Medicaid. The women are likely to work 
for a firm with human resources staff who are aware of Badger Care (SCHIP in Wisconsin), and 
may be assisting the employee with information about eligibility and the application process. 

It is in the firm's interest to have the employee enrolled in Badger Care rather than their own 
insurance package. Presumably the employee is advantaged by getting better insurance at a lower 
cost sooner — because there is no 6 month waiting period — than with the employer s plan. The 
firm saves money, so there is a mutuality of interests. 

We have put this research into the hands of policy makers because research into policy is 
what we are all about. We have policy briefs and so forth. 1 am concerned about the re-authori- 
zation. We should not be here; we should all be on Capitol Hill. Before we leave town, we 
should go to the Hill. 

My understanding is that in some of these various versions of the bill there are great implica- 
tions for every one of our states. 1 understand that they took the state match away, which would 
further decrease some of these billions they are adding. So overall it could be worse than you 
described. Is that right? 

Salandy: Yes. The rationale was that there are fewer people on the caseload, so more can be 
done with less money. The Democrats are arguing that individuals who are not on the caseload 
are marginally poor; they are living either right at the poverty line or a little bit above it. They 
too need support services for which states might use TANF dollars. 

Your first comment is extremely important, because individuals who come to Washington for 
annual meetings often set aside a congressional day or morning, to meet with their 
congressperson to tell them about issues important to them. 

Individuals who know the research and can articulate it are seen in briefings, but too often 
they do not talk to legislative assistants who deal with the issue. Other times, advocacy agents 
give only anecdotal evidence that something is important. We have thousands of students 
coming up to Washington to discuss environmental issues. Few students, particularly graduate 
students, come to advocate for funding issues dealing with children and families. Faculty comes 
to ask for science and research funding. We need to make a push to be advocates for families 
and children, especially considering the research that we do. 

Thornburg: The week that the bill was being considered in the House, a group of us from the 
Poverty Institute were here. Virtually three times a day, there was a briefing going on that 
attempted to get legislative assistants into the room to talk about research. It seemed to me that 
much of that was going on, so maybe you can share with us how it might be more useful. 

Salandy: There are many people doing briefings and bringing people up to talk about these 
issues. However, the week that the bill was in the House, many legislative assistants addressing 
this issue did not know what TANF stood for. They were trying to get a grip on what this meant, 
all the aspects of the bill, and so on. Sometimes, one finds a political science major, and TANF is 
not the only issue that they address. 

TANF is not the only issue 1 work on. 1 also look at environmental issues, crime, drugs, and 
HIV/AIDS. The person assigned to an issue may be 24 years of age and overloaded with work. 1 
barely understood everything, and 1 come from a psychology/ social policy background. Some 
people come to the briefings, get the information, and buy into it; some come to the briefings, 
buy into it, try to sell it to their boss, and their boss will not buy into it. Those are the politics in 
the policy. 



O 

ERIC 



328 



334 



CONSEQUENCES OF WELFARE REFORM 



Williams: For those of us who do research, it can be discouraging sometimes because we relay 
the policy implications and we do not see it making much difference. You hit the nail on the 
head when you said that this issue is coming up in a re-election year. The ideology and the polls 
have driven much of this. 

One of the striking things about the 40-hour workweek proposal is that governors, both 
Republican and Democrat, are adamantly against it. They know that it means they would have 
to create jobs. It takes away an incredible amount of flexibility. It is interesting that even the 
governors from both parties could not carry the day on that. People's beliefs and ideologies 
about work are playing a huge part in this, no matter how much information is passed on to 
them. 



Salandy: There was some discussion about extending TANF, as it is right now, for one more year 
and taking up the issue next year in the 108th Congress. I do not think that will happen. I do 
not think the bill will be conferenced in July; they may attempt to conference it in July, but I 
think it will be conferenced when they come back from summer recess in September. If that is 
the case, it will be close to the September 30 deadline. 

Carla Patterson: In any of these surveys, or other studies, did you pick up anything about how 
or if these families use information technology (IT) to gain information or skills that they need? 
It was indicated that they were not accessing services because they were too poor. Are there any 
interactive IT ways for them to access some of the services? 



Williams: Early in our study, we visited one of the large welfare offices that was beginning to try 
to help people on TANF in the transition to work. They had screens and other resources that 
women were supposed to be able to use to get information. Nobody used them. When we .tried 
to use them, they were not working. That is at the systems level and would have been in 1999 
or 2000. 

For our parents, they are not buying computers; they can hardly buy food. They do not have 
access to information technology. We must remember that this is one of the issues that is 
prevalent when people talk about growing inequality. There is an incredible gap between the 
poor, the middle-class, and the well off, in terms of their knowledge about information technol- 
ogy. It is another indicator of the growing gap between the rich and the poor. 

Francis: Our families do not use word processing. Even the ones who are in college do 
not know much about word processing. Out of the 71 families we have for the ethnography, 
only 3 have ever used the Internet. They also do not use the library services, which are excellent. 
Some of the children use computers minimally, and we are in the midst of interviewing some of 
the teenagers. I am interested in who brings information into the family. 

We have 26 Latino families, and language is a major issue. Interestingly enough, one of the 
families is online all the time; one person we know uses the Internet a lot, and she met a 
gentleman on the Internet. She has gone to Texas to visit him, and they are in a relationship that 
may have a bright future. 

Frands: We are looking at where people get access to information. I am concerned with the gap 
between those who use technology and those who do not. 

Patterson: Are there programs being initiated to address that gap? 

Frands: No. 



O 




335 



329 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Williams: Cable TV also costs people an incredible amount in terms of their budget so, if they 
had a telephone line and went online, their monthly costs would skyrocket. 

Patterson: 1 was not thinking of them using IT in their own home; 1 was thinking of them using 
it in some kind of community facility. 1 take your point about it not being user-friendly. 

Williams: This system was in the welfare office that had supposedly set it up so that familip 
could research the steps they needed to take for employment and training. It was not working. 

Wolfe: In some of the communities in Wisconsin, they have set up some programs using IT, 
particularly the job bank. My impression is that in several of those communities it is quite 
successful, in the sense that people can access the information. 

Carol McAllister: Thornburg mentioned that 1 was at the Pittsburgh site, which is one of the 
nine states involved in the study. The other part of my work life is as an anthropologist. My 
original work was in developing countries, including Malaysia and Nicaragua. My focus has 
been on economic change, particularly its impact on women and families. The similarities 
between places struck me more forcefully than usual. 

One thing we often look at is impacts of structural adjustment policies, which are imposed by 
the World Bank in many developing countries. One of the main impacts of these policies is a 
downturn in the public sector, when people move from all sorts of public sector involvement, or 
support, into the private sector, and their income goes down. One of the findings we heard 
today is that people move off TANF into low-wage jobs and are still living in poverty. If they are 
also not accessing benefits like food stamps and Medicaid, then their actual resources are going 
down. The other thing we need to think about is that TANF was implemented in a time of 
economic upturn. Another major finding involves time for women. The number of women in 
the workforce has increased significantly and has many implications: work in the family, work 
outside the family, lack of time to rest, lack of time to sleep, and health consequences. 

It seems to me that you all are saying the same things, such as "Who is going to care for 
children?" In the developing world, child care is not often formalized. What that means is that 
the child is sent elsewhere, or the mother or father migrates elsewhere, and the families are 
separated. 

It seems to me that the situation is complicated, but 1 would like to ask you to briefly 
synthesize what you see as the most serious concern. What would you focus on if you had to say 
one thing to policy makers? What is your most serious concern, and what is the most important 
step we need to take before this becomes a disaster? 

Thornburg: 1 will offer an answer, though 1 am not going to say it is the most important. When 
1 look at the full set of programs we have in place, including assistance and incentives, 1 see that 
we have created a system that makes it difficult to be successful, in terms of moving to a job that 
provides sufficient income for one's family. So many of our programs are income-conditioned 
that we have taken away the incentive for people to work harder, to put more effort in, and to be 
successful. 

1 do not have a simple solution for this problem. We must have a support system that 
combines making work worthwhile — through the earned income tax, food stamps, and child 
care — with a full package of assistance and medical assistance. A support system that is "target- 
efficient" (according to economists) gives a lot of assistance to people who need it, and then 
takes it away, because we are unwilling to make some programs universal. We put people in the 
position where, if they get paid more, they will have less income for their families. That is a 
fundamental flaw in the way we have designed the programs. 



er|c 



330 



336 



CONSEQUENCES OF WELFARE REFORM 



Williams: We need to acknowledge that the TANF program has helped some families, but it was 
not intended to be an anti-poverty program. It was intended to get people off the welfare rolls. 

In the re- authorization discussion many people tried to put that on the table. We have many 
families who are working but they are still poor. We have done a bad job overall in making sure 
that people can still get the things for which they are eligible, like food stamps. 

If I had to do one thing, I would try to make sure that everybody in this room who is working 
has some security, and that they be honest with themselves about our welfare. I work at a 
university. I am a professor. They match my health insurance so that I have a good health 
insurance policy. I do not have to pay to park when I drive my car to work. I get a lot of welfare 
because I am employed full-time. My pension is matched by the university, which gives me 
some security. 

If I had to make it just on my salary, and had to then figure out how to pay full coverage for 
my health insurance, my life would not be as secure. We have not been open with ourselves as a 
country about that. We link everything to work and think that those of us who are working and 
have this level of security deserve it, and that others who are not do not deserve it. This way of 
thinking can only be changed by people like you and me. In part, we are talking about a values 
question. We have to decide what is important in this country. 

If I were going to make one program universal, it would be healthcare, in order to provide a 
safety net for people. In the state of Massachusetts, we have done well with healthcare coverage 
for children. It is up to 93%. Everyone we interviewed for our study has had covered children, 
and that makes a world of difference. Most of the parents are also covered. Their stories are a 
little different in that sometimes they are off for a few months because they are in between 
welfare and a job, or they move from one job to another, but they are also savvy about free care 
and other things because of the state medical system. That makes a world of difference in 
putting a floor under parents. Parents, while they may not take care of themselves, will take 
advantage of MassHealth, our program for children. It is in high use. We worry that the program 
may become less generous. 

Wolfe: Since Williams discussed health care, I need to tell a story about one of our interviews: A 
Head Start child from a half-day program was on the bus with a teacher who also rides that bus. 
After lunqh the bus started out, and this little girl clung to her teacher, not wanting to go to the 
place where she would have to be from 1 :00 until 7:00 that evening while her mother was 
working in a pig processing plant. 

Her Head Start experience was wonderful for 16 hours a week, but then she went to this place 
and kept saying, "I do not want to go. I do not want to go." She started talking about the 
mosquitoes. In fact, she was put in a room for the rest of the day with dogs and had fleabites 
every single day. The Head Start teacher was almost crying as she was telling this story, saying, "I 
really hate taking her off the bus, to have her go there for the rest of the day." 

Full-day or extended-hour Head Start for working families is an example of something 
consistent and high quality that is needed for the children. We have to remember that most of 
these families, whether they are in rural or urban communities, are living with violence and/or 
drugs in their neighborhoods. It is difficult to think of one thing to do because the whole system 
needs to change. We need to look at these children in total, and that includes their neighbor- 
hoods, the violence, the healthcare, and the full-day programs that these children attend. 

In terms of the re-authorization, we have to look at what counts as work. Some state adminis- 
trators and others note that some families are not ready to work in the workforce as we see it, 
even with two years of support. We have to talk about child care and transportation. We are 
talking about one re-authorization now. Head Start re-authorization is going to come on its 
heels, and that will be an issue. Ted Kennedy has introduced a bill now where some people are 
suggesting taking funding off the top of TANF or child care reauthorization to pay for this bill. 




337 



331 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



We are so fragmented. When we look at TANF, the Child Care Development Fund, Head Start, 
and all of the re- authorizations, everybody wants their piece of the pie to do something a little 
bit differently. We have to start thinking in a more cohesive way, not only cohesive for the child 
and the family, but also cohesive in our policy making. 

Francis: If you notice, people have been talking about getting married. The question is, "Who 
are people going to marry?" One poor income plus one poor income equals one poor family 
income. We also need to ask what jobs and education opportunities exist for men, to enable 
them to contribute to household income. Child support is not the answer; families need to have 
the fathers involved with the children, and fathers need to have a feeling of pride in being able 
to support their families. We have little talk or action in place to train and support young boys 
and men in becoming family providers and parents. For anyone interested in that, a big study 
called The Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study pays attention to the opportunities for 
fathers. 

Salandy: One good thing about the House bill was that they had $1 billion over the next 5 
years for father initiative programs. There is more proposed money in the Hatch, Breaux, and 
Jeffords legislation that is in the Finance Committee. There is more money in other places that 
states and community organizations can use to create and develop fatherhood initiative pro- 
grams. 

Johnson-Powell: I began this session by telling you all that I was a welfare child. My mother 
had migrated from rural Virginia to Boston, and in 1939, when I was 3 years old, she could not 
-find a job. A social worker came to our house at least twice a month and sat down with my 
mother for more than an hour. I know that it was more than an hour, because they gave us tea 
(a little bit of tea with a lot of water in it) and some cookies. We used to beg for her to come 
because of the cookies. She was a real friend of the family and directed my mother towards 
many resources for all of us. 

I grew up in Boston. I never went a day without clothes, without warmth, or without food. 

My brother and I went to summer camp every single summer. We all had music and piano 
lessons. I graduated from Girls' Latin School, Mount Holyoke College, and Meharry Medical 
College, and I have spent my life as a child psychiatrist. I was the first African American to train 
in child psychiatry or psychiatry at the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) and the 
first African American woman to become a full tenured professor at Harvard Medical School. 

I have often talked about being a welfare child, because as I went through the process of 
education I began to understand the disdain of many people towards families and children who 
received public assistance. I never felt as though I was poor. That system allowed my mother to 
raise us. It allowed her to come up to school to see how we were doing. It allowed her to provide 
the recreational opportunities that she felt we needed. It allowed her to watch over us and to 
nurture us so that we could all get an education and give back to this country. That was in 1939. 
It is a pity to see what has happened today. 

Finally, there are many things about this country that we all love. This is a country that 
spends more on healthcare than any other country in the world. It spends more on medical 
research, and other kinds of research, than any other country in the world. Yet some of its health 
indices are as poor as that in Afghanistan, especially infant mortality. For those of us who are 
professionals, those of us who are not professionals, and all of us who care, we have to make 
our country accountable to the rights of all its citizens. 




332 



338 



CONSEQUENCES OF WELFARE REFORM 



The Use of Head Start for Families in 
Experimental Welfare and Antipoverty 
Polices and Effects on Child Well-Being 

CHAIR: Linda Scheer 

PRESENTERS: Lisa Gennetian, Martha Zaslow, Hirokazu Yoshikawa, C. Cybele Raver 

Linda Scheer: This session presents four research studies related to the effects of the welfare 
reform legislation on children and on programs for children. 

Lisa Gennetian: Data for these studies are, for the most part, random assignment studies of 
pilot welfare and employment programs prior to 1996; thus it is important to keep in mind that 
these studies do not reflect current conditions under welfare reform. However, these studies 
provide the best evidence to date on the kinds of policies that are currently tested and being 
implemented in many states. Most of the data for these studies are from the National Evaluation 
of Welfare- to-Work Strategies (NEWWS), a multiyear study whose final report was just released 
in February 2002. The report is available on the Health and Human Services website, at Child 
Trends, or at Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation (MDRC). 

One program evaluated in this effort was a mandatory employment services program, 
requiring mothers with young children to participate in an employment-related activity such as 
job training, employment, or job search. This presentation will examine findings from three 
sites where there were head-to-head tests of labor force attachment models and human capital 
development models. 

Other programs that were studied provided earning supplements for welfare recipients 
moving from welfare to work, by either allowing thern to keep more of their welfare income as 
their earnings increased, or by supplementing their earnings outside the welfare system. The 
third model examined, called New Chance, was a program for young mothers on welfare who 
had not completed their high school degree. 

It is important to note that all Head Start information is based on survey reports of Head 
Start use from mothers, usually elicited in response to questions about child care. Keep in mind 
that Head Start is a program targeting low-income children. We want to ensure that the mothers 
on welfare who are trying to work, meet welfare requirements, or take advantage of benefits, are 
also maximizing the use of any services that are directly targeted to them. 

We need to consider whether we are measuring the use of Head Start adequately from a 
research perspective and how we can improve or change our measurement of Head Start in 
future research efforts. We also need to determine how Head Start programs are accommodating 
the work schedules and requirements that many single mothers face in entering the workforce. 

Martha Zaslow: I am from Child Trends. We have asked Rachel Cohen to join us, to comment 
on findings in Early Head Start for children in families with a history of welfare receipt. The 
NEWWS study was the test case that piloted and refined our measurement strategies. Within this 
study, there is a substudy of children who are 3 to 5 years old at baseline. We looked at issues of 
child care and early development in the context of a mandatory employment-focused program. 

Our study tracked the full sample of children in follow-ups at 2 years and at 5 years. For one 
of the samples, we did more in-depth work close to the time of random assignment in a 
descriptive study. We also examined an observational study focusing intensively on mother-child 
interaction, to determine whether there were impacts and what those impacts might mean in 
terms of the outcomes we found for the children. Let me set the context of findings related to 
child care use, and determine whether there is a missed opportunity in welfare-to-work programs 
in terms of complementing mothers' work transitions with early childhood programming. 




339 



333 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



In this study, we developed a detailed child care participation calendar and looked at the 
nature of child care experiences of the children in the control and two experimental groups. The 
members of one experimental group were participants in a quick, work-oriented, immediate 
transition to work group; the others were participants in an education first group. In both of 
these experiments, from 2 months before random assignment to 2 months after, there was a 
slow and steady increase in the control group s participation in child care, with a fair proportion 
of children participating in child care on a regular basis. In the two experimental groups, 2 
months after random assignment, there was an increase from about 40% to about 70% of the 
children participating in a child care arrangement on a regular basis. 

Interestingly, when the families were tracked over time at the 2-year and 5-year follow-up, 
there was not marked evidence of concurrent child care participation in most of the sites. By the 
5-year point in one of the study sites, there was still evidence of impacts on child care use as well 
as concurrent impact on employment of the mothers. For the control group, as employment 
increased, the employment impacts became less marked as did child care impacts. In addition, 
we found that traditional measures of child care were no longer as useful for 8-, 9- and 10-year 
olds. Asking about time use and who the child was with turned out to be much more useful for 
detecting impacts. 

Related to our question of missed opportunity, at one site where more intensive data was 
collected, we examined the characteristics of families participating in formal early childhood 
programs based on a wide array of background characteristics collected at baseline. We also 
examined data from the descriptive study done 3 to 5 months after random assignment, 
controlling for the background characteristics that predicted use of formal care, to determine 
whether there were concurrent associations with child outcomes. 

Results mirrored the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) 
study, with concurrent associations of participation in formal early childhood programs for the 
children's cognitive development but not for their social development. This is significant 
because the NICHD study is often critiqued for not including a substantial sample of low- 
income minority families. NICHD is much richer in terms of longitudinal data. Our data from 
welfare and minority families indicated that participation in formal early childhood programs 
was associated with better cognitive outcomes, in congruence with NICHD. 

Our examination of Head Start use was limited by having a very small subsample. We found 
that the predictors of Head Start use differed. Children were in Head Start for fewer hours, and 
mothers were less likely to be employed. Controlling for all background characteristics that 
predicted use of Head Start, we found that even though the children were in Head Start for fewer 
hours than children in other child care programs, they showed better cognitive development. 

Our methodology involved traditional regression analyses, controlling for an array of 
observable background characteristics, such as observations of cognitive stimulation and 
emotional support in the home, which predict use of a formal program and Head Start. Even 
controlling for those characteristics, we found enhanced child outcomes. 

In conclusion, there is some indication of a missed opportunity. If one couples a welfare-to- 
work program with participation in a formal early childhood program and/ or with Head Start, 
there seems to be enhanced cognitive development in the children. However, this is a prelimi- 
nary finding, and we have to determine if there is other evidence available and what further 
research is needed. 

Young Chang: Our study examined the effects of welfare and employment programs on 
children s participation in Head Start. New welfare policies strongly encourage parents on 
welfare to be employed. As these policies increase employment rates of parents with young 
children, we might expect an increase in parents needs for child care. 

As a free center-based program for young children, famous for its beneficial effects on 
developmental outcomes for children in poverty, we thought Head Start could be one of the 





334 



CONSEQUENCES OF WELFARE REFORM 



choices parents consider as a child care setting while they work. Based on this, we developed 
three research questions: (a) whether welfare programs have any effects, positive or negative, on 
the use of Head Start by low-income single mothers; (b) whether the changes in Head Start use 
in the program groups are similar to the changes in the use of other types of child care, such as 
home-based child care or center-based child care; and (c) whether the program impacts a 
mother's employment and income, and whether these are related to use of Head Start. 

Data came from 10 welfare and employment programs from four random assignment 
studies. The studies were New Hope, New Chance, AMFIB, and NEWWS. All have a common 
goal of moving low-income families and families on welfare into work, but each program has a 
different approach in terms of managing employment services, earning supplements, and child 
care services. 

Child care use was assessed for 5,107 3- or 4-year-old children of single mothers. At the time 
of the follow-up survey, we asked the mothers whether they had ever used Head Start, home- 
based, or center-based child care. In this study, program impacts means the differences in 
outcomes between the program group and the control group. This straightforward comparison 
between the two groups was possible because the sample members were randomly assigned to 
the program and control group. Thus, the only systematic difference between the two groups is 
the assignment for the program group. 

Significance of the program impact was tested using regression, controlling for baseline 
characteristics of families collected at the random assignments, such as family stmcture, commu- 
nity type, mother's education, and number of children in the household. To chart differences, 
we also calculated and tested simple weighted means of the program impact of 10 programs. 

For example, the weighted mean of center-based child care is 7.63. This is the average 
difference between program groups and control groups in the percentage of mothers who ever 
used center-based care. Our impact analysis revealed that there were no program impacts on 
Head Start use except for one program, Adanta Labor Force Attachment (LFA), where there was a 
decreased use of Head Start in the program group by about 9.11%, and the weighted mean of 
the program impacts show that there was no significant overall increase or decrease in the use of 
Head Start in program groups. Many programs significandy increased the use of center care and 
home-based child care. 

Looking at program impacts on employment and income, mothers in program groups were 
more likely than mothers in control groups to be employed, to be working full-time, and to 
have more family income. However, the magnitude of program impacts on employment and 
family income does not appear to be related to the size of program control differences in Head 
Start use. We can conclude that even though these programs increased the mother's employ- 
ment, family income, and use of center-based and home-based child care, they did not produce 
an impact on Head Start use. That is, mothers in the program groups did not use Head Start 
more or less, compared to mothers in the control group. 

Mothers did not use Head Start to satisfy their child care needs while at work — especially 
mothers working full-time — perhaps because they needed reliable and extensive child care. Many 
of the Head Start programs at that time operated half-day classes on the school-year schedule. 
Thus, employed mothers using Head Start would probably need to find additional child care 
arrangements covering fiill-day, summer, and school holidays, to cater to their needs. 

In addition, mothers may have preferred a single child-care arrangement that covered their 
work schedule instead of combining multiple settings that required transportation and other 
logistical challenges. Many women in low-wage jobs worked irregular and nontraditional hours, 
making it more difficult to have child care only available on weekdays during the school year. 
Other mothers may have had free and/or more flexible child-care options such as family 
members, especially if transportation was unavailable to get to a Head Start program. It is also 
possible that working full-time increased family income to the point where they lost eligibility 
for Head Start. 



O 

ERIC 



341 



335 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



In conclusion, we find that the two sets of policies for low-income families — welfare policy 
and child care or early childhood intervention policy — are operating independently and 
possibly in conflict. Continuing efforts to make Head Start a fiill-day, full-year program may 
help more low-income families achieve their dual goals of economic self-sufficiency and 
educational enrichment for their children. 

C. Cybele Raver: Our study team is particularly interested in barriers to families' use of services, 
looking at higher risk versus lower risk for use of Head Start and for employment, and examin- 
ing how these interrelate. 

Investigators have recently identified a combination of family risks that appear to substan- 
tially increase the odds that low-income mothers of young children will have difficulty finding 
and keeping a job. The new generation of welfare reform research is focusing on barriers to 
employment that make it particularly difficult for some families to comply with time limits and 
employment mandates. We were interested in determining if the same "psychological and 
human capital barriers" that make it difficult for families to work may also make it difficult for 
families to enroll their children in Head Start. Conversely, does a single set of family skills or 
strengths predict both employment and family's use of early educational services? 

This question is important for early educational policy because of the mixed results of early 
findings from evaluation research suggesting that we are not getting as large a set of program 
impacts from early educational intervention as we would like. One explanation has been that 
potential benefits of these programs may be truncated by underenrollment of the most hard-to- 
serve families, so that families who are competent or doing well are enrolling their children in 
Head Start; and that results would not have looked much different had they enrolled their 
children in other forms of center-based care. Head Start may have difficulty recruiting and 
retaining a given community's most disadvantaged families. 

We first examined a common set of demographic characteristics and psychosocial barriers 
predicting mother's use of both adult-focused employment-related services and her use of child- 
focused early educational services, with the expectation that the families who are least likely to 
enroll are the most disadvantaged. 

Our second research question, building on work by Hirokazu Yoshikawa and his colleagues, 
was to determine whether experimental welfare-to-work programs have a measurably positive or 
negative impact on the likelihood of families enrolling their children in Head Start, based on 
whether they fall into lower risk or higher risk groups. We used the exact same NEWWS data, 
dividing the families into four different groups of risk. We considered both factors within the 
family and factors outside the family. 

We also took a brief look at families' reports of sanctioning. This was not experimentally 
induced. Families were not randomly assigned to a sanctioned group, but this provided a prelimi- 
nary opportunity to examine whether there were any associations between families who have 
extremely negative experiences in welfare reform and their avoidance of using educational services. 

In determining barriers, we emphasized the human capital factors, such as lack of a high 
school diploma, low literacy skills, mothers' mental health or depressive symptoms, as well as 
mothers' attitudes and values regarding the benefits of center-based care. This was not nationally 
representative of all children enrolled in Head Start; it was specific to welfare-receiving Head 
Start enrollees. I want to point out a few characteristics as a descriptive snapshot of Head Start- 
enrolled children in the NEWWS data set from two of the sites. Mothers with a low reading 
score ranged from as low as 7% to as high as 41% of Head Start-enrolled families in this sample. 
About 50% of mothers in one site, and a little less than half in the other, had no high school 
diploma. Over a third in both sites had depressive symptoms. We found that Head Start mothers 
were working, both across control and experimental groups, and that between 12% and 26% of 
Head Start families receiving welfare were experiencing sanctioning. 

Related to the propensity to be employed, use training, and use Head Start, we used multiple 
regression to examine whether a common set of risks predict propensity of service use. We used 




336 



342 



CONSEQUENCES OF WELFARE REFORM 



involvement in training because potential differences in local labor markets or persistent 
employment discrimination might affect actual employment. Therefore, we also looked at 
parents' participation in job-related training as an index of adult-focused services. 

We found that African American identity, being a long-term recipient of Aid to Families with 
Dependent Children (AFDC), or Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), having 
earnings, and opinion of the usefulness of child care were predictive of employment, but were 
not predictive of Head Start use. Different variables were predictive of service use across the 
different domains. The only factor predictive of Head Start use in this case was mother's low 
literacy, and the data suggests that mothers with lower literacy levels were more likely to use 
Head Start, that is, the more disadvantaged rather than less disadvantaged. 

Overall, however, we found little similarity across the two or three forms of service use. 
Families experiencing more barriers to participation in Head Start were more likely to use Head 
Start rather than those with fewer barriers, so we have very few variables that predict Head Start 
use overall. Furthermore, those variables that predict employment are not the same variables 
that predict Head Start use. 

In summary, there is no evidence from our analyses that the same psychosocial stressors that 
predict employment are barriers to Head Start enrollment. If anything. Head Start families seem 
to be less advantaged rather than more advantaged, and there appears to be no overlap of factors 
predicting employment and Head Start use. 

When we examined high risk and low risk families, we used Yoshikawa and colleagues' 
strategies to assess risk by determining how relatively burdensome those risks were. Using those 
weighted coefficients, families were assigned to different groups, higher risk or lower risk, in 
terms of their likelihood of service use and employment. We have modest evidence that, for the 
highest risk groups only, there is a slight increase in Head Start use for the experimentally 
assigned families. We found no association with sanctioning. We found very little overall. 

Hirokazu Yoshikawa: I am from New York University. The question that motivated our study 
was to examine the combined effect of public policies in child development programs on 
children. The developmental pathways ^at are targeted by welfare and antipoverty initiatives 
and child development programs, such as Head Start, can be pretty distinct. For example, 
welfare and antipoverty policies primarily target what are called human capital pathways, like 
employment, earnings, and welfare receipt. Head Start, as a comprehensive child development 
program, targets family processes and child development directly and, to some extent, those 
human capital pathways, but not as intensively as welfare and antipoverty policies. 

We know from the developmental literature that these different pathways, such as human 
capital, parenting, and child focus pathways, do not completely overlap. They explain different 
amounts of variance in children's cognitive and behavioral outcomes, and these pathways can 
have additive or even more than additive effects on later child development. The question arises: 
If programs like Head Start are targeting one group of developmental pathways, and welfare and 
antipoverty policies are targeting human capital pathways, would the combination of these two 
kinds of social interventions have more impact on children's development than either of those 
alone? 

We also used data from the NEWWS programs, which are mandatory welfare policy programs 
that primarily aim to increase employment but not necessarily to increase income at the same 
time through earning supplements. We examined a cumulative developmental pathway hypoth- 
esis that the combination of welfare policy and Head Start use might be associated with more 
positive child development outcomes in middle childhood than the effect of welfare policy alone. 

The data from the human capital development and labor force attachment programs were 
kept separate in our analyses. One of the methodological difficulties was that, in these experi- 
ments, only welfare policy was randomized. Families were not randomized to Head Start versus 
no Head Start use. So, across these two sets of studies, we had two halves of the equation 
randomized, but not the full picture. 




343 



337 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



We used propensity score analysis to equate propensity to use Head Start across the experi- 
mental and control groups of these programs, to find families in the experimental and control 
groups of these policy interventions that show the same range of propensity to use Head Start. 
We would then rerun experimental impact so we would end up with, for instance, an experi- 
mental impact on child development among families who are more likely versus less likely to 
use Head Start. Our human capital variables included whether the mother had a high school 
diploma at baseline, her earnings in the prior year, employment behavior, some measures of her 
cognitive skills, whether she was a long-term welfare recipient, some indicators of family 
structure, her depressive symptoms at baseline, and her extent of work search effort. 

We also used some attitudinal measures, such as mother s preference for going to school 
rather than looking for a job, belief that children who go to day care learn more than children who 
stay home, whether the mother liked or disliked going to school herself, and whether the mother 
perceived that the cost of child care is a barrier to participation in employment-related activities. 

Using the whole set of baseline characteristics to model the propensity to use Head Start, we 
also had fairly slim findings; however, in three of the four programs examined, we found 
significant levels of prediction for Head Start use. Similar to the other studies, we found that the 
more disadvantaged families at baseline appeared to be using Head Start more. One explanation 
for this might be that the more disadvantaged parents at baseline engaged in employment at 
lower intensity and had more flexibility in their schedules to use Head Start, which was a part- 
day program at most of the sites studied. It could have also been related to the characteristics of 
the Head Start program itself, specifically that Head Start staff must enroll needier or higher risk 
families first. 

In programs where we were able to significantly predict Head Start use, we divided the 
samples into high and low propensity to use Head Start groups, basically splitting at the 50th 
percentile on the propensity score. We were interested primarily in parents' reports of behavior 
problems, both externalizing and internalizing, using the Behavior Problems Index, Bracken 
Basic Concept Scale, and School Readiness Composite. 

Anna Gassman-Pines: We found that among the families with a high propensity to use Head 
Start, those assigned to the program group, had increased Bracken scores; and we saw a small 
effect in the opposite direction for the families with a low propensity to use Head Start. We 
found no differences in high and low propensity families on any of the other measures that we 
looked at, and we did not see any differences in maternal reports of behavior problems. 

These results suggest that exposure to the LFA policy environment, or exposure to a policy 
which really encourages mothers to look for work, quickly combined with Head Start, is 
associated with higher levels of middle childhood cognitive ability. 

Interestingly, programs found that while maternal employment increased, the percentage of 
enrolled families living in poverty also increased. A caution to share is that our sample size was 
small, and so our ability to look at a fine grain level of likelihood or propensity to use Head 
Start was limited. We plan to pool some of the data, to increase our power, and conduct similar 
analyses to determine those with the highest propensity to use Head Start. 

Rachel Cohen: I am from the Administration on Children and Families. I have been working 
over the last few years on the Early Head Start Research and Evaluation project. This impact 
study was mandated when the program was funded in 1995. Early Head Start is a diverse 
program, with home-based, center-based, and combination option services. Seventeen of the 
first programs from across the country were selected to participate in the evaluation, reflecting 
the diversity of the program at that time; the evaluation reflects center-based, home-based, and 
some combination programs, urban and rural populations served, and so forth. 

The study followed 3,000 children and families, half of whom were randomly assigned to 
Early Head Start; the other half could avail themselves of any other services in the community, 
but not Early Head Start. The study collected national findings across all 17 sites on children 



O 

ERIC 



338 



344 



CONSEQUENCES OF WELFARE REFORM 



and families, and site-specific data collected by university-based local researchers. Nationally, we 
found a pattern of modest positive impacts on a broad array of child and family outcomes. 

We found some interesting patterns when examining the group of families who were receiv- 
ing cash assistance when they enrolled in the study. We found that across the entire study, 
families receiving cash assistance who were enrolled in Early Head Start received significantly 
more services and more types of services than the control families. These services included home 
visits, center-based care, child development services, case management, education-related 
services, employment-related services, and transportation. One exception was for health and 
mental health services. Basically, 100% of the families were receiving the basic health care 
coverage, but very few families were receiving mental health services. 

Many of the families receiving cash assistance at enrollment tended to be in home-based 
programs. Interestingly, we found a different pattern of home visiting service. The group initially 
receiving cash assistance started off with a high level of intensity of home-based services, and 
then there was diminishment over time. Enrollment in Early Head Start increased the use of 
center-based care for that group; however, overall it appears that the families receiving cash 
assistance tended to use less formal types of care and less center-based care than those who were 
not receiving cash assistance, and were also using child care for fewer hours. 

Turning to the child and family outcomes, at age 2 we saw a pattern of strong impacts on 
child language, sustained attention, and play with parents. At age 3, we saw no pattern of 
findings for child impacts. In terms of parents, at age 2, we saw positive impacts on emotional 
supportiveness of the child, support for language and literacy in the home environment, reading 
to me child daily, and daily routines in the house. By age 3, many of those had disappeared. We 
had some remaining impacts on daily routines, and some impacts emerged on use of mild 
discipline strategies. However, the pattern that we saw at age 2 just seemed to be disappearing. 

In terms of self-sufficiency, we saw impacts on education and training and no clear pattern on 
employment, but it is also important to note that employment was initially about 80% in both 
groups. There was also a reduction in repeat births. About 21% of the program group experi- 
e^ed a repeat birth versus 34% of the control group. Perhaps the strong impacts were dropping 
off because of the intensity of the services that the families were getting. 



Question: Has anyone considered using recruitment and enrollment factors for different Head 
Start programs as a variable in the analysis? 



Raver: Many of us tend to take family-focused or individually-focused approaches, and we are 
remiss in that. We think that we have the story covered when we actually do not. We need to 
think about important agency and location variables. It is clear that there are serious site 
differences indicating that programs operate differently. 

Stephanie Jones: I agree. Perhaps we need to rethink about data collection in the future. 

Yoshikawa: It is something we have discussed: going back to the counties and the neighbor- 
hoods and finding out about specific Head Start programs and then trying to link to Program 
Information Report (PIR) data. There are many other factors around Head Start that we would 
want to look at as factors that affect our results. 

S Acer: As we do research with Head Start, we must remember that each program designs, 
within parameters, how they provide services to their communities, and there is great variation 
that will affect outcomes, based on where the research is done. 

Comment: Head Start is a national program, but it allows local design. In contrast, the national 
welfare-to-work program is a national initiative with federal requirements. We expect Head Start 
to move into more full-day, full-year programming. 

345 

ERIC 



339 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Comment: Listening to all the study results, there is a consistent theme of inherent conflict 
between these welfare reform programs, requirements of those programs and participation in 
Head Start. It has to do with some of the structural features in Head Start. It may also have to do 
with some of the requirements of Head Start, such as parent involvement. There are a variety of 
things we could talk about in how to integrate these two programs in a more useful way. 

Naomi Goldstein: Although the welfare-to-work program is federal, TANF has great flexibility at 
the state and sometimes local level. There are examples of collaboration between TANF and 
Head Start. As an encouraging note for the future, ACF has contracted with MDRC and a couple 
of collaborating organizations to evaluate welfare-to-work approaches for hard-to-employ 
families. We hope to develop some two-generation approaches that would combine welfare-to- 
work services for parents with appropriate developmental services for children. 

Comment: One difference that we have seen across Head Start programs is how well they meet 
the performance standards, which are similar to the National Association for the Education of 
Young Children (NAEYC) accreditation standards for the child care sites. There are different 
results from children's development if they are in a program that meets all of those criteria. This 
program characteristic will impact child outcomes. I think even more than the part-day or full-day 
program issue is quality of care, interactions with the caregiver, and other services in the organiza- 
tion, like mental health services or special services for children with socioemotional issues. 

Cohen: In the Early Head Start study, we had an implementation study to look at how well 
programs were implementing the performance standards and we found a much stronger pattern 
of impacts when programs were implementing those standards. We also found a stronger 
pattern of impact wiA children and families in the mixed approach program. Those programs 
that had the flexibility to provide both home-based and center-based care to either the same 
family over time, or to different families, was important. There is a message here: the needs of 
families are changing, and those programs that can flexibly meet those needs are going to best 
succeed. 

Constance Williams: I am on the next panel that is in this room. Our study interviewed 
parents. We found a high level of depression among parents, which is an incredible barrier to 
work and is sometimes not visible to case workers and others working with the family. We also 
found a high level of domestic violence. Has anyone found impacts of these two issues on 
child outcomes? 

Zaslow: We will present a paper later on in the week about depression and illiteracy as they 
relate to children's outcomes and the role of parenting, and whether those things form a 
particular pattern when they co-occur. We are beginning to think that we need to look at 
bundles of things. People looking at the data are taken aback by the rates of depression and 
domestic violence. They are disturbing and alarming. We have looked at depression, but we have 
not looked at domestic violence in relation to the child outcomes. 

Comment: For the depression and domestic violence as outcomes, they have been looked at in 
the context of these welfare and employment programs, and we have not generally found 
consistent effects on depression, at least for the mothers who are enrolled in these programs 
compared to mothers who were not. We are finding some scattered evidence that the mothers 
who are in these programs, who largely have increased their employment and sometimes their 
income, have reported reduced domestic abuse. 




340 



346 



CONSEQUENCES OF WELFARE REFORM 



Yoshikawa: We looked at how effects on depression varied by the employability of families. For 
die 25% hardest-to-employ families in earning supplement programs, there were some small 
increases in maternal depression, whereas in the lower 75%, there were small increases in terms 
of their risk. Overall, there was no big impact, but for the hardest-to-employ families, there was 
some suggestion that when they increased their employment substantially, their rates of depres- 
sion went up a bit. 

Scheer: I also think that the use of mental health services is impacted by the availability of 
mental health services. There are not enough mental health services out there for the children or 
the parents. Use is probably low for all of the subjects. 

Zaslow: For the decrement in service use that Cohen documented, was that specific to the 
families receiving cash assistance, so the other families in the experimental group sustained a 
higher level of service use and the impacts on the children and families at the 3-year point were 
also sustained? 

Cohen: Yes, that is what I intended to say. 

Comment: In considering maternal depression, I can see much higher levels of stress as mothers 
enter the workforce, because of child care scheduling and other stressors. Perhaps this is part of 
what we are seeing. In addition, as a parent becomes employed, is there a decrease in the 
services that they are eligible to receive? 

Raver: Yes, families often lose their eligibility for Head Start and other early childhood pro- 
grams as well as family services. On the other hand, a lot of these programs are not showing 
increases of earnings that parallel increases in employment, so families are, in fact, working but 
not earning more than they would have on AFDC or TANF. That whole notion about being at 
low risk, meaning that one is employed more, does not necessarily mean that one has higher 
income. 

Comment: I am concerned about the accuracy and thoroughness of the family information we 
are getting. Are we asking families about their perspective? 

Yoshikawa: Our Next Generation project identifies the clustering factors, like the difficulty in 
making ends meet and balancing family, work, and in some instances child problems. Families 
with children who have higher levels of problems have a much harder time balancing those 
multiple stressors. They address the kinds of chronic low level depressive symptoms that these 
parents face. It is hard to determine causality, but these things do seem to go together. 

Comment: The data we all used in today's presentations were pre-1996 welfare reform data, so 
we are hearing a mix of what people know about today versus the data we have. Do our findings 
agree with what you are seeing happening out there today in Head Start use? Are you seeing 
similar conflicts or complementarities that occur in families satisfying work requirements, 
managing their work schedules, and using Head Start? 

Comment: Parents are anxious, because many of them would like to use Head Start or Early 
Head Start and there are not enough openings. The ability of the systems to understand each 
other is a real issue. We ought to look carefully at the people who are talking to the families and 
who are trying to help people meet their requirements. Another issue is individuals who have 
disabilities. People call them hard-to-employ or hardship cases. We have a segment of the 




347 



341 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



population who are disabled, are caring for a child with special needs, or caring for adults in 
their family with special needs; and we have to carefully look at what their needs are. 

Robert O'Brien: The Family and Child Experiences Survey (FACES) study has results that 
address a number of the issues that have been raised. In a substudy we went back to about nine 
or 10 of the sites of our original study and did focus groups on outreach and recruitment with 
Head Start. We interviewed administrators, Head Start field staff, and families who were eligible 
for, but not attending. Head Start. We also looked at program records and reports about the 
community. 

Schcer: 1 want to go back to the comment about disabilities. Research informs us that poverty is 
a predictor of disability in children, meaning that more children with disabilities are in poverty 
than in the typical population, so parents caring for children with disabilities are certainly an 
issue. We also need to consider, especially with our group of families who are most difficult to 
move into the workplace, that some of the parents may have diagnosed or undiagnosed disabili- 
ties. 

Yoshikawa: 1 am interested in hearing about innovative program strategies that Head Start is 
using as parents engage in higher levels of work effort. Goldstein mentioned some TANF- Head 
Start partnerships. For the practitioners, what are some ways that you are responding to families 
who are facing these higher stressors, possibly from the combination of work and program 
responses? 

Comment: 1 am a mental health worker, and for about 5 years, two of us have implemented a 
mental health onsite service doing outreach for about 400 families, including home visiting, 
onsite classroom work with children, and referring them to links with the system, but the system 
is inadequate. 

Schcer: Another issue raised in the literature is the policies of employers of our families, as well 
as the policies of the entities that are implementing this welfare-to-work program. We talked 
about sanctioning and how so many parents are sanctioned because of family obligations. These 
are not always family-ffiendly policies. Employers that are employing our most hard-to-employ 
families do not usually have family-friendly policies for their employees. This is extremely 
significant as we look at these programs, and it may be why we have families that either drop out 
of the welfare-to-work initiative or move from employer to employer, in and out of the system. 

Raver: It also brings to mind children who are "sanctioned," specifically children who are 
having behavioral and emotional difficulty, and the ways in which Head Start parents are told 
that their children are having a difficult time. Head Start is mandated to serve these children, but 
other center-based care providers are not. 1 am particularly concerned about the impact of being a 
"hard to serve" child on both child outcomes and on family self-sufficiency. 

Comment: We have an Alternative Learning Program (ALP) that serves about 1,000 children. 
Based on tab scores, staff referrals, and observations by our psychologist, children are placed in a 
therapeutic classroom onsite during the day. The statistics for the behavioral changes of these 
children is amazing, as well as the support for the teachers in the classrooms to continue the 
strategies with children with extreme emotional behaviors. We have done it with blended 
funding, and we are trying to figure out a way to connect to the HMOs, to somehow pay for 
some of this. 




342 



348 



CONSEQUENCES OF WELFARE REFORM 



““‘‘‘’“"S'' >'”"8 families in stress, many mothers in depression, 
ntft eniovaU expectations, mote pressure to get into the job market in jobs that are often 

affLtT^^ '■ ’ pay*®'*' We know that family conditions 

affect A, Idren and thus we are seeing children in stress. We have certainly heard many thoueht 

sT:X‘ s” of -arch, J Wot' 




349 



343 



Conversations With the Masters 



MASTER LECTURE 

History of Research and Practice in Head Start 

CHAIR: Ann Bardwell 
LECTURER: Edward Zigler 

Edward Zigler: We started planning Head Start in the fall of 1964 and got serious in the spring 
of 1965. Just imagine thinking through a national program that you are going to put into place 
the following summer. We kept arguing about the number of children to serve. We agreed that 
25,000 would be a good number, then it became 100,000, then 200,000. Then the applications 
kept pouring in and to make a long story short we put 560,000 children into Head Start that first 
summer in 1965. Nobody knew what Head Start was, what it was supposed to do. There were no 
performance standards for the first 5 years of Head Start until I took over and ran Head Start in the 
early 1970s with the help of my Deputy, Sal Rosoff. But this is not a story of my life, this is the 
story of Head Start. It is not even the story of Head Start. It is the story of research in Head Start, 
which is not a terribly happy story for me to tell with the retrospective of all these years. 

Many of us write a variety of books and sometimes these books make a difference in the 
world, sometimes for the better, sometimes for the worse. I have written more than any one 
person should have to on Head Start. I wrote the first book. Head Start: The Legacy of the War on 
Poverty. If you want to know the archival history, who the founders were, and what they thought, 
that is the book to read. I also wrote Head Start: The Inside Story, which is still a pretty good 
overview. Then I wrote Head Start and Beyond, because from Day 1 I knew that we were not going 
to get very far with 1 year in the life of the child. It is like telling a mother, if you are a terrific 
mother for 1 year you do not have to mother anymore. You have done it. That message has been 
a hard one to sell. I am finishing a book this summer called. The Head Start Debate, and it has 
chapters by people who love Head Start and people who hate Head Start and there are plenty 
out there. It should be an interesting book because people are essentially having their own say 
and it actually is a series of debates. Some of them make interesting reading, including the 
chapter that tells the world that I destroyed Head Start all by myself. But it has been an interest- 
ing journey. 

I was the youngest member of the planning committee for Head Start. Now I am the oldest 
member of most groups, but I learned a lot over the years. I started as a standard experimental 
child psychologist. I did studies, I tested hypotheses like we were taught to do, and I knew little 
about policy. Therefore, being on the planning committee was very exciting for me. There was a 
senior research psychologist with whom I studied in graduate school. Urie Bronfenbrenner and I 
hit it off very well. I also was the noisiest by far on the planning committee. I had very firm 
views because the whole concept, quite frankly, left me a bit cold, but not cold enough to say I 
did not want to do it. 

The initial plans for the program were not what we would plan for now. Today, if we were 
going to start a program for poor children in our rural slums, Appalachia, and our inner city 




344 



350 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



slums, how many of us would say, "Let's have a 6-week summer program?" However, in fairness 
to those early planners, of which 1 was one, we also had 8-week programs. It was called Head 
Start plus. I had worked with and studied disabled children so I knew about children, their 
growth, and development. I knew it was unrealistic to think you are going to make any differ- 
ence in the life of a child in just a few weeks. Think of the hills these children have to climb. It is 
probably a little worse today than it was back then. We did not have the huge drug problem and 
we did not have so much of the violence in neighborhoods that comes with the drugs. So, I 
believe it was easier to be poor in 1965 than it is in 2002. How could a group of hand-selected 
experts from a variety of fields — pediatrics, social work, education, early education, nursing, 
child psychiatry — come up with such an idea? 

We read books on the subject. There were two famous books that set the Zeitgeist for the 
1960s and were the seeds of Head Start, seeds of its glory and some of its failures. By far the 
most important book of the two was Joseph Hunt's book, which was standard reading in the 
1960s, Intelligence and Experience. Hunt was absolutely convinced that very small changes in your 
experience would have huge changes in your growth trajectory. Which particular part of your 
growth trajectory? Cognitive development, that is intelligence. It was not accidental that right 
after Head Start hit the scene, everyone was investigating IQ changes as the ultimate criteria for 
the success of Head Start. We got that from Joe Hunt. I remember one of his articles that was 
published in that most sacrosanct of scientific journals at the time. The Reader's Digest. They did 
not just have his article in it, there was also How to Raise Your Child's IQ 20 Points. There was 
nothing to it. We don't know to this day how to make children a hell of a lot smarter. We have 
some rough ideas. We know that the name of the game is not just cognition or IQ. Americans 
have had a love affair with IQ way back to the 1920s. This morning we heard from a Nobel 
Laureate that it is not just a matter of teaching literacy and numeracy. We need to rediscover the 
whole child. The second book that was also famous at the time was Benjamin Bloom's Stability 
and Change in Human Characteristics. He was telling the world that half the learning of the child 
is over by the age of 4. That is where that notion came from. The same message as Hunt's, the 
critical importance of the first years, but again the emphasis was on the change in intelligence. 

We were actually hoisted on our own petard and, despite the fact that there were naysayers on 
that planning committee including myself, after that first summer everyone wanted to give it a 
try. Leon Eisenberg, a famous child psychiatrist at Harvard, did a study in one of those 6-week 
centers and, lo and behold, discovered that in that center they raised the IQ of the children 12 
points. So everyone said if we could do that, let us sell that. Harvard psychiatrists are telling us 
this, as well as New York Post articles. This one particular article described a program that 
predated Head Start where they were raising IQs by a point a month. I remember reading The 
Post and thinking I would send my 2-year-old child down for 40 months' worth. That was the 
thinking of that period. I knew better at the time. 

I did a study around 1968 with Earl Butterfield where we tried to examine how you can 
possibly get these kinds of IQ changes. The fallacious notion was that when you get an IQ score 
for a child you have got an inexorable readout of that child's intellectual endowment. That is 
not it at all. When you do an IQ test you are measuring three things: The first is formal cogni- 
tion in the Piagetian sense. The next thing that is measured is achievement, what experiences the 
child has had. For example, one of the items on the vocabulary test is what is a gown. If you 
have never heard the word "gown" you fail that item. That is not intelligence. That is what we 
call achievement. That is the content of the system, not the formal structure of the system. 
Another example, you go into any inner city slum and ask a 4-year-old what a wino is, he could 
tell you. He walks over them all the time. My son could not tell you, but my son is not penalized 
for not knowing because the word is not on the test. That is the cultural unfairness issue that 
Jerry Kagan and others have written about. 

You also are measuring motivation and emotion, the third factor. I did a series of studies to 
show that these programs were evaluating, not changing IQ at all. You were changing the third 




O K ^ 

Q 0 X 



345 



V3 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



factor, motivation and emotion. I have tested many poor children where no matter what you ask 
them, they say "I don't know." They do not even try. That has nothing to do with their intelli- 
gence. It has to do with their self-image, whether they even want to play your silly game with 
you. Some children just want to turn off the experience, and the easiest way to do that is to say, 

"I don't know." Say that four or five times and the test is over. So I demonstrated that. All we 
were doing was assessing that the child, at the end of 6 weeks, was no longer scared to death 
when he came into the testing situation. The whole difference was in his/her motivation and 
his/her test-taking behavior, and none of it was related to improvement in basic cognitive 
abilities. 

Let us go back to the beginning to tell you one of the most surprising stories of Head Start 
that is still not known. Here is this huge program we are going to launch for 550,000 children. 
All of these bright men and women were sitting around the table devising Head Start and Julius 
Richmond was not in the planning committee. He came on after we had made.the plan for him 
to become Head Start's first director. So I was alone in saying to the committee that we should 
have an evaluation. We should find out if Head Start is making a difference. We could not get a 
control group, but we could certainly do a pre-post quasi-experimental design to at least 
demonstrate that these children are different at the end as compared to the beginning. There 
had been absolute silence. 

"Ed, what's to evaluate? We're going to give these children a big lunch, a snack, medical care, 
and we are going to get their parents involved. It has to be good. Why bother evaluating?" 

I kept arguing but we were making no progress. Do you know what Head Start was called 
back then? Project Rush Rush. We used to keep files in bathtubs in the old Colonial hotel. The 
people who were sending out the money never saw any programs. None were reviewed. If your 
proposal described five components, you would get a check and start a Head Start. Julie Rich- 
mond was the intellectual leader of Head Start at that time and Jules Sugarman was the adminis- 
trative leader, but it was the administration that distributed the money. Jules told me that we 
were going to fund the programs and then visit them. The ones that were good would continue 
to get their grants. The ones that were bad would be closed down. Five years later I was respon- 
sible for Head Start. There were no performance standards. The programs were doing anything 
they wanted. Some of it was good and some of it was lousy because the way we started guaran- 
teed heterogeneity in quality. However, the efficacy of a program depends essentially on two 
factors. The first and most important factor is the quality of the program. You do not change 
children by waving the Head Start flag over their heads. You have to have experiences that 
change the developmental trajectory, and that is hard to do. The second is the intensity of your 
program. That's why I never believed that we were going to get that much bang out of a 1-year 
program. What we really needed was a high quality program from birth to 3 followed by a good 
preschool program for 2 more years and then 4 years of a good program in elementary school. 
They should all be dovetailed and flow together. This is written about in Chapter 5 of Head Start 
and Beyond. We have Head Start and Early Head Start now, but we are still having a heck of a 
time with the transition into schooling. 

Back to 1964 when Jules Ifichmond was watching all of this. J was outvoted in the committee 
but Jules told me J was right about wanting an evaluation of Head Start, so he told me to go 
back to Yale and make up an evaluation for Head Start. J went back and rounded up all my 
graduate students and exploited the hell out of them. J made them steal this item from that 
measure, construct this, construct that, make questionnaires. We had a whole battery. Was the 
battery any good? It was terrible, but it was the best we could do. We only had weeks. Then J 
discovered one of the first great truths of Head Start. J love those expressions "from practice to 
research" or "research to practice" because it could go in either direction as far as J am con- 
cerned. J discovered that the program people all over the country hated the measures. They 
hated giving them; they hated doing them; they could not understand why we needed to do it. 
So J saw then a huge chasm between practitioners and researchers. Researchers are egocentric. 



ERIC 



346 



352 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



including myself. What made me think that people who are busy trying to get a new program off 
the ground wanted more work to do? Research was important to me. Evaluation was important 
to me. Therefore, it must be important to everybody. I learned why it was so important for us to 
develop close partnerships with the practitioners to allow them to have a say in what you are 
trying to accomplish. They too want evidence that what they are doing is worthwhile, but it 
should be a cooperative venture, and we did not engage in that back then. The data were frankly 
useless. They were not that good even if they had been gathered perfectly well. However> it was 
still a victory for Head Start, because what happened as a result of that research became an 
integral part of Head Start, and from that day on Head Start has always had a research division. 
As I will point out to you later, we never had the money to do as much as we should have done, 
but at least we established the precedent. 

Practitioners think that sometimes what the researchers do is going to destroy Head Start, and 
it almost did. This is a story about a certain crisis, the role that research played in it, and why 
practitioners suspect us. I took over Head Start in 1970 and was met with two important 
publications. The first was The Jensen Report. I am an old behavior geneticist and if Jensen had 
taken out the nonsense about the intellectual inferiority of Blacks it would have just been one 
more demonstration of the genetic factor that goes into an intelligence score, which we all knew 
and still know. But he decided for some awful reason to start that with "Compensatory educa- 
tion has been tried and it has failed." 

Then we got the second blow with The Westinghouse Report from 1969. It was Head Start's 
absolutely darkest hour. I was a perfectly happy young professor at Yale, just beginning to build 
a solid career, and I was asked to come to Washington and become the head of what is now the 
Administration for Children, Youth and Families (ACYF) and chief of the Children's Bureau. 

Part of my job was going to be to run Head Start. They recruited me, and for about 3 months 
nobody said anything to me. They said they were going to move Head Start out of The Office of 
Economic Opportunity and into Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW). In 2 weeks I was called 
to a meeting. I didn't know then that the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) really runs 
Washington. At the meeting, the OMG puts a sheet of paper on the board and says here is the 
plan. We are going to phase out one third of Head Start in 1 year, then we will phase out a 
second third in year 2, then we will phase out the last third in year 3, and in 3 years we will be 
through with Head Start. Those were my orders. 

This is an involved story with some big names included. To do justice, however, I must give 
an oral history from a major layer from that period. The White House and HEW were on 
different tracks. I wanted Head Start to have a chance. I thought I could make it better but I was 
totally appalled and went directly to a great hero in this country who has never received the 
credit he deserves, a man named Elliott Richardson. He was the Secretary of HEW, a liberal 
Republican, a very smart man with a good head, and a good heart. I told him that nobody 
mentioned this plan to me, and if this is the plan, I will resign today, and not only will I resign if 
this is the plan, I will resign at the moment I hear so much as one dollar being cut from the 
Head Start budget. 

He said. Well, let me go to the White House, Ed. You just go back to your office and do your 
work." He cleared up the situation. He is the hero and I Imow now who the villain was. It was 
all due to The Westinghouse Report. It was a very shoddy study. Head Start, in the interim, had 
developed a research committee consisting of Ed Gordon, Urie Bronfenbrenner, and Ed Zigler. 
When we heard about The Westinghouse Report, we were able to say all the things that were 
methodologically problematic. You can never be in a position to say you do not want to be 
evaluated. I would be the last person to say that. I was the one that was fighting for evaluation. 

But you should have a good evaluation, not a lousy one. What we recommended was to let us 
do a good longitudinal study with a proper comparison group. We could not have pulled off a 
random assignment experiment study back then, but we could certainly use a solid quasi- 
experimental design. They said The Westinghouse Report done in 3 months and how long 
would ours take? 




353 



347 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/ CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Originally we approached Educational Testing Service (ETS) to produce the study. We wanted 
to assess Head Start up to the second grade or so, do it with a well-designed study and complete 
it in 4 years. Ultimately the study was not produced by ETS; Jeannie Brooks-Gunn published it 
25 years later when the data were worthless. They found that Head Start had positive effects, so 
ETS simply let us down back then. 

I will share with you one experience about how this town works, why people like me have a 
hard time in a place like Washington, so it may help those of you who might embark on similar 
endeavors. I tend to be an overly honest person and part of that comes with our trade — we want 
to see what the data say. If you are not honest, you are not going to last long in our field. So I 
went to testify before a very powerful chairman of the House, Labor, and Education committee, 
Carl Perkins. I went there, a babe in the woods, and he was very pro-Head Start. The Westinghouse 
Report is out in the public domain, I am defending Head Start to keep it alive, the Secretary got 
us through, I am going ahead with the Performance Standards, and I am starting the National 
Lab concept in Head Start. Nonetheless, I am testifying. Perhaps you have seen a testimony on 
TV. They sit way up high and you sit way down low at a table in a well. You know right away 
what the power structure is. Carl Perkins starts asking me some friendly questions. 

Perkins loved Head Start but when he mentioned The Westinghouse Report, I said, "Mister 
Chairman, ..." and I laid out the reasons why I would not take this report seriously and why 
we have to do better research than that. He was happy as he could be and he was so friendly 
and warm. 

Nonetheless I continued, "Mister Chairman, there is one thing we should learn from The 
Westinghouse Report." [This is all in testimony, so it can be read.] Perkins became more tentative. I 
told him the report showed some small gains for the full year — by then we had both full-year 
and summer programs — but I said it showed that for the summer programs you get no effect. 
You are essentially wasting your money. I included everything I know about what human 
development tells me, that these summer programs are tokenistic and that what we should do is 
take that money and turn it into more full-year programs. You would be able to serve fewer 
children, but at least you would give them something of value for your money. Perkins became 
very angry. 

Shaking his finger at me, he said, "Dr. Zigler, if you close one summer program, I will 
subpoena you and have you back here so fast it will make your head swim." 

I thought, "My God, what is a subpoena? Am I going to go to jail? I could not understand 
what he was so mad about. What had I said? I went to see John Brademas, one smart person I 
had met in Washington who later became President of NYU and was on the committee at the 
time. I asked him, "What made Perkins so mad? What is wrong with closing programs that are 
worthless?" At first he did not want to talk about it. It was like MD's who do not want to tell on 
each other. Congressmen do not want to do that either. 

He said, "The Chairman has his views, Ed." He took some pity on me because I was a pitiful 
creature at that point. He would not actually tell me, but he played Socrates and Plato, with 
questions and dialogue. So he asks what district is he from? I said he was from Kentucky. 

His next question was, "When he runs for election, who mans the phones to get out the vote 
so that he gets reelected?" 

I said, "Teachers. We all know that." 

He said, "Who works in the Head Start programs in the summertime?" I told him teachers. 

He finally made it clear. Perkins wanted to get reelected and to serve his constituents. Jobs for 
his people— not whether Head Start was good or not, nor was it your tax dollars or mine— it 
had nothing to do with research or science. 

I went back about my business. I lasted a litde longer; I did not go to jail. He did make me 
continue the summer programs so I decided to start a new summer program. It was probably 
one of the worst programs in the history of man. My idea was to round up children in the 
summertime and get them into a physical and mental health care system. It lasted about 2 years 
until the evidence convinced me that we ought not to have the program. But I was more 



er|c 



348 



354 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



successful with other projects like the National Laboratory concept. I felt that we couldn't just 
do Head Start. Some of these other projects are still in operation, like the Home Start program. 
Now they call it Home-Based Head Start. 

I started that program and the very first family support program in which the notion of the 
importance of birth to 8 was stressed. It was the Child and Family Resource Program, and it was 
a very good program. It was the first in this country. I also invented the Child Development 
Associate certificate and several other things. Early Head Start is simply the latest in this mine of 
National Lab experiments. But the IQ issue was killing us because at that time everybody, not 
just The Westinghouse Report, was coming up with the idea of the fadeout. Everything I knew 
about intelligence told me that you could not give a child a program for a year and get huge 
changes in IQ. In the history of the field of psychology, IQ is largely the most stable measure 
past the age of 8. Yet everybody was reporting fadeout. There are some fluctuations, but they are 
not huge. \Vhy would anybody want to take the psychology's most stable measure and take 
changes on that measure as the criterion for the success of a program? 

I went around the country dying to explain away these fadeouts of IQs. That is what was 
fading out, the IQ. I said the goal of Head Start is not IQ. Why would you want to take some- 
body who is an awful human being and raise their IQ 10 points? You would only wind up with 
smarter criminals. The problem with the planners, including myself, was that we had too many 
goals for Head Start, even though IQ change wasn't one of them. There are about 13 or 14 goals 
in our proposal and nobody could understand them. Many groups, such as ETS and 
Mathematica, worked on how to promote the development of children. Then I came up with the 
goal of Head Start, something we called social competence. The federal government spent tens 
of millions of dollars trying to get the scientific community to operationalize the construct. I 
finally got tired of it all and wrote a paper with a colleague that was published in American 
Psychologist. It is called "IQ Versus Social Competence and the Assessment of Early Intervention 
Programs." It was not a complicated concept to me then. I do not think it is complicated today. 

The first side of social competence is meeting social expectancies, like school readiness. For 
example, when you turn 5, it is expected to be optimally ready to go to school and stay out of 
trouble, and there are developmental tasks for the period. It had four concrete measures that 
could be administered fairly easily. The first was health. Health is an area that we still don't get 
enough credit for in Head Start. How much has Head Start done to improve the health of 
America's poor children? I put it first because the people who do evaluation studies tend not to 
be pediatricians or health-related professionals. They tend to be psychologists, and they keep 
acting like health is somebody else's area to study. However, it is ours and it is measurable. The 
second was achievement. The third was cognition. I am not against making a child as smart as 
we can make him or for developing literacy. But even though I am for cognition, the fourth 
measure, emotion and motivation, doesn't get emphasized enough, whiA I have been doing in 
my own work for well over 40 years now. This is what I meant, these aspects of social compe- 
tence can be operationalized. 

A dark period in this history occurred when Urie Bronfenbrenner, a close fnend of mine, 
supported the fadeout notion and said that Head Start was essentially useless, that there were no 
long-term effects of programs like Head Start. At the beginning he played a constmctive role as 
one of the planners. He is an icon in my field. His ecological model has changed the nature of 
how we think about human development. Therefore, I am the last person that would ever 
belittle him. He is a great man and a great thinker. But that 2-year period where he supported 
the idea of fadeout was almost more damaging to Head Start than The Westinghouse Report was; 
so this was a problem caused by a close fnend. 

Fadeout is still out there. I was invited by the National Association for the Education for 
Young Children (NAEYC) to give a keynote address, and I decided to use that podium to make a 
point. I said that I would quit saying that Head Start has long-term effects but suggested we put 
together an empirical effort to answer the question the way it should be answered, with data. 
Through Cornell Consortium, we found about 12 studies around the country that had been 





349 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



following children involved with good intervention programs. If you want to know all of it, 
there is a book called As the Tluig is Bent. If you just want to read an article, there is a piece on the 
Cornell Consortium called "Work in Science." The studies were analyzed very conservatively, 
and it was shown that at least in these programs, two of which were Head Start, they did indeed 
have long-term effects. It was at that point in time that Head Start began getting its first major 
increase, and that is the flip side of where research has helped practitioners and people running 
Head Start to prosper. This was better research than what was in The Westinghouse Report. 

I am going to quickly run through the rest of this long history. ACYF had a Blue Ribbon Panel 
that Donald Campbell headed. Donald Campbell, who is no longer with us, has to be the 
premier methodologist of my lifetime. His advice was never to do a large-scale random assign- 
ment study of Head Start. Though he had alternatives for evaluation, they never went anywhere. 
Yet ACYF went ahead and created the Head Start Research Roundtable on which I sat, Jeff White 
chaired, and Deborah Phillips, one of my students, staffed. The roundtable came out with a 
report that concluded we needed more research. 

One of the sad stories of Head Start has been that in our research agenda we tend to be 
reactive. For example, we recently responded to Congress with a huge impact study, which is the 
opposite of what Donald Campbell would have recommended. But Congress wanted it and they 
got it. I was on the experts panel that supported and designed the study because we should 
never be in a defensive position where we are afraid to evaluate. Then ACYF conducted the 
Family and Child Experiences Survey (FACES) effort whose second cohort already indicates 
Head Start is looking better. But it has a weak design, no comparison group, and is based on 
standardized tests. That is not going to satisfy anybody, although when you talk about the 
FACES, the Head Start people love it and praise it. It is a half-full, half-empty set of findings. 
People who love Head Start see all the positives, the higher Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test 
(PPVT) scores. Other people see the lack of literacy advances, letter recognition. It was not the 
salvation of Head Start that they thought it would be. These are examples of the problem with 
being reactive. 

We were a high-powered team in those first days. Along with me, we had Ed Gorton and Urie 
Bronfenbrenner, two of the best minds in our country. We must know something about re- 
search, and we were essentially advising Head Start on what to do in the research shop. But the 
research shop never had the money. There is no parallel to that kind of a committee telling 
young people who are running Head Start research to see the bigger picture. They are always 
reactive. 

A friend, Jim Gallagher, once said, "If we acted like business does, we would give 5% of the 
Head Start budget to research each year to improve our product." The research budget is so 
small, less than 1%. It is an infinitesimal amount of money compared to a program that spends 
6,000,000,000. This problem in research has never been corrected, and I do not know if it ever 
will be corrected. What precipitated the impact study was a report. But this argument about 
whether Head Start works or not has been going on for 37 years from the first summer on. There 
has never been total consensus. In Washington, when Congress has a question and they want an 
objective answer, they call on the Government Accounting Office (GAO). They are decent and 
nice people, but hardheaded. Congress asked them a simple question before the 1998 Reautho- 
rization of Head Start. Does Head Start work? We have been studying that since 1965. We have 
thousands of pieces of work, for example the S 3 mthesis Report or Steve Barnetf s review. We have 
got a lot of positives, and we have a few negatives. On balance, it looked to me (they had asked 
me to consult to the GAO) that there was positive evidence. At the 1998 hearings, I sat beside 
their representative and I could not take issue. Their testimony states that the findings were 
either old or methodologically weak, that you could not conclude whether it worked or not. 
That led the Congress to demand a random assignment, impact study, which is being run now. 

We have gone from 1964 to today. Those of us trained in methodology were all trained in 
random assignment study experiments. This is a Cadillac design, but as people begin thinking 
about it, they see problems with random design. Literature exists today that questions the value 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



of random assignment studies. There are also ethics issues, especially in the Head Start commu- 
nity. Researchers like James Heckman, a Nobel Laureate, Larry Hedges, and Robert McCall have 
all now written papers questioning the value of random assignment. First of all, you do not 
know what is happening to the comparison group when you randomly assign. It is not like the 
medical model where you can give them a placebo or if it is a rat, you just leave it in the cage 
and it does not get the treatment. Children are doing something in your control group, and 
often with all the state programs, they may be getting better services than the children in a poor 
Head Start center because they still do not have the money to get the quality up to the place 
where I would like to see it be. So that is the research story from the inside, from a player who 
was there. 

Susan Longcor: I am from a Head Start program in New Jersey. I find health to be a nonentity 
sometimes in the Head Start program because of the lack of participation of health professionals 
in some areas of research. Do you have suggestions as to how to get them back as partners? 

Zigler: They were partners early in Head Start and, of course, Julius Richmond is himself a 
pediatrician. The American Academy of Pediatrics worked side by side with Head Start, but they 
were primarily interested in services. I think it behooves those of us in psychology and sociology, 
people who actually do Head Start research, to become acquainted with simple, straightforward 
health measures. It is not rocket science. It has just seemed to us like it is not our field. I re- 
viewed the role of Head Start in health in the Annual Review of Public Health because I believed 
their efforts would go on unrewarded. It has never received the credit it deserves because 
psychologists and other behavioral scientists do not study it. We could team up with MDs to do 
this work if we are more comfortable. We should become more interdisciplinary. There are many 
psychologists today who do use health measures like testing a child's size for his age. I would 
like to make one other comment because it is something I have never said to an audience 
before. We have always known the link between health and development. A sick child cannot 
learn or do much of anything. But a colleague of mine many years ago coined the term, "sleeper 
effects." The Clarks in England, who were no friends to early intervention or Head Start, wrote 
the book. The Myth of Early Childhood, not unlike that recent. The Myth of the First Three Years. So 
I have seen this before. 

Toni Ledet: I was wondering if you would comment on whether you have any opinion about 
the possibility of Head Start being moved to the Department of Education? 

Zigler: I have strong views on this, and they are public. I fought this fight with the Carter 
Administration years ago. We have been down that road before. What some of us should do is 
tell the world what really needs to be said. When the President of the United States, be it Carter 
or Bush, says that they are going to send Head Start to the Department of Education, to the man 
on the street, what difference does it make? What the man on the street does not know is that 
the Department of Education does not run programs the way Head Start is run. Right now 
DHHS is the only program in the federal government, and it has always been the only one, that 
goes direcdy from the federal government, bypassing the states, to local grantees. The Depart- 
ment of Education does not do that. They will block grant this program and send it to the states. 
If that is what they mean to do, and there are people like Doug Besharov who have been arguing 
for that, then this would be destructive to the Head Start that all of us have built and understand. 

There are only two new ingredients that went into Head Start at that first planning, but they 
were revolutionary at the time. Before Head Start, there were only small education programs in 
early intervention. What the Head Start Planning Committee did, and this is where I think we 
showed wisdom, is introduce comprehensive services. The interdisciplinary nature of the 
Planning Committee guaranteed that we would have health, both physical and mental, social 
services for families, nutrition, and other services, all the components of Head Start— -compre- 



er|c 



357 



351 



SYMPOSIA /ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



hensive services. The Department of Education does education, so this program will go back to 
being an education program, only with a heavy emphasis on literacy, and maybe numeracy 
might be squeezed in. 

The second great loss would probably be one of the most successful aspects of Head Start. 
Before me, all they talked about was "maximum feasible participation of the poor" in their 
programs. That was the rhetoric of the war on poverty. It was not until 5 years later when I was 
running Head Start that I invented and put into place the Parent Policy Councils, which have to 
be made up of 51% parents. This is the only program in America where parents really have the 
last word, and education hates that. Title I is evidence of that. They have gone up and down on 
parent involvement, their track record is pathetic. I am not a politician. I do not love the federal 
government any more or less than I love the state government, but I do insist upon the quality 
of Head Start with those two ingredients. I want a high-quality program. Anytime I become 
convinced that the states will do this program better than the federal governrrient, I will myself 
argue to transfer it. 

I am an empiricist, so Td like to conclude with a piece of research. I was trying to get out 
ahead of the curve and some colleagues of mine, under the direction of Carol Ripple, wrote an 
article in the American Psychologist called "Will 50 Cooks Spoil the Broth?" It is an honest 
analysis. Right now as we speak, 42 states have some kind of state program for at-risk children, 
often the same children as in Head Start. Therefore, we looked at those programs and compared 
each one of them with what Head Start delivers. In fairness to the states, there were two points 
in which they performed better than Head Start, and Head Start should learn something from 
that. They paid their teachers better than Head Start does, and they did not stop at the poverty 
line. It doesn't make sense to admit children from families that make $5.00 under the poverty 
line and to not do so for children whose families make $5.00 more than the poverty line. States 
know better than that, so if a child is in that region they can still attend their programs. But on 
everything else, including parent involvement and comprehensive services. Head Start was far 
superior. So on balance, right now if this were a horse race, in my honest opinion, the feds mount 
better programs through Head Start than the states are doing through their state programs. 

I just looked at an article with Walter Gillian where we took 10 or 11 of the state programs 
and examined them for their efficacy. It is going to be a continuing battle to assess these issues. I 
am going to be spending the rest of my life, whatever life I have left, looking at whether Head 
Start is the answer. This is difficult to say at a Head Start conference, but it is honest and people 
should know my views because I have supported Head Start my whole life, but Head Start is not 
the answer to the needs of poor children. We have to learn the lessons of Head Start. I have been 
at this 37 years. In 37 years we are serving approximately half the children that are eligible. Poor 
children do not have 37 more years for it to be fully funded. Furthermore, there is something 
that I complained about loudly from the beginning. I do not believe in segregating children by 
race, and I am opposed to segregating children by class. Everything I know about pedagogy and 
human development in this age of diversity says that we should have children of different 
socioeconomic classes together to learn from each other and to know each other. Schools are 
not perfect, but I think the solution may well be to build universal preschool education begin- 
ning at 3 and make that universal preschool education look a lot like Head Start for all children. 
We would have to do it with that $6,000,000,000. 

They are touching an infinitesimal part of the 0 to 3 population. Schools are never going to 
get 0 to 3 money beyond home visitation, like Parents as Teachers in the state of Missouri. But 
we could take that whole $6,000,000,000 and do a number of things with it. I would spend a 
lot more money on Early Head Start and do something about 0 to 3 in a big way instead of the 
kind of small National Lab way we are doing now. I would hate to tell you how many children 
are now showing up in Head Start already emotionally disturbed. Some of you are nodding. You 
know yourself that if you have two of those children in your Head Start class, they are impos- 
sible and nobody else in the class can learn anything either. We need early screening and 



ERIC 



352 



358 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



therapeutic nursery schools for some of the children that we are now encountering in our inner 
cities. So I would not have any trouble coming up with a good agenda for the Head Start money 
to continue Head Start m its tradition of trying new things. ^ 

Where IS the power? The fart is, government at every level does not care that much about 
poor 1 ren ecause poor children are not powerful. They do not pay taxes; they do not vote. 
We have good idealistic people, like Senator Kennedy and Senator Dodd. There are a lot of 

Inn^t ^ nobody cares. I am just saying 

look at the record. Why are we 37 years down the track with only half the children served when 

Q? both Bush (the father) and Clinton promised us full funding for Head 

otart ir they were elected. We never got it. We never have gotten it 

rn.In?'"*' high-quality preschool education in this 

country is when all children have preschool education in this country. We could build in a fee 

jstem so that we do not have to subsidize people with a lot of money, especially if we made the 
day as long as mothers and fathers' workdays. So the preschool would provide both a good 
quality pres Aool program and a child-care experience for children. If you want to see a model 
Aat IS already working, look at the Schools of the 21st Century that we invented and now have 
1,300 aro^d the country. Kentucky's are statewide. You call them Family Resource Centers in 
Kentucky. They are working fine. So mine has been a long journey. Some of you are young people 
and you are just starting. The work is great. I would not have done anything else with my life. 

Carl BaskervUle: I am a graduate student from Maryland, and I would like to get some more 
mforrnation about the randomized study. In particular, regarding the issue of validity, 
how this new study can validly test the outcomes that Head Start is designed to achieve because 
of studies^ academic achievement, which has been the focus of a lot 

Zigler: You are asking for a book instead of an answer. The fact is. Congress ordered a group of 
expe s, an was one of them— they essentially gave us our marching orders— to come up with 
a random assignment impact study. We talked a lot about the outcome measures. It is always an 

lhTor^ms7?h "Sht along side of you, is watching 

the progress. They are field testing the measures now. I am sure they are using a lot of the same 

measures Jat are m FACES, but they may not. How good the study is going to be is an open 
S^years^t Jo hte'^^" question m my mind that we had to do it. We are doing this study about 

When Head Start was about 10 years old, Donald Campbell said a very smart thing. He said 

J w program when that program is proud. We were proud about 10 

y ago. We had the Performance Standards m place for 5 years. They were updated in the 
Clinton years. But back then we did not have all these state programs and a thousand other 
services. What is going to muddy the waters is what the control children are doing. Like the 
Comprehensive Child Development Program evaluation, some of the children in the control 

hJh chMren in the experimental group, and that may happen 

again _ Head Start has improved m quality thanks primarily to the Clinton years. We had a great 
penod m Head Star, Helen Taylor. She was magnlficenr She gave us the new Performance 
Standards, she gave us higher quality; she was a great woman and I miss her greatly. It is simply 
t^gher and tougher to do random assignment studies. They have four different organizations 

° which Donald Campbell told us not to do 20 years 

ago He said we would be a lot better off doing some well-controlled small studies and building 

JhM he replication. He had a pretty good strategy, but we are doing exacdy 

S ^ f ^ The answer to your question is playi4 

Itself out right now m this study. My advice to you is, if you care, track it closely as it unfolds 



ERIC 



359 



353 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/ CONVERSATION HOURS 



CONVERSATION WITH ANN BARDWELL, BARBARA BOWMAN, 

ROSS THOMPSON, SUSAN H. LANDRY, AND RON HERNDON 

Facilitating Young Children's 
Enthusiasm for Learning 

Arcenia Pickett: I am from the Head Start Neighborhood Centers Association, in Cleveland, 
Ohio. 1 am the Chairperson of their policy committee, and we have 517 families in our program. 
With all of the research on the children and our attempts to increase their readiness for school 
and the world, is there research underway on those who must accept our children once they are 
out in the world? We are doing what we are supposed to do, and we raise our children according 
to society, our surroundings, and our community. They are just as ready as everyone else, if they 
are not taken outside of their environment. But anyone taken out of their environment will 
clearly not compare to someone who is already in that environment. My child went from Head 
Start to kindergarten. She was 4 years old during the first part of the year. Head Start enforced 
literacy and enhanced the program to get children developmentally ready for school in order to 
succeed in the future, but our children had a 4-month gap, so basically, it wasted their Head 
Start learning time. 

Barbara Bowman: The first part of the question was, is anyone studying the teachers, and 
indeed we are. We are trying to devise strategies and experiences for teachers that sensitize them 
to the different communities with whom they work. When people go through teacher educa- 
tion, particularly at the bachelor s level, they get a certificate to practice, but it does not say that 
they can only practice in one community. Indeed, many young teachers find themselves in 
communities where they have had very little experience. We work hard to create experiences that 
will sensitize teachers to the differences in communities and on ways to capitalize and build on 
children's prior knowledge. Children have an enormous amount of knowledge that they bring to 
their preschool or school experience. How to take advantage of that knowledge is not easy. 

Let me assure you that teaching teachers to do this is not an easy task. We are studying it, and 
there is research on teacher attitudes and on some of the reasons why children do not fare as 
well as they ought to in classrooms. For example, some issues include teachers calling on boys 
more than they call on girls, and teachers' differing expectations for certain children. 1 men- 
tioned earlier today that parents see their children as more persistent then teachers do. Teachers 
have different standards and expectations than parents. Where are these kinds of studies? 1 am 
not sure that they are good enough yet. As long as children are not achieving in their communi- 
ties and in school, we are failures. 

Texas Instruments has funded some nice work in this field. Some Head Starts in Dallas 
worked hard to put together the strongest program they could, and when they followed the 
children into school, they found that their strong readiness disappeared by kindergarten, first 
grade, and second grade. Instead of quitting, they put a solid collaboration transition program 
in place to support the children. It also helped teachers in the elementary schools to understand 
the children's backgrounds and skills, and to promote those and effectively challenge them. 
When that was in place, the gains were sustained, and they actually increased over time. Evi- 
dence shows that it is critically important to not stop at the end of prekindergarten, but to make 
connections, collaborations, and enhancements to our early elementary program. 

John Webb: I am from Community Action Agency Head Start in Cincinnati, Ohio. Is there a 
study of the two environments — the preschool Head Start environment and the kindergarten 
environment? It is a simple point, but the average Head Start classroom has 17 children, which 
is different from a regular public kindergarten class, where there is not a comprehensive pro- 



ERIC 






354 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



^am Aat looks at all aspects of the child. It is a narrowly focused program. Has there been a 

mente and T ^re compatible? We have heard about environ- 

and maybe we need to look at the compatibility of these two environ- 
ments, and how we can make them more compatible. iwo environ 

Bowman: There have been many studies. Hie relationship studies are probably the most 
important. Carollee Howes and Bob Pianta have done these studies at both the preschool and 

or^S'^Th relationship ts'I Ttrong 

predictor of how well children do the next year. It is not just how well they do in the yefr that 

n H- ° are probably the most 

important studies around the transition period. I also have personal experience of going 

between preschools and the local school, particularly Head Start. I am appalled byL number 

of preschool teachers who have never been to the local kindergarten. I am equall/appalled at 

know the preschools in their neighborhoods and 
hat kinds of expenences the children have had. There is some research, but I am not sure that 

m practice we are implementing what we know. am not sure mat 

Sl!!n * concur with that. It is interesting to look at the sociology of this phenom- 

Smn TtToofs" "";'y community operates with different ways^f thinking about 

pH r f * I ^ different issues concerning early childhood education, compared to the 

rnsSion to kindergarten and first grade. The transition from one 

institution to another can be quite a jamng transition for a child 

woifhard withT ^ phenomenon that I think you all would understand. She 

works hard wiA her children to develop their sense of curiosity, excitement, self-esteem, self- 

.rP ^ 1 ? j enthusiasm for school. When she mns into these children 8 months later they 

renthltr*' “T ^ discourage her. Sometimes they have lost their confidence 

it stems nardv'f^^ are discouraged and are no longer excited about school. Her belief is that 
It stems pa^y from a rough transiuon. There have been few bridges to help children negotiate 

enviro„m.SS“gaIlL“'’‘’'°^^^ environmem in pre^ool and an academically oriented 

If relationships are so important, and part of the transition for children from preschool to 
nprhanT*^f"f*^ c loss of some relationships, as well as having to establish new ones, then 

nSductivP transition in more constmctive and 

H most directly, the different worlds of early child- 

nfifpl primary grades establishment is also mirrored in the research Jommu- 

nthr^^^h researchers who focus primarily on early childhood development, and there are 
^ f transition and then follow children as they get older That is 

pffnrt*!T‘*^"'i?M'^ has gone against the grain for years and made every 

r ^ ^ ^ parents, who was also a member of the Parent 

teaZr °How "In knowing how to read. Tfre parent asked the 

nott^L iTe e skills?" The teacher replied, “I am not, we do 

not stress that here. The parent then said, "In Head Start, my child had simple homework Are 

you going to have some homework?" The teacher again replied in the negative. "Do you havt^ 

^y materials that I can use to build upon my child's Head Start experience?" asked frie parent 
Hie teacher directed her to pick up some dittos from the table if she wished. ^ 

After a month, this child was labeled a behavior problem. She was fortunate, because her 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



mother's aunt ran a Montessori School in Sacramento. The Head Start is in Portland. The 
mother said, "I am leaving, because I will not let them do this to my child." That hurt me. I 
thought about all the other parents who cannot leave, who may not be as smart as she is, or who 
do not have the confidence to know what their child is capable of. There are parents who have 
not been in a classroom to see that their children can learn to read, speak Spanish, and do many 
other things. One of the frequent expectations is the perception that the children come from 
certain backgrounds and cannot do well. 

Bowman: A positive thing to be said is that 20 states have changed their 4-year college teacher 
education certificates, to go from prekindergarten through third grade or birth through third 
grade, so that teachers are beginning to get a better picture of what children can and should be 
doing during those early years. 

Ann Bardwell: Sharon and Craig Ramey did a presentation yesterday on the Transition Project. I 
am the Director of a Transition Project in Columbus, Ohio. Those projects ran from Head Start 
through the third grade. Some of these data are significant in looking at some of those processes. 
It does require building bridges between Head Start and kindergarten, first, second and third 
grade teachers, and principals. Obviously, class size will not change. We will likely be unable to 
convince public school districts that 20 children per class would be wonderful, and that two 
teachers per classroom would be even better. But, some conversation and collaboration can take 
place between the two groups. We built significant collaborations in Columbus through the 
Transition Project. 

Patrida Home McGee: My question is about building bridges between the researchers and 
those researched, and about how one does that in the Head Start community. 

Bardwell: The question is how to build a bridge between the researcher and the practitioner. 
What are both of their roles in translating research into practice? That is an eternally asked 
question, but certainly one that we need to address. 

Thompson: I am doing research with the Early Head Start Program in the Lincoln, Nebraska 
area. It has proven to be a fruitful collaboration for us, in part, because the research itself is 
designed to address some of the questions that the Early Head Start personnel are wondering 
about, particularly on the impact of economic and psychological stresses on mothers, and the 
impact on relationships with their children. At the same time, we are asking questions that are 
relevant to the broader questions concerning the impact of developmental relationships on 
social and emotional functioning. 

The collaboration is also deepened because the grant makes it possible for us to hire some 
Early Head Start staff to work in our data collection efforts. The partnership helps us to be more 
sensitive to the families and to the issues they face, while also assisting the research effort by 
putting the families in contact with people whom they are already in touch with for other 
elements of the Early Head Start Program. 

It has been a fruitful collaboration, in part because the research questions arose out of the 
Early Head Start evaluation studies that we were already involved with. And in other cases, and 
with other projects, it has not been quite so smooth, in part because it has not arisen from the 
Early Head Start program itself 

McGee: For the Head Start communities on which you base your data, or whose practice and 
policy you are meant to influence, how were the bridges built between yourselves and those 
communities who would be most affected by this body of work? 



3fi2 



356 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



Bardwell: In our case, we have worked with programs that initiated research by putting in 
proposals, or we have gone to them, asking them to participate. Both ways can work, but efforts 
are most likely to succeed when the programs initiate the involvement by saying what they want 
to do or what they want help with. Then it takes working closely with them and meeting on a 
regular basis, with them implementing much of it. We met monthly with large numbers of 
program coordinators, to keep the research on track and to be sure it was sensitive to program 
challenges. 

Comment: As a participant in that program, the key word that made it unique is "relationship." 
We began by meeting with parents on the Policy Committee, and we interviewed parents about 
their wishes and desires in terms of literacy. That was one set of relationships. We then contin- 
ued by having huge parent involvement meetings throughout the years. The other set of rela- 
tionships were between the mentors and teachers, which I would be curious to hear more about. 

I cannot express how important this is in terms of a training model. A trusting relationship 
was built over a couple of years by visiting the classroom every week and observing classrooms. 
There were days when the parents hung out in the parent room and had meetings, and one 
becomes part of it all. This may sound cliche, but one becomes part of a Head Start family. One 
gets to know the parents of the children. The teacher/mentor relationship was significant, as was 
the mentor relationship to the group. Your research is on families and relationships, but the 
training model was on how our relationship was built. Without different sets of relationships, 
there would be no point to the program. 

JoAnn Williams: I am Director of Child Development, Inc. from Russellville, Arkansas. I am 
also Region IX President of the Head Start Association. There are many things that we in Head 
Start can do on our own to provide sound documentation about what happens to children after 
they leave Head Start. We work in a 13-county area across rural Arkansas, so we are broadly 
based. In our area, we still have weekly newspapers that carry school honor rolls and other 
accomplishments. Teachers and directors are paid well at our 25 centers and 14 units of home- 
based and migrant Early Head Starts, and they.stay with us. Therefore, the director or teachers 
have likely been there since the beginning. \ 

The other key is that we have a Transition Coordinator and written agreements with 43 
elementary public schools. The Transition Coordinator goes into every one of the schools in the 
fall, after our ongoing assessment and the children's health records have been passed on to the 
school with the parent's permission. The Transition Coordinator meets with every set of school 
people, or with whomever the superintendent decides. We have noticed in the last few years, 
since early childhood has been in the forefront, that Superintendents and principals attend 
these meetings. Many times, kindergarten teachers also attend. Some of the schools have more 
than one kindergarten, or there may be more than one elementary school, so it may entail 
several meetings. 

There is a definite relationship between Head Start and the schools. They even have copies of 
our ongoing assessment, which is done on the children three times a year. They know what we 
are doing; we know what they are doing, and we all discuss it. Our staff watches the newspapers 
for accomplishments of any children who have ever been in Head Start. We get the newspapers 
into our central office, and we follow the children's progress. 

We take the clippings and underline the children's names who make the honor roll or 
accomplish other things. For instance, Williams with the Detroit Pistons graduated from the 
Head Start program based on the campus of Arkansas Tech University. Naturally, we followed 
him and some others on our governing board. The Speaker of the House of Representatives in 
Arkansas was a former Head Start child. We do not stop, we follow those who accomplish things 
in kindergarten, first grade, and all the way through life. We receive funding from 15 different 
sources, so it is important to track our success. 



363 



357 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



It does not require extra money within a program to do that, but it does require staff commit- 
ment and retention. It also takes relationships and transition between Head Start and the public 
school. It also probably depends on the part of the country. I realize that if I lived in Dallas, I 
would not get a newspaper that listed honor roll students in kindergarten. However, there are 
many rural programs where they still do that, and so it is right there in one's hands to track. 

I will use an example from a clipping I saw a few days ago. In the eighth grade, there were 
eight children who made straight As. All eight of those children's names were underlined as 
having been a Head Start child in a rural Arkansas town. In meetings with the schools, we ask 
about how children did at the end of kindergarten when they enter first grade. If names are not 
provided in the newspaper, the schools release the names to us. The relationships one estab- 
lishes with schools will affect the information one can get and how to track it. 

Bardwell: One of our transition schools in Columbus has the highest mobility rate of any other 
school in the district. It is unlikely that any one of our Head Start children who entered kinder- 
garten in the fall will still be there in June. 

Kere Hughes: I am from the University of Kansas. I have a couple of comments, one relating to 
transition. There is a large body of literature in the field of special education for children with 
disabilities, on what kinds of strategies can be used to make transitions between Part C Pro- 
grams and Part B Programs. That might be one place to draw on for information. The other 
comment has to do with an earlier question about relationships. I have recently been involved 
in two different studies. One is with our local Part C Program, and the other is with our local 
Early Head Start Program. They were generated in two very different ways, as Landry described: 
one where we approached them with a proposal, and one where we had an ongoing relation- 
ship and they approached us with a proposal. 

We had completely different experiences with each approach. In the study where we ap- 
proached them, we did not have a relationship in place and the research was difficult to com- 
plete. The families were fine, but the relationship with the program and with the interventionist 
made it difficult to complete. On the other hand, our relationship with the other agency has 
been an ongoing one where we provide the data to their program to inform their growth and 
change model. They then inform us about their next goals and where they want to go with their 
program. Being in a relationship makes the research much easier to complete. We also attend all 
of their Parent Policy meetings and develop relationships with the parents and the community, 
so that our research organization is grounded within the needs of the community and not just 
what we think we should be doing or what is interesting to us. 

Webb: I am from Cincinnati, Ohio. One thing that I was trying to get at in my earlier question 
was pedagogical differences. We had two examples here of children coming in ready and 
reading, then being told "we do not do that here." Morrison spoke yesterday about when the 
child comes in with high vocabulary and high phonemic awareness and the teacher-directed 
pedagogue is used, and the child's skill level goes down. When a child-centered pedagogue is 
used, that child's skill level goes up. So, when we are talking about transition, it is not just the 
transition activity, or the relationships, because many of us do that. It is also what the pedagogy 
differences are between kindergarten, public school, and Head Start. Head Start standards 
require individualization. I do not know if that is required by the standards in public schools. 

Bowman: One of the things we did in Eager to Learn was to take a look at all the curricula we 
could get our hands on, and the one thing I can tell you is that they all work for somebody, and 
none of them work for everybody. The end result is that one has to find the match between what 
works for a particular group of children and the curriculum that is offered. There is no magic 
bullet out there, and it has to be adjusted both individually and for the group. 



358 



364 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



Anita Varmc: I am from the Collaboration Office in Iowa. The research 1 am hearing says that 
Head Start is doing something right. Ramey's research says that children who had been in Head 
Start continue to show growth through third grade. We believe that the reason for that is the 
comprehensive services provided. I am concerned about emphasis being placed primarily on the 
cognitive literacy development of young children. I would like to hear some responses to 
reassure me that this is not going to be the case, that the whole child is still going to be consid- 
ered to be just as important. There is going to be a tremendous amount of time spent training 
Head Start teachers to focus on literacy, and I am afraid the other developmental domains of the 
child will get lost. 

Herndon: Oftentimes, people will use the word "research, "and everyone is supposed to genu- 
flect. Research has shown anything that people have wanted it to show. There has been much 
discussion with the current administration about Head Start not doing enough in the area of 
literacy, based upon research. When pressed, what is the research? Then one finds that this 
becomes an agreed-upon myth, and there is no specific research. We hear claims that Head Start 
has not done enough in the area of reading. A high-ranking government official said that the 
documentation for that claim is The Deficit Study, which was apparently released in 1997. A 
child coming into Head Start knows one letter of the alphabet and when he leaves, he knows 
two. This has been accepted at face value, without debate. There was no mention of the instru- 
ment used, who did the testing, or what outcome variables were used. What they did not say is 
that prior to 1997, every administration regional training office had always said to not teach 
children to read in Head Start, that it is not developmentally appropriate. Even when people 
came in to do reviews, reviewers told Head Start staff to take down the alphabet on the wall. 

Not everyone is telling the truth when they say Head Start is not doing what it is supposed to 
do in the area of reading. Every administration. Republican and Democrat, made this statement. 

I had fun talking to Wade Horn a couple of months ago. I said that if people are going to 
criticize Head Start about this issue, why not have everyone sit down and say that it was an 
agreed-upon myth. It was national policy, and let's see what has happened since the 1998 
reauthorization bill, when Congress challenged us to have children be able to identify ten 
letters. We set these high standards. What has happened since then? Apparently, from what I 
understand of federal initiative, the new research shows something different. When people say 
"research," the question is by whom, for what? If I already have a political agenda, I can find 
research that shows that the moon rises in the west. If I have enough money, I can get it. We 
need to be careful and humble when we begin to say what Head Start cannot do and has not 
done, and begin to say that we can all do something together about the issue, rather than saying 
it has not occurred and blaming Head Start. 

Last year, the gentleman who was a former Governor of our state, sent an article to us from 
the National Bureau of Economic Research Review. They are the ones who talk about the gross 
national product and make economic predictions for the country. He also sent the article to the 
head of Nike, Phil Knight, because our Head Start program convinced Nike to get involved in 
making computers available to Head Start children. He said, "Neither of you have probably seen 
this. You should look at it." There was an article last August in this economics publication that 
talked about all of the benefits of Head Start. Not only did it say that the benefits happen for the 
children, but it talked about lessening the involvement in crime, and that their siblings who had 
never been involved in Head Start also had benefits that were far greater then siblings of the peer 
group who had not attended Head Start. When people begin to say, it does not work in this one 
area, and it is based upon research, what is the research? Who did it? When? Why and what were 
the politics behind it? 

Susan Landry: I certainly agree that one needs to watch research. I wrote an article once that 
said research is only one source of knowledge. There are many others, and one needs to negoti- 





359 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLES/ CONVERSATION HOURS 



ate how to balance those sources of knowledge. But, it is one source of knowledge. Over the last 
35 to 40 years, I have observed the marvelous job that Head Start has done in establishing what 
I call the developmental supports for children. But, these children are not doing as well in 
school as we would like, and there are ways Head Start can improve. One ought to look at some 
of the research and decide whether it is a useful tool for one's program. It ought to be based on 
developmental competence, and then one can begin to layer on it more and more educationally. 

Kathryn Barnard: I am from the University of Washington. I have been involved in the Early 
Head Start National Evaluation, tracking a number of other studies and the National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) Child Care Study, including the Transition 
Study. One of the things I would like to mention that the research seems to bear out is that 
family conditions explain more of the variance in developmental outcomes than any education 
program. My particular passion is for parents who have essentially had rotten lives full of 
trauma and posttraumatic stress, and their children carry these anxieties. I have a theory that 
some children are exposed to so much trauma, crisis, and stress that they need even better 
environments and curricula than the average child. I wonder how educators address the prob- 
ability that 25% of Head Start children may need much more intensive, thoughtful, and educa- 
tional support to withstand the trauma of their environments. Is anybody thinking about that? 

Bowman: I often think about that issue. I like your figure of 25%, because it means that 75% of 
Head Start children are doing their tasks developmentally, even if they have not learned all the 
things that schools want them to know before they come in. That 25% is a hard nut to crack. 

The families often need such extensive help that children will be grown before one can get the 
family well. We need to do much more Early Head Start, of having programs available to take 
pressure off of parents so they do not have to do everything themselves. The Ounce of Preven- 
tion Program teachers with whom I have contact found that once they get the children to be 
smiling and responsive, the parent tends to respond better than when the children are de- 
pressed. Caregivers can do things to both bridge that period for the child and at the same time 
get the child to help elicit from the parent the kind of parenting they need. But, it is a complex 
and difficult process. 

Landry: I agree with Bowman that Head Start is doing an excellent job in most areas. But, this 
effort to focus on stronger language support and early literacy in the classroom is being done by 
almost everyone. They are working hard at it in the spirit of trpng to figure out how to prepare 
children to be confident when they enter school. We need to focus on how to do that in ways 
that support and facilitate social and emotional development. We need to stop fighting about 
how one gets left behind if the other one gets attention, and work hard to understand how 
research on children's development may be applied to the program activities we need to develop 
for young children, to enhance both areas of development. 

Lisa Klein: I am from the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. I hope that the rest of the panel 
will also address this issue. One of the things we are increasingly aware of is the divide between 
those who support the literacy movement and those who support a social emotional movement. 
It is happening in all areas that we see, including the research, program, practice, and policy 
levels. All of us understand that all areas of development interact for the best school success and 
growth throughout life. Could you speak in a practical way about how we can stop talking about 
this as either/or and talk about what we consider to be key, which is that there is a link between 
them without which we cannot develop effective programs for children. We need you all to 
make those links so it does not look like it is this person against this person. 



O 

ERIC 



360 



366 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



Landry: The research tells us we can support both of these perspectives. It has been examined, 
described, and reinforced with new research. I am personally not sure how to stop this split. My 
efforts are to continue testing models that attempt to bring the two together, and show that one 
perspective need not get lost for another. We have to keep working with people to see if we can 
put those types of programs in place and get the best outcomes in both, rather than argue about 
it at conferences. 

Bowman: 1 would like to respond to that, because in some ways 1 was partially responsible for 
the current controversy. The first intervention of developmentally appropriate practice said what 
we knew at that time, that children are not ready to learn to read and write at that age, and they 
do not need to learn letters. The second intervention, which 1 do not think anyone has ever read, 
was stated by Sue Bradycamp who said that it is not either/or; it is "and." We can do them both. 
This is the message you all should take back to the field. The research community is clear about 
this now. Unfortunately, we did a wonderful job educating everyone on the first intervention, 
but we have not done a good job of getting out the additional message. 

Thompson: Your question probably has as much to do with rhetoric as it does science. It is a 
question of how one provides images and models that have a compelling effect. Part of the 
reason that the divide occurs is because we begin with an academic mindset. After all, we are 
talking about school readiness, in which we are accustomed to thinking that one can educate 
minds apart from the emotional connections. But, if one starts at the opposite end of the 
developmental spectrum and thinks about the enormous growth of the mind in infancy, it is 
inconceivable that one could tutor a baby outside of the relationships that make social iriterac- 
tion such a profound catalyst for all sorts of gro^vth, including the growth of the mind. 

From my point of view, part of the way to convince external audiences is to compare a young 
child's learning to what we see early in life, and to argue that part of what opens up the mind as 
a catalyst are the relationships that the children find so compelling. In a senses the human 
connection the children make provides the bridge, the gateway, to all sorts of intellectual 
catalysts. That weans us away from the academic model that has been so unproductive. 

Herndon: One of the problems is that this is not just an academic discussion. Most Head Start 
programs have probably never seen the dichotomy in what they have been doing. The problem 
that we have now is that an administration has come in saying that we are not doing enough in 
the area of literacy. As a matter of fact, to help us, they have decided to move us to the Depart- 
ment of Education. The administration made up its mind, without doing any research or finding 
out about the practice or lack of practice in the Head Start community, and then set policy based 
upon faulty mythological assumptions. Therefore, if one hears Head Start staff sound almost 
fanatical about the literacy issue, it is not just about literacy; it is because they have been 
convicted and sentenced already, before the academic discussion about literacy. It is hard to do 
it in that environment. We have a President who stands up and says that if we do not improve 
literacy quickly enough, then we might lose our funding. When that comes out of a President's 
mouth, it is no longer an academic discussion. People from the highest levels of political office 
in the country have made assumptions about our professionalism, livelihood, and body of 
work, and they have already decided how this issue should be resolved. 

In our program, we stressed teaching children to read when it was not popular, and we were 
criticized. Interestingly, some of these companies that sell products sent me personal letters after 
a national presentation about teaching children to read in Head Start, saying I should not do 
that. I see that they now have new products and new chapters in their books. Many Head Start 
programs have done a great deal of work, and no one has ever asked them what they have done, 
what their experiences are, and how to replicate the best known practices. No one has posed 
these questions to the field. 



O 

me 



367 



361 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Lastly, Head Start does not toot its horn enough for the ways in which it helps different 
ethnic groups preserve their culture and language, especially in Indian Head Start programs. 

They have said that were it not for Head Start, they would not have had a way to preserve their 
native languages in their communities. Also, there are some communities who have not only 
done that, but have come up with excellent materials. The most troubling part for most Head 
Start people is that no one ever asked. We are talking about research, the most basic thing one 
can do. What is occurring? Before one comes up with the solution, ask what has happened in 
the field. If we sound passionate about this subject, it is because of erroneous assumptions that 
have been made at the highest levels of government about what the problem is and, most 
certainly, what the possible solutions are. 

Mary Kay Smith: 1 am a Head Start Director in Bryan, Texas. 1 would like to clarify something 
that 1 heard Landry say at the Midwinter Management Conference in Dallas this year. 1 wrote it 
down, because 1 had hoped to dialogue with you to see if 1 misunderstood or misheard your 
comments. You were responding to the child measures and the indicators that we had focused 
on during that conference. 1 heard you say that these things will not be achieved through the 
current types of curricula used in Head Start, and that only by using a literacy-based curriculum 
will positive child outcomes result. Then you referred us to several specific curricula that would 
work, which were on your website. Is it still your stance that the type of curriculum used by 
many Head Start programs will not affect this change or achieve good literacy outcomes for 
children? 

/ 

Landry: Take the High Scope or Creative Curriculum, for example. When we look at a large 
number of programs that do independent assessment of language development and preliteracy 
development, the programs are using child-centered but focused approaches to language and 
literacy. The children were significandy more likely to show greater gains across the year. There 
were 4,000 children tested in 20 large Head Start grantees. If there is good curriculum that gives 
teachers materials, books, and ideas on how to enhance vocabulary, and studies show they are 
based on research and can be effective, then it makes good sense to encourage their use. It does 
not have to be one or the other. Teachers often want to put things together that enhance differ- 
ent areas of development. In many ways, 1 see High Scope as a strong, positive, philosophical 
approach, but teachers often say that they need more things to work with, like books and ideas 
about how to put things in centers that relate to literacy. It is harder for a teacher when they do 
not have the tools. It is not impossible, but it is more difficult. 

Smith: 1 have another question about your study on the 360 families. How were those families 
selected? What were the social and economic levels, and the ethnic groupings? Who comprised 
the sample? 

Landry: A large goal of that project was to better understand literacy and the needs of healthy, 
full-term, children from low-income families, compared to biologically high-risk children, like 
those with very low birth weight. Because it is much more difficult to recruit large numbers of 
very low birth weight children in a short amount of time, the very low birth weight children 
were recruited from three large county and state hospitals. Full-term children were carefully 
matched so that we did not have social, economic, or family background differences among 
those groups of children. 

There were approximately 60% African American families, and a much smaller proportion of 
Latinos, because when we started this research about 12 years ago, the National Institutes of 
Health (NIH) required us to have families with English as their home language because of the 
types of measurements. It was not a random sample. 



ERIC 



362 



368 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



Kelly Williams: I am an Education and Early Intervention Manager in Pennsylvania. My 
question pertains more to the teachers and the transition issues that we have been discussing. 
My hurdle is keeping teachers' morale up when it comes to believing in what they are doing, in 
comparison to what the public school teachers are doing. We have a difficult time getting the 
public schools to treat us like professionals, even though they know what we are doing. We are 
attempting to establish a rapport with them, but teachers repeatedly come to me and question 
what we are doing. I keep encouraging them to believe in what we are doing; we are doing it 
right. I present them with the research, but I would like to hear if anyone has any experience in 
how to continue to support teachers. 

Bowman: It is a tough issue. I am not quite sure I know which people you are talking about, 
who are so discouraged. Is it the classroom teachers or the specialists who are coming in to help 
the classroom teachers? The classroom teachers are discouraged because they do not know how 
to do it. It is difficult for them to have expectations laid upon them, and they feel like they do 
not have the skills or the knowledge to handle children with special needs. 

Williams: The difficulty is that teachers do feel good about what they are doing. The problem is 
that when children transition to kindergarten, they seem to regress. The teachers question what 
they might have done wrong. Would you have any suggestions for how to convince them that 
they are doing well? 

Bowman: My answer stands, because the kindergarten teacher is the teacher with many children 
and little understanding. Most of them have had no courses or experience with special needs 
children, and suddenly they are being asked to integrate all these children into their classrooms. 
They often feel overwhelmed and unsupported. Frankly, they are often not supportive of the 
children because it is so stressful for them. More help for the kindergarten teacher is probably 
the best way to maintain the growth of the preschool children. 

Bardwell: We have been working in Columbus, Ohio, on this issue for some time now. We have 
a collaboration between our County Board of Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabili- 
ties and our Head Start Program, where we have shared teaching between Head Start and the 
Early Intervention teachers. We are moving toward the transition into the public schools, where 
the issue exists. Bowman is saying that those teachers who inherit these children are scared. The 
numbers of children in their classes are probably larger than the classes where the children came 
from, so it is an issue of helping those teachers gain the skills to be as prepared as your teachers. 

Comment: I remember the first year we integrated children with disabilities into Head Start 
classrooms. The panic. The horror. "We cannot do it." "What are you asking us to do?" "You 
are crazy. I directed the Transition Project for Region V, and I remember our work with regular 
Head Start teachers, because it was a shock. All kinds of bad things were said about those 
children. 

Valerie Arnquist: When I heard your question, I thought it was referring to the credibility of 
Head Start as a program. As Head Start teachers, we struggle with that all the time. Every Head 
Start does. I have been with Head Start for 17 years. We are always working at not being 
"dissed," and being on an equal plane with so-called "real teachers," the K- 12 teachers. That is 
the issue. It is not about special needs. We have enrolled special needs children for years, and we 
have done well. It is a difficult journey. It is hard to take research back and translate it into 
practice. It is nice to know all this information, but all we can really do is go back to our 
neighborhoods and our books, and hold our heads up high and do what we can. It is always 
about relationship building. Everytime one turns around, it is always about relationships. If we 





363 



SYMPOS I A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



get up each day and continue doing the right thing, pretty soon we earn credibility in our 
program. Tell your teachers to stand proud, by getting educated and using research. 

McGee: That goes back to my question regarding relationships, and of researchers understand- 
ing the nuances of the community. 

Pickett: In Cuyahoga County, Ohio, we serve about 8,000 families. This comment is on the 
curriculum. You said that you have been in Head Start since 1975? 

Herndon: Yes. 

Pickett: What curriculum were they using then? Or was there a curriculum? 

Landry: There was no curriculum. 

Herndon: If one had money, there was a curriculum. For literacy, there was not anything 
specific because early child education programs were told not to "literally" teach phonics and 
reading in those days. 

Pickett: I graduated from Head Start in 1974. There was no actual literacy curriculum, but I 
graduated from Head Start knowing how to read. Socially, I got to first grade and was telling my 
teacher how to teach reading to the other children. I was put in the corner almost everyday, but I 
continued to be ahead of my class. Now, my own child is transitioning from Head Start, know- 
ing how to read with a high score, using the curriculum that Head Start uses with nothing else 
added. What is so broken with Head Start now that it needs to be fixed? Many children in Head 
Start are reading, but families have the option of whether or not to be included in the different 
research projects that look at this issue. Many low-income families do not like to be put con- 
stantly in the public eye. When is the research going to stop? Twenty years ago, the issue was 
drugs in low-income, African American families. Ten or 15 years ago, all eyes were on pregnancy 
and STDs, and just 7 years ago it was lead levels in low-income families. Now, the problem is us 
not being able to read when the government wants us to read. The research is still not complete. 

Landry: How many people in this room feel that Head Start has no improvements to make? 

Pickett: Everything needs improvement. 

Landry: Right. Are we going to get anywhere by being defensive? When one is already very 
strong, why not work with that strength and get even better? 

Pickett: Head Start as a family has no problem with growing, but I never hear about all the 
good things Head Start does, about research on the good things. It is always "they are not doing 
this and not going to be able to do that." 

Greg Powell: I am from National Head Start Association. First of all, I want to react to a couple 
of the comments that were made earlier, and come back to where we are at now. My understand- 
ing from the presentation is that Head Start children are currendy able to identify eight to nine 
letters, so we are falling short of the expectation. We have always focused on making children 
ready for school. One of the things I was impressed with about Bowman's presentation was 
her focus on what environments make children ready to learn, not ready for school, but eager 
to learn. 




364 



370 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



Landry: The question is, what are they learning? Developmentally competent children are 
learning all the time, and if one wants them to learn things for a specific social context, one has 
to give them the opportunity to learn it. 

Powell: That is correct. I certainly concur with that. I studied anthropology, and I can offer a 
quick example. There are two Olympic sprinters. One was raised in an environment where it was 
a practice to hold the child up and let him pretend to walk, beginning in the first couple of days 
of life; so he was getting exercise in his legs. In the other environment, the child was strapped to 
the mother s back for the first year of life. Both of them learned to walk very well, and actually 
ended up running quite fast at the Olympic level. 

The problem has been in the rhetoric. Nobody here believes that Head Start does not have 
room for improvement, but the language that has come out more recendy is that it is broken 
and needs fixing, which is a different angle than believing that it simply needs improvement. It 
is insulting to many people like yourself who have worked in the Head Start field for close to 30 
years. I have watched how we get new requirements and complain about them, but we imple- 
ment the requirements the best possible way we can with the resources that we have. One of the 
things that I have not heard from this panel is the reiteration of the fact that it is not so much 
the curriculum that works, but it is how the curriculum is used in a particular community. A 
strength of Head Start has alwa)^ been its ability to adapt a curriculum to a community. 

Blanca Quiroz: I am a student. I want to offer some examples that I have wimessed while doing 
research on language development with mothers in their homes. Language is important, because 
it impacts how we construct ourselves, learn about our emotions, and express our experiences of 
the world, including our pain, sorrows, and happiness. A curriculum allows us to learn to be 
literate. When we go to homes and ask the parents what they expect from Head Start, they have 
a very specific spectrum of expectations. "I expected my child to learn to tell what she feels, to 
express herself" Some say to be independent. Some say to feel proud of themselves. Some say 
to learn the letters. 

In almost all cases, the parents are happy that their children have learned it. In almost all 
cases, they have expressed having strong relationships with the teachers. These are parents that 
are probably from other cultures, who are minorities and who do not speak English as their first 
language. We have gone to classrooms and were amazed by the amount of Spanish that non- 
Spanish speaking teachers are using in the classrooms. The fact that that experience does not 
continue in public school is not a failure on Head Start's part. Head Start should be very proud 
of what they do. 

Jeanie Carpenter: I am an Administrative Director from a primary care practice in the inner city 
of Philadelphia. I am here because we are starting a parmership spearheaded by the United Way, 
to bring together key stakeholders to look at school readiness. It is predominantly geared toward 
those children who are in child-care centers. I actually work at the Children's Hospital in 
Philadelphia and am responsible for what we call School Readiness Specialists. These Head Start 
agencies are going to be involved with parent education and parenting skills education. Head 
Start and Early Head Start have done a lot of work in that area. I have not heard anything so far 
about parent involvement and what is expected of parents in terms of getting their children 
ready for school. I cannot stress enough the importance of the relationship between parent and 
teacher and for teachers to be role models for parents. 

Specifically, my question is whether there are any good, useful, and simple tools to assess 
parent involvement or parent engagement. We are targeting children from birth to 5 years of age. 
We are trying to teach parents in different settings such as health care centers, physician offices, 
early child-care centers, and so forth. The unique component of this initiative is to create or 
adapt a curriculum for parents at larger early child-care centers. We are struggling with how to 




37i 



365 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



gauge a baseline for parent engagement or involvement. We are doing needs assessments as we 
go out and actually talk to some of the parents. In reaction to some of the discussions this 
morning, I have not heard about how the parents should be involved. 

Bowman: There are an endless array of parent education models out there. The problem with 
parent education, which has been researched endlessly, is that it tells people how to raise their 
children. If they want to change how they raise their diildren, then they are perfectly good 
models. But most people raise their children the way they do because it is personally meaningful 
to them. It makes sense to them, so asking them to behave in a different way, when nothing else 
has changed in their lives, is probably asking them to be a little crazy. One is asking them to 
accept on faith that what one is telling them about how to raise children is valid, even though it 
may not fit anything else that their neighbors do or anything else that makes sense in their own 
life. Should they change how they treat their children on that basis? Obviously, relationships make 
a difference, but we have to be extremely conservative about what to expea from didactic educa- 
tion of adults who are living in an enclave that does not support what we are trying to promote. 

Bardwell: The Children s Hospital in Columbus, Ohio, with the American Academy of Pediat- 
rics, has begun a program. They are called Close To Home Centers. It works through pediatri- 
cians' offices and those kinds of sites, with the same kind of goal and the same kind of principle. 
The program is called Reach Out and Read. 

Webb: Herndon explained the high stakes, and that is what this is about. Out of 13 mandated 
indicators, 12 are in language and literacy and one is in early math. Therefore, when one is told 
that they will be judged on those items, and on those alone, the Head Start community looks to 
the public school community and all the failed attempts of teaching to the test. That is where 
this "or" comes in. We believe in the "and," and always have believed in the "and." But, 1 am not 
tracking or mandated to track and combine 5,000 children's social and emotional development. 
We do that domain on every child, but 1 am not mandated to track it. 1 do not know what will 
get reported to Washington; yet philosophically, many Head Start people believe that the social 
and emotional aspects of relationships will have a greater impact on language development and 
literacy then anything else. 

1 am interested in Landry's research on the amount of words spoken by children. 1 do not 
know if the issue to focus on is the amount of words spoken by diildren, or the relationship 
between the adult and child, because 1 think building relationships improves language. 

Landry: It is both. 

Webb: However, language and literacy areas were highlighted much more than social and 
emotional development. 

Landry: There are six areas that need to be attended to. Language is the content, and the way 
language is engaged with the child involves sensitivity to their signals, building on their inter- 
ests, and not restricting or stopping them from expressing themselves. That is the style with 
which the language and cognitive activities, whether science or math, can be child-centered, 
engaging and effective. 

Webb: But we are not mandated to collect information on those topics, and that is where the 
point lies. 1 might do a good job in those areas, but 1 will not get judged on it. That is where we 
are. Head Start has instead been put through the situation exemplified by "put the letters up and 
take the letters down." When 1 first came to Head Start in 1995, 1 told the teachers to put up the 




366 




CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



alphabet. I was in public education before that time. The Head Start teachers told me that I was 
going to get into trouble for having the alphabet in the classroom, and I said to let me worry 
about that. 

Landry: One was supposed to have a literacy rich environment, but no letters. 

Webb: We are having a back and forth conversation, but if the stakes were "and," we probably 
would not be in this debate. 

Landry: Here are the stakes. One takes the relationship, that set of behaviors that are critically 
important as scaffolding support, and puts those in place to ensure that content in the class- 
room provides children with knowledge and concepts. It will all fall into place. One will get 
scores or reports on children's outcomes where they need to be because one has put social and 
emotional relationships as the support and foundation for all the rest. 

Webb: I still think that when we have a set number of domains, and we are only going to 
measure one or two of them, there is a high stakes aspect to it. People focus on teaching to the 
test. That is what has happened in public school education for years. 

Comment: I have so much more concern for the child then I do for the program. Bowman 
shared how some children are going to learn all about letters and some children are going to 
learn all about trees. My concern is about the children who want to learn all about trees. What 
about the children who are not motivated, with no interest in letters. What happens to their self- 
concept, when there is so much emphasis on literacy and letters? That is my concern. 

Landry: Those children can learn four or five letters out of trees. 

Bowman: All of the vocabulary that goes with trees is where the emphasis should be. The point 
is not to just learn sorne letters; it is to build a strong language base that gives children cognitive 
readiness. 





367 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLES/ CONVERSATION HOURS 



Conversation With Julius B. Richmond, 
Edward Zigler, Judith Palfrey and John Pascoe 



John Pascoe: This is a conversation hour with Julius Richmond, Ed Zigler, Judith Palfrey, and 
myself. Dr. Richmond has a few comments, and then we will open the discussion with questions 
and comments from the audience. 

Julius Richmond: Judy Palfrey made some comments earlier about some early work that Bettye 
Caldwell and I had done on the development of children growing up in environments of 
poverty. We, for somewhat different reasons, were not studying children growing up in poverty. 
We wanted to look at the development of children over a period of time. However, the medical 
school, the State University of New York in Syracuse, was located, as many medical schools were 
in that era, in a very low-income area. So we recruited families from that area. 

As we began studying these children, we began to see what we came to call developmental 
attrition. Judy had referred to this as gradual developmental decline. One might say, why was 
that so novel in the early 1960s? The fact was that we had had many studies on the develop- 
ment of young children, but most of them were conducted on university campuses by faculty 
members in child development. Usually they ended up studying the children of other faculty 
members who were enrolled in the campus preschools. Those children, of course, did not show 
any development decline. We published our findings showing this developmental attrition over 
the first year in the Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine. Dr. Zigler, over the years, has been critical 
of us for having published it in this journal because he said, "you know, that journal does not 
have a wide enough circulation." Coming from Yale, he knows. 

Our first thinking was about how we could prevent this kind of developmental attrition, so 
we instituted an intervention program we had developed. With this intervention, we essentially 
prevented the development decline. The intervention was basically a comprehensive early 
childhood program. We were doing this work at about the time that the war on poverty came 
along, and at that time we had the political will and the resources to make a national commit- 
ment to try to do something like this on a larger scale. 

When students ask about how policy is affected, I tell them that the important thing is to first 
try to develop the skills to further the knowledge base. Then when the opportunity comes along 
to apply the knowledge that we have, it will be done on the basis of sound knowledge. When 
Mr. Shriver asked me to come to Washington, to see if we could implement this intervention on 
a larger scale, we basically knew what would work. It was perhaps somewhat risky to think that 
we could do it in 2,700 communities simultaneously, but at any rate, we knew what the ingredi- 
ents were. We thought that people in their local communities could respond and develop the 
kinds of programs that would make a difference with their children. 

I do not think I would have had the courage to say to Mr. Shriver, "yes, 1 think we can do it," 
if Bettye Caldwell and I had not had the direct experience, in smaller numbers, of demonstrating 
what it takes to prevent this attrition and to try to enhance the development of children. 

Edward Zigler: I have to point out something that Julius left out that historically, is very 
important. He talked about other people s courage. We should all know, because history has not 
forgotten this, but the times have changed. This was the first research of its kind ever done, and 
it took great courage and confidence to do it, because both Julius and Bettye Caldwell could 
have been pilloried if this did not work. At that time in this country we had the Child Welfare 
League of America. When this research was being done, the Child Welfare League believed that 
no child, during the first year of life, should ever be anywhere but with their mothers and 
fathers, which meant, primarily, with their mothers. They continued to hold that position long 





it 



368 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



after this work had been done. What Julius Richmond and Bettye Caldwell showed is that it is 
not so much who you are with, but the quality of the environment. 

This problem is back with us in the scientific arena. In each of their last books two renowned 
pe latricians, T. Berry Brazleton and Stanley Greenspan, both proclaimed that no child in the 
first year of life should be in child care. I can empathize, because we have from a cost/quality 
outcome study done in Connecticut, Colorado, North Carolina, and California that looked at 
mfant/toddler centers with young children from birth to 3. In 40% percent of those centers, the 
quality of care was so poor as to put the children's health and safety at risk. Combine that with 
the demographics that today, in the United States, 55% of mothers with babies under 1 year of 
age are in the out-of-home work force. For college-educated mothers, that number is 68% 

When great pediatricians tell mothers they are doing a great disservice to their children, we 
know that many of these mothers have no choice but to work. That is especially true if one is a 
poor mother on welfare. 

My own position is, of course, we have to tell what our science shows, which is why people 
like me keep saying women ought to be able to decide what they want to do with their lives. 

Our responsibility is to make sure that the quality of care is as close to the care that Julius 
Richmond and Bettye Caldwell gave children decades ago. We have to know that these children 
are going to have the normal growth development that we want to see. I decided to take my own 
stand, fighting for high quality programs instead of telling mothers that they are damaging their 
^ild. Most mothers have no choice. It is not just Welfare mothers. Many families in this country 
live from paycheck to paycheck. They need those two incomes to function. While this work was 
classic, wherever it was published, I just want it in a broader arena. I never criticized Julius, he is 
my mentor, and I announce that publicly. Julius never gives up and I have never heard him raise 
his voice. I have never seen him get sad. He is always upbeat and optimistic. He is waiting for 
that next great period. 

I want to share a short piece written by Joan Lombardi, entitled Opening a New Window on 
Day Care. She talks about a study of day care and family day care done in 1970 by the National 
Council of Jewish Women and then repeated 30 years later. The story is all in one table— what 
mey found in 1970, what they found in 2000, the same, the same, the same, the same. All the 
data I have read say to me that in over 30 years, during which many of us have spent a lifetime 
trying to improve the quality of child care in the United States, it is exactly the same mediocre to 
poor quality, particularly for infants and toddlers. 

We have yet to learn the lesson of Julius Richmond. Julius, he is like that Energizer bunny 
that keeps going and ping and going. Some of us have the weakness of getting tired, and it is 
pretty tough to live with 30 plus years of failure about what we have been able to accomplish in 
day care, and the lessons Julius and Bettye Caldwell taught us almost 4 decades ago. It is not 
rocket science. I have been studying human growth and development for about 50 years, and the 
quality of the environment is the critical aspect for helping children grow and develop property 
whether it is at the cellular brain level, or at the level of their everyday behavior. Bad environ- 
ments do not help children; they might not hurt the most resilient of them, those who have 
potpive factors, but they can be bad enough to be damaging to children. We saw this in the 
declines that Julius spotted almost 40 years ago. 

Judith Palfrey: Ed, can I take you on a little bit about that rocket science issue? I have been so 
moved by watching Julius's neuroscience slide used in certain ways back in the '60s and losing 
Its potency, and then in the 90s, the brain has arrived. People now know more about the data 
than 60 years ago, and stating the premise in a way that caught the public's eye and caught 
maybe that latent interest that was there is amazing to me. Every time that we say it is not rocket 
science about childrens development, we shoot ourselves in the foot. I have started saying the 
exact oppsite, that the kinds of things that you and Julius have done over the years is absolutely 
rocket science, and that it absolutely requires the same level of commitment of intellect. 




375 



369 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



resources, time, and energy as sending a man to the moon. One can actually think about it in 
the same terms if you ask this question: What makes rocket science? One of the things that 
makes rocket science is that one has to put multidisciplinary teams together, one has to have 
chemists, one has to have people who know something about astronomy, and one has to know 
people who know geology, who know about jet propulsion, and so forth. That, in fact, is the 
same deal for child development. One needs educators and public health people and dentists 
and social workers, and they each have to have a knowledge base, and so forth. 

However, it seems to me that the difference between rocket science and child development 
involves two things. One, when sending a man to the moon, you know exactly where you 
are going; you are sending a man to the moon. It always helps me to talk to Julius, becajUse I 
can always hear where the moon is, in his view. I am not sure that all of us really agree, and I 
think that is what you were talking about with the Child Welfare League, that that is the place 
where we are going. There is the debate about whether home environment versus center envi- 
ronment matters. 

The second thing is this issue of maybe not knowing the target exactly. I am not sure that we 
articulate the urgency in the way that Sputnik articulated it; that this has got to be done now. If 
we can somehow grab that Yogi Berra thing about knowing which way to go and take the fork 
in the road, and go with clear articulation and urgency, than we should use the rocket science 
metaphor in a different way and say that this is rocket science. 

Virginia Rauh: I am struck by new vocabulary — one is "exposures" and "susceptibilities" and 
the other is individual versus community effects. The issue of children has not changed. Those 
who are most exposed to risk have the lease effective child care. What are some of the things that 
suggest susceptibility? Poverty is an exposure paradigm. These are useful terms in the interven- 
tion field. 

Edward Zigler: I think there are two things that have happened in the field of human develop- 
ment. One has been we have had our own tremendous paradigmatic shift over the 50 years that 
I have been in the field. Of course our new paradigm is Urie Bronfenbrenner s bioecological 
model. That has given rise to something that is both old and new that can be traced all the way 
back 35 or 40 years, but now has new saliency— a systems approach to human development in 
which all the disciplines make a contribution. When thinking about the organism, one has to 
start dealing on multiple levels: biological, epidemiological, and so on. There is something 
practical in what you say, and that is that words are important. This is a fact of life, because 
whether you look at Urie s ecological approach or the systems approach, there are a multitude of 
levels one has to worry about: the neighborhood, the family, the society, the laws made in 
Washington, and so forth. It is an interdisciplinary task. Unfortunately, we are still relatively 
weak at talking across disciplines. 

Many people are still not comfortable with the concept "at risk." This morning we heard Ron 
Herndon talk about respecting people. To many people, that still "smells" like the old deficit 
model — there is something wrong with these people, they are at risk. In fact, there is a new book 
out challenging that whole approach called Children of Promise. 

Theorists, for better or worse, develop their own lingo; they have their own terms, their own 
constructs, and even though they are trying to fit themselves somewhere into this systematic 
approach, they still use their own language. That is because exposure and susceptibility are 
words that have a common vocabulary meaning, and anybody who understands the English 
language can understand them. However, they are not terms that are bandied about in psychol- 
ogy. The point that I am making is that we are making progress, but it has been slow; it has 
taken a long time. It has been 50 years, and we are still not great at using each other s language. 

It just does not sound right to us. We get back to that reductionism argument of which level is 
the right level. However, it is not important because they are all the right levels if you take a 



O 

ERIC 



370 



376 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



systems approach. These are translation problems, and I believe that as this model becomes 
more and more pervasive, we will get better at talking to each other. We still have trouble talking 
across disciplines, even though we now know we have to. 

Richmond: The issues you have raised in the use of language is important, but I think that we 
need to develop and continue to develop strategies for a large population. That is where epide- 
miological approaches become so meaningful. Lacking that, in terms of exposures or suscepti- 
bility, what we tend to do is to rely on anecdotes. An interdisciplinary approach is important, 
because one can put these types of questions to the test, through population-based studies, 
which is the stomping ground of epidemiology. I would emphasize that, whether we are talking 
about individuals or communities. In my introduction to Judy's book, I said that this is a "seminal 
book for pediatrics," because it turned what is traditionally a discipline that faces inward to the 
hospital outward to the community to tackle complex and difficult intellectual problems. 

We need to understand the use of those words, but still try to interpret them. There are 
translation problems, but we have to try to interpret them in relationship to determining if they 
apply to large numbers, or if we are dealing only with individual, largely idiosyncratic phenom- 
ena. If we are really interested in larger populations and the larger public good, then I think we 
do, ultimately, get to population-based sciences. 

When we were developing Head Start, we thought about our knowledge base, which was 
more than adequate to proceed. The knowledge base helped generate the political will, by which 
we mean resources — that is basically what political will is. Where we as professionals, both from 
the research side and the applied side, are the weakest is at social strategy. If there are the 
resources and the knowledge, there is still the question of how to put it all together to make it 
happen for the larger population. That is how I have tried to deal with some of the issues you 
are raising. 

Palfrey: I might just comment on the theme about mentorship. Julius taught me to ask the 
questions, "Do I have the knowledge base, in other words have I developed the model for 
protecting children from child abuse? Do I have the political will? Do I have the resources?" If 
you have answered these questions and you can meet those tests, your chance of success is much 
better. You have to have all three. This is the lesson that Dr. Richmond has taught so many 
people over the years. 

His other quality is not just to say the words "social strategy," but to demonstrate, in elegant 
terms, how you translate that strategy into action. One needs to ask, "What are the components 
I am going to need, what is the timeline, how do I go after it, how do I plan for it?" That is the 
social strategy piece that we frequently do not put to the test. Julius will be remembered for this 
particular way of thinking. As an intellectual contribution it is just stunning, and I hope every- 
one is taking notes and uses his method. 

Diane Langkamp: How can we move child-care policy forward at this time, with Welfare 
Reform, and so forth? 

Richmond: Earlier I made reference to the fact that we have not manifested as much creative 
leadership as is needed. We have not identified a way to focus the public's attention on what the 
next steps are that will work. Let me explain that by indicating that you cannot go to a legisla- 
ture or to people in a position of large-scale administrative responsibility and suggest that you 
want to do a little bit of everything at once. When I say we have not manifested creative leader- 
ship, I mean that we have not extrapolated from our experience and research data, the issues 
needed to mobilize the political will. 

We merely let it play out in a pluralistic way and say the research is out there, make up your 
mind. In terms of policy, this does not lead to helping many children. At this time we need to 




377 



371 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



think dearly about what the next steps should be that would benefit large numbers of children 
who need better care than what they are receiving. 

The fact is that in more affluent families where both parents are working and their aspirations 
have changed, we have not mobilized their communities to improve child care. A case in point 
is when Zoe Baird was nominated for a judgeship. The rhetoric was at the level of, "did she pay 
Social Security for her babysitter?" This was extremely revealing to me because the real issue was 
the kind of child care that educated, wealthy women are getting for their children. 

1 believe we should we be moving more towards a policy framework for strategies for univer- 
sality in improved child care, rather than remaining as focused on children and families of low- 
income backgrounds. 1 am being self-critical, because 1 think we have not yet developed a good 
strategy to be more persuasive with the public at large. 

Zigler: 1 stick with things a long time. 1 am very persistent, but unlike Julius, 1 get ruffled and 
unhappy, and 1 want what is right to happen. Child care has been the greatest defeat. After 
working on it for many, many years, 1 thought long and hard about your question. It is a 
complicated issue. For one, we are still ambivalent about women being out of the home. They 
do not understand the economic circumstances, the economic changes that demand that young 
couples have two salaries. We have a very active right wing in this country that has very good 
resources and works very hard for their favorite causes. 

1 was one of the architects of the Comprehensive Child Development Act of 1971, in which 
we thought we were going to have a child-care system in America. We came very close in 1971, 
but the right wing came out in hordes and argued that we do not need day care. The family 
should be raising children. There is a long history in this country that the government be 
involved with children until they enter school at age 5. The right wing is very active and believes 
there would be no child-care problems if women read their Bibles and were where they are 
supposed to be— at home taking care of their children. That movement is not going to go away. 

There is another very serious issue that we have just discovered, thanks to Frank Gilligan, 
which is a new concept called " frames of knowledge." We used to call them scripts in the old 
days. That is, for everting that comes into your head you already have a framework to give it 
structure, and to organize and understand it. On the Benton Foundation web-site, one of their 
studies asks what comes to mind when you say day care. They think babysitting. He came up 
with a nice discovery — there is a metaphor in people's heads, and he calls it the "container 
metaphor." To most people, even wealthy people, day care is just keeping children. One of the 
tragedies is that even those who have the means to do so do not find and pay for high quality 
care. This is because they do not view it properly. 

The work that the Benton Foundation paid for showed that to most people child care is 
babysitting, it is a container mentality — you park your child, the package, and you want it to 
be safe and dry, then you pick up the package at night and go home. That is the metaphor for 
day care. 

Welfare reform, this time around, is a very good example of how child care has nothing to do 
with children. It has to do with women going to work. It is a service that allows mothers and 
fathers to go to work. What we know in the 37 years since Head Start began is that child care is 
an environment that is critical to a child's growth and development. 

1 have tried to solve this problem and have now decided to invent my own solution. The 
knowledge base 1 have about bonding and attachment and well beyond, tells me that 1 want 
mothers and fathers to take care of their own children for the first few months of life. Every 
other industrialized country on the face of the earth, except Australia, has paid maternity/ 
paternity leave. 1 pulled together a commission 20 years ago, and we recommended that this 
country have a 6-month leave, with 3 -months pay at 75% of income. That would have put us on 
par with Canada. 



372 



378 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



Ann Crittenden: To get your point across to policy makers you must begin to think of our 
children as our national resource. You must say that we need to take care of our infants properly 
and they belong with their mothers. The only countries that do not have paid leave are 
Swaziland, New Guinea, and the U.S. You must be aggressive about this, and then talk about 
universal extension, the other issue. You must say that the public clearly supports what we are 
asking for. 

Zigler: Where we must go next with child care is to universalize it. We are going to have good 
quality preschools for all children and then there will be good quality child care for poor 
children as well. In my model, Schools for the 21st Century, care is universal and begins with 
preschool at age 3. From birth to 3 there are home visits to help parents become their children's 
first teacher. These schools recognize the "new world and have a day that corresponds to the 
work day of mothers and fathers. Then there are "before- and after-school" and sunimer vaca- 
tion programs for children until the age of 13.1 sold this to Hawaii, and they just picked up the 
school-age part. My schools are called family resource centers, and in Connecticut and Kentucky 
they are statewide. We are working to put these schools in Arkansas right now. It is catching on; 
it sells itself You are right, when child care is universal it is for everyone. It also removes the 
onus that it is only for poor people, and for Welfare mothers. It is even for the affluent. 

We can see the solution, even though during the first 3 years of life it is still difficult. How- 
ever, I believe we are going to win, thanks in large part to you and others who are better commu- 
nicators than I will ever be. There are 33 countties that have a paid leave— maybe more by now, I 
have not kept up on this. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the National Association of 
Manufacturers testified against the unpaid family medical leave act. They said it will bankrupt 
America; small business cannot have it. We passed the bill — and you know there is an old adage 
in Washington. You win what you can win when you can win it. It was an uphill struggle, but we 
finally have an unpaid family medical leave act, which was all we could possibly win. 

There was a report on the costs of unpaid family medical leave. This report found that it costs 
next to nothing. Most employers do not even hire a replacement because other employees pick 
up the slack. Therefore, it costs next to nothing and could not bankrupt anyone. However, only 
half of the women are covered because, in the present economic milieu, most women cannot 
take an unpaid leave. They live from paycheck to paycheck. 

Ending on an optimistic note, I believe it is going to happen. It is going to happen state by 
state by state, so we have to all work within our states to make this happen. I argue that tying 
child care to the schools is simple and appealing. We will always have schools, and if we could 
just turn child care into education we could win this one too. 

Richmond: We came very close to having a Child Development Bill. It passed both houses of 
Congress, and Ed was then directing the Office of Child Development. What Ed does not tell 
you is that this was a crisis of conscience. He and Secretary Richardson had to resign, because 
even though this was the will of Congress, and presumably reflected that the country wanted 
comprehensive child development programs across the country, the president decided at the last 
minute not to sign it. At any rate, we came close. We had the political will. We could not quite 
implement it, and we have been struggling ever since. 

What I was referring to as the need for creative leadership is what Ann is manifesting. She has 
figured out how you put this together and communicate it to decision makers in the executive 
and the legislative branches of government. Also, the private sector has a major role to play, and 
particularly the corporate sector needs to be part of the discussion and the solution. 

Crittenden: In California with Welfare Reform, it is cheaper to have paid leave than to have 
infant care. In Washington state they have changed from requiring mothers to go back to work 
after 3 months to going back to work when the child is 1 year old. 




\ 



379 



373 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Richmond: Another point is that Ed keeps saying the glass may be half empty, and I see it as 
half full. Maybe the only plus in the Welfare Reform legislation is that it has focused attention 
on the children in ways that we were not doing before. 

It does not take a rocket scientist, Judy, to understand that if parents are put to work, we also 
have to focus on who will take care of the children. Essentially, the right wing opposition has 
not ideologically moved from where they were, but in practical terms, they lost the fight. They 
wanted Welfare reform; they got Welfare reform. Now they have to face up to the issue of child 
care in ways that they never had to before. We might win if we put the package together in a way 
that communicates the needs of children and families in a more visible and articulate way. We 
cannot ask for a little bit of everything. The issue must be well focused and clear. 

Shannon Dungan: As a practitioner I see that we need high-quality teachers. We must be able 
to pay for their training. How are we going to make educators tackle this problem? Elementary 
and secondary teachers do not even consider preschool teachers as peers. 

Zigler: I have been giving this one a lot of thought too. You are right, none of this will work 
without good, highly qualified teachers. We all agree on that point. The question is how to do it. 
There has been a chasm between those in kindergarten through high school and those in 
preschool. For too many years there was a notion that what happens in those first 5 years of life 
have nothing to do with education. Think about it for a moment. We have the NEA, why do we 
need an NAEYC? Because preschool and elementary school are seen as two different, unrelated 
worlds. Frankly they just did not like each other; however, this is beginning to change. Studies 
on brain development, along with Zero to Three and other organizations, now show that if we 
are looking for greater achievement in later years, we must deal with the first 5 years. 

Educators are coming around, and the fact that my schools are now in 20 states, shows that 
they are getting that message. Even the President of the United States recognizes the importance 
of preschool, even though there is no allocation of funds for it. The more practical issue is how 
to build a career ladder to produce qualified child-care workers. It looks as if this will only 
happen state by state, just like education. 

The Mailman Family Foundation recently held a full-day conference on the subject of your 
question. At the conference there were many suggestions. We find that people are thinking about 
this issue and working on it. They know that the essence of success is the teachers. There are still 
many problems, such as not paying preschool teachers enough. I am not going to pretend that it 
will be easy. I am telling you that there is good thought going into developing programs for 
professional development. In North Carolina there is the TEACH program, where they are trying 
to upgrade day-care workers and help them pursue higher education. This is being done in 20 or 
30 other states as well. 

Richmond: I believe the universality approach will go a long way toward dealing with this issue. 
Being under the same auspices should help in minimizing the differences. Of course, those in 
higher education who train teachers need to retool how they do this. That is an important 
dimension. 

One of the problems, and the reason why Ed keeps coming back to state by state, is that we 
have to remind ourselves that in this country elementary and secondary education have been 
funded largely at the state and local level. This means that there are 50 different systems. It is 
always amusing to me to hear the Secretary of Education make pronouncements about elemen- 
tary and secondary education. Aside from the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, they 
contribute little, if anything, into these schools. 

When the first President Bush called a Governor's Conference on Education, he thought it 
was not going to cost him anything, but the governors were one step ahead of him. They wanted 
him to focus on early childhood education because there was a precedent, with Head Start, of 





374 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



federal funds being provided for early childhood programs across the country. They were no 
fobls. They were sending the message that there should be federal money for education. How- 
ever, if we develop a completely separate federal system for early childhood education, then we 
could be bumping up against each other in unfortunate ways. 

Dungan: Many states do not even have degree programs in early education. 

Peter Lenrow: Parents are viewed as the primary educators and health care providers for 
children. How do you, within Head Start, implement practices that place parents as the primary 
educators and health care providers? Would 1 be right in saying that by universalizing preschool 
education you help this? 

Zigler: I think that will help a great deal and that is why it is time to move to a universal system 
similar to those found in many other countries. 

What has always been troubling to me is that there is another program that receives more 
money than Head Start; that is Title 1. 1 have been watching the Title 1 peer involvement compo- 
nent, and one of the problems has been how they deal with it. In Title 1, they demand parent 
involvement, then they go away from parent involvement. They are not comfortable with poor 
parents. What Ron Herndon said this morning is true, and that is why so many poor parents. 
Black and White, have such low regard for the schools. There is a new knowledge base about the 
role of parent involvement in children's school performance. We now have a vast body of 
literature that shows definitively that the more a parent is involved with his or her child's 
education, the better that child does in school. 

At that first governors meeting, six goals were developed. The first goal, because of Head Start, 
probably, was school readiness. School readiness, as we know, takes place in the first 5 years. The 
reality is that poor people do not have a lot of power. It is only when they can team up with the 
middle class and the mainstream that you begin getting programs through. In Europe they have 
always taken the universal approach. France and Belgium have a universal system with add-ons 
for the poor. In the United States, the pattern is very clear; we take a categorical approach that is 
cheaper. You just give money to poor people. Julius is right, children in the United States have 
only one universal entitlement — schooling from age 5 to 18. We have a long way to go, but I 
think universality, as you suggest, is going to help. 

Palfrey: I had the opportunity to participate in a universal program called Brookline Early 
Education, basically a Parents as Teachers program. The program had all the components that 
Ed talked about, and was offered through the schools to all children in the city of Brookline. 
Since there are not many poor children in Brookline, one third of the population from neigh- 
boring Boston was added to enhance the sample. The young people are now 25 to 27 years old, 
and we have had a chance to talk to them and to their parents. What is fascinating is that the 
parents of whom we called the "suburban children" were the most enthusiastic about what the 
program had done for them and their children, and wished that programs like that still existed. 
We will try to do something qualitative with the information from the phone interviews. There 
was a control group, and the suburban children in the program did not do any better on 
anything than the suburban children in the control group, nor did their parents change on any 
measures. By contrast, we did not have quite that same depth of excitement from the urban 
families in the program, but the children did much better on measures of health, engagement 
with education, and mental health. 

I keep thinking about Muhammad Ali. You've got to float like a butterfly and sting like a bee. 
Sometimes you have to have both parts of the approach, and for needs that are so profound, 
targeting is important. On the other hand, for the buy-in, the universal approach becomes 
important. 



er|c 



381 



375 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



To change the subject a bit — I want Jack to say something about fathers. I found a wonderful 
article that had been written in 1915. It was one of the first epidemiological studies to show the 
relationship between poverty and infant mortality. Unlike today they actually looked at father's 
income and infant mortality as a direct relationship. The study also looked at breast feeding and 
infant mortality and found that breast-fed babies died at one third the rate of non-breast-fed 
babies in 1915. What was even more interesting about this paper was that there was a group of 
children who were not counted in it — illegitimate children. They were children that did not 
exist, because if you did not have a father, you did not exist. Therefore, even researchers who 
were looking at the effects of poverty did not count these infants in the denominator. 

Here is my two-part question to Jack: (a) What happened to illegitimacy? and (b) Why don't 
we think about the fathers in our discussions? 

Pascoe: Illegitimacy has become single parenthood. Recently, I have been looking at fathers 
indirectly working with maternal depression. What I have been impressed with, from the 
National Survey of Children and Families, is that if you look at depression in mothers, and 
correlate it with child outcomes, there is not a single good outcome for children. Mothers who 
are socially isolated, not married, do not have a live-in partner, and are indigent, have depres- 
sion rates approaching 50%. There are other smaller samples of indigent mothers with small 
children, collected Jn pediatric offices where there are fairly constant rates for maternal depres- 
sion at about 40 to 50%. Obviously as pediatricians, we are not addressing the problem. There 
may be other disciplines that are beginning to address the issue of maternal depression, but I see 
the lack of a partner as a major factor in maternal depression. That obviously has ramifications 
for child development and for well-being. 

Palfrey: The reason I was asking is that Jack has done some of the most beautiful work in 
showing a difference in birth weight, when the father is present and not. I am being a bit 
provocative here, but I think one of the things that sets us back in some of these political arenas 
and in social strategy is that poor women are looked at very differently from middle-class 
women. They are looked at in a variety of different ways, but primarily they have to be the 
family bread-winner. The father is nonexistent; he is a sperm donor and is part of the child's 
life — in fact the term, "my baby's father," is often used to describe the father. As I get older, I get 
more right wing — but is there any part of the debate that is about family? About the fact that 
there are two parents? Are we taking advantage of what we know about the strengths of fathers 
and putting them into the faihily equation? 

Pascoe: At the National Data Center, I do not think they asked about partners so much as 
marital status. Whether you were poor or not, if you were married you were much more likely to 
have lower levels of chronic depression than if you were unmarried. Again, the chronic stress of 
being a single parent, whether or not you have the financial resources, is detrimental to yourself, 
as a mother, and eventually to your child. 

Richmond: Let me go back to your earlier question about parent involvement. I commented 
during lunch about some of the dilemmas and issues we faced in the early days of Head Start. As 
a result of the fact that Bettye Caldwell and I had been in the trenches, we knew from our 
clinical experiences that parent involvement was important, so we made a parent involvement 
component a requisite in our request for proposals. 

Because of the experiences that we had, we did not use the term parent education; it was 
always parent involvement. This meant we put out some general suggestions such as that parents 
should be involved in watching, with the teachers, the behavior of their children. Over the years 
we have added communities trying different approaches, which we encouraged. We have had a 
variety of approaches studied, and Judy has just commented on some of data that have been 




376 



382 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



collected. We never said the involvement had to be from mothers; we always used the term 
"parents/' so when fathers were available, we certainly encouraged that. Another part of the 
legislation was the phrase "maximum, feasible participation of the poor," which we took 
seriously. In effect, what we were saying to communities was, we trust you to be interested and 
concerned about how these monies are spent on behalf of children. While Head Start has not 
grown quite as much as we would have liked, no administration has ever been able to cut it. 
That is because the program is so deeply embedded in local communities. 

Zigler: It is embarrassing to say this, but developmentalists only discovered the father as an 
important factor in human development about 30 years ago with Michael Lamb's seminal work. 
Today there is widespread interest in studying and understanding the importance of fathers in 
the development of children. A recent paper I sent to Kyle Pruitt, one of the best thinkers on the 
subject of fathers, stated that for poor fathers, their interactions with their children in infancy 
predict their child's IQ scores at ages 3 and 4. 

For too many years the story of human development was a dyad, the mother and the child. 
That is changing, and it is important in helping us move in the right direction. Furthermore, 
Wade Horn was the president of the National Fatherhood Initiative, and he is putting emphasis 
on getting more fathers involved in Head Start, which is what we have been trying to do ever 
since Julius's day. 

Richmond: I can't help but observe that this may have been the only Head Start meeting that 
ever had on one panel three M.D.s and one Ph.D. 




383 



377 



I 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



CONVERSATION WITH JOHN W. HAGEN. CLAIRE B. KOPP. SYBIL CARRERE 

The Emergence of Self-Regulation 

John Hagen: One current federal position is that we ought to be emphasizing education. That is 
interpreted as cognitive when we are looking at children with special needs and children in 
Head Start. The research message that I get is just the opposite; we have to be looking at the 
whole spectrum. How well children do in preschool and elementary school is as much related 
to their social-emotional development as their underlying physiological development. I hope 
that we will be able to bring that message back to our various constituencies and make sure that 
this becomes a part of the larger message. 

Sybil Carrerc: I would like to echo what John was describing. When I learned who was going to 
be on this panel and the different kinds of topics that we were going to be discussing, I realized 
that the type of research that we do is extremely complementary. Each of us, in a sense, is 
looking at a different piece of the puzzle: our work with emotion regulation and the importance 
of understanding how parents teach their children about emotions, Claire's work with cognition 
and self-regulation, and Megan's work that looks at stress and how that is involved with 
children's well-being. One of the things that I hope people are taking away from this conference 
is that these are not competing ideas; these are ideas that fit nicely together. 

Claire B. Kopp: I would like to say that we have been de-emphasizing selfhood and the role of 
selfhood in so much of early development. We have not emphasized language enough, particu- 
larly the different kinds of language that children use to help themselves learn. We probably 
need better measures of language. We also need a better way to look at a young child's sense of 
self. It is a topic that is so badly ignored that we do not have measurement tools. 

John Hagen: That comment reminds me of one of the faculty that I have known at Stanford for 
many years. Her name is Shirley Brice Heath, and she comes from linguistics and anthropology. 
She works with very different populations, mainly adolescents at risk, and yet she also says that 
language is the key. From language she gets a window on their minds and a look at their souls. 
Language, in many ways, is powerful, and we have not looked at it nearly as broadly or as in- 
depth as we could even though we have wonderful information now about the way language 
emerges and the roles that it plays. With that comment, we would like to hear from people in 
the audience. 

Jane Kostelc: I am from the Parents as Teachers National Center in St. Louis. I would like to 
know how we can best teach these techniques. Does your research group have a parent educa- 
tion curriculum? Is there some way that some of us could do that in partnership? 

Kopp: I am still trying to learn from parents, and I feel that parents are our best teachers on 
what works well and what does not. John is beginning to move into the area of interventions 
with family and is currently doing an intervention study with one of his graduate students, 
Allison Shapiro, whom I mentioned during my presentation. They are using some of the 
emotion coaching with parents of infants. Of course that is going to look different. 

They are drawing on the work of Monica Hildenborg who is at the Karl Lynski Institute in 
Sweden. She has done some social engineering whereby all new parents go through training 
where they learn about how to communicate with their infants about emotions. She demon- 
strated that even with premature infants, while it may take them awhile to get those neural cogs 
moving and so forth, they respond. Even when they do not have language, it is important to be 
talking about these things. As yet, there have not been any intervention programs that have been 




378 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



done for preschoolers or young children; however, there are things that could be drawn and 
developed from the type of work that we are doing. 

Kostelc: "Parents as Teachers" is a program that goes from prenatal to age 5, but prenatal to 3 
years is our main focus. 

Kopp: So this might be perfect for you. Monica Hildenborg has a video that is wonderful to use 
with parents. For any of you that would be interested, you are welcome to e-mail me and I 
would be glad to share the information about her video. Her work is not only with infants but 
also with middle school-aged children. 



Rick Vincentes: I am with Project Head Start in San Diego. I am interested in the nonverbal 
aspects of this research as well as communications that parents give their children. We are 
working with a diversity of cultures. Obviously you already identified the group of people on 
whom you had focused. Is there any attempt to look into this next phase? 

Kopp: There are people looking at nonverbal communication but not in relation to messages 
about everyday rules. As a matter of fact, there is a terrific book about signing with hearing 
infants as a source of information that is nonverbal language. You raise a point that I find 
fascinating because we know that different cultures use gestures in different ways. It would be 
interesting to look at exactly how parents gesture. 

For example, I am from New York, and across cultures in New York there is much hand 
activity. There is not as much where I live now in California. It has been said that people of 
Italian descent use many gestures. I have no idea of how that translates into a rule system, but I 
want to look now that you have raised it. Do you have any ideas? 

Vincentes: As an example, we have a large Indian population in the center of Mexico. I was 
talking with a father whose child was here. He said he could not understand how she wrote 
because at home they did not give much verbal direction. The experiences they have there are 
more on a survival basis. That is a totally different culture of how to survive, compared to an 
urban area. I spent a year in Korea and found those parents also have verbal and nonverbal cues 
that give directions to the children. 

Kopp: You mention the point of survival, where a culture is concerned with survival in terms of 
economic survival and having enough food. However, there also must be issues of safety there, 
and for a culture that is not very verbal, one would want to know exacdy how, for example, self- 
protection or child protection is carried out. 



Comment: I thought it was interesting when you were relating the findings from the Japanese 
population. I have the impression that they keep their children much closer to them, that they 
do hot see it as the child's role to protect themselves, and have less self-care kinds of behaviors 
that you might see. That is one way that the culture has an impact. For longer periods of time 
they do nonverbal cues for things that are important to communicate to children. 

Kopp: I have to tell you a story about toddlers. I was having lunch with a graduate student in 
Chinatown. We met in a huge restaurant where they do dim sum for lunch. Many professionals 
come as well as mothers with young children. When we were there, we saw a group of three 
mothers and six toddlers. After the children ate, they were running all over. In fact, a few of them 
stepped onto one of the big round tables and were dancing on the table totally out of control. 
Dim sum comes on individual carts. There was a cart filled with food in the aisle. As the moth- 
ers and children got ready to leave, it was almost as if there was an instinct and a button that was 



O 

ERIC 



385 



379 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



pushed because every mother grabbed hold of a child, sometimes one in each arm, and held 
them tight as they walked by the cart. So there is something that says, "I am responsible even 
though there is indulgence, like letting a child dance on the table." 

Comment: There was a family grouping, and several family members were signing. The children 
could understand everything that was going on. They could speak in English. In fact, one of 
them was translating to the other. They also had facial signing. Facial signing would be an 
interesting course of study, like studying the long look one gets as a teacher. That is amusing to 
children. 

Kopp: The mother look and father look is so important for safety and possession rules. 

Question: Did you find a difference in your research between boys and girls? 

Kopp: We do not have differences in our samples, probably because the children are still quite 
young. However, we clearly know there are more boys who have problems with rules than girls 
do. It is particularly apparent during the school years and is partly a function of boys in general. 

I am making a generalization, but boys in general tend to be a little more active than girls. The 
school environment the way it is today is harder on young boys because there is so much 
restriction on their need to move about. 

Comment: I would be curious in relation to nonverbal communication. The information I 
read is that boys do not respond to nonverbal communication or facial expressions as well as 
girls do. 

Kopp: I do not know if the studies controlled for the amount of time that parents spend 
communicating with boys versus girls. There is a longitudinal study 25-30 years old by Terrence 
Moore. He showed that mothers spent more time talking to and generally interacting with their 
daughters than they did with their sons. They were perfectly happy to have their sons go off and 
explore trucks and so forth. What was so fascinating about Moore's study is that when he 
evaluated the intellectual competence of the boys versus girls, at a younger age the girls were 
doing better, and performing slightly higher in intelligence test scores primarily because of their 
verbalizations. By age 8, the boys had exceeded the girls. Now we are not talking about huge 
numbers but there was this flip-flop probably because the mothers were not talking as much to 
the boys, but the boys were learning. 

Carrcrc: I want to add that this is one of the things that we know is cross-cultural. It does not 
matter what culture one looks at — there is a difference between how boys and girls are social- 
ized. Girls are spending much of their time socializing around emotional issues, whether it is 
that first talk with the mothers about emotions or another issue. However, in terms of their play 
with their peers, if one looks at their games, their games will stop if somebody's feelings get 
hurt, and they try to repair them and take care of the feelings. With boys, on the other hand, the 
game is a game, and one deals with the emotions and moves on. This sets up a different kind of 
social world or a different kind of experience for boys and girls growing up. 

Kopp: That reminds me of a classic study by Janet Lever. She spent a year with 11 -year-olds 
following them around the school yard. The point that you made is very much in Janet Lever's 
study in that when there was a conflict, the boys negotiated the conflict so that the game could 
go on. She pointed out that so often the boys' games had a rule stmcture to the game so that if 
one did not resolve the conflict, the activity could not continue, whereas many of the girls' 
activities were in a smaller group, and there was no rule structure. There are rules for how a 





o 



380 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



board game is played, for example. One could stop the board game, but one cannot stop a nine- 
inning softball activity. I was so impressed with this study that I was talking to my daughter 
about it one day and she said, "Let me tell you about our discussion group. There were six 
professional women. One evening, the discussion group women could not decide what books 
they wanted to read next. So the group broke up." I said, "Don't tell me that." I do not know if 
things are changing now because we see more females more involved in organized sports. There 
are many junior soccer leagues, for example. More girls and young women of today s generation 
are involved in activities that have a rule structure. 

Comment; If there are more female heads of household rearing more boys, the socialization of 
these boys may change for this generation of children. 

Kopp: In terms of taking over some of the family routines. 

Comment; In the emotional sphere as well. 

Kopp; One would hope so. 

Hagen; Given that Dr. Megan Gunnar is not here, I would like to interject for her and see if we 
could have a brief discussion of what some important implications are, some of which were 
brought out in her talk. A strong message is that we now know that cortical levels seem to be 
related to the way that parents and mothers in particular interact and provide support and 
comfort for their very young children, and that these effects seem to go on as the children get 
older. We know about the individual differences and why we have them. It seems to me there is 
somewhat of a chicken and egg issue here. Are there some children who are predisposed to 
having some differences, and perhaps mothers respond that way? Or is it primarily that the 
mothers have these different styles that result in the different ways that provide better coping for 
the youngsters in stress situations? 

I have also worked with children and adolescents who have diagnosed problems such as 
learning disabilities and ADHD. I feel that our understanding of these is very primitive. We have 
mainly used behavioral indicators and some rather artificial tests to come up with our diag- 
noses. Yet, when one works with the individuals, one sees some underlying characteristics many 
of which are along the lines that relate to Megan s work. The other thing that was obvious as an 
important change is how this relates to how the children are going to do in child care. What is 
the quality of the child care they are in? What about the particular adults with whom they 
interact? Can they provide consistency from the parents or not? 

Carrcre; It is interesting that we are primarily talking about little people, and those I like to call 
STP — "small type people" — at this conference. However, the research that I am currently doing 
with my colleagues John Gottman and Maryanne Taylor is looking at children as they make the 
transition to puberty. We are starting with children at age 8. As many of you know, we have this 
secular trend where girls are coming into puberty at younger and younger ages. One of the 
things that Megan's work reflects on is some work that is being done by Elizabeth Susman at the 
University of Pennsylvania who has found that when sex hormones change during the transition 
to puberty, there seems to be an interaction between those levels as they increase. 

In terms of family dynamics and conflicts within the family, the other issue that is interesting 
that has come out in her research is that there is an interaction between cortical and a sex 
hormone called DHEA. It is like the reciprocal of cortical such that as the sex hormones increase, 
it magnifies the effect of cortical. Certainly in adolescents it looks like there is an interaction 
between stress and other biological systems of the body. 





381 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Mary Marks: I work in evaluation services in Head Start training. How is the cortical level 
measured? 

Carrcrc: There are a number of ways that it is measured. The easiest and the least invasive way 
to measure is saliva. One of my friends who studies this says she wants to become the "queen of 
spit." It makes it relatively easy in terms of toddlers and middle-school children. With younger 
children and infants, they swab inside the mouth to gather the saliva. When cortical measures 
are done using saliva, one is capturing what is happening right at that moment. The other way 
to measure cortical levels is through urinary measures, so children — and they love to do this — 
give you urine. It is problematic to use plasma measures because if one sticks a child with a 
hypodermic, one gets a large increase in cortical levels. So we try not to do that. 

Kopp: There is an interesting trend in early life in terms of cortical measures. One sees a decline 
in cortical levels across times. For all ages, there is also a diurnal cycle in cortical levels so one 
has to be careful to measure it consistently. I have always thought that the toddler period 
probably has a time of stress not quite as dramatic as puberty, but we do know there are times 
during toddlerhood — somewhere between 16 to 22 months — when toddlers have sleep prob- 
lems and there is a surge in feeding difficulties. They either want to eat all the time or they want 
special foods. There is a growth spurt, and there seems to be for some toddlers an increase in 
irritability. I wonder if there is a physiological basis for this. It could be that around this time is 
when some of the socialization techniques have less effect, and it is possible that if parents are 
stressed and the child stressed, things can go wrong. This is all speculation, but we do know that 
there is a window of change in toddlers' systems. 

Carrcrc: There is also some different but similar disturbing research that has been done by one 
of my colleagues at the University of Washington, Sam Wasserman, who does both human and 
animal studies. He does field work in Africa with Rhesus monkeys and has found that in those 
monkeys who have the highest levels of cortical material that there is an associated loss in brain 
cells. So death of brain cells is an interesting impact. 

George Morrison: I am at the University of North Kansas, and we are working with about 
5,000 children. For us, the big issue, day in and day out, is how to take what you are telling us 
and make a difference in terms of professional staff development with young caregivers of 
infants. What advice could you give us? We do not even get into the cortical levels and those 
types of things with the training. How can we take what you are saying and share it with 
caregivers and others? 

Kopp: I worked with students who were going out in the community, and one of the first things 
they have to learn is how to observe the children with whom they are working. This is a throw 
back to the way I was trained. Help your staff to look at the children with whom they are 
working. This means writing a short paragraph on what they saw. We used to call these anec- 
dotal descriptions. If one is dealing with 5,000 children, one is dealing with a large number of 
workers. However, a training program that does not focus on observation misses out on looking 
at the key behaviors of language, self, and cognition. We do not have good ways to measure 
these, so one has to use good old-fashioned observation, using developmental norms. We are 
focused on individual differences, yet we have normative data that say at this age we expect 
language to look like this or cognition to look like that. 

Comment: I would agree. It is important for teachers to watch their children and be able to see 
what is going on with them. In addition, the degree to which parents look at what is happening 
with the child and themselves is crucial. There is also learning from the parents. The discussion 



382 



388 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



at yesterday's plenary session focused on how we always work from the deficit model that says 
the parents do not know what they are doing. However, there are parents who do know what 
they are doing, even 18-year-olds are doing something right. They may be getting one thing right 
or several things right and building on those things. Some parents or particular individuals are 
doing well and then expanding on that. / 

One of the themes that I have heard in common is that we think it is important to get parents 
and child-care providers to spend the time modeling and doing the kinds of things that we have 
been discussing. We have talked about the self and language skills, bringing those skills into 
play, modeling those behaviors, and talking with the children to develop those types of things. 
Hopefully, the teachers and the parents are not spread too thin. 

In terms of emotions, as parents we often see things happening with our children. Much of 
the time we do not verbalize it. The teacher is taking the time and teaching the parents to take 
the time to start verbalizing, to start talking with the child about emotions. We think that 
children do not understand. In fact, they do, and that is the point I was trying to make that even 
a premature infant that is 1-2 months early is able to understand the way that a mother or a 
father is emotionally communicating with him or her. The role of sign language would be 
interesting to explore. Children can become incredibly frustrated because they have things that 
they want to say and cannot say them. There are people who are doing sign language with 
children who cannot speak, and they are able to use sign language to communicate. 

It is important for your staff to model these behaviors and to get the parents involved with 
doing this, helping them to learn how to do these things. 

Hagen: On a more general level, there are always gaps between the latest scientific knowledge 
and what we can do in a responsible way. It is important to know about both: to know about 
what is going on, see what has been around long enough to become tried and true, and then 
figure out ways where it can be translated. The Society for Research and Child Development 
publishes Social Policy Reports three times a year. Each of these is an attempt to translate the best 
research findings in a certain area to policy and practice. They are now available on our Web site: 
www.SRCD.org. We find that we are getting more requests for those from both policy makers 
and practitioners. We are interested in suggestions and topics, because sometimes we will seek 
out authors to put together papers on topics that are going to be useful. 

Mary Kay Smith: You talked about the quality of self-regulation being a function of the stress 
encounter. If so, then, what level of stress is experienced during the shift from a child-care 
environment to a home environment? There are different self-regulation expectations several 
times a day every day. 

Sarah Freidman: I am from the National Day Care Study at NICHD. Children have a lot of 
stress during transitions. Are child-care providers doing anything to help these children deal 
with the stresses and frustration? This is not something that we are looking at but that should 
be explored. 

Hagen: It is important to communicate to child-care providers that what they do is important 
and that it is going to make a difference, and then to have some leads as to what some of those 
things might be. 

Freidman: Quality matters when talking about the setting in relation to elevation in behavior 
problems. 

Hagen: It depends significantly on the outcome one is looking at. 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Comment: In a perfect world, child-care providers and parents would get together and have 
something planned since children go between those two environments all the time. 

Freidman: The child behaves differendy in different settings. For example, parents report that 
they do not see behavior problems, but the child-care providers see them. It is so important to 
communicate with the parents and child-care providers. 

Comment: In many instances we are talking about parents and caregivers who are not far 
removed from adolescents themselves. This is a big issue that we face in terms of the quality of 
the environment and the quality of the caregiver. We have a national crisis regarding the 
provision of high-quality infant care. 

Hagen: There are a number of programs at the national level that are addressing working with 
mothers who are viewed as being high risk for whatever reason because of their situation, 
inexperience, and/or emotional immaturity. The programs that I know of show that they are 
responsive to input that combines social, emotional, and cognitive types of things. It is not as 
though they are not receptive, but they have to be given guidance and consistent reinforcement 
for employing it, then they can become more effective at parenting. 

Kopp: That takes a lot of money. I would like to raise the issue of children who are in pre- 
schools or in the early school years who seem to have problems with physiological regulation. 
This represents a different group of children in terms of working through issues of emotion 
regulation and self-regulation. These children are vulnerable early on, and they are probably 
more resistant to interventions. I am talking about the child who has been a poor sleeper from 
the early months of life and continues that disturbed sleep, who is drowsy during the day, who 
cannot control attention. We tend to lump this child into the larger corpus of children who have 
difficulties, whether it is emotion, behavior, or following rules. There might be better success 
with programs if there were more preliminary noninvasive, nondetrimental categorizing for the 
groups of children who seem to have difficulties. I say noninvasive and nonharmful because we 
do not put a label on these children. However, we have this group of children who are truly 
ignored in terms of their basic needs. 

We have a sense that when sleep is disturbed, it could be from dysfunctional family environ- 
ment, but it could be something as simple as ongoing mild sleep apnea which is not life- 
threatening but does cause sleep disturbance. Again, there is an area of research that is needed — 
there are major implications for the day-to-day running of centers. 

Carrcrc: That is interesting because it is different, but it is related. Steve Forges, whom I men- 
tioned during my talk and who developed the poly-vegal, is doing intervention work with 
autistic children. Here is a classic case of children who have great difficulty in terms of interfac- 
ing with their environment. He is using self-soothing techniques to help these children in terms 
of their environment. 

Hagen: Following up on that point, have any of you read the book Stairway to Heaven by Temple 
Grand? There are three or four autobiographies currendy available written by persons with 
autism of various types and stages. Temple Grand is a professor of animal biology and a veteri- 
narian at Colorado State University. She was originally hired by Swift to make the killing of 
animals in the stockyards more humane. She has worked the last couple of years for McDonald's 
because McDonald's is the largest consumer of chickens and beef. A group of their stockholders 
voted that they had to get their animal products only from places that were killing animals 
responsibly. I have read her book, and it is absolutely fascinating. It gives one an entirely 
different perspective of what life is like for individuals who are processing information differ- 
ently. She talks about how early on in life she did not process things verbally at all. In fact, that is 



O 

ERIC 



384 



390 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



why she says she has great empathy for animals and also gives insight into the richness and 
complexity of emotions and the theory of stress without the verbal component. Then, after many 
years of hard work, she became highly verbal. She is now able to give us insights into both aspects. 

Following up on Claire's point, we now know that autism is genetically a complex disorder. It 
is not a unitary syndrome but is multifaceted, both in degree and in certain features and t 37 pes. 

At the University of Michigan, one of my former students directs our program for students 
with disabilities. He told me recently that we have seven or eight students on our campus now 
who are truly autistic, and yet they are functioning in a highly competitive university environ- 
ment. They are bringing very different experiences with them. He was telling me about one 
young man who is absolutely brilliant in engineering. He got a call from the assistant dean of 
engineering saying they were having a problem with him because the professor did not show up 
one day, and all the other students left after the 10 minutes of courtesy. He sat there and got very 
agitated because he could not understand why the class that was supposed to meet at 10:10 a.m. 
on Wednesday morning did not. He had that kind of disturbance yet was able to function well. 

These are some examples of the kinds of extremes that we find in any population of children 
or adolescents with whom we are working. It is a way of giving us insights into how different 
people experience their world, how they learn to cope, and how we have to be adaptive and 
clever in coming up with ways to help facilitate their coping. I am especially enthralled with 
Stairway to Heaven. The book is so entitled because the Autes that the animals go up when they 
are going to be killed are very narrow. Grand says they feel very comfortable with that and do 
not show stress even at the moment of slaughter. She sees that as if they they are going to 
Heaven. 

Carrere: John, you are making me a vegetarian. 

Hagen: Actually the message is the opposite for those of us who still are carnivores. One realizes 
that it can be a much less stressful situation for the animals and also for the people who are 
working there. There is an interesting parallel, too, for those of us who have worked in clinical 
settings with children with serious problems. One of the difficulties is that the staff employ 
defense mechanisms. Often, they can be insensitive and make jokes about the children. It is the 
same thing as one can imagine for those who work in slaughterhouses. The current effort is to 
make the workers more attentive and understanding of what they are doing. 

Comment: I work in Early Head Start where half of the children are in foster care. Early Head 
Start works with the birth parents and the foster parents when possible. Since we have inter- 
viewed the foster parents, there has been no absolute educational support. These are cases with 
self-regulation issues. The birth parents have not been able to keep their children safe, and in 
many of these cases there have been generational problems and violence— the mothers have not 
been able to keep themselves safe. As we have been looking at patterns, clearly the mothers 
themselves do not have good self-regulatory skills. The mothers do not have the skills to protect 
themselves, so they cannot pass them on to their children. At Head Start when we went in to 
videotape the parent-child and family educator interaction, so much of the time ended up 
being focused on the mother that there was little opportunity to focus on and interact with 
the child. 

We videotaped the foster mothers who were very committed to these children. They were not 
reading the cues appropriately because the children's cues were not as strong as they would 
expect from their own children. In addition, we are finding that they are not estimating where 
the children are developmentally. They are using a tremendous amount of language, but their 
language is responding to the children at their chronological age, not at their developmental age. 

Hagen: Is there a reason why they are not working with the foster parents? 



391 



385 



VI POSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



nment: There are no funds to do that. One of the Head Stcurt scholars in the last year has 
n tiying to do that. In the spring she was invited to the agency that places the children in 
er homes. She did a series of three workshops that were extremely well received. However, 
foster parents are given information about the issues of being foster parents. There is no 
ning, and the Head Start philosophy is that foster parents and birth parents should not have 
tact because that puts stress on the birth parents. So they keep them apart, and Head Start is 
rged with providing the training for the birth parents. However, no one is providing training 
the foster parents so far. That would be the best place to begin to develop some of these self- 
ilatory skills. 

Are the children out of the home because the mothers have been abused? 

nment. In some cases, it has been violence against the mother and child,* in other cases, it 
been neglect on the part of the mother because of mental health issues. 

>p: Is your staff trained to deal with mothers who have been abused versus mothers who are 
itally ill? 



ament: I do not know the extent of that. Again, this is the population we interviewed. Head 
t administrators talk a lot about the variety of support needed when addressing emotional 
es. There is a tremendous turnover; stress in dealing with these families is a contributing 
Dr. We also found that much of the training for the staff was related to how to deal with 
r own emotions because we have had people become so emotionally involved that it was 
1 for them. . 

»p: Was there a support system for the staff? 

nment: That has been a major function that the administrators saw as their role: getting 
►tional support to the staff. We were seeing that facilitating parent-child interaction became 
ndary or tertiary because much of the training went to how to address the problem. Much of 
.ension is still directed to putting out the crises. It has been hard to get them to get down to 
evel of the parent-child interaction. 

p. Do the staff understand the difference between chronological age and developmental age? 

iment: We do not have a good sense of that. The scenario we are seeing is a relatively 
istent mismatch of either underestimating or overestimating where the child fits. 

p: What is being used for estimation? 



iment: It is based on our own experience along with some of my doaoral students who 
had experience in evaluating children. I have done a lot with play-based assessment. We see 
Jiildren in a play environment with their parents and observe their language when interaa- 
vith toys. I have a relatively good estimate of where they are. 

p: Do you think it would be helpful to have a short brochure discussing the difference 
een developmental age and chronological age? 

iment: There was a study within the last year which looked at parents and caregivers' 
aations of children of different ages. Knowing where children are developmentally needs to 
part of it. If the children are not suspected of having a developmental problem, parents and 
;ivers are not sensitive to routine delays. If it is clearly a disorder, they will get referred to a 




3B2 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



local Part C program for children with disabilities. Otherwise, there has not been any assessment 
done, or else there has been a hesitancy with the assessment. One of the foster mothers that we 
interviewed said that every foster child she gets should receive a developmental evaluation 
because her experience has been that the children have delays. However, it is not part of the 
system. She had to fight to get those children evaluated. 

Kopp: Is that an issue for others in terms of where the children are? Those of you who are in 
programs, is there an issue in terms of differentiating where the child is developmentally? Is this 
a problem? 

Comment: It is a major problem when it comes to the training issues, the education. 

Comment: On your comments regarding observation, sometimes there is a disconnect between 
workers understanding, theoretically, behavioral and developmental expectations. Then, as we 
connect those two — where the child is — saying one is supposed to be doing this as opposed to 
observing and being sensitive to what the child actually is asked to do. That is not my level of 
skill. 

1 am from High/Scope. We use the Child Observation Record. Training was added, and 
having caregivers use that became a tremendous issue for us. We developed our own child 
development measure. How to encourage the use of the Observation Record on a weekly basis is 
a challenge. It has everything to do with this disjoint between what children are like and what 
people think. 

Additionally, 1 wanted to make a comment about the caregivers who have foster children. In 
some cases, there are grandparents or relatives, and in others, there are people who are not 
family. One of the things that 1 found with the family is that oftentimes the problems the 
mother had experienced are still there with the family, and there is not much treatment for them 
because they have other problems. 

Another issue is that we work with a diverse population. Which children are doing well and 
moving along based on these criteria? What are we going to do with the children who are 
coming from foster care? 1 am not saying that these disabilities cannot be helped. In San Diego, 
we work closely with the school districts, and the school districts have to provide us with 
information for the children on what they see. Along with that, we have people who work with 
children. We train them to work with the children, with whatever disability they may have. 
However, the issue of who takes care of foster children is a big concern. 

Hagen: Part of the problem is getting the different systems to coordinate and to work together. 
That is a problem 1 see everywhere. In my area, licensed foster parents are required to get 
training initially and then go to a certain number of classes per year. They get both professionals 
and more experienced foster parents to teach them. At least at that level the system is trying to 
address the issues thought to be helpful to foster parents. There often remains a gap in commu- 
nicating with the schools. 1 do not know whether your systems are more typical in terms of 
being able to provide that type of programming. 

Some of you heard Professor Todd Risley speak here at the conference. He is from Alaska. In 
talking with him about providing services for at-risk children there — it is a small state and they 
have fewer professionals — they are able to get resources to work better than in larger, more 
complex states and situations. That is an ironic situation in that they have been able to provide 
services that cut across, and are successful in both the education and mental health realms. 

Kathryn Barnard: 1 wanted to follow up and get more information on what we mean when we 
say developmental age. Do we mean an IQ assessment that places a child at a certain develop- 
ment level, or do we mean there is a profile of their development in several arenas? In one arena 
they may be at an age appropriate level; in another arena, they may not. 





387 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Kopp: A majority have uneven developmental profiles. In thinking about a developmental age, I 
tend to go back to motor, social, emotional, cognitive, and language skills. We are in a difficult 
position these days because we do not have good measurement tools for infants and toddlers. I 
am not the first one to say this at this conference. It has been said repeatedly. Those of you who 
are trying to work with staff to make them more sensitive to the issue have a major problem in 
terms of what is it that you are going to use. 

My suggestion is to draw your own guidelines about what you expect of children at a given 
age using the developmental literature. There is normative data available saying that we recog- 
nize it is normative data, and there is variability around the norm; however, at least it is a 
benchmark. I have an aversion to giving young children what I would call IQ scores or develop- 
mental quotients. It is done, but it is not helpful. 

Hagen: What do we do when we have these data? Earlier at the conference^ Fred Morrison spoke 
about his work on early literacy and translating that into reading and cognitive performance. He 
has a clever experimental paradigm and has a good deal of data. He took advantage of the fact 
that schools — and he was working in the Chicago area at the time — have to have an arbitrary 
cut-off date for entering kindergarten or first grade. So he had matched children that were 
virtually the same age but one group went to the school a year ahead of the others. The evidence 
is clear that it is an advantage to go to school earlier. 

One of my mentors at Stanford 40 years ago said one of the worse things we do is hold 
children back; they do not do well in first grade. The chance that they are going to do well the 
next time is even less. Yet schools still do that all around the country even though we now have 
good evidence that it is not necessarily going to be a productive approach. If there are good 
indices of developmental levels, then how does one make use of that? Just knowing the informa- 
tion is not going to solve the problem for children. 

Kopp: If you know that a 2-year-old should be using three-word sentences and has little 
language (at 18 months there is a word spurt and children might be speaking 50 words), then 
you can direct caregivers and parents to provide little conversational episodes during the day. 

One of the problems that is quite common among caregivers in child-care centers is that these 
caregivers do not talk much themselves. 

So when we are asking them to work with children, we are asking them to do something that 
they do not feel comfortable doing. Certainly we cannot ask them to evaluate children. How- 
ever, a first step is developing some kind of expectation that the caregivers can have to at least 
define the level of where a child is. Years ago, Elizabeth Bates suggested that at least for early 
toddlerhood, the comprehension was far more important than productive language in terms of 
long-term outcomes. Although the MacArthur scales are a little unwieldy, they are terrific in 
terms of getting at the young child's comprehension. Parents and caregivers can use it. So there 
are ways that are going to be time consuming to get to the issue of where the child is with 
language. Second, are caregivers talking enough and what can we do to get them to talk? Third, 
how do we get a good interface between the caregiver and the child? That is a developmental 
age issue. 

Barnard: One of the assessments that I have been using recently that is quite good, is developed 
by Greenspan, Wieder, and DeGangi, and is called The Functional Emotional Assessment Scale. 

It is classified by different developmental age levels from 0 to 5 and looks at not only what the 
child is doing in terms of attention, mutual interaction, and representation, but also at what the 
caregiver is doing. There are things one can observe about what the caregiver should be doing in 
relation to the child's age as well as to how the child is performing, so one can look specifically 
at the social and emotional functions. It also includes problem solving, language, and so forth. 

It is available on the Web from the International Gouncil of Developmental Learning or 



O 

ERIC 




388 



CONVERSATIONS WITH THE MASTERS 



Amazon.com. It would be wonderful if people in child care/foster care could be oriented to this 
approach. It probably is not important to impart culture to children developmentally but it is a 
wonderful context in which one thinks about relating with children. 

Hagen: That sounds like a good opportunity for people. 

Question: How does one work on simple longitudinal studies, looking at the average of 
children's development? Often one is basically an observer, using complex assessments and 
gathering much good, helpful information, but it is never transmitted to families because they 
are not treatment studies, but longitudinal observation studies. Several times it has been my 
experience that I feel as if I have information that no one else has. I am a researcher. I cannot 
give the information to the program with whom the child is working. I cannot give the informa- 
tion to the school. 

Hagen: Why not give it to the parent? In fact, you are obligated to if they want it. 

Comment: If they want it, we give them a version of it. However, in general, we do not share the 
information with people. All papers are published and presentations are available to parents, 
but most of our parents are not at a reading level to understand much of the material. There is 
nothing tailored for individual families. 

Kopp: Many people who do longitudinal work do newsletters and other types of information 
dissemination that are targeted. They give general information. When we do longitudinal 
studies, at the end of the measures for that particular year we talk with participants about what it 
is they have learned from the experience. In a sense, just being in the research study is an 
intervention because they have had a chance to go through the laboratory procedures and fill 
out questionnaires that get them to think about what is going on. 

When I first started doing longitudinal research, I was concerned about information getting 
back to the families because I thought that it would have an impact. With the nature of the work 
that we are doing, the media has a tendency to gobble it up. We were put into a situation where 
families were getting information because what was being published was information about 
them. I found that our families continue on their trajectory. According to a researcher who 
conducts marital research, if one does a 2-day workshop with most couples, they get it then but 
the effects begin to fade. That happens with parents as well. I am less concerned about even 
giving them feedback about strengths — things that they can build on in the study — than I used 
to be. For more general kinds of information, one can send newsletters to families. For example, 
one could write about new work that is going to be done with the children. For our longitudinal 
studies, we provided access to parents if they had questions and also sent out end-of-project, 
casually written materials. I have always had the philosophy that if a parent or child is in 
trouble, one should do something. One provides a recommendation, for example. That is just 
good practice. 

Hagen: In a way, we are in a different era because of the information explosion. There are so 
many different ways to get information now. Much of it is available through Web sites, but it is 
also available through the popular press. Many professionals have mixed feelings about it 
because some of it is good but some of it is not. How do people judge what is good from what 
may not be good, or what may be a pet project of someone or a pet theory that someone is 
pushing? That is something that different professional associations are grappling with. 

I am sure most of you have encountered this. When my undergraduates write papers, I look at 
their reference list and some contain good, solid sources. Other sources are from Web sites, 
some with dubious validity. How does one deal with that? It is not easy. 




ERIC 



389 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Barnard: In Early Head Start, we have been working with parents with lower education levels, 
and there are also social class and cultural differences. 

Hagen: Regarding the information explosion, we are getting even more disparities in terms of 
access. 

Barnard: How do we translate some of this published information in language and cultural 
content so that it becomes salient and appropriately available? For example, there are many 
handouts with charts and developmental wheels, and the idea is that one gives it to the mother. 
Sometimes by osmosis she will read it, understand it, and make the connection, however, from 
what I see that is not happening. 

I hope the field starts thinking about how to provide appropriate, participatory guidance to 
parents who struggle with education, and focus on developing Internet and other techniques in 
that area. That means also addressing the issue of who should be hired for Early Head Start, 
what educational level we expect of teachers, and how we train them. It goes both ways. This is 
where the translation of the research to findings we all use becomes critical. 

Hagen: In fact, it is even a bigger problem. There has been a lot of research on medical compli- 
ance and it is not just poor families or families without literacy skills. Middle-class people who 

get information from their physicians do not use it a large percentage of the time. There is a 
huge gap there. One is often handed a brochure when a prescription is picked up. A majority of 
people do not read the material and take advantage of that resource. It is a challenge. 

Kopp: What would you think of soliciting the help of elders of the community, such as church 
members, in terms of translating— using "translating" in a very broad way— some of the research 
messages? 

Barnard: It depends. How do we read in general? How do we learn infonnation? How do we 
accept what someone says to us? Sometimes we appreciate the relationship or the expertise. Is 
there a relational issue as well as an expertise issue? Who in the community does one listen to 
over one's social network? Some people prefer, for example, the elder network so there is a 
generational relational concept at work. Some people will listen to someone like a pastor or 
someone in the religious community but others will not. What I see happening lately is that we 
are recognizing that spiritual connections are supportive. However, at the same time, we are also 
realizing that not everyone falls into the spectrum of accepting that connection, so that one can 
think about individualizing all transmissions of messages. I agree that for some people, looking 
to the elders would be effective. 

For different cultural communities, those are different people. In some instances, for ex- 
ample, a grandparent may be the person one needs to enlist in order for that information to get 
at the source, because in some families that may be a hindrance. One would need to enlist the 
grandparent but then need to do a double education. One would almost need to do corrective 
learning and teaching with the grandparent and align oneself with her before one could accom- 
plish anything with the daughter who has a child. I was thinking about the foster care parent. If 
we do not pay attention to the knowledge of the foster care parent and teach them historically, 
and also never bring them together with the birth parents, what can we expect to accomplish? I 
struggle with that. 

Hagen: That could be done at many levels. For example, several years ago the American Acad- 
emy of Pediatrics instituted the provision of specially written books to parents and infants when 
they come in for doctor's visits. They are at certain developmental levels and are specifically 
designed for parents to read to children. Data have shown that that has been a successful program. 
So different venues— bus stations, grocery stores, or community centers— could be used. 





390 



Early Childhood Assessment 
and Outcomes 



Cross-Cultural Issues in 
Assessment and Accountability 

CHAIR: Gregg Powell 

PRESENTERS: Oscar Barbarin, Samuel J. Meisels, John Love 

Gregg Powell: I am Director of Research and Evaluation of National Head Start Association. We 
are focusing on the importance of addressing culture when dealing with assessment. 

Part of the problem 1 have with the title is that 1 remember assessment as being used to 
determine what a child needs in order to provide appropriate services. Now that it is being 
linked to accountability, we need to look back to the original meaning of assessment. It is to 
identify what a child brings in order to address what they take away when they leave. We must 
identify both strengths and weaknesses. 

Oscar Barbarin: This is in many ways the kind of presentation that 1 would love to go to just to 
learn. 1 will use this opportunity to stimulate, provoke, and think about the whole issue of 
culture within this context of assessment, also known as incentives, accountability, punishment, 
and reward. 

1 would like to start by telling a story. It is a story of two men in South Africa sitting on the 
side of the road. As they are sitting and waiting, a Mercedes Benz drives up. Two men are in the 
car. One of the men gets out and talks to them. The man speaks to one of the South Africans 
who approach him. The man from the car shrugs, goes back to the car, and takes off. When he 
gets back, the man who is sitting down says, "Well, what did they want?" He says, "They wanted 
to know where Mr. Mandela lived." He asks, "Well, what did you tell them?" He answers, "I told 
them 1 don't know." The first man asks, "What, you didn't ask me?" and starts chasing after the 
car. He runs and is out of breath but finally catches up to the car. He knocks on the window. The 
man rolls down the window. He pants, "Were you the guys who wanted to know where Mr. 
Mandela lives?" The driver nods his head affirmatively. The man then says "Well, I've come all 
this way to tell you that I, too, do not know where Mr. Mandela lives." The point of the story is 
that you may end up realizing that I, too, do not know what the cultural issues in assessment are 
but I will give it a good try. 

It seeqis to me that one of the main questions that we deal with is the issue of race in this 
country, the issue when we think about ethnicity and culture. In the past hundred years, as 
articulated by W. E. B. Dubois, the question of race had to do with Jim Crow laws; overcoming 
racial inequities, prejudice, the reduction of disparities in income, education and housing, 
health, and so forth. It is not that these issues are no longer prevalent, but in many ways we are 
considering new issues as we look forward to the middle and end of this century, when ethnic 
minorities will be the majority in this country. The growing Latino population will produce 
many changes, along with the stability and perhaps slight increase of African Americans. At 
some point. Whites at some point will be less than the majority in the country. 



ERIC 



397 



391 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



In many ways the terms of the race question in this country have become a bit different. 
Presently, it is bought of in terms of diversity and how to maintain it. We question the extent to 
which we can maintain the integrity of national unity in the face of disparate, diverse groups. 
How can we maintain individual ethnic diversity and, at the same time, not devolve into 
Balkanized states. How can we find common ground? 

In some ways this question may seem far from the issue that we are struggling with about 
assessment wi^ accountability and standards. But indeed it is not. The question of learning 
standards often has been linked to the issue of ethnic disparities in educational outcomes and 
the need, for example, to produce better outcomes among poor children. In many ways the 
question is how to address the issues. When we begin to look at it, we understand that we are 
pulled into the whole issue of ethnicity and diversity. 

There also is a tendency, when dealing with assessment and accountability in this country, to 
say that this is not a question of ethnicity; it is more a question of income. I would argue — and I 
have some data to suggest this — that although income hardships, poverty in particular, are 
important, this does not eliminate the question of ethnicity as being an important consideration 
of educational disparities. 

The issue that schools face in achieving equality of opportunity is that families of different 
ethnic and cultural groups prepare children for the challenges they will face in the setting that 
they are growing up with. My argument is that we have created a range of sociocultural niches 
that have their own particular demands and needs, and that these influence and shape children's 
academic aspirations and their social behaviors. Culture is very much a part of this. It is impor- 
tant to learn about the specifics of these sociocultural niches because they play an important 
role in the interface of spools with families and ultimately their effectiveness. 

I would argue that family life is the most important mediator. It is the crucible of culture. 
When we are interested in trying to understand culture, we can either look at it at an abstract 
level or we can look at it at a more concrete level. When we look at the concrete level, culture is 
expressed in the day-to-day routines of family life. Children's experience and the inculcation of 
culture occur within the context of the family. To that ©ctent, it is important to understand what 
children are exposed to in their day-to-day lives, what they are told regarding appropriate 
behavior, how they give expression to their feelings, the learning climate that exists within the 
family, and the relationships and practices that exist within the family. 

I would like to draw this closer to the issue of standards and accountability. I will begin with 
a confession. I approached the initial efforts in imposing standards and creating accountability 
with a great deal of skepticism. I had questions about the motives and the potential outcomes of 
these efforts, particularly in regard to the use of high-stakes testing. The basic argument and 
premise upon which this is based is that one gets better results if one combines high stan- 
dards — that is, one is explicit about what children should learn — with assessment of outcomes, 
then provides incentives or punishments in some cases for either success or failure. 

In principle this sounds like a good idea, but in practice it is fraught with difficulties. As 
someone who is particularly committed to poor and ethnic-minority children, I can see the 
downside when we think about who will systematically come out at the low end. The danger is 
not so much in looking, because it is valuable for parents, children, and teachers to know how 
children are doing. The question is whether these standards are appropriate, whether the 
measures that are used to assess are tied to those standards, and whether there is some agree- 
ment about the kinds of outcomes that people want and need. 

For those of us who are particularly focused on children of color, we are left wondering: If 
standard measures are good, why is it that they consistendy lead to outcomes that are stratified 
by ethnicity? One can look at almost any measure, for example, the tests of achievement that are 
used by many of the states' systems for assessing outcome. When one looks at the results, they 
are often stratified in such a way that Whites are typically on top, Asians in some measures come 
out highest, and Latinos and African Americans are often the lowest. One has to question what 
this means, what the contributors are, and how one should deal with this information. 




392 



EARLY CHILDHOOD ASSESSMENT AND OUTCOMES 



In spite of my initial skepticism, I believe in the value of accountability. I have also gained a 
great deal more optimism about the whole issue, given all the discourse and contention that has 
gone on, particularly about high-stakes testing. Parents have been involved and concerned, and 
not only parents of ethnic minority children. We have school systems that are raising questions 
about the expectations of the system, both in terms of practicality of administering, as well as 
the kinds of incentives that will be applied as a result of it. 

Public discourse was not sufficient prior to the passing of the federal law "Leave No Child 
Behind" and the requirements regarding testing. In some ways the field of debate has shifted. 

We have standardized testing required for children that we have to deal with. I think that 
democracy may be at work, in the sense that we are now debating a whole host of issues related 
to it. 

What are the kinds of issues we should be debating? What are some difficulties? First, we 
know that assessment has to be seen as a system; it is not just a test. It is a system that includes, 
among other components, standards and uses for information. Many people have pointed out 
that Ae lack of connection between standards and curriculum is a fatal flaw in any attempt to 
do high-stakes testing. The lack of multiple and diverse modes for assessing performance over 
time is difficult. The interpretation of the test results is also important. What does it mean if a 
child fails? Is it a problem with the child? Is the problem with the school? Is it a problem with 
the family? What actions are appropriate? What incentives, what consequences, for whom and 
to what end? To simply punish a school that is not doing well does not serve anyone^s purposes. 

Then there are technical problems in using an assessment at the preschool level, in, for 
example. Head Start. There is a real issue about the developmental relevance of tests and the 
standards. There have been many efforts to develop standards. I would argue that in some cases 
we might know enough. For example, we know a great deal about some of the developmental 
steps in reading, so we can develop what is appropriate for a 5-year-old or a 4-year-old. There 
are many other areas, such as math, where much less is known about what is appropriate and 
what should be expected of children. 

I would argue— as part of the debate and part of what needs to happen for research and for 
establishing meaningful, realizable standards— for accuracy in capturing what children know. 
Clearly, a single test is not going to do it. 

The diversity of children's experiences, particularly in preschool, means that they are going to 
have differential opportunities to acquire the tested skills. As much as we may want to, we are 
never going to create uniformity in families. We may increase the uniformity of experiences in 
schools, but that is a long ways off. Once again, that leaves us with the question of how to 
interpret differences in children's performances on tests. 

One of the issues that I find intriguing is whether we are asking the right questions in order 
to understand why one ethnic group falls below standards on tests. Often the quickest answer is 
that it is due to poverty and hardship. Another answer that is often given to us is that the parents 
are uninvolved; if we could just get the parents more involved in the school and show them how 
the teachers teach, we would be better off. Those answers may be true, but I would argue that 
they do not represent enough information and do not give us enough helpful insight. I think an 
important arena, both for discussion and research, is to explore more about which groups of 
children consistently do poorly and to understand why. I would argue that at least a piece of it 
will come from understanding the environments in which the children are raised and the 
opportunities they have to learn. 

Another thing I would suggest is that we think differently about groups of children. We are 
accustomed to thinking about a single group. Presently, we have an at-risk group. Typically 
children in this group are poor; they are poor children from Appalachia, poor Afiican Ameri- 
cans, poor Latino children, and poor immigrants. This is too broad a stroke; in fact, we would 
be much better off if we thought about children as growing up with specific sociocultural niches. 
These niches may be defined by three coordinates, and perhaps more; SES, ethnicity, and gender. 



399 



393 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/ CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



The experiences that children have within niches defined by these coordinates are sufficiently 
different to account for some of the differences in standardized test performance in school. 

I will preempt my conclusion. I was at a meeting not too long ago where someone who was a 
consultant for Head Start made a statement. This person argued that there is no way we are 
going to be able to help all children meet the Head Start Standards. I was appalled, upset, and 
angry; my own impression is that we are giving up on some children. We have to look closely at 
the Standards; perhaps we do not have a sufficient basis for their creation. However, if we have 
Standards that we think are realistic for all children, then all children should be able to meet the 
Standards, no matter how poor, from what ethnic group, or from what language. 

On the other hand, it is important to know that when children come into the classroom they 
have different attributes. We still do not know a lot about how we should match some of the 
particulars of those experiences to the kinds of changes that might improve children's experi- 
ences in school. j 

We know that there are many different influences that come from these niches. We know 
about what these children are exposed to and the kinds of teaching styles that they have experi- 
enced from their families and in their classrooms. These niches also have an impact on how 
children are seen by others. The notion that some children cannot succeed is a perception that 
people often hold. Believing that some children are problematic is a perception. The feedback 
children receive ultimately influences how they view themselves, by reinforcing the position 
they occupy. 

I was struck by a series done in Britain following children from about age 4 or 5 to adult- 
hood. It was amazing how much stratification worked in children s lives. They were asked 
around age 3, 4, and 5 what they thought they would be when they grew up. Of course, some 
children talked about working in factories and plants; others talked about becoming barristers, 
working in prestigious law firms. In a sense they were reflecting the kinds of occupations their 
parents had and what they would be exposed to. When the group was in their 30s, the research- 
ers went back and talked to them; from the responses at 3 or 4 years of age, the researchers were 
able to predict quite well where they would end up in life. I am not suggesting that American 
society is as stratified as British society. Maybe it is, but it is clear that there is an impact, that 
these niches must be understood more clearly. 

In looking at the niches that are given by the coordinates of SES and ethnicity, I have data 
from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study (ECLS). The ECLS is a longitudinal study that 
followed a cohort of about 22,000 kindergarten children in the United States. It tested them in 
the fall and spring of kindergarten, then continued to test and follow them into fifth grade. In 
the parents' interviews, they were asked to describe how often they read to the child, played 
word games with the child, and so forth. I summed up the number of activities that the parents 
said they engaged in. Then I broke the data down by quintiles of SES, so as the quintiles 
increased so did the SES. The lowest quintile (quintile 1) would be families making $10,000 or 
less total family income. For quintile 5, the average income for Whites was about $95,000; for 
African Americans it was about $65, 000-$ 70,000. The quintiles parallel incorne although they 
are based on parent education and occupational status. 

Surprisingly, in the lowest quintile, Asian parents reported the highest number of activities. 
The number of activities was also high for African Americans in the lowest quintile. Unlike our 
assumption, low-income, low-SES families do engage in what we would call cognitively stimu- 
lating activities at least at the same level as, if not more than, higher SES families. 

I have known for a while that African Americans watch more TV than other groups. There is a 
strong SES effect in operation here: the lower the SES, the higher the number of hours of TV 
watching. The inverse relationship between SES and TV watching is true for all quintiles. Afncan 
Americans, however, tend to watch more TV than any other group. Whites are typically at the 
lowest end in terms of TV watching. I know there has been a lot of devaluing of TV watching. 
However, one also needs to understand the role of TV in the lives of children and families. I do 
not presuppose that a lot of TV watching is terrible; it greatly depends on the program one 



er|c 



394 



400 



EARLY CHILDHOOD A S S E S S M E NT AN D OUTCOMES 



watches. The point is that African American children, relatively speaking, spend a lot of time 
watching TV. When one considers watching TV on the weekend, African Americans again watch 
the most. There is a slight class effect, but almost across the board, African Americans watch 
more TV. Even the highest SES group of African Americans watched more TV than the lowest SES 
of the other groups. One can ask what the role and impact of TV watching is in this particular 
sociocultural niche. 

The next set of data has to do with what is important to parents. The question was asked 
about how important various activities were to the parents. 1 do not know if there is a one-to- 
one correspondence between parents' values and their actions, but it does give us some sense of 
what they expect their children to know. The highest group is Whites. Almost across all SES 
groups. White parents said that learning the skill of counting gets a high rating in importance. 
Latinos and Asians were in the middle. African Americans were the lowest group. Again, it 
appears that the ethnicity effect is much more prominent than the SES effect. It is inaccurate to 
simply say that the results are due to low-income or poverty effects. Regarding the importance of 
knowing the alphabet, there was a similar pattern: Whites were at the top and Afiican Americans 
were the lowest group. This was across SES groups. 

Concerning the parental valuing of calmness — and I assume this might be related to social- 
ization of sitting down, being quiet, being relaxed, not being active — Asian parents almost 
across all SES groups valued it more highly than the other groups. Low SES Latinos, Whites, and 
African Americans were pretty similar. As one went to the higher SES, Whites valued calmness 
more. It went up for higher SES Blacks, but they were still lower than other groups. 

How important do parents think it is to share? This was a very interesting one to me because 
in this case, there seems to be an inverse relationship between SES and sharing. Maybe this is 
how lower SES groups get ahead. Asians were the highest group, and there was only a modest 
SES effect. The other groups were relatively similar, and it went down precipitously for African 
Americans from low to high SES. 

There are many other data that demonstrate differences between families, regarding the 
extent to which they value a close relationship with the child and the extent to which they 
engage in specific practices. I would argue that this is a fruitful line of research, at least for 
understanding differences in what children bring to school. I cannot explain the link between 
these differences and the kinds of experiences children have, but I think that it is fertile ground 
for thinking and additional research. 

The other point I would underscore is that when some groups of children go to school, there 
is a major chasm between what they experience at home and what they learn in school. There 
are many things that we do not appreciate and many things we cannot articulate. For example, 
although we do not realize it, we have been trained implicidy to pass someone on a particular 
side. Which side is that? The right side. When I went to South Africa, I did not realize that I was 
walking on the "wrong" side of the sidewalk. People would be looking at me and bumping into 
me. 1 never realized that this was a rule I was taught until I went to a different place. When 
children go to school, they often understand, but are not always able to articulate. They have 
litde power to negotiate the fact that what is happening to them at school is very different. 

We have to appreciate this struggle; it is not easy sometimes. They are tr 3 nng to manage a lot of 
different messages. I would argue that for children in some sociocultural niches the difference 
is not that great. I would postulate that with the higher SES children and maybe White children, 
there may be greater congruence between what happens at home and what happens in 
the classroom. 

The argument here is that if we are going to have culturally sensitive, relevant measures and 
programs, we must understand and appreciate the diversity of children's families and social 
environments. 

The final point, which I presaged with my comment about some people thinking that certain 
children cannot learn, is that 1 have an unshakable faith that all children can learn and that 





395 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



there are certain propensities common to all children. It is clear to me that if one does not see 
this, it is because one does not believe that it is possible. I think that believing must come first. 

John Love: When I was asked to fill in, I was not expected to give a long and detailed compre- 
hensive presentation. What I would like to do is to raise some issues and suggest some areas for 
discussion, because, as Barbarin said at the beginning, I also would like to learn from all of you. 

I was intrigued by the story of the search for Mr. Mandela. It reminded me of a very old joke 
about the drunk who is wandering around on the street at night under the street lamp. Some- 
body comes up to him and says, "Why are you fumbling around under the street lamp?" He 
replies, "I've lost my keys." The person asks, "Where'd you lose them?" He says, "Over there," 
and points to a distance half a block away. The person asks, "Well, why are you looking here 
then?" He answers, "Well, this is where the light is." 

I think that in some sense, that is where we are in our assessment systems: We select assess- 
ments, procedures, measures, systems, and so forth because they are something we know. 

Instead, we must fumble around in the dark to look for a key that we have lost, and really never 
had. Even then, perhaps if we found the key, we would not be sure it was the right key. It is a 
dilemma in trying to find ways of assessing diverse children, children who have very different 
experiences and are often in the same programs. 

When we talk about accountability, it is because we want to find out whether the experience 
the child is having at that particular period of time is making a difference on something that is 
important for the child's development, according to the adults who work with the children. That 
long-winded sentence suggests that a lot of different decisions and issues are involved in 
assessment. 

In some ways, all assessment is for accountability, but different types of accountability. Even 
the teacher, who wants to find out whether the child is benefiting from instruction in her 
classroom during the last week, is in some sense trying to find out whether she has made a 
difference for that child and wants to hold herself accountable. We get worried when we see who 
is holding whom accountable. If the director of the Head Start program is assessing accountabil- 
ity, that may be good because we want program directors to understand how well their staff is 
doing and how well the children are doing in the programs. However, when a government 
agency — whether state or federal — is assessing accountability, it is aggregating data from 
millions of children in many different settings and making high-stakes decisions about 
children's lives, such as funding of programs. In these cases, we get to a definition of account- 
ability that worries some of us and makes us want to step back and look at what the measures 
are and what they really tell us. 

Part of the issue is in selecting the measures in the first place or developing new ones. Maybe 
the issues are different for different dimensions of development. The strengths and limitations 
of existing measures go along with the issues of selecting them. There is also the issue of 
interpreting or understanding the implications of what is learned from the assessment process. 

No matter what diverse settings children are in, one approach that makes a lot of sense might 
be referred to as a "theory of change." We talk to program staff or teachers in order to find out 
what they are trying to accomplish, what outcomes they would like to see, or what indications 
they would like to see that show that their program or their classroom has made a difference for 
children. 

When one works with children over a period of time — and I think of this in terms of some 
program evaluations that go on for several years — children grow older and the issues of age 
diversity come into play. Even if one were able to get a beautiful measure at 3 years of age, one 
probably needs something a litde different when the child is 5, 7, or 8 years old. It was certainly 
true in the experience that we recently had in Early Head Start, where many children began the 
program before they were born. The issues of assessing something like language development 
when children are 1 to 3 years of age requires very different strategies than those used with 



O 

ERIC 



396 



402 



EARLY CHILDHOOD AS S ES S M ENT AN D OUTCOMES 



different ages. How does one make sense of the development from the different measurements 
one has taken? 

We judge the value of a particular measure on the basis of its previous use. This brings a 
dilemma because there are not many measures that have been used with the diverse cultural and 
racial groups that we are concerned about today. 

We always eventually come to the psychometric properties. It seems that there is an increasing 
emphasis on the role of predictive validity in selection of measures. Herbert Ginsberg referred to 
this as the pernicious predictive validity criterion. According to him, there can be many reasons 
why a measure taken with a child at one point in time is a good predictor of that child's behav- 
ior or development at some other point in time. 

A particular case in point is the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, which apparently is one of 
the better predictors of children's language development and success in school in language. Yet I 
have not heard an expert in language development say that receptive vocabulary is the most 
critical aspect of development at age 3, 4, or 5. 

What is pernicious about predictive validity is that many measures, as we know, capture many 
developments going on in the child's world besides what we are particularly interested in 
measuring. It is quite possible that children who grow up in the upper quintile happen to be in 
homes where they learn how to recognize vocabulary, and so forth, along with everting else 
they are learning. We do not know whether receptive vocabulary is most critical to their develop- 
ment. 

Many of us like to adopt the strategy of having diverse assessment methods. We may combine 
teacher observation and rating of a child on various dimensions. We may have an observer, who 
is trained to look at particular facets of behavior and who may have different perspectives than 
the teacher, spend some time with a child and make a rating. We may have a direct assessment 
or a standardized test, where children read the items themselves and respond individually. We 
have assessments of the Howard Gardner nature, where children are instructed to engage in a 
learning activity, and we measure what the child is learning during the structured situation. In 
other words, intelligence is often not measured on standard tests. 

Then we get to the reality of assessment and, since most assessment has to be paid for by 
somebody, we end up worrying about costs. That is one advantage of standardized tests; they are 
inexpensive, can be done in a group setting, do not require a lot of materials or equipment, do 
not require a lot of training to administer, and so forth. That is the practical sense of how we 
handle some of the dilemmas of assessment. 

I challenge everyone to think about the extent to which culturally appropriate assessments 
might vary. They may vary depending on the child's race, ethnicity, language, and community. 
They may also depend on the elements of the child's development that we are interested in. 
These five dimensions come from the National Education Goals Panel's definition of key 
elements for children's early development and learning and success in school. 

I think the issue of finding culturally appropriate assessments is tied in with the application 
of those assessments. Often there is a focus on the top one or top two categories of cognitive 
and, language development. We certainly want children to behave appropriately in social 
settings, but what really counts is whether there is language development, language literacy, and 
numeracy — this the tri-part directive that the President has given to the Head Start Bureau. 

Regardless of the child's race, ethnicity, living circumstances, or outcome assessment, we 
cannot understand the child's development without knowing something about what the Goals 
Panel referred to as "the condition that supports that development." The Goals Panel listed three 
or four of the qualities related to this development: (a) programs that children have experienced 
up until school, (b) experiences of parents, (c) opportunities for parents to benefit from 
parenting education classes and to act as the diild's first teacher, and (d) issues such as TV 
viewing, as Barbarin mentioned. It is not only what is being watched, but also how it is being 
watched and how parents use television toward the benefit of children. 




403 



397 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Other conditions include support for parents, nutrition, and health care. There are dozens of 
other conditions that are important for supporting or hindering children's development, and I 
just listed a few there. Some final thoughts: I think so-called culturally appropriate or culture- 
fair tests are criticized because they are often held to a different standard. Certain tests may 
continue to be used despite not meeting our high standards of validity and reliability because 
we have some other purpose in mind. We sometimes think that if a test is going to be used for 
accountability by a school system, for example, then it really has to be reliable and valid, but for 
other purposes, maybe it does not. To me, there are no higher stakes than the decision that a 
teacher makes every day about what to do with the children in her classroom. The information 
that a teacher has, and how she gets that information, is important. Perhaps Sam Meisels will 
talk about that since he has made some major contributions in helping teachers be able to 
wisely make those daily and weekly decisions. 

Children are highly variable in many ways, as we have talked about. The contexts that they 
live in are highly diverse. Whatever we end with as a measurement, it is an indicator, and it 
really is just that. It is not necessarily the key that we were hoping to find in the dark, but it is 
something that is close to that key. We have to make judgments about what that key tells us in 
the context of many sources of information. 

Samuel Meisels: I feel totally unprepared to do this presentation. It is not that I did not 
prepare; I just feel unprepared, and I am not sure what I have to offer. I am impressed with how 
many people are here, which I think has something to do with the fact that we all feel unpre- 
pared about this issue. I do not know if the topic that we were given, assessment and account- 
ability with multicultural and multilinguistic populations, is solvable. I get calls from people 
who tell me, "My school district has 108 different languages represented among kindergarteners. 
What screening test should I use?" I reply, "Beats me." In fact, the answer that I usually come up 
with is that I would not give a screening test in such a situation. 

Since my colleagues have told stories, I will tell one story. I started the world of assessment 
many years ago when I was at Tulsa University. I developed the Early Screening Inventory at that 
time; we had a different name for it then. In fact, I have changed the name in most places I have 
gone, but it is not going to be called the Erickson Screening Instmment; it is going to stay what 
it is. In any event, I began that work in Somerville, Massachusetts in the mid-1970s. There was a 
high concentration of Portuguese and Greek families living in Somerville. A colleague of mine 
and I developed the Early Screening Inventory at that point because the only developmental 
screening test was the Denver Developmental Screening Test. 

I knew, even as a beginner in the assessment field, that this test would never distinguish or 
discriminate among children at-risk and not at-risk. We found a person who created a Portu- 
guese translation. Then he got fired and took the translation with him, so that was the end of 
the Portuguese endeavor. For the Greek children, we found a father from the Greek Orthodox 
Ghurch who came in and administered it. Every Greek child got a perfect score; it was phenom- 
enal. We had learned over time that multicultural assessment has to do with a lot more than 
just translation. 

How do we develop socioculturally competent assessments? This is the thought that I add to 
my two colleagues' remarks. First, we have to recognize that revised procedures in the absence of 
revised perceptions will be incomplete. This gets to Barbarin's last comment about what we are 
willing to see and what we are willing to believe. We have to recognize that we need to change not 
only how we assess, but also how we see what we are assessing. There are some significant differ- 
ences that may be present, which are consequent upon differences in cultures and ethnicities. 

The tasks on our assessments may need to change as we go across significantly different 
cultures; cultures that are more separated from other cultures, or cultures that are newer to the 
U.S. than some other cultures. There are a lot of assimilated cultures. In fact, one solution to 
multiculturalism is assimilation, but that is not the one we are going to be able to turn to here. 




398 



404 



EARLY CHILDHOOD ASSESSMENT AND OUTCOMES 



Our task is to ask for suitable, appropriate, or culturally meaningful questions and to interpret 
the answers that we get within a meaningful cultural framework. 

This is very difficult. First of all, there are those 108 languages — maybe not 108 cultures, but 
there are many differences out there, most of which none of us knows about. It seems to me that 
the easiest way to deal with assessments across cultures is to have a teacher who is of the same 
culture to administer the assessment, but that is not what we usually find. If we have a teacher of 
the same culture as the children, or we have a teacher who is very familiar with the culture of 
several of the children, then we can probably expect that this teacher will be able to make 
adjustments and accommodations. When the teacher does not know very much about the other 
cultures, that teacher needs to get some help and bring in other points of view. 

In thinking about how I could contribute something to this discussion, I began thinking that 
perhaps it would be worth my telling about how we structured the work-sampling system, which 
is a performance assessment, which my colleagues and I have developed. We constructed it to be 
used in a wide range of cultures, and it has not seemed to pose problems when we move 
between all kinds of children across the country: from White suburbia, to African American 
children in inner cities, to Native American children who are in the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
schools, to Latino children. 

This assessment has been in use in those situations and while I do not have systematic 
evidence to support it, I do have people telling me that it is working for them. I am not sur- 
prised that it works because generally speaking, when we think about standards that anchor 
assessments and help us to know which indicators are reasonable in evaluating children's 
learning, there are three kinds of standards. There are program standards, content standards, and 
performance standards. 

The kinds of standards that I am interested in are the latter two: content standards and 
performance standards, not program standards. Program standards are very familiar to Head 
Start because Head Start may have more program standards than any other known program in 
the world. What do they do? They focus on aspects of classroom composition, structural 
elements, and so forth. They also primarily describe the formal structure of the setting; they do 
not imply what children are taught or'how they are taught. I want to define program standards 
so that everyone knows what I am talking about. I have never thought about it, but I am sure 
there are major cultural artifacts that are tied to program standards. I believe we are going to find 
most cultural issues in the dynamic elements. It is in the dynamic aspects where we have to 
revise our perceptions and not just revise our procedures. 

Let me define content standards: They describe the general knowledge, skills, and competen- 
cies that children are expected to demonstrate within some domain of knowledge. Content 
standards are intended to define what children should know and be able to do in different 
domains. One of the issues with content standards is that they can be too broad and give very 
litde direction for implementers, or they can be too specific and not provide enough flexibility. 

When one looks at the standards that states have promulgated for learning in K-12, very often 
there are content standards that are either too broad or too general. More often they are too 
broad. They present the content standard in mathematics learning in computation for K-3, or 
for K-6 even, and that is obviously too broad. 

Sometimes they will be very specific in which case they are getting more into performance 
standards. They do not provide any flexibility. Flexibility is a key element of worldng in a 
socioculturally competent way in assessment, as well as in instruction. 

I am going to define performance standards, and then I want to come back to content 
standards. Performance standards are more specific. They provide concrete examples of compe- 
tent, skilled, and knowledgeable behavior. They describe specific behaviors or performances that 
children must demonstrate in order to achieve at specified levels. They are often associated with 
a mbric or scoring framework, which consists of a set of criteria used for distinguishing among 
different kinds of performances. Finally, the issue here is that if performance standards are too 



ERIC 



405 



399 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



specific they can dictate a curriculum, or interfere with the need to individualize and remain 
open to cultural variation. 

It is important for us to consider the level of specificity and generality for performance 
standards when we are looking at socioculturally competent assessment. This approach appar- 
ently has not had problems in terms of its use across a wide range of cultures in America. What 
we have produced primarily in work-sampling are content standards, not performance standards. 

An example of an indicator from our adaptation of work-sampling for Head Start, in the 
domain of language and literacy, is in the component of listening and understanding, where the 
indicator is that the child gains a meaning by listening. The content standard for that says that 4- 
year-olds gain knowledge about their world by watching and listening; for non-English speaking 
children, listening skills are key to beginning to understand English. A 4-year-old's ability to 
understand an increasingly complex and varied vocabulary is enhanced as stories, poems, and 
songs are read to large and small groups, as children participate, and so forth. We give many 
examples of this, which helps teachers make sense of it. This is at a general level. 

We can be more specific, and I can show the performance standards for this. Primarily, when 
people use work-sampling — taking four different situations in the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
schools; in Grosse Point, Michigan schools; in Chicago public schools; or in Dade County, 
Florida schools — they stop at the point of the content standards and teachers, since this is a 
curriculum-embedded assessment. They then need to decide which of the examples, shown here 
and in other places, are correlative to them and are best going to depict this content standard. It 
is here that teachers will make a culturally relevant decision about how they will implement 
this, where they will look for it, and what indicators they can record and evaluate as a result of 
taking the specific situation into account. 

The question then is whether we have lost validity. As we go from one classroom to another 
in different cultural milieu, do we have teachers who are applying different standards? We have 
the same content standard, but we do not necessarily have the same performance standards. 

The empirical research that we have done on work-sampling shows that the implementation 
varies greatly from teacher to teacher. Yet the results are so similar that it probably can handle 
that much ambiguity and it does not matter. That seems to also say that there is a certain 
likeness among children despite their cultural differences. 

If we do not apply the same standards or the same form of evaluation in a rigid way, we may 
in fact do better than if we tried to do the same for everyone. Our validity may be enhanced 
through offering some space room for teachers to make on the spot decisions or to make 
decisions that they have learned make the most sense. In other words, they may not approach a 
child in a direct way; they may approach a child in an indirect way in order to learn something 
about the child's language or other skills because, for certain children, that is the most suitable 
adult-to-child interaction. In other situations this may be inappropriate. 

I am going to stop here and say that I am a learner in this; I think we are all learners in this. It 
is important that we understand Aat we do not know everything. We must pay attention to the 
people who ask us what screening test they should use with 108 languages in their school 
district. What I mostly say to those people is to watch the children; that is where one must start. 

Linda Espinosa: I am currently at the University of Missouri. The distinction Meisels made 
between content and performance is very important, particularly as we look at the Head Start 
Outcomes framework and at cultural diversity. With respect to that Outcomes framework and 
what we all perceive as the high-stakes accountability that is emerging in the Head Start regula- 
tions, I do not think the distinction between content and performance is well understood. We 
still do not know how to assess it or how to make local community adaptations that would be 
more culturally relevant and culturally consistent. Are there any specific recommendations for 
training, or for guidelines, to assist Head Start as they look at the Outcomes in relationship to 
cultural diversity within the communities? 



er|c 



400 



EARLY CHILDHOOD A S S ES S M ENT AN D OUTCOMES 



Meisels: The Head Start Outcomes framework is an example of content standards, not perfor- 
mance standards. It IS consistent with the approach that I was giving, and in fact we have aligned 
thfr t'nd"”^ framework so it is one and the same. That is my explanation from 

The issue is m the latest policy framework that has come from President Bush, who we are led 
to believe is spending a lot of time thinking about Head Start. There is talk about a national 
reporting system for Head Start. This has to be done with tremendous care in Head Start. Head 
Start IS an ^emplar of so many wonderftil things. One thing is diversity of the children who 
partiopate. Every year we see greater diversity in Head Start than the year before. As we move 
toward a naUonal reporting system, we are going to move toward performance standards and not 
toward content standards that allow some ambiguity. It will become more and more difficult. 

e vTOuld need to do a careful series of equivalency studies that would show us that children 
backgrounds are not disadvantaged by the assessment that is used. A study of that 

SmT"* r u iu- perform. The DHHS has been told that they have to be in the 

rield this fall. This is very worrisome because nobody can do it that quickly. 

One cannot force children to grow up in the same way that one can force tulips to open up 
These children are very stubborn; they take all year to grow a year older. One is not going to 
know at the beginning how it is going to come out. 

John Fantuzzo: You all hit the nail on the head about one of the struggles we have. We are in a 
contact zone that we agonizingly call "virgin" where folks are basically saying that they have got 
to know now. Some of the processes we are talking about, and the children we have to know 
about quickly are the children whom we know the least about. 

.K assessment perspective. What are the constructs? The literature says 

that ffiese constructs are important, so we rally around the literature. But how did we determine 

important and who do we study to determine that these constructs are 
mportant. We have a construct problem that people are not really wrestling with. 

To deal wiffi the construct problem is a major headache. One must have the will and motiva- 
tion to ask which constructs are important for what groups of children with those 108 different 
is aS ** money, so folks are going to assume the construct 

Then there is the assessment part, which is content validity. People assume that an item in a 
measure represems a particular constmct for everyone, so people are not even agonizing over 
con ent validity. However, they should ask whether that item has the same meaning for different 
g oups of people, instead of assuming that they respond the same way to the item. 

Meisels: Let me respond to Fantuzzo, because it helped me understand what I said before a 
little better^ One can have the same content standard, but different children from different 
backgrounds are going to show their skill or knowledge of that standard differently, depending 
on the expenences that ffiey have had. The question of content equivalence becomes important 
m evaluating the ways that different children demonstrate what they know and what they can 
do. I do not kriow that anybody has ever worked those equivalencies out, but that is part of 
what one can do formally in work sampling. It is an informal assessment where certain mea- 
surements can be made in a formal way. 

Fantuzzo: That is the last point I was going to make. We are not even doing research into 
constmct and content validity— the most concrete, beginning place. We have stmggled with this 
ecause Head Start parents who we initially worked with forced us to say that the measures we * 
had chosen were useless for the children. We said, "That is an empirical issue, isn't it? Why don't 
we study the measures and see whether or not they are useless?" We found that for some of the 
measures we studied, with the constmcts they were talking about, we would have been better off 



O 

ERIC 



407 



401 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



randomly assigning the items to factors. One got better factors from our factor structure than the 
factors that were reported in the literature. We are not doing enough of that kind of research at 
the most primitive level, bringing in skepticism to existing measures such as the Child Behavior 
Checklist (CBCL) or the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT). 

The notion is to consider low-income families and resolve to take a look at the assessments. 
None of us want to look at this critically. If we carefully assess the batteries we have, we will not 
have any assessments left when we are done. The next level is constructing measures with good 
content validity, which are appropriate for a variety of groups. 

Then we have a harder, more vexing question of whether or not these constructs are salient 
for the groups that we care about. Particularly with Head Start and large African American and 
Latino populations, we should be developing an assessment technology that takes into account 
that those large groups should be governing how we proceed. Those are the largest populations, 
empirically speaking. 

1 am reminded of what an anthropologist once told me: "Approach children with three 
things in mind: they are smart, they are busy, and they are in a place." The critical element for 
understanding the place can help us understand how they are smart and busy. That is where I 
feel it falls apart, because we do not necessarily have the will and the motivation to study the 
place, and the meaning of different events, for different groups of children. Maybe now is the 
time of high stakes. There is something good about the high stakes: It should keep our ethics 
high about what we are allowing to be called good assessment. 

Vivian Gadsden: How do we get some certainty about what good assessment looks like and 
bring it into policy discussions? We are all under pressure and under the presumption that we 
know all we need to know about children when in fact we may not know much about them. 
How would we take some of what was presented, which shows variability across class, and put 
that into the discussion of how assessment enters not only research, but policy as well? 

Meisels: Maybe the answer to that is doing the kind of research that Fantuzzo's comment 
suggests, providing counterexamples of why the CBCL, the PPVT, and the various other mea- 
sures we use to assess reading and vocabulary do not work for particular groups. It takes a lot of 
persistence because there is no market for that research. 

There actually is a great deal of research going on. People have data, and maybe what we 
need to do is get people who have these large data sets on ethnic minorities to come together 
and see if they can tell a story. If the data tell a worthwhile story, then we can give some more 
attention to it. 

With respect to the socioemotional issue, say the CBCL. I have been involved in and I have 
heard of other people being involved in trying to find out from parents, for example, what they 
deem to be behavior problems in their children. This is in place of assuming that the DSM- 
generated items reflected in the CBCL represent problems and concerns that parents have. We 
have found that measures of aggression do not closely parallel parents' concerns. Parents make 
much finer distinctions about behavior than represented in many of these measures. It is 
important for parents to know the degree of provocation, in order to determine whether 
aggression is a problem. There is a study of African American and Latino poor families that 
show aggression was a problem under conditions of provocation but was a serious problem if 
there was no provocation. There are other instances, where things that are problematic for a 
population as a whole are not problematic among some African American samples. 

Those findings come from studies that are more qualitative in nature, where parents are asked 
about their expectations for their children's behavior, what things they consider problematic, 
and so forth. This is the kind of thing we are trying to do in this large multistate study of 
preschool children and families. 



408 



402 



early childhood assessment and outcomes 



Susan Yom: In your assessments, I assume you are primarily focusing on preschool children 
bec^se m the K-12 continuum there are national performance standards that are established by 
the Commission already. In addition to that, states have their own standardized tests. For 
^ample, m New York there are fouth-grade students who are taking standardized tests in math, 
anpap, and p forth. These are formal content standards, in that these assessments are 
basically sound and proven to be fail-proof because they are not cross-generational or cross- 
ethnic. Has the preschool community looked at the K-12 standardization in performance 
standards nationally? 

The reparch has shown that New York State and Massachusetts have something, to show with 
eir good testing measures For example, they test listening, speaking, reading, and writing from 
different perspecuves, on what they believe to be a grade four level benchmark. This benchmark 

m accordance with the national standards and with what New York State has developed as its 
own standards. 



Meisels: There is contrary research in Massachusetts about the Massachusetts Comprehensive 
Assepment Teste (MCATs), if that is what you are referring to. I do not know because I am not 
parly as san^ine about these tests or even the fact that there are performance standards in all 
pmams. Natiopl curriculum groups, like the National Council of Teachers of Math, National 
Cmmcil of Teachers of English, American Association for the Advancement of Science, and 
others, have created mostly content standards and some performance standards. Then states 
PP gone to the content standards and have adapted them to their own situations. There are 
differences from state to state because there is not a national set of performance standards 
pmeump they are set very high. Virginia is a good example of a state that has set those stan- 
dards so high that a vast majority of children fail the Virginia Standards of Learning. 

Your oper question is about preschool. What we have tried to do in our work is to do a 
pwnward extension of the better standards through age 3. There are significant differences 
ptween 3-par-olds literacy learning and 7-year-olds or 17-year-olds' literacy learning There- 
fore one IS bringing in very different content that has to be changed along the line. We do not 
have a cumculum organization that has dealt with the preschool years in the same way that we 
have dealt with K-12. That is a remaining issue for the preschool world. 

Mary Ann Walker: California has spent a lot of money on standardized tests in the K-12 
system, but they still pve not been able to minimize the cultural bias in those teste. It is the 
pme ipp we are pemg at the preschool level, that many assessment tools and screening tools 
f Tk fr^mewpk, but they do not address or help teachers look at the child through the filter 

of that chiM s culture and language. I am not optimistic about what I have seen in the K-12 
pstem. I think they have a lot to learn from what we are doing at the preschool level to try to 
delineate some of these divisions. 



Kevin Aprkman: It is also important that we bear in mind that young children in preschools 
are mup more regulated by their environment. As children get older, we are more likely to see 
reliability m test scores What I often see— particularly in child assessments of professionals who 
have been trained on older children and then start working with infants and preschoolers— is 
that thp are much more wedded to right and wrong answers in the face of ambiguity and are 
more likely to cling to standardized instruments and responses. 



Fanpzzo: 'This discussion keeps prompting me to remember how we spend a lot of time 
tpchmg Aildren to learn specific concepts, such as table and round. Imagine how conftised 
they would be if they came m here looking for the round table. We have a lot of work ahead 
us. Whp we have been able to identify at least is that we do not have answers about how to 
assess children, especially at the preschool level. 



of 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Certain expectations have been forced on us in Head Start, and I am sure it is happening in 
other preschools too. We talked earlier about programs now having to ensure that all children 
leave knowing 10 letters. We found out from the FACES Project that they now know 8.9. But we 
do not have any real basis for knowing where that figure came from. Hopefully in the future, 
like everything else, we will learn how to do that. 

Love: It might be useful to know that the Early Head Start Evaluation created a consortium of 
national and local researchers. That consortium has created a number of working groups that are 
focusing on various issues. There is one group in particular that is addressing the issue of 
cultural appropriateness in the measures that we use in Early Head Start. We have a substantially 
diverse sample, with children with disabilities— whom we have not mentioned at all today— 
African Americans, Latino, and Whites, children from rural and urban areas, and so forth. This 
group is going to look at a number of measures that were used at 1, 2, and 3 years of age to see 
whether different factor structures might be better measures for different cultural subgroups in 
that sample. Perhaps 2 years from now, these meetings will have data related to that. 

Barbra Lancelot: Could you comment on whether using a Rasch analysis is a useful way of 
looking at tests that exist in light of different cultural contexts? 

Daryl Greenfield: Yes it is, but few assessments have the right kind of data to do a Rasch 
analysis. Rasch analysis is a latent trait model that 1 am unqualified to explain to anybody, but 1 
have used it and know that this is a way for us to control for certain variables that are important 
in terms of multicultural assessment and other kinds of assessment. However, one must collect 
the right kind of data; one cannot just apply it to any data set. 

Markman: We seem to come back to the issue of the power of setting standards, who it is that 
sets standards, whether it is the content standards, program standards, or performance stan- 
dards. If it means that someone has a model in their head about something, the experts princi- 
pally do the process by which standards are set. 

1 was having a discussion with Linda Espinosa who says they have a curriculum that values 
democracy, children sharing, and having a role in decision-making, yet they are working in a 
community where those are not valued behaviors or outcomes. It occurred to me that there is a 
kind of imperialism in experts deciding what to assess and how. 

1 wonder if part of the answer is in recognizing that experts are not going to be able to 
completely dictate a set of standards that everyone will meet. 1 wonder whether at least some 
process of negotiating, at least at the preschool level, should exist about what we want our 
children to learn. 

Question: Is there a new term one could coin called "'ignorant experts ? Someone could be 
identified with the power of being an expert, but they could be ignorant about certain things. It 
seems that real scholars should be identifying ethical principles and identifying what their 
limitations are. If experts could admit that they are ignorant about certain things, it would drive 
inquiry towards what is necessary. 

Gadsden: How does partnership, which is central to research, fit in? What would it mean to 
include parents and other community people as coexperts? We seem to be thinking about 
assessment so empirically that parents cannot inform the process. What would be the process of 
inviting and engaging parents and Head Start staff as well as the experts in the construction of 
appropriate assessment? 




410 



404 



early childhood assessment and outcomes 



Fantuzzo: We have approached that by sampling different measures where parents can review 
them. We have research staff question teachers. We then evaluate different measures. We devel- 
oped a system that we are using and it is working well for our group. 

Comment: But it was completely nested within this one center, this one community, and this 
one neighborhood. Your point is reductionism versus valuing divergent thinking, and we are not 
asking how many different ways we can assess. We need to find the best way, the single way. 
Imperialism is built into our methodology and is built into the way we approach children in the 
assessment process. 

Richard Budgell: I am the manager of a national program for aboriginal people in Canada. 
When we developed our national principles and guidelines, we held a consultation across all the 
communities then involved in the program and had them design the principles and guidelines 
for the program. This included parents who were involved at that time, teachers, and other 
community members. As the government, we went to this with some ideas of what we wanted 
to see in the program, but it was done as a joint effort. Of course, that got us investment and a 
buy-in into the definition and the standards of the program. 

Comment: It sounds revolutionary. ^ 

Budgell: We did not think so. 

Carla Patterson: I am from Australia, and I would attest to the fact that Budgell's study has 
worked there. They consulted parents and workers, and let them form principles and guidelines. 
Then they followed those principles and guidelines. 

Gadsden: It is funny, I was thinking as I was listening and trying to learn, that maybe we need 
to get out of America. But then I realized that I have been out of America, and it is not perfect 
out there either. Clearly what is being said about Canada and about Australia — and I understand 
this is true in New Zealand as well — is that there is a great deal that we could learn from leaving 
these shores. 

Powell: The glass is not half full or half empty; it is just too big. 




405 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Policy Issues Concerning 
Child Outcomes in Head Start 

CHAIR: Samuel J. Meisels 
DISCUSSANT: Sue Bredekamp 

PRESENTERS: Samuel J. Meisels, Thomas Schultz, Susan Anderson 



In the context of the first year of use of the Head Start Child Outcomes Framework, many policy 
questions are coming to the forefront regarding standards, assessments, and impact on program 
self-improvement. These issues and others were addressed. 

■ The Head Start Child Outcomes Framework 

Thomas Schultz, Susan Anderson 

(Paper summary not available.) 



■ Policy Issues of Early Childhood Outcomes 

Samuel J. Meisels 

(Paper summary not available.) 



406 



412 



Language, Literaq^, and Early Learning 



Language, Literacy, and Cognition 

CHAIR: John Hagen 

PRESENTERS: Twila Tardif, Todd Risley, Fred Morrison 

John Hagen: I represent the Society for Research in Child Development. I am cochair of the 
Program Committee for the Sixth Head Start Conference. 

This session is on literacy, language, and cognition. We have three excellent researchers with 
complementary work. From these presenters, we will see an interesting story unravel from both 
the basic research and the implications for policies and practice. I will introduce each of them in 
order of their presentations, and then there will be time for discussion and questions at the end. 

Our first presenter, Twila Tardif received her Ph.D. from Yale University. She did a 
postdoctorate at the University of Michigan and then she was a professor at the Chinese 
University of Hong Kong. She recently returned to Ann Arbor and now has a new position in the 
Center for Human Growth and Development. She is involved in fostering new directions in 
research, as well as collaborations with Asia, and she continues her collaborations in China. She 
has done work on Cantonese and Mandarin and is a fluent speaker of both languages. She will 
talk to us today about early language development and cross-linguistic differences in the 
fundamental milestones of young children. 

Twila Tardif: As I was working in Hong Kong, we started developing a Cantonese and a Manda- 
rin version of the MacArthur Communicative Development Inventory (GDI). Over the last 2 
years, we have continued to receive inquiries from various programs, including a couple of 
individuals involved in Head Start. To avoid any ftirther requests at this point, we are not yet 
ready to release our version of the GDI. 

I want to present some preliminary results from that research and other research that I have 
been doing on Chinese families and children's language acquisition. My question is "What is 
the task of a child in acquiring their native language?" Essentially, children must become 
confiderit members of their linguistic community. They need to understand what their parents 
and family say, and they need to be able to speak. So, there is comprehension and there is 
production. The task of the child is to become involved both as one who is able to comprehend 
and as a speaker. This is tme everywhere in the world. The majority of children, and I say 
majority but not all because some children do have language acquisition problems, will learn 
the language of their community. In Ann Arbor, it would be English. In Beijing, it would be 
some version of Putonghua or possibly a Beijing dialect of Mandarin. In Hong Kong, it would 
be Cantonese, which is sometimes Chinglish because Cantonese also incorporates many 
English words. 

When acquiring a native language, there are a number of important milestones. Children 
need to be able to understand as well as produce the sounds and words of their language. 
Children get to a point where it is not just first words, but a significant number of words they 



SYMP OS I A/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON H OURS 



need to acquire to move on in the world. That difference, movement from their first word to a 
50- or 100-word vocabulary, occurs slowly for some children and rapidly for others. 

There are two different milestones. First, children need to start putting words together. Once 
that happens, they begin to learn the grammar of their own language. They also need to be able 
to participate in conversations and follow specific conversational rules, but these rules can vary 
across cultures. The point that 1 would like to make today is that there are cross-linguistic 
differences present in these milestones. The milestones are universal, but how children achieve 
those milestones, and possibly when children achieve those milestones, can vary tremendously 
across different languages. 

I am going to focus on first words and the 50- to 100-word vocabulary. 1 will primarily 
discuss the early stages of acquisition in 1 V 2 - to 3 V 2 -year old children. Why did 1 become inter- 
ested in Chinese, and why is Chinese important for this? Many people who hear Chinese are 
immediately struck by the fact that it sounds different. This may be because Chinese is a tonal 
language. For example, ''ma" has four tones that mean four different words. Ma said in a 
falling tone is to swear, but "ma" said with a high, flat tone means "mother." One does not want 
to be swearing at one's mother. Those of you who speak Chinese know the difference. 

Chinese is also lexically different in a number of ways. At a superficial level, the word 
"cousin" can be confusing. In English, everyone is a cousin. Your mother s sister s daughter 
would be a cousin. Your mother s sister's son would be a cousin. They are both cousins. In 
Chinese, they both have a specific word. There are all kinds of kinship terms, and with uncles 
and aunts it gets even more complicated. 

On the other hand, English is complicated with its numerous nouns. Chinese does not tend 
to be so specific with nouns. In particular, Chinese and English differ in their nouns and verbs. 
Syntactically, they are also different. Nonnative speakers of English, particularly Chinese 
speakers, often get "he" and "she" mixed up. It is not that they do not know the difference 
between males and females, it is just that Chinese does not mark that difference syntactically. 
There are also tense differences, plural differences, and pragmatic differences. Languages differ in 
where their complexities lie. 

Phonological systems of almost all languages are complex, but again, they are complex in 
different ways. In English, the vowels are comparable to Chinese vowels. There are different 
vowels, but they have similar levels of complexity. When looking at consonants and syllable- 
initial consonants, they may be more complex in English; English has many more syllable-final 
consonants. We say "truck." In Mandarin, there are few, and possibly as some people argue 
no true consonants. There is an "m" and an "n. Cantonese has some consonants, but they are 

stuck in the throat. They do not quite get out. 

English consonant clusters, such as "string" or "upbringing, present a complex sound. 
English has many of those clusters. Chinese Mandarin has none. Cantonese, arguably, has two. 
In terms of tone, English has no tone; Mandarin has four, possibly five tones, and Cantonese, 
depending on how one counts them, has between six and nine tones. Again, the point is that 
languages are complex. Phonology is complex, words are complex, but they differ in where they 
are complex. 

Children can have problems with learning the phonology of their language. Many English- 
speaking children have problems with complex consonant clusters. Instead of spaghetti, they 
say "pisgetti." There are instances where they reverse the order, or they cannot quite get them 
out. Similarly, tones can be a problem, but in fact, when looking at native speakers acquiring 
their native language, tone errors are rare. Although there are fewer consonants, they are still 
problematic. 

The levels of complexity sometimes translate to problems for children learning the language. 
However, native speakers do not have problems with things that appear to be complex for 
nonnative speakers. The he/she, gender agreement case is an example. At 3 years of age, native 
speakers of English know the distinction. If they get it wrong, it is because they are truly con- 
fused as to whether somebody is a boy or a girl, rather than the marking. 



414 



408 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



Moving froni sounds to words, my interest is in how children learn words. There are two real 
positions. One is what 1 call "all words are created equal." The idea is that children acquire all 
words through the same processes, regardless of what type of words they are. There are general 
principles of learning and cognition for nouns, verbs, articles, and so forth. The second position 
is that some words deserve special status. There may be some innate biases that the child brings 
to the task of learning words that help him to acquire words that are more important. The 
position that I am going to present, because it has been argued for a long time, is that children 
start out learning many nouns. This is a statistical fact, and some people have argued that there 
is a reason for it. 

In 1982, Centner did an extensive review of the cross-linguistic literature and discovered that 
nouns appeared to be predominant in all children's vocabularies. There was an argument as to 
whether in English that was 100% tme. The argument holds that nouns might be easy for 
children to learn because the neurological mapping process is simpler. For example, in the case 
of a chair, a child can see its boundaries; the chair would not include part of the carpet. Usually, 
when we refer to a noun, we are referring to the whole object, not just to a piece of it, unless we 
have specifically mentioned the whole object and then the piece. It may be that we are hard- 
wired to acquire nouns. 

Centner examined a number of different languages and found evidence that across languages 
children learn nouns early. This finding was consistent. For a ratio measure of nouns to nouns 
plus verbs, if it is 0.5, then it is equal. If it is 1.0, then there are all nouns. If it is 0.0, then there 
are all verbs. People sometimes ask, "Well, what about words like 'up'? Children might use this 
as a verb, with 'up' meaning 'pick me up', but it is not really a verb." I am excluding those types 
of words, and I am not counting proper names or words that are ambiguous in both English 
and Chinese, such as the words "pee" or "pee-pee." These are common early childhood words, 
but what are they? Are they nouns or verbs? They could be either. 

This was the background to my dissertation research. I was dismayed when I first came back 
from the field and started looking at the vocabulary of the 10 children in my study. I found that 
at the earliest visit, all 9 of the 10 children who were producing any words at all were producing 
more verbs than nouns. This was my dissertation. I was a graduate student at the time, and one 
can imagine my horror: "Oh my Cod, I have done something wrong." 

As a result of my dissertation, I have spent a long time working on this area of language 
acquisition. I have found that although there was a Mandarin sample in Centner's study, the 
Mandarin-speaking children that I looked at did not appear to conform to this trend. I was 
surprised by that. This led me to ask the question of whether Mandarin-speaking children go 
through a different process than English-speaking children. Maybe this universal is not really a 
cognitive universal, but more of an effect of the input or the environment to which children are 
exposed. It might be that English-speaking parents are constantly playing this kind of naming 
game and Mandarin-speaking parents are not. 

Evidence suggests that there are social-class differences in the naming game, and that there 
are social-class differences in the use of nouns and verbs. It may be that input partly accounts for 
it. It, could also go beyond general parent-to-parent differences in input; it could be that differ- 
ent languages set up the world differently. It may be that Mandarin is setting up the child to 
learn a different system, because in Mandarin the verb syntax is simple. Therefore, Chinese 
speakers have a hard time learning English because of all of the tenses. In Chinese, there is a 
marking on verbs, but it is straightforward and related to aspect. Aspect refers to time, whether it 
is happening in the past, present, or future. 

In Mandarin, no matter which way one hears a verb and what aspect is marked, one still 
hears the common verb. I guarantee that every verb follows this. In the English "mn," "mnning," 
and "ran", it is hard to pull out the commonality because "ran" and "mn" are not quite the 
same. In Mandarin, every verb is regular, and the marking is actually separate from the verb. The 
marking does not get imbedded into the verb like "go," "going," and "went," instead, it switches 
completely. 



4i5 



409 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



There are other arguments as to why Mandarin might have more of an emphasis on verbs. In 
particular, Mandarin allows a relatively free dropping of nouns. One can drop subjects. One can 
also frequently drop the object and just say "went," and as long as we both know what is going 
on, who went and where they went, there is no confusion. A classic example is that many 
Chinese speakers become confused when they hear the phrase it s raining. What is raining? In 
English, one must always have the "it," even when it does not really make any sense. 

There may also be some cultural differences. This is tme within the U.S. as well, and it is 
possible that Chinese parents focus more on actions than on objects. There are also some 
artifactual reasons that one should recognize. 

Now I will present a series of studies that I have done to address different aspects of the issues 
mentioned above. The first looks at Mandarin, Italian, and English. Why Italian? Well, we know 
about Mandarin and English. In my original study, I only looked at Mandarin. I wanted to find 
some samples of children with comparable types of familial background arid naturalistic 
situations in the home. I wanted to address the issue of whether or not input in the language 
system affects the acquisition of words. 

Italian is interesting because it is also a pro-drop language, meaning that one can drop the 
subject. It is similar to Mandarin in that respect, but it is also similar to English in the verb 
system, where the syntctx on the verb is complicated. In fact, it is more complicated than English, 
although it is regular. It provides a nice contrast. 

Nobody had ever looked at this noun/verb issue in Italian. My question was "What is the 
pattern of language acquisition for Italian children? Are they more similar to Mandarin- or 
English-speaking children? We found that the number of types of words they were producing 
was comparable to English-speaking children. When I say types, I mean ball, duck, and 
"birdie." All three words are different noun types; it is the number of different words, riot the 
number of times a child says one word. If I say ball, ball, ball they are three tokens. 

In English and Italian, the number of different nouns and verbs children were producing in 
their natural speech was similar. Again, children of both languages produced more nouns than 
verbs. However, Mandarin-speaking children actually produced more verbs than nouns. It did 
not appear to be dramatic, but the difference was significant. 

The Italian-speaking children were producing tokens. This was expected in our research, since 
one can drop nouns relatively freely in Italian. Tokens were not as frequent, but Italian-speaking 
children produced as many different nouns as English-speaking children did. The English- 
speaking children were producing nouns much of the time, the Italian-speaking children 
roughly 50% of the time, and the Mandarin-speaking children, more verbs than nouns. 

We then examined some of the artifactual issues. We looked at what the parents were saying 
by measuring token frequency, type frequency, and when verbs appeared, if they were inflected 
and with what frequency. We even documented whether the nouns and verbs appeared at the 
beginning of sentences or at the end, which is the more salient position according to researchers 
in the field. Across all of our measures, we found that English-speaking parents were making 
nouns easier to learn. Nouns were more frequent and there were more types of nouns than 
verbs. Nouns frequently appeared at the end, instead of the beginning, of sentences. In fact, 
much of the adult-to-child speech consisted of verb constructions such as "get up" or "sit down" 

occurring at the beginning. • u --u n - 

When nouns appeared, they were uninflected, or had few inflections, so it was either ball, 
or "balls." When verbs appeared, there was much more variation, such as "go," "going," and 
"went." We concluded that in English, nouns were more easily learned. As predicted, every 
single Chinese parent put more emphasis on verbs. Adult-to- Aild speech in Chinese highlighted 
verbs, which made it easy for Chinese children to learn them. Among Italian children, the ratio 
of vocabulary type was right in the middle. 

It is not surprising that adult speech is driving a child's production. If adults use more verbs, 
then children probably will produce more verbs. Another interesting finding is that although 



O 

ERIC 



410 



il6 



A \ n 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



there was an emphasis on the adult-to-child speech with verbs versus nouns, all of the children 
used more nouns than their parents. Children may find nouns easier to learn, but it depends on 
their environments, how redundant nouns versus verbs are, and what words they will produce 
in the end. 

I wanted to know the extent to which a child's vocabulary could be pushed around. We 
conducted a laboratory study. Instead of allowing children and parents to interact the way they 
do in their homes, we tried to control the context of the interaction. The sample consisted of 24 
English-speaking and 24 Mandarin-speaking children. There was a productive speech measure 
during three contexts of play: (a) book reading, (b) regular toy playing, and (c) mechanical toy 
playing. We also used the MacArthur GDI to measure vocabulary. We wanted mothers to report 
what their children were saying outside of the laboratory setting. 

We found that when English-speaking children and parents were talking about books, there 
were many words. When children were busy playing with mechanical toys, there was more action 
and less talk, which is not surprising. What is interesting is the ratio measure: The amount of talk, 
as well as the quantity of nouns versus verbs was different. Parents who engaged their children in 
the book-reading activities bombarded them with nouns, and they produced many nouns. 

In the Chinese families, the same pattern was true. The three contexts resulted in different 
proportions of nouns and verbs, but in every single context, the Mandarin-speaking children 
produced more verbs than the English-speaking children. There was still this consistent differ- 
ence between English and Mandarin families. 

Mandarin-speaking children produced more verbs than English-speaking children, and 
English-speaking children produced more nouns than Mandarin-speaking children. There was 
this double crossover. It was not just that the proportions were different, or that one group 
produced more nouns or fewer nouns; it was different with both types of words. Mandarin- 
speaking children used more verbs and English-speaking children used more nouns than their 
counterparts, although this depended on the setting where different patterns could result. 

The results for the MacArthur CDI indicated that the English-speaking children produced 
many nouns. For Mandarin, the children still appeared to know more nouns, overall, than verbs. 
That is not surprising, because the number of objects in the world is infinite, if not close to it. 
Where we found an incredibly consistent difference was that Mandarin-speaking children were 
producing more verbs and fewer nouns than the English-speaking children. Again, it is not that the 
ratio was different and one-sided, it was two-sided and there were more verbs and fewer nouns. 

The same pattern was true with first words. Over two thirds of the 3,200 children in the 
sample from Hong Kong and Beijing had a noun/ verb difference, even with first words. English 
speakers used virtually no verbs at the first word stage, and Mandarin speakers had many verbs. 
This finding was consistent. 

Now I will present the findings on comprehension from our MacArthur study. In English, few 
common nouns were comprehended early. Many names for people and social words were 
comprehended, but no verbs. In Mandarin, half of the words were verbs. In Cantonese, not quite 
half of the words were verbs and there were still many nouns. It is also interesting that the early 
verbs and nouns were similar across the languages. They acquired the same types of verbs, but at 
different times, for example "bye-bye" and "kiss." "Kiss" is the first verb for English and Manda- 
rin speakers. The word "eat" is a common verb across both languages. 

In terms of word production, there were no verbs in any of the languages and few nouns. 
However, we found that 22% of Mandarin-speaking children produced the eleventh-rank verb, 
hit at 12 months of age; but "hit" is a general verb that can be used for many things. 

In English, 4.5% of 12-month-olds are saying "all gone." "Go" is a common verb, but it was 
used less than 5% of the time in English and close to 15% in Mandarin and Cantonese. At 20 
months of age, there was an incredible consistency across the Mandarin and Cantonese speak- 
ers. Ninety percent of 20-month-olds in both the Mandarin and Cantonese groups used verbs 
such as want, "hold," "hug," "up," and "grab." Only 50% of English speakers used words such 



as eat or sit. 




411 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



The overview of noun versus verb production showed that nouns take over as children get 
older and their vocabulary expands. In English, nouns are dominant at an early stage and 
continue to be more dominant. In Chinese, the acquisition of nouns and verbs are close. The 
gap widens, but not significantly, until the children have 200 to 300 words in their vocabulary. 
This is a different pattern than with early English language acquisition. 

What are the implications of this research? For lan^age development, we know that funda- 
mental aspects of adult language use are different. Children are going to acquire the lan^age of 
their community, so they are going to move towards producing adult patterns of speech in 
different ways. 

It is important to consider the specific language when measuring children's early language 
development. In English, if a child has few nouns and many verbs, it is a potential marker of 
serious language delay or language impairment. That criterion should not be used for Chinese. 

In fact, in Chinese, if a child has few verbs and many nouns in their early vocabulary, that might 
be a marker of language impairment. That is not to say that nouns are not important in Chinese. 
Certainly they are important, but the proportion or extent to which those differences exist are 
different across languages and have implications all the way down. 

Hagen: This has set the stage for the issues that will be addressed by our next speaker. Professor 
Todd Risley. Risley obtained his Ph.D. at the University of Washington. He was part of the 
cohort at the University of Washington that pioneered much of the research on behavior 
development and behavior modification. He moved to the University of Kansas, where the 
Bureau of Child Research at Kansas studied children who had performance problems that led to 
academic problems. It was in Kansas that he engaged in research with Betty Hart that resulted in 
the volume Meaningful Differences, which helped to refocus the debate looking at the links 
between children's early family experiences, aspects of language, and later cognitive growth. 
Risley moved to his native state of Alaska, where he is a professor at the University of Alaska at 
Anchorage. Several years ago, he also served as Head of the Department of Mental Health for the 
State of Alaska, so he has been involved in policy and practice as well as the academic arena. 

Todd Risley: Betty Hart is a master preschool teacher. She is the one whom I learned everything 
from. She was my graduate student and ran the Turner House Preschool. I did an enormous 
amount of research on day-care environments, and it all came from the same kind of question: 
"What would Betty be doing?" She was also fascinated with child language. The two of us have 
collaborated for 35 years on these issues. 

I will talk about our work, and I am still going to use the same old title. Meaningful Differences 
in the Everyday Experience of Young American Children. We had no idea when we started this in the 
1980s. We went through the literature, and there was no indication as to what went on in the 
homes. All we knew about children was from laboratory situations. I want to remind everyone 
that a child is awake 100 hours a week. That is an opportunity for experience each week. What 
goes on in those 100 hours? In the first book that came out in 1995, Hart and I reported what 
parents actually do in American homes. We had collected data with reliable samples of the daily 
life of sufficient numbers of families to be able to estimate the average amount of parent-talk 
received by American infants and toddlers. 

Researchers went into homes for 1 hour a month, from the time the babies were 7 months 
old until they were 36 months old. They observed what was said to the infant and to other 
people in the infant's presence, and what they did and said in their interactions. By the time we 
found out how hard it would be, we had so much invested in it that we could not stop. The 
other thing to remember is that the observer would become a friend of the family. 

The observer would record and take notes about the behaviors of people in the home. It 
hampered observer reliability. The observations were recorded, then the data were coded and 
transcribed. Each hour of observation took 8 hours of transcription, and probably, another 10 



. 4 1 8 



412 



language, literacy, and early learning 



hours of coding. For every time there was an extra adult in the home or someone was visiting, it 
added another 2 hours of data handling time. 

Our sample consisted of American children, not failed families. These families were perfectly 
happy to have someone come into their homes every month, hour after hour. They were rich 
families, they were poor families, some received public assistance, and some held professional 
degrees. There was no child abuse, drug abuse, or homelessness. These are confident families. 
They may receive public assistance and they may be working poor, but they are not failed 
families. In the data that I am talking about, we have excluded a whole category of people who 
are of concern. 

We started making observations when the babies were 7 months old. That was to get every- 
body used to ever 3 ^ing, get his or her routines down, and get everyone comfortable with the 
process. We began taking serious data when they were 9 months old. We stopped when they 
were 36 months old. We are not talking about 4- and 5-year-old children. Things are different 
with older children who spend more time with other children and more time alone. 

One- and two-year-old children must have a caregiver. They need an adult to stay alive, and 
they have maximum access to time with an adult in their life. They have to be cared for, and an 
adult has to be there to mediate all of the things that are important. Before 1- and 2-year-old 
children have said their first word they rely entirely on adults. This changes from infancy, to 
toddlerhood, to being a full member of the family, that is, being toilet trained, eating adult 
foods, and so forth. They require assistance from adults. Things are different early in children's 
lives compared to when they get to be 3, 4, or 5 years old. 

In regard to everyday experience, we needed to have an idea about what occurs during the 100 
waking hours of a child's weekly life. We needed a good estimate, but we did not get complete 
random selection of times because the research team had to make appointments to be in the 
home based on the families' schedules. We were there in the daytime, evenings, and times that 
were somewhat representative in terms of the child's life; when the television was on, when people 
were on the telephone, when people were visiting, when there was laundry to do, and so forth. 

I want to talk about the first two words of the title of the book: "differences" and "meaning- 
ful." In the process, we found something that we were looking for. This is not in terms of the 
differences within families, but what goes on in an average child's life. 

The numbers indicate that children have 340 utterances addressed to them. They have 1,400 
to 1,500 words addressed to them an hour. There were 17 affirmations, indications that what 
they did was interesting, right, and appropriate. There were 7 prohibitions, indications that what 
they did was not right or appropriate. Those numbers are important, and I will return to them at 
the end. In terms of out-of-home programs, those are areas that we need to think about. 

We have some numbers and estimates that we did not have before, about range and standard 
deviation. What goes on in American homes with these children? The differences were a big 
discovery. I want to mention this because these are the things that we could not see. There are 
things that one cannot see in life without some augmentation and help. We had no notion of 
the magnitude of the differences we saw. 

Everybody talking to a 1- to 2-year-old child is saying similar things. The dialogue is about 
eating, dressing, and using the toilet. It all sounds similar. However, we knew there were 
differences in families because of the data. For example, there were three typical families in our 
data. The age range of the children was from 9 monAs to 36 months, and we recorded the 
number of parent utterances to the children in an hour. There was variability in how many 
utterances were spoken to the child by the parent. Sometimes people were quiet, and sometimes 
people were talkative. This changed, in terms of how they felt on the particular day and what 
was going on. 

What we could not see was the overall pattern. One family varied in the amount of talking, 
but most of the time the amount of talking to that child was high. There was another family 
where the amount of talking varied but was usually low. The differences needed some kind of 



ERIC 




413 



SYMPOSIA/ROUND TABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



observation over time and consolidation to be able to see the magnitude of those differences. 
That was the real discovery in our data— the size and the scope of the differences. 

I will break down the data in terms of words. Words were in three socioeconomic class 
categories for the 42 families. They were low-income parents receiving public assistance, 
working class parents (white collar/blue collar jobs), and professional parents. We saw that there 
were differences. For example, the professional parents addressed 2,100 words an hour to their 
children hour after hour, month after month. The low-income families addressed 600 words an 
hour to their children. The working class parents varied greatly, with an average of around 1,200 
words an hour addressed to their children. 

The amount of parent-talk differed greatly between families. Some parents addressed fewer 
than 500 words to their child in an hour of family life, while other parents addressed over 3,000 
words an hour. Some parents expressed approval and encouragement more than 40 times an 
hour of family life, and other parents expressed approval and encouragement less than four 
times an hour. 

These differences accumulcite. The consistencies within the families indicated that one could 
begin to accumulate data and ask about the magnitude of the child s language experience. For 
each family, the parents talked to their children in consistent amounts, over time. 

We were interested in how much is going on when we see the children in preschool at 4 years 
of age. What has their previous experience been? What are the differences? What we have is an 
estimate or extrapolation: 48 million words for the child in the professional family. Among 
families on public assistance, 13 million words were addressed to the children in their home life. 

In the working class family, the average was about 30 million words addressed to children in home 
life. The size and consistency of the differences was the big discovery, as well as the magnitude of 
the differences in language experience that had been accumulating in children's lives. 

For those of us who are interested in more than language, let us look at encouragement and 
prohibitions. Children in professional families heard "You are right" 32 times an hour, while 
they heard "You are wrong," "Get down from there," "Stop that," or "Don't do that about five 
times an hour. That ratio is 6: 1 . It adds up, so that by the time the children are 4 years of age, the 
differences may be between hearing encouragement 750,000 times, or only 120,000 times. The 
children will hear that they are wrong only 120,000 times or 250,000 times per day. This is a 
ratio of 2:1 in the other direction. That is a massive kind of lifetime batting average. 

The amount of family talk is characteristic of high and low socioeconomic status. That is the 
big socioeconomic correlate here. We looked at the number of parent utterances per hour to the 
child. Among the college-educated group, almost everybody was talkative, but in the low- 
income group, most parents talked less to their children. The working class, from blue collar to 
white collar, was scattered all over the place. This is "Middle America," where some people are 
talkative, with college degrees, and some are low-income families receiving public assistance. 

Let us talk about "meaningful." The number of words in the children's recorded vocabulary at 
3 years of 3 ge was measured. The average number of words said per hour by the parent to the 
child before the child was 3 years old was measured. The amount of talking to the child and the 
size of the child's vocabulary had a strong relationship and were related to developmental 
projector! es. 

The cumulative vocabulary acquisition of the children from our data showed the rate of the 
child adding new words over time from 10 to 36 months. The children from professional 
families grew at a high rate, working class children were at a middle rate, and low-income 
children were at a low rate. The reason that this is important is that it indicates where they are 
going, not just where they have been. The developmental projectories are different. They are 
going in different places. There is a widening gap. In terms of child language development, that 
is the meaningfulness. 

Using the Stanford-Binet with a group of 3-year-olds, we found a correlation of 0.78 between 
IQ scores and extra talk, that is, a parent talking to their child more than they have to. This is 





414 



420 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



from the business of everyday life. I want to provide an idea of how big that correlation is. The 
test/retest reliability of the Stanford Binet was 0.81 . Our interobserver reliability was about half 
the reliability of our data on parenting variables, which was in the high 9.9s. So, one hopes to 
apply those two together and not get much higher than 0.78. It is accounting for all of the 
variance that is left over in the measures. 

My point is that the real variable does not seem to be poverty or receiving public assistance; it 
is the amount of parent talk. When we eliminated the low-income and the professional families, 
the correlation between the amount of parent talk and IQ test scores was 0.76. We followed this 
up when the child reached the third grade, and the children were given a Peabody Picture 
Vocabulary Test (PPVT). 

The correlation of what we saw in parenting before age 3, and then at age 9, for PPVT was 
0.78. Looking at only the working class children, it was 0.77. The issue is magnitude. How 
much experience has been packed into a child's life? It is built up over 100 waking hours a week, 
hour after hour. 

I want to end with a discussion of how much children experience. When we looked at parent 
words per hour in low-income homes, it was 616. In working class homes, it was 1,251. In 
professional homes, it was 2153. In 1 year, we are talking about 3.2 million, 6.5 million, and 
11.2 million words and experiences. The respective number of affirmations per hour was 5, 12, 
and 32. 

Those are the numbers to keep in mind, because those numbers are relevant to our family 
child care. If a parent addresses 1,200 words per hour and responds positively to a child 12 
times an hour, what are they getting from day care or other out-of-home programs? Does the 
remedial program even match what would have been happening at home? We would like to say 
yes; however, if one were to observe some of the programs, the answer would be no. 

Children between the ages of 9 months and 36 months only gain experiences that are 
mediated by an adult. The implications of these numbers are the ones we want to come back to, 
in terms of group care programs for children. What is the experience per hour compared to 
typical homes? Remember that there are 100 hours, even in a 10 hours per day, 5 days per week, 
day-care setting. The child is still in the home half of his waking hours. One cannot consider 
early intervention without addressing the parents. The younger the child is, the more critical 
the intervention. 

Hagen: Our final speaker is Professor Fred Morrison. He did his Ph.D. work at Harvard Univer- 
sity. He has been at the University of Minnesota, the University of Edmonton, the University of 
Alberta, the University of North Carolina, and Loyola University. 

His more recent research has examined the impact of child, family, and schooling factors in 
shaping growth, specifically those factors that may lead to predicting early problems in school. 
He has used an innovative approach called the School Cutoff Method. This method takes advan- 
tage of a natural experimental situation, which he will talk about today. 

Fred Morrison: Over the past few years, I have been involved in a number of research efforts 
looking at the process of school transition. I would like to expand upon what has already been 
described, in order to emphasize the importance of early individual differences and parents. 

Then I will discuss what happens when children start school. What are we doing in terms of the 
schooling environment and society to address some of these issues? I will present some of the 
research that we have done by observing classrooms direcdy. 

FirsL I want to reinforce that it is absolutely critical to recognize that before children ever start 
school, there are significant, meaningful individual differences and a broad range of important 
skills that are relevant for success in school. Skills such as vocabulary, phonological awareness, 
word decoding, and self-regulation. Self-regulation goes by a variety of names ranging from 
"executive control," to "attention control," to "learning-related social skills." All of these are 



O 

ERIC 



421 



415 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



important skills that promote learning. It seems that over the past 30 to 50 years, we have seen 
deterioration in these skills for some percentage of our preschool children. 

Those differences have focused on attention, on the true importance of parenting. We are 
beginning to get a sense that it is not just the literacy environment that makes a difference for 
literacy development over the school transition process. There are other important dimensions 
of parenting in which there is variability and which predict outcomes in kindergarten, first, and 
second grade, particularly, warmth/responsivity, as well as control/discipline. When we put these 
together into what is an ecological, contextual, or a multilevel framework, we begin to see that 
there are complex interactions among children and their parents leading to particular pathways 
of development in early life. 

In some of the research that we have done on large samples, the family learning and literacy 
environment directly impact a child's academic skills, including vocabulary and word decoding, in 
complex ways. Parental warmth/responsivity and sensitivity seem to have a dual focus of directly 
influencing academic skills, but also indirectly influencing academic skills by impacting the child's 
self-regulation. Controlled discipline appears to operate primarily through its effect on a child's 
self-regulation, work-related skills, or response inhibition. 

We cannot lose sight of the fact that some important differences and dynamics relate to 
parenting. All of these dynamic factors produce huge individual differences for the children who 
walk in the school door. 

One of the questions we have tried to answer is "What happens to children when they start 
school?" We are living in a situation where we have a pessimistic view about being able to close 
the gap. The existence of Matthew effects, that is, the rich get richer, the poor get poorer, would 
indicate that school is not having much of an effect. Overall, this notion pervades our society. 

The research on early instmction started out with something called the "great debate." It is 
now called the "reading wars." It refers to the extent to which an emphasis on basic skills or 
phonics is more or less appropriate than an emphasis on meaning, or whole language. Beyond 
the reading wars is an attempt to say that there is an adequate amount of research suggesting 
that all children benefit from some amount of basic skills or phonics training; in fact, learning is 
best imbedded in a meaningful or rich literature environment. 

Keith Rayner and others are talking about a balanced curriculum. The problem with that, 
however, is that we do not really know what the right balance is for a particular child or particu- 
lar groups of children. This is one issue we want to understand better. 

A second issue that has arisen, and one that I think is beginning to impinge on our under- 
standing of the effect of schooling, is what I call "specificity of learning." There is growing 
evidence that the impact of particular parental behaviors or instructional practices actually 
produces specific outcomes in certain cognitive, language, or literacy skills. 

Monique Senechal and JoAnne LeFevre have shown that parental activities, such as book 
reading, have a direct and unique impact on children's language, but little impact on literacy 
skills, such as word decoding or alphabet recognition. We have also found evidence that the 
amount and types of instruction that children receive in kindergarten and first grade can have a 
dramatic effect on skills such as phonological awareness or word decoding, but not on vocabu- 
lary. The specificity of what children learn is, in essence, what they are exposed to. There is little 
transfer in this kind of developmental richness and it does not seem to apply to many of the 
skills that we consider important in school. It therefore appears as if the impact of particular 
kinds of instmction differ in their effectiveness, depending upon the child's characteristics or 
level of functioning. 

Barbara Foorman has evidence that children who are at risk, and who are relatively low 
functioning at the beginning of first grade, benefit most from explicit and direct code teaching 
in basics skills, such as word decoding. She also found that the diildren who were lowest in 
phonological skills at the beginning of first grade benefited most from that type of instmction. 

Connie Juel has some interesting data on those children in a classroom where there was 
emphasis on basic skills. The children who started out the year with the lowest reading skills 



O 

ERIC 



416 



422 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



benefited most in that classroom. However, the children that started out with high reading skills 
benefited most in another classroom that was much more open, where there was discussion. 

There is a growing sense that we need to focus more on some specific child instmction 
interactions. Working primarily with first graders, we have been trying to develop a systematic 
way to conceptualize the early instructional environment and to break our data down into more 
specific dimensions that we can quantify. From the literature that we reviewed, we focused on 
three dimensions. We looked at the teaching environment, where we found that issues of 
learning break down into whether the instruction is primarily teacher-managed or child- 
managed. If one hears echoes of phonics and whole language, that is deliberate. 

Teacher-managed (TM) instmction means that the teacher is in charge of directing a child's 
attention to a particular skill, or level of processing. Child-managed (CM) instmction means 
that the child is in charge of his or her own processing. An independent, but interlocking 
dimension, is whether the instmction is explicit (E), or implicit (1). If the teacher is using initial 
consonant stripping or phonetic awareness as an instmctional practice to promote word 
decoding, the instmction is direct and explicit. For example, sustained silent reading was a 
salient activity in the district that we studied, where the primary or explicit focus was the 
extraction of meaning. Children may have also been implicidy learning vocabulary, or learning 
to decode words. Again, this was an element of the whole language approach with an emphasis 
on implicit, or incidental learning. 

Another dimension that we looked at was word level versus higher order, which essentially 
asked whether the instmction focused on the word level or on a higher order comprehension. 
One other dimension that has not received attention, which we believe to be important, is the 
extent to which the teacher changes the amount of particular types of teaching across the school 
year. Connie Juel found that a teacher who emphasized basic skills systematically decreased the 
amount of explicit teacher-controlled instmction that she produced. There is some sense that 
this is important because the classroom is not a static environment. We wanted to see to what 
extent teacher sensitivity to changes in instmction might also predict growth at the end of first 
grade. In addition to that, we wanted to ascertain the child characteristics that were important. 
We were decoding vocabulary, phonological awareness listing, comprehension, and so forth. 
These work-related skills are called executive functioning. 

In our study, we examined word decoding and vocabulary. Our working hypotheses were: 

(a) Children with low decoding or vocabulary scores in the fall of first grade would achieve 
higher decoding scores in the spring in classrooms with more teacher-managed explicit (TME) 
instmction and decoding and less child-managed implicit (CMl) instmction; and (b) Children 
with high decoding or vocabulary skills in the fall would benefit from less TME instmction and 
more CMl instmction. 

We followed the children from kindergarten through the end of third grade. We had 108 
children in the first grade. They were a normal group, judging from the results on the Stanford 
Binet. We followed 44 teachers over time. We went into the classroom three times a year: the fall, 
the winter, and the spring. We stayed there all day. We created a narrative, recorded what the 
teacher and children were doing, what the materials were, and any other remarks. From that, we 
extracted quantitative measures of the types and amounts of instmction. 

Now, 1 will focus on the teacher- versus child-managed and explicit versus implicit instmc- 
tion. We observed classroom activities and coded them according to the dimensions of instmc- 
tion. An analysis was conducted to determine the extent that the instmction and activities would 
influence the child's word decoding skill. 

TME instmction included alphabet activities, or direct teaching of letters and sight and sound 
activides. An example of TME is when the teacher says, "The next line says 'id.' What is that word 
1-i-d?" The children respond with the verbal response, "litde." The teacher says, "No." Then, the 
children say, "lid." And the teacher says, "Yes, that is correct." 

TMl instmction was vocabulary, teacher reading aloud, and other acdvities for which the 
explicit activity was focused on something else, but could influence word decoding. For CME 



423 



417 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



instruction, only spelling activity was observed and coded as explicitly influencing word decod- 
ing. Interestingly, that there was a strong whole-language emphasis in the school district we 
studied. There was little seatwork and few word-level worksheets. There was a lot of CMl, 
particularly sustained silent reading. 

We measured the children’s decoding skills with the Peabody Individual Achievement Test, 
the children’s vocabulary with the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, and we also used measures 
of the home literacy environment. The parents’ educational level was used as a control variable. 

The children’s vocabulary levels were fairly standard. Overall, they were a little higher than 
first grade, although, this was a skew caused primarily by a few children in the district whose 
v'ocabulary skills were extremely high. We used hierarchical linear modeling, considering the 
spring decoding score as a function of the child variables, and also as a function of the teaching 
variables. This was a powerful technique, which allowed one to take out all of the background 
variables and look only at those influences of interest. 

We wanted to find out the effects of different kinds and amounts of instruction, in relation to 
the children’s characteristics. We found support for our initial hypothesis; the level of the child s 
fall decoding score varied with the amount of TME instruction. Low-reading children benefited 
from more TME instruction, and high-reading children benefited from less. We did not find the 
predicted interaction with the amount of CMl, which was somewhat of a surprise. 

We found a mirror image with the vocabulary scores taken in the fall of the school year: 

High- and low-reading children responded to different amounts of CMl instruction in the 
predicted direction, but it was not the same effect with TME. Because of what we assumed was a 
reasonably high correlation between vocabulary and reading, we had expected that we would 
find the same pattern and results with both types of instruction. We were suspicious that 
something more complicated was occurring. We examined the relationship between vocabulary 
and word decoding scores. 

In this sample, we found that the correlation between the children’s vocabulary scores and 
their reading scores was only 0.26, which was surprisingly small. When we performed a scatter 
plot, we found that many of the children clustered around the mean, but that there were a 
significant number of children in each quadrant. We thought that the instruction was sensitive 
to more complex characteristics of these children, which related to both their vocabulary and 
their word decoding scores. The data were analyzed in the same way, but there were two indica- 
tors, the level of vocabulary and the level of word decoding, instead of a single indicator. 

The low-vocabulary/low-decoding group was functioning at the 25th percentile of the 
standardized test scores according to the national norms. We found that those children who 
where low in vocabulary and low in decoding benefited significantly from more minutes of TME 
instruction. However, there was a different pattern for CMl: the more CMl and the more 
sustained silent reading, the worse these children were doing. 

An interesting finding was that the rate of change, or the extent to which teachers changed the 
amount of CMl instruction over the course of the year, also predicted growth. Those teachers 
who went from low to high amounts of CMl instruction over the school year produced children 
who had higher scores at the end than those who had a less steep slope, a flat slope, or for 
teachers who had high CMl throughout the year. For these children, it was not optimal to have a 
high proportion of CMl over the course of the entire year. Instead, they should start with a small 
amount of CMl and gradually move up as word-decoding skills improve. 

Assuming these data were a reasonable reflection of what was happening, we wondered what 
we could expect from instruction if our dimensions were reasonably good predictors. We looked 
at more effective and less effective strategies, and attempted to measure how much growth they 
would produce over the course of the first grade. We examined the 90th and 10th percentile 
strategies on the three dimensions. The 90th percentile was the more effective strategy, com- 
pared to the 10th percentile. If our predictions were correct, we could move a child who was well 
below first grade reading level at the beginning of the year to well above second grade level by 



418 



424 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



the end of the year. In fact, no child ever achieved this, but our predicted outcomes were based 
on extrapolation. 

We found that the less effective strategy produced almost no growth. Individual children 
seemed to conform to the pattern. We found that a child who was close to the optimal strategy 
in the first grade approached the least optimal strategy in second grade and was still about a 
half-year behind. 

The other groups conformed to the pattern that we predicted. For the high-decoding/ high- 
vocabulary group, the amount of TME instmction had no effect. The more CMI instmction they 
received, the better they performed. The best predictor, in terms of change, was a steady amount 
of CMI over the course of the whole year. The high-decoding/low-vocabulary group was interest- 
ing because given their high decoding skills they did not need much TME. There was no effect by 
amount of TME. In fact, because of their high decoding skills, they benefited much more from a 
year of steady CMI instruction. Since their vocabulary was low, the best predictor was the steeper 
slope of CMI. The low-decoding/high-vocabulary group needed much more in the way of TME 
due to their low decoding, and a steady diet of CMI, because of their high vocabulary. 

We may have captured real phenomena that could help us to understand the complex 
patterns that are observed; that is, why some children succeed at some points and fail at other 
points. In general, we found that different profiles of instmction appear to be most effective for 
children with specific combinations of child characteristics or levels of skill. 

For further research, we should try to understand the dimensions of instmction at a more 
analytical level. What are the dimensions of instmction? How do they operate? What kinds of 
variability do we see in our classrooms? 

It is also our intention to start looking at other child characteristics. Clearly, phonemic 
awareness is a worthy area of study. However, consider a situation in which two children are 
both good readers, but one has reasonable self-regulation skills and the other is presenting with 
ADHD. One would suspect the patterns of effective instmction for these two children to be 
somewhat different. It would be useful to have empirical confirmation of that suspicion, 
because it would tell us something about what should happen in the classroom. 

This entire research effort attempts to take what Risley and Tardiff are doing, in terms of 
understanding the nature of these early differences, and match that to an understanding of how 
schools can best deal with those individual differences. Our sense is, and we have just begun this 
process, that we are looking at some complex interaction patterns. We think the implications for 
instmctions are fairly clear and straightforward. If we are ever going to make a difference at the 
individual child level, we have to be able to identify what a child's individual profile of skills is. 
At some level, we have to admit that we cannot make a difference until we know what that 
particular child needs. 

Finally, it seems that when we have a profile, and if we do understand the dimensions of 
teaching, that we could put this together into an effective package of instmction at the individu- 
alized level. It is not just a matter of balancing one or another kind of instmction, but also 
looking at a particular profile of strengths and weaknesses and fashioning an individualized 
instmctional profile for a given child. 

That may seem rather idealized at this point, but we are building a good foundation by 
considering exactly how to make a difference in children's lives, and how to optimize the 
reading and literacy levels of children. 

Question: I had a question about the TME instmction and the down side for children who are 
doing well. In other words, for those who come in with high-vocabulary, high-decoding skills 
are you suggesting that it can cause major problems for their continued learning if you stress 
their outlook too much? 



425 



419 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Morrison: The optimum profile for the high-vocabulary, high-decoding group is that they do 
not even need to go to first grade. 

Question: If we do interfere, and give them too much indirect instruction, are we going to make 
them worse? 

Morrison: That is what these data imply. Not so much that it would make them worse, but 
essentially, it would retard the degree of growth that they could show. The degree of growth 
between them is not that great. It is half of a year, but that is half of a year in first grade, second 
grade, and third grade. All of a sudden, in fourth grade the child who received the most effective 
strategy you could produce is 2 years ahead of another child who did not receive it. 

Question: Did you control for socioeconomic status when you looked at these data? 

Morrison: Yes. 

Question: Did you find that low-decoders/low-vocabulary producers were more likely to come 
from low socioeconomic backgrounds? 

Morrison: In general, that is true. Our children did not really go nearly as low as Risley's low- 
income children did. In general, there is an association with parental education, which was our 
main message. 1 think Risley^s point has to be recognized. I think that is one of the starkest 
graphs in his book. Theoretically or conceptually, I am not sure we should be focusing on social 
class. Let us go down to the proximal level and ask what behavior is producing the outcome. 

Question: Say there is a child from a lower socioeconomic class and early intervention is 
provided. How do we intervene with the parents? How do we make this child produce more like 
higher income children? 

Morrison: Risley's data are sobering, in terms of what it takes to work with parents. In our lab 
we go back and forth between whether or not we should take those dimensions of parenting; 
whether or not we should try to work directly with the parents to help them gain control of 
themselves, learn the skills they need, and impart these skills to their children. That is a mam- 
moth undertaking. What we need to do is educate the next generation of parents. We should 
start parenting classes for middle-school children. That is the real answer. 

Risley: The problem is that it is impossible. You cannot do this in a generation. We were given 
the Civil Rights Movement and lohn F. Kennedy broke our hearts with that issue by saying that 
we were going to make it different in one generation. You have to be thinking about the next 
generation; about how to make sure every child receives more language and more vocabulary 
than his or her parents. We have to stick to that movement. 

Hagen: Unfortunately, we are not patient; people want results right away, or else the money is 
removed from programs. 

Question: This brings up the issue of early screening. If this pans out in your study, then we 
should take a look at assessing children when they come in and then design a future strategy 
based on the assessment. Is that accurate? 



426 



420 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



Morrison: Yes, that is the direct implication. If these results were accurate, that would be the 
first step. We need to know what a child's profile looks like, and we should not have a global 
instmctional intervention for them. 

Hagen: I would point to Joe Torgeson's research as something to look at if you are not aware of 
it. He has an NICHD grant for the largest funded study there has been on learning disabilities. 
He takes a preventative approach to learning and reading disabilities, and talks about how one 
should start at a general level, then move to a more specific level as the data from the child will 
show what she needs. 



ERIC 



437 



421 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Teaching Mathematics to Head Start Children: 
Developmental Approaches 

CHAIR: Catherine Sophian 

DISCUSSANT; Sidney Rachlin 

PRESENTERS: Catherine Sophian, Douglas A. Frye 

■ Mathematics for the Future: Developing a Head Start 
Curriculum to Support Mathematics Learning 

Catherine Sophian 

While mathematics instruction for very young children needs to be age-appropriate in format 
and content it should also prepare children for the future. I will begin by expanding on this 
idea and the broader developmental perspective behind it because considerations about future 
learning are not widely discussed. I will then describe a Head Start mathematics curriculum 
based on this perspective and present preliminary assessment data. 

The core of developmentally appropriate practice is that the content and format of early 
instruction should not be too advanced for the cognitive and behavioral characteristics of young 
children. This perspective is derived primarily from Piaget s (1970) account of a sequence of 
cognitive-developmental stages. Piaget cautioned against providing instruction prematurely, 
warning that it could interfere with the discovery process he considered essential for genuine 
cognitive growth. 

However, Vygotsky's (1978) theory, which emphasizes the role of society in promoting 
cognitive development, has different instructional implications reflecting this perspective. Soviet 
work in early mathematics education has been concerned with identifying the conceptual 
foundations for mathematical ideas and making them central to mathematics instruction from 
the beginning. In 1966, Davydov developed a curriculum for the entire course of primary and 
secondary mathematics education based on an analysis of the concept of numbers as a founda- 
tion in measurement. 

The Head Start curriculum I have developed also emphasizes measurement. Core concepts 
include the unit of measure, and composition, or the idea that individual units can be combined to 
form higher-order units or taken apart to form lower-order ones. These themes run through 
learning activities that span the domains of: (a) numbers, particularly counting and comparison 
tasks involving units other than discrete objects; (b) measurement, including continuous 
quantities, such as area and volume; and (c) geometry, with a focus on the discovery of relation- 
ships among shapes. w 

Two 1 2 -week instructional sequences that were presented consisted primarily of structured 
small-group learning activities involving objects that can be manipulated, such as containers of 
different sizes, materials to fill the containers, and cut-outs of geometric shapes. Related family 
activities were also provided. 

Two assessment instruments were administered at the beginning and end of the year: (a) the 
mathematics subscale of the Developing Skills Checklist (DSC), and (b) an original instrument, 
the math supplement, which was developed for this project and contained nonstandard enumera- 
tion items, measurement items, and shape items. 

Although scores on the DSC improved from pretest to posttest, no significant differences 
emerged between children who received the math intervention and children who received a 
literacy intervention instead. On the math supplement, the 4-year-olds who received the math 
intervention showed stronger gains on the measurement items (but not on the other items) than 
children who received the literacy intervention (see Figure 1). 




428 



422 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



Figure 1. 



1.4 




Pretest Posttest Pretest Posttest Pretest Posttest 

NUMBER MEASUREMENT SHAPE 

While further work is needed, these findings raise important questions about what we can 
and should be teaching young children about mathematics. 

References 

Davydov, V. V. (1966). The psychological characteristics of the "prenumerical" period of mathematics 
instmction. In D. B. El'konin & V. V. Davydov (Eds.), Learning capacity and age level: Primary grades 
(109-205). Moscow: Prosveshchenie. 

Piaget, J. (1970). Piaget's theory. In P. H. Mussen (Ed.), Carmichael's manual of child psychology, Vol. I 
(703-732). New York: Wiley. 

Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 



■ The Effects of Strategy-Based Learning for 
Emergent Numeracy in Head Start 

Douglas Frye, Adam DiBella, Virginia Hampton, Margalit Ziv 

The current project was designed to support Head Start children's cognitive strategies in emer- 
gent numeracy. The project's aim was to identify a reliable pathway to early math learning in 
school. In partnership with Head Start in the School District of Philadelphia, the project used 
research on children's cognitive strategies to formulate a set of whole class and small group 
instrurtional activities in early math. The activities included instruction in counting, number 
recognition, cardinality, comparison of amounts, and addition. 

The project builds on developmental and educational research that establishes the impor- 
tance of cognitive strategies in acquisition of early math (Baroody, 1987; Frye, Braisby, Lowe, 
Maroudas, & Nicholls, 1989; Fuson, 1992, Fuson & Secada, 1986; Siegler, 1995; Siegler & 
Jenkins, 1989; Steffe & Cobb, 1988). The curriculum presents activities that allow children to 



429 



423 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



apply a known strategy to a problem in order to discover an appropriate answer. Thus, the 
curriculum fulfills the dual goals of the new National Council of Teachers of Mathematics 
Standards (2000): providing students with a method to compute an answer but doing so in a 
way that supports the relevant numerical concept. 

The effectiveness of the strategy-based activities is currently being tested with the participa- 
tion of 180 children (M = 5 years 3 months; range = 4 years; 5 months to 6 years) from 21 
classrooms in six Head Start centers in Philadelphia. Half the children are experiencing the new 
curriculum and half are acting as a comparison group. Both groups were pretested at the 
beginning of the year and posttested at the end, using shortened versions of the TEMA-II 
adapted from Ginsburg & Baroody (1990). The results show a significant advantage for the new 
curriculum. The longitudinal data will eventually make it possible to analyze individual differ- 
ences at multiple time points. These data will be used to ascertain whether early strategy use 
forms a pathway to later strategy use and learning in school. 

The results that have been analyzed indicate that the children in the study possess a variety of 
early math strategies (DiBella et al., 2001). For counting, the children recognized that numbers 
must be said in sequence and the entire set counted, although not all the children knew that 
they should both count the numbers in sequence and count the entire set. They also understood 
that addition involved the combining of sets, which was an understanding they had developed 
before being able to count the total accurately. The results show that having children choose 
between strategies was a more sensitive method of assessment than Siegler and Crowleys (1994) 
approach of having them rate individual strategies. Being able to compare strategies appeared to 
help the children identify the important differences, and may offer a new means of strategy 
instmction. 

The final results of the project have the potential to yield important theoretical information 
about the relationship between cognitive strategies and learning, the impact of early experience 
on strategy formation, and the characteristics of strategy use that best provide a pathway to later 
learning. The partnership will provide a practical demonstration of how an approach that 
supports emergent numeracy strategies in Head Start can contribute to the achievement of 
school readiness. 

References 

Baroody, A. 1. (1987). Children's mathematical thinking. New York; Teachers College Press. 

DiBella, A., Frye, D., Abramovici, A. Gaitman, P., Classman, K. Hampton, V., Monahan, S., Park, H. T., 
& Prabhu, R. (2001, May). Assessing emergent numeracy strategies and understanding in Head 
Start. Paper presented at the Cross-University Conference: Bridging the Gaps between Developmental 
Research, Practice, and Public Policy, New York University. 

Frye, D., Braisby, N., Lowe, Maroudas, C. and Nicholls, 1. (1989). Young children's understanding 
of counting and cardinality. Child Development, 60, 1158 - 1171. 

Fuson, K. C. (1992). Research on learning and teaching addition and subtraction of whole numbers. 
In G. Leinhardt, R. T. Putnam, & R. A. Hattmp (Eds.), The analysis of arithmetic for mathematics 
teaching. (243 - 275). Hillsdale, N}: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Fuson, K., & Secada, W. (1986). Teaching children to add by counting-on with one-handed finger 
patterns. Cognition and Instructionf 3, 229 - 260. 

Ginsburg, H. P, & Baroody, A. 1. (1990). Test of early mathematics ability. Austin: PRO-ED. 

Siegler, R. S. (1995). How does change occur; A microgenetic study of number conservation. Cognitive 
Psychology, 28, 255 • 273. 

Siegler, R. S., & Crowley, K. (1994). Constraints on learning in nonprivileged domains. Cognitive 
Psychology, 27, 194 - 226. 

Siegler, R. S., & lenkins, E. (1989). How children discover new strategies. Hillsdale, Nf. Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. 

Steffe, L. P, & Cobb, P. (1988). Construction of arithmetical meanings and strategies. New York: Springer- 
Verlag. 



424 



430 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



Impacting Policy Through Research-Based Emerging 
Language and Literacy Practices: A Model Program 
Leads to Policy Changes on State and National Levels 

CHAIR: Ann Minness 

PRESENTERS: Nell R. Carvell, Salvador Hector Ochoa, Connie Peters, Wanda Smith, 

Liston Mike Rice, Bill Ball 

Ann Minness: I am the director and grants administrator with the Texas Instruments Founda- 
tion (TI) and also a member of this collaborative team. You will learn how a partnership 
including a corporate foundation, private and public universities, and courageous Head Start 
agencies were instrumental in impacting policy at the state level in Texas. We have also seen 
changes in early childhood education at the national level. 

Our panel of speakers are Mike Rice, President of the Texas Instruments (TI) Foundation; 
Wanda Smith, CEO of Head Start of Greater Dallas; Connie Peters, Director of the Southern 
Methodist University Preschool Initiative; Nell Carvell, author and creator of the Language 
Enrichment Activities Program (LEAP); Bill Ball, Researcher and Director of Initiative for 
Program Evaluation; and Hector Ochoa, Associate Professor of Psychology at the School of 
Education, Texas A&M University. 

Mike Rice: Two other universities are working with us in this program, including the University 
of Texas at Arlington, School of Social Science, and the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public 
Affairs at the University of Texas, Austin. 

In the late 1980s, the Board of Directors of theTI Foundation asked the staff to find an 
activity in Dallas that was important and unique, with the potential to impact the community. 
We decided to focus on early childhood intervention, largely based on the Prairie Preschool 
Study, which showed that a solid preschool experience could pay itself off many times over in 
the future of children. 

We formed a collaboration with the Head Start of Greater Dallas, in a new Head Start center 
called the Cone Head Start Center, which opened in 1991. We have worked together ever since. 
In the area of Dallas served by the Cone Center, 97% of the parents were single parents when 
the program was started. Furthermore, 85% were unemployed, and the average yearly income 
was no more than $7,000. Children in kindergarten were scoring in the 20th and 30th percen- 
tiles on the Iowa Tests of Basic Skills, and by the time they entered third grade they were about a 
year behind their peers in skills. These numbers have improved since the collaboration. 

The Foundation's initial activity consisted of adding strength to the medical and social 
services components of Head Start as they were normally offered at that time. A full-time nurse 
practitioner was based at the Center, to work with 90 children. We provided excellent medical 
care to the children because our nurse was there all day, everyday. We also employed two 
graduate social workers for this caseload of 90 families. The way social workers are used in the 
public school system in Dallas, it is impossible for them to have any real impact on the families. 

As an example, Frazier Elementary School has one social worker for one half-day a week, for 
250 children. That social worker cannot have any impact on the lives of those children or their 
families; but with a caseload of 45 families per social worker, they could have some impact, and 
they did. 

We sent the children into the Head Start system, they experienced activities, and they became 
extremely well socialized. They learned how to complete activities by themselves. However, they 
were not learning enough about the educational tools they needed in order to succeed in the 
public school system. In the Iowa Tests of Basic Skills (ITBS), the children at Cone were in the 
36th percentile for reading and vocabulary; this is below the national norm by 14 percentiles. 



O 

ERIC 



431 



425 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



The cJiildren who did not attend Cone did worse in that particular domain. However, the Cone 
children did not score any higher on average than the children who had not attended Cone. The 
same finding was true of the second group that went through kindergarten. We started to 
wonder whether the program was making a difference considering the amount of money we had 
invested in it. The educational values that we had hoped to find were not apparent. 

We went in search of the silver bullet. That silver bullet was phonics. We checked with the 
best private school for young African American children in Dallas, and we requested permission 
to use their phonics program designed for the preschool level. The headmaster of that school 
said we could not, since the Cone children were way behind the children at the school. This 
school charges tuition and only accepts a limited number of children. He told us we would 
have to find our own suitable phonics program, and if we could not find one, we would have to 
make one. 

The next step was to find somebody with the ability to make a phonics program. In the early 
1990s, we found Nell Carvell. She came to the Cone Center and observed the children's activi- 
ties. She loved all the activity centers, the movement from one activity to another, circle time, 
and the discussion about what the children had done. She thought the activities were wonderful 
but her impression was that we needed to enrich the language component. Ten years later, she is 
still adding language to the mix. She cannot seem to get it done, but she is good and does not 
give up. 

The national norm is at the 50th percentile. The language program started in the third cohort 
of children, around 1993 or 1994. There was some improvement when the program started but 
my goal was to get the children up to the national norm in the disciplines that ITBS tested at 
that time, which were vocabulary, word analysis, and math. 

We are up in the mid- to high-40s for reading vocabulary and word analysis, and at 54 for 
math. This work was done at Frazier Elementary School, across the street from the Cone Center. 
The combination of the preschool, the stronger preschool language program, and a new 
principal at Frazier resulted in the data at cohort four. Cohort four is above the national norm. 
They are above approximately two thirds to three quarters of all children in the United States, 
with scores of 65, 73, and 73. These are young African American children who live in dangerous 
neighborhoods with violence, drugs, and environmental issues. 

Carvell and I continued to develop this program. One of the instruments Carvell has used in 
the evaluation of the curriculum is the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT), in its third 
edition. It shows the situation of the children when they come into the Center, with a bell curve 
distribution to the left. 

The only trouble with that distribution is that it is backwards. There should be a small 
number on the left where we had 25% of our population. That is the bottom 1 percentile of all 
children in the United States. We should have 0.4 children in that section of the curve. Then they 
get gradually smaller and smaller. One child is at or above the 40th percentile. It is typical in this 
population that we do not get a single child who is at or above the norm. Not one of the 90 
children in the Center were above the national norm. 

When we get through one year at the Cone Center, we see that we are down to only one child 
in the bottom 1 percentile. That is not good enough, but it is much better. Seven children are in 
the 40th percentile category or better. We have not given up, and we are making great strides. 

We now have 8 years of data, and eight groups of children, with 90 children per group. For 
reading and vocabulary, the early cohorts went from the 36th percentile, to the 21st, to the 40s, 
up to the 60s, and as high as the 94th percentile in our latest cohort. In word analysis, the Cone 
children are up in the 60s and 70s on average. In math, they are up in the 60s and 70s, with a 
couple of exceptions. 

These children are now performing better than the average child in the United States. Regard- 
less of color, creed, or anything else, they are above average. When looking at the Texas Assess- 
ment of Academic Skills (TAAS), the school these children attend has shown exemplary results 
over the past 2 years, in the state's highest category. In various groups, 90% of the children have 




432 



426 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



to pass the TAAS. Over the last two years, every child who went to the Cone Center and took the 
TAAS reading and TAAS math passed the test, through the third grade at Frazier. That is a better 
statistic than if one looks at all the White children in the state of Texas, or all the White children 
in the Dallas independent school district. One does not often see data sets where young African 
American children outperform young White children, but that is one of them. 

The Dallas independent school district has a strong analysis and evaluation group, and they 
looked at a group of students who attended Cone and Frazier and stayed in Frazier. When those 
children got to the third grade, 55% of them could read at grade level, compared to the Dallas 
school district average of the low thirties. Of the children who did not go to Cone but did attend 
Frazier, 42% of those children could read at grade level. That implied a 13% improvement in 
children who could read at grade level, just based on the preschool experience. Of the children 
who attended Cone, then Frazier for kindergarten, and were then scattered through the system, 
only 19% could read at grade level. 

Everyone who sees this data agrees that family factors influence those numbers when chil- 
dren move that often, and I believe that is absolutely tme. But the fact is that those are the data. 
For the children who did not go to Cone and then went to Frazier for kindergarten and then to 
various other schools, only 5% of those children could read at grade level. There was a 14% 
change based on preschool. The message is that a good preschool experience is essential. It is 
equally important to have a good elementary school experience. 

At the state level, we commissioned a study by the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public 
Affairs at the University of Texas at Austin, to create a legislative initiative to distribute research- 
based curricula, evaluation, and teacher training across the state. Some graduate students created 
a program worth $ 1 million. The state legislator saw the amount and said that with such a high 
figure, they would have to tell him what to cancel, since there was not $ 1 million available. 
When they finished, they had appropriated $17 million to this program for research-based 
curricula with strong evaluation programs and teacher training. That is in process today. 

As a precursor to that, the state gave a few hundred thousand dollars to Southern Methodist 
University (SMU) to start four centers around the state of Texas, in Mount Pleasant, Brownwood, 
West Orange, and El Paso. Bill Ball will talk about the data from those four centers. Interestingly, 
we always hear about little towns, poor children, "bad this" and "bad that." In all four of these 
sites, the children came into the center ahead of the children that came into Cone— so much for 
the small town idea. 

Wanda Smith: Rice is a hard act to follow, and I have been trying to do that for the 13 years 
now. Head Start of Greater Dallas is a large metropolitan program, and we serve the entire 
Dallas County. We operate 27 grantee centers, and we have two delegate agencies who operate 
six other Head Start Centers. When Rice discovered us, we had probably 11 centers and 1,180 
children, so we were very pleased to be discovered by Texas Instmments. 

We were fortunate in that we had just received expansion and were about to open the 
Margaret Cone Center, so that gave us an opportunity to start out fresh with Texas Instmments at 
a new center in a new location in the city. The Cone Center is located in a federal housing 
project in an extremely low-income neighborhood. It is one of the lowest income neighbor- 
hoods in Dallas. 

The University of Texas at Arlington was commissioned to talk about what a quality, ideal 
center would be. What would it be made of? A lower teacher to child ratio was the first thing we 
identified, so at the Cone Center we have a 1:9 ratio, with one teacher per nine children. We also 
have a nurse practitioner there on a daily basis. She takes care of every health need a child could 
have. We also have the two social workers, a site-based Center manager who is responsible for all 
of the Center staff, and a receptionist to answer the telephone and do secretarial work. 

It is an ideal place, a place that people dream of How can Head Start dollars to do that? That 
was very difficult for us to do previously. Some of our advantages include the corporate sponsor. 



O 



433 



427 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



a university partnership, and collaboration with a unique person, our Mayor Fullbright, who is 
with us every step of the way. In terms of challenges, we are part of a community action agency 
and have not been accustomed to dealing with "Corporate America." Rice has been wonderful, 
talking constantly with us. That first assessment of when our children went to Frazier blew us 
completely out of the water. We were devastated. We asked what we were not doing to prepare 
children, because the initial research by the University of Texas had talked about Head Start 
children and how they fared well above their peers, with fewer failures in school and fewer 
children in special education classes. All of those things had been precursors to our involvement 
with Texas Instruments. 

As we went into Frazier and that first cohort whom we had worked with for 7 months took 
the ITBS and did not do well, we were devastated. We did not know where to go. When we 
began to look at their assessment and what we were doing, we knew that there was something 
wrong. We did not know that phonics would be the answer, and we were reluctant about it since 
it was something we had never done. One of the good things about Head Start of Greater Dallas 
is that we learn from lessons. We learn from assessments. We learn from what has been shown 
to us in black and white, and we are flexible. 

We began to look at what our children were not doing, and we then began to seek out the 
answers. We met with Carvell, who was at SMU, and she too believed in developmentally 
appropriate activities. Initially, that was one of the phrases that Rice hated, but I think he has a 
good understanding of it now. Learning has to be meshed with expectations of children and age- 
appropriate tasks. Carvell understood that and integrated her program into classroom activities. 

It is difficult to replicate a model center with Head Start, in that there was not enough money 
to do the things that worked at Cone. We began the replication as we received quality money. 

We could not hire a nurse practitioner for every center. Our initial hiring was two nurse practi- 
tioners, who had the responsibility of ensuring that our health content area was operating above 
the performance standards. They went to the centers and examined individual children. They 
made sure children had a health home. Our on-site management philosophy has expanded to 
all of the 26 centers. 

We replicated what worked at Margaret Cone in the curriculum. We have expanded the LEAP 
curriculum to all of our centers with the exception of nine, where we have just received funding 
to expand. We wanted to take responsibility for, but could never prove, the fact that we were 
responsible for the change in the language of reauthorization for Head Start. We know that we 
cannot take credit for it, but as we look at every child. No Child Left Behind, and all of those 
things that have come into the national forefront, we feel that the Margaret Cone Center was 
used as a beta center. The Cone Center proved that a language-enriched environment works. The 
$17 million received in Texas was based on what we were doing at the Cone Center. No Child 
Left Behind is based on what we are doing at the Cone Center. 

Our agency is in its third long range plan and many of the components that are implemented 
are attributed to what we have done in the past, and what we can build on to make our program 
exceed the quality of performance standards. One of our new endeavors is the Jerry Junkins 
Center and Ochoa will present the program. It has been a hard role to learn to work with 
children who have three different masteries of language. It is one that we know that we are 
finding the answer to. We feel strongly that those children will come out ahead of the curve, and 
that it is something that could be used as a model for our program, as well as other programs 
that work with predominantly Latino populations. We have been able to examine and refine our 
work along the way. 

Nell Carvell: I have had the blessing of working with Rice, Minness, and Smith, who are 
visionaries. From the beginning, the program has been written with the teachers. I met with the 
teachers weekly for 2 years. The teachers told me what was working and what was not working 
in the classrooms. I never tried to write a phonics program. I did not feel that it was appropriate 
for 4-year-old children, but they were missing language. Children have limited vocabularies. 





428 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



They do not speak in complete sentences. They did not use correct endings on words. We know 
from research that these circumstances will hinder their abilities to learn to read. If we could 
correct, build upon, and strengthen their language skills, then we felt we could tmly give them 
an edge toward learning how to read. 

1 want to briefly go over the components of LEAP. We want children to love reading. If they 
love reading, and they can learn to read easily, they will be far ahead of the game, for the rest of 
their lives. The first 3 years of school are spent learning to read, and if we can get these children 
ready to enter kindergarten ready to read then they will succeed. 

The seven components of the Language Enrichment Activities Program (LEAP) are: 

(a) language with stories, (b) language with words, (c) language with letters, (d) language with 
sounds, (e) language with ideas, (f) language with fine motor skills, and (g) language with math 
and science. The first and most essential thing is to have books in the ^classrooms. Hardcover 
books for children are always part of the budget. The books are in Spanish or English depending 
upon the class composition. Language with stories builds listening skills, begins print awareness, 
enriches vocabulary, strengthens sequencing skills, and shares the joy of reading books. How- 
ever, if 1 only had $7,000 per year in my budget, 1 would not buy books because they are not 
essential. They may be essential for one's soul but they are not essential in the same way as food. 
Head Start families do not have money to purchase books. If we can put books in the Head Start 
environment then they will be available to them. 

Language with words builds vocabulary, strengthens concepts, and models correct grammar 
and syntax. The Oxford University Press has a nice series of bilingual posters of children doing 
everyday things, and we talk about them. We talk about what is happening in the poster. 
Children in Dallas, in the inner city, often have no experience with a farm; they have never seen 
a real cow or a horse. They have not been to the beach, so if one can bring that in with literature 
and posters, it provides a way to talk about objects and events. We work on vocabulary. We work 
with the teachers as well as the children. 

Language with sounds is phonological awareness. Of all the components of the program, this 
aspect has been the most controversial. In the early 1990s, people did not like to talk about 
phonological awareness. We now know that it is critical. We begin with rhyming, sounds, and 
finger plays. We march to words. We clap words. We talk. We show them print awareness and we 
explain that words mn across a page from left to right. Historically, we have not done such a 
good job with that at the auditory level. If 1 say, "stand up tall," I want a child to know that the 
phrase has three whole words that it is not just the concept of "stand up tall," but in language, it 
is three units of speak. We talk about a whole word. Your name is a word. Naming things is part 
of learning that words are units of speak as when it is seen in print. We progress from one- 
syllable words to phrases to compound words. Some of our children in the late spring are ready 
for single sounds, but that is only an option for children who have turned 5 in the winter and 
are ready. 

Language with letters provides an experience with block capital letters, an introduction to 
lowercase letters in print, and is the beginning of sound-symbol association. Along with phono- 
logical awareness, children need to be aware that letters and numbers are different. They are 
both symbols with meaning in our visual environment, but they are not the same. We talk about 
upper case letters. The first letter of the child's name will be the first letter he or she recognizes. 
The children learn that first letter by wearing a nametag. It impacts how they scribble and how 
they draw when they begin to write. It often reflects the shape of the first letter of their name. We 
talk about letters while engaging in free play; it is not a stmctured activity. 

The fifth component is language with ideas. After a few years, we found that although the 
classrooms had a lot of size, shape, and color sequence activities, the children were not talking 
about it. If children do not use language to express the concepts, then they cannot communicate 
their knowledge. We want to build vocabulary so that a child is able to communicate with 
others. We have teachers talk about sequence, patterns, size, shape, color, and linguistic concepts 
to build language. 



435 



429 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Language with fine motor skills is important. Motor skills develop from the center out to the 
extremities. Think about your fingers; they are out at the end. If someone is holding objects with 
the whole hand then they are not ready to pinch. We develop fine motor skills (prewriting) with 
whole hand activities that require grabbing and grasping and finger activities to squeeze and 
pinch; both are incorporated with language. 

The last component, language with math and science, is a recent development of the pro- 
gram. Last summer we decided that maybe our children were not performing as well in math 
and science as they could. Although math and science was scattered throughout the program, we 
did not specifically say, ^T'his is math. Now here is a whole section on math. There are many 
graphing, patterns, numbers, and counting activities. There is a science and discovery table with 
magnets, measuring, and sorting. Many children can sing the ABCs or count 1 to 10 but it has 
no meaning. We use graphing to back up these concepts. 

Connie Peters: I have been with this group for almost 4 years. Our pilot site for English- 
speaking children is the Cone Center. Our pilot site for Spanish-speaking children is the Junkins 
Center. We had curriculum improvement because we worked together with teachers to develop 
lesson plans. But there was a missing piece because there was no teacher-training component. 

We went into the classrooms and observed the teachers. Head Start does a great job of 
involving parents and bringing them in as teachers. All that is required is a GED or high school 
diploma. We wanted to encourage these teachers to have better language skills with their 
children. 

We started offering a 3-hour course for credit at Southern Methodist University (SMU). We 
incorporated LEAP, but we also spent an enormous amount of time on improving the teachers' 
language skills. The results have been tremendous. At the beginning of the semester the teachers 
are rather passive, and by the middle of the semester they are in fully engaged in learning. They 
are excited and ready to learn. Then they have the confidence to go back to school. As you know, 
the Head Start mandate is to have 50% of teachers with an associate's degree by 2003. 

We received a grant from Texas Educational Agency (TEA) to pilot LEAP in four sites around 
Texas: Brownwood, Mount Pleasant, El Paso, and West Orange. This was a challenge for us 
because two of these areas were incorporated with the public school and they had degree 
certified teachers. We did not feel that it was necessary to work with those teachers to improve 
their language skills. We changed our teacher training to build upon their existing skills. We 
wanted to help them manage their learning centers. Since language is important in the pte-K 
classroom, we trained teachers to incorporate LEAP throughout the day, whether it is transition 
time, free play, or circle time with large and small group activities. 

Recently, we went to California and trained 135 teasers. California has decided to itriple- 
ment LEAP in a statewide initiative program. We will also be implementing LEAP in Louisiana. 
In Tuscaloosa, Alabama we had an incredible model because we combined the pre-K and the 
public school Head Start for teacher training. We are using that model in Dallas to train Head 
Start programs and independent school districts; 235 classrooms will be using LEAP. 

The three necessary components of LEAP are curriculum, teacher training, and volunteers. 
There is an incredible volunteer program at the Margaret Cone Center and at Jerry Junkins. The 
children and the teachers love it when the volunteers come. It is not break time for the teachers; 
it is a time to observe good teaching and practice. The volunteers go to the center to read and 
model lessons with the children. This last component has been probably the hardest thing 
to replicate. 

Bill Ball: I have been at the Margaret Cone Center for 12 years. We still use the assessments to 
form our intervention and changes in curriculum, but the core part of the curriculum has been 
there since the mid-1990s. I will not present composite data for that era. We did mostly entry 
and exit testing with scores on the PPVT-III and Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals- 



436 



430 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



Preschool (CELF-P). The CELF-P includes six subtests: three receptive language subtests and 
three expressive language subtests. The total language score is calculated from the scores on each 
subtest. I will present data in finger scored format. 

For those of you who are not familiar with finger scored format, a score of 100 is the median 
national average for these scores. These are all standard scores, where 100 is the mean and 1 5 is 
the standard deviation. For example, a score between 90 and 110 is in the average range. If a 
child enters the program with a standard score of 74 and has the same score at exit, it does not 
mean that the child did not learn anything. It means that they were learning at roughly national 
averages. They stayed in the same position in rank relative to their peers throughout the nation. 

On the PPVT-III, the children at the Cone Center (1997-2001) started out with the standard 
score of 73.95 at entry and had an exit score of 83.46, a 9.5-point gain. To provide a rough 
comparison, a 1997-98 national study found a 3-point increase from entry to exit on this 
measure. There were some nice gains in our standard scores on CELF-P. There was a gain of 9.5 
points on the receptive language composite score. There was not as much gain in expressive 
language, but still a nice gain of 5.5 points. There was good positive gain in total language scores. 

I will present the data for the four Head Start centers. Keep in mind that the data are from the 
first year the curriculum was implemented in each of these sites. There was an 8-point gain in 
West Orange. Mount Pleasant had 9.5-point increase. El Paso had a 3.5-point increase. It is not 
an impressive score, especially compared to the national study. However, it is still a respectable 
increase and there are some complex language issues since El Paso borders Mexico. Brownwood 
had an 8-point increase. 

Michael L. Lopez: Can you tell a little about the sample size? 

Ball: They range from probably 20 to 40 for each center. We have continued to assess the Mount 
Pleasant center because it is a nice place for longitudinal assessment. It is a more rural area with 
only three elementary schools in the community. It is easier to track children there than in 
Dallas where there are hundreds of schools. Mt. Pleasant public schools have a number of 
centers. Some receive direct Head Start funding and there are full-day classrooms, half-day 
classrooms, classrooms just for 3-year-olds, classrooms for 4-year-olds, and so forth, all under 
one roof 

I will present some data over a 2-year period from 2000 to 2002, for preintervention and 
postintervention. On the PPVT-III, there was an increase of 6 points for 3-year-olds in full-day 
classrooms. The 4-year-olds in half-day classrooms had a 10-point gain. There was a 5.5-point 
increase for 4-year-olds in full-day classrooms. Overall, this is positive data. The total scores on 
the CELF-P were also promising. There was a 3-point gain for 3-year-olds in full-day classrooms. 
There was a 9.5-point gain for 4-year-olds in half-day classrooms. There was an 8-point increase 
for 4-year-olds in full-day classrooms. 

A measure that we recently started using was three subtests of the Woodcock-Johnson-III 
Achievement Battery (WJ-III). This is probably the most administered measure for special 
education decisions in elementary schools throughout the nation. We examined two different 
years of exit scores, 2000-2001 and 2001-2002, from preschool on the WJ-III. 

The letter-word identification subtest is an early type of reading measure where children are 
asked to identify letters. The test moves into advanced items such as simple words and even more 
complex words. In the 2001-2002 school year, the children exited with a median standard score 
of 100; that is right at the national average. The children are not exceptional letter identifiers, but 
they are improving to meet the national average. It can be translated to mean that the children 
are moving to the same level as some of their peers who come from more enriched settings. 

The spelling test involves fine motor tasks such as staying in between the lines, writing some 
letters, and forming capital and lower case letters. They are even asked to write words and spell 
words. Not many children in this sample, at the end of preschool, would be there but the skills 




437 



431 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



develop at some point. For spelling, in 2000-2001 the children exited with a score of 90. In 
2001-2002 the children exited with a score of 96; that is still within the average range. 

Sound awareness is a new task on the WJ-III. There are many phonological awareness tasks. It 
is well standardized in part because most of the administration is on tape. It is tricky because 
much of the administration variance is in how the words are pronounced. There are four tasks 
that make up this one subtest, which makes it thorough, especially for children this age. In 
2000-2001, the results were incredibly good with a median standard score of 108. In 2001- 
2002, the median standard score was 99; this was also a solid score. 

The students that attended Mt. Pleasant Preschool in 2000-2001 were followed and measured 
again the end of kindergarten. At the end of kindergarten the children had a mean standard 
score of 111 on letter-word identification of the WJ-III. For spelling and sound awareness on the 
WJ-III the scores were 110 and 107, respectively. We have not been able to fully document the 
extra variables in kindergarten, but children can really benefit when those variables are inte- 
grated the way they are in the school district, where there is good communication between 
preschool and kindergarten. 

Then we had a comparison group who attended some private preschools in the same com- 
munity. This data just came in and it should be looked at cautiously. I can generally say that 
there was not a strong emergent literacy focus in the private preschools. There was some letter 
exposure but it was not a key part of their curriculum and that is a significant difference. 

The children in the comparison group scored a 104 on letter-word identification, a 101 on 
spelling, and 100 on sound awareness. The children hit national norms in most districts. 
However the children who had the LEAP curriculum scored 111, 110, and 107 respectively. These 
samples still need to be compared and examined further to see what the difference may be. 

Hector Ochoa: I will talk about the development of the Jerry R. Junkins Child Development 
Center. Texas Instruments and Head Start were interested in expanding what had occurred at the 
Cone Center to Latino children who were limited English proficient (LEP) in the Dallas area. 

The number of children who enter school and are LEP will increase and it has become an issue. 
The latest census data reported that one out of every five children in the United States has at 
least one parent who is born outside the country. From the best data that we have collected, LEP 
children in pre-K to sixth grade comprised 9.3% of the student population in the U.S. In Texas, 
it is more apparent; one in every five LEP in the United States resides in Texas. One advantage in 
Texas is that 96-97% of the LEP student population are Spanish speakers. The LEP population is 
much more homogenous in Texas than it is in California, for example. 

Head Start and TI were interested in serving LEP children as a result of this increasing trend in 
the late 1990s. They called several university consultants who had backgrounds in reading and 
worked in schools with large heterogeneous populations. We wrestled with several questions. 
What language should we provide services in? The issue of providing second language or dual 
language services to second language learners is very controversial in the U.S. It was a greater 
challenge because many families in Texas are skeptical that bilingual education works. Should we 
provide language in the students' first language (Ll)? Should we provide instruction in English? 

There is a classic study by Jim Cummins that discusses Basic Interpersonal Communication 
Skills (BICS) and Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP). BICS are skills that students 
need to communicate and have social conversations. However, it does not develop the type of 
language that is necessary to succeed in school, and that is CALP. He advocated that the way to 
make students proficient in English is to development proficiency in their first language. 
Concepts should be taught in the language they bring into the classroom. Another study by 
Thomas and Collier concluded that one of the best predictors of positive education outcomes 
for LEP students is the amount of time they received instruction in their Ll . 

We decided to teach the curriculum in Ll and English. When these students enrolled in the 
Dallas public schools, they completed a home language survey and they were tested to find in 
which language they should receive instruction. In Texas it is required to provide bilingual 




ERIC 



432 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



education services if there are 20 students that speak the same language across the district, in the 
same grade. The students were tested and given measures of oral language proficiency. The 
concern was that these children received instruction in English in Head Start, and 2 years later 
they would enter the public school system where they would most likely receive instruction in 
Spanish. Unless the parents gave a bilingual denial, most of these children would be placed in 
bilingual education classrooms. Our vision was to provide a center that could make a smooth 
transition to help develop that first language based on a research model because that is what 
these students would experience when they entered public schools. 

We talked to parents about their concerns. Many parents said that they wanted their children 
to learn English since they were new immigrants. Some of the parents felt they were discrimi- 
nated against in the public schools because they were not proficient in English. 

We provided training for parents to learn how to promote learning in English even though 
they did not speak the language. We dispelled the myth that speaking to LEP children in Spanish 
hurts them because they will never learn English. We also explained that they had rights in the 
public school system. We empowered the parents. 

Once we decided to provide services in Spanish, the LEAP curriculum had to be translated 
and modified to be culturally appropriate. That was a huge task because concepts have difficulty 
levels and some concepts cannot be directly translated. This has been a period of transition and 
there is a team of experts who modified the curriculum and continue to reexamine it. Although 
the curriculum is in place there are still other issues. We have to find Spanish-proficient staff; 
that is a critical component. Some of the staff may be Latino, but they only speak English or vice 
versa. It has been a difficult issue regarding optimal services to Head Start children who are LEP. 

The first step in providing services for these children is to screen them for their language 
abilities. The issue of measurement surfaces right from the start. How do we find the appropriate 
measures when there are limited measures available in Spanish? When we first began, we used 
language measures and looked at growth in LI and Spanish and growth in L2. This what they 
were doing at other centers, but we used the PPVT in Spanish and there are no standard scores in 
the Spanish version. 

Greater Head Start of Dallas started implementing the Developmental Indicators for the 
Assessment of Learning, Third Edition (DIAL-III) to measure growth. This assessment is avail- 
able in Spanish but we noticed that there was not much psychometric literature in the technical 
manual. TI was grateful and allowed one of my doctoral students to do his dissertation on some 
of the psychometric properties of the DIAL-III in Spanish. We will conduct another study next 
year to examine the validity of this instrument. The DIAL-III looks at three domains: motor, 
concepts, and language skills. We looked at effect size to account for sample size, as well as 
growth from pretest to posttest. We also analyzed all the items within each of the scales and 
found how many children were performing at age-level expectations. 

This is how the Jerry Junkins Center started about 5 years ago. We spent the first few years 
observing the environment and making changes. Finding the staff has taken a lot of collabora- 
tion. Teachers have to believe in the curriculum and understand the importance of providing 
instruction in Spanish. Dealing with the heterogeneity of this group has been a big challenge. 

We cannot automatically assume that because these children are Latino they speak Spanish. 

Some of them only speak English, some of them are proficient in LI and L2, and so forth. There 
is in-group variability and we have to figure out how to account for that variability. There are 
different amounts of instructional time depending on the language proficiency of the student. 
For next year, the directors have proposed that testing and screening of children for their 
language proficiency happen a week before school starts. This makes a smoother transition and 
matches up children with teachers. 

Erin E. Carlisle: I am from the University of Florida. You found Dallas Head Start. I am 
working at a Head Start that has not been recruited to participate in such collaboration. How is 
a center recruited by a funder? 




433 

439 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Rice: I cannot answer that question from experience, because I did not have to crawl up the pipe 
that way. We decided to do something and we chose Head Start over other possible candidates 
because we felt that if we learned something worthwhile in Head Start, it could be used by a lot 
of children. There are 4,000 children in Head Start in Dallas. There are Head Start centers across 
the country and there is the possibilility to affect millions of children; the program can be 
implemented nationwide. 

I do not know anything about Gainesville, but if 1 wanted to find a partner for a project I 
would get a book of foundations and companies that are headquartered in Gainesville. Then I 
would approach them with some ideas about collaboration. 

Carlisle: In one of our language classes last semester, we talked about Black English Vernacular. 

I heard you say that students are not using the correct ending on words. We learned that Black 
English Vernacular is its own dialect and those incorrect endings are actually correct within that 
dialect. Again, 1 understand that it will not help a student on a reading test. What is the LEAP 
philosophy on that? Do you correct the students when they use Black English Vernacular or do 
you let them use it and then teach them the Standard English so that they can succeed in 
our schools? 

Minness: The question is do you correct Black English because it is not Standard English, and 
what is the LEAP philosophy? The philosophy is that since it is a bilingual setting where Black 
English is critical for survival in the neighborhood, 1 do not want to take that away. 1 also believe 
that Standard English is essential for learning to read, write, and succeed in the business world, 
which is what we want for children. If we can show them instead of correcting them, that is the 
best way. 1 would not interfere with a child who is playing, but if a child comes to me and asks a 
question, or if 1 am interacting in a small group time, 1 might model the correct way to say it, 
instead of correcting the child. It is the way one teaches 2-year-old children. One models for 
them. If the child says, "Him do it," I would respond by saying, "Did he do it?" You model and 
when they hear that model they pick it up. We taught many of our teachers to model because 
they did not know it. 

Lisa Lopez: You talked about children who have limited English-speaking skills and are 
proficient in Spanish. How are you focusing on teaching these children? What language are you 
using? 

Carvell: The Dallas school district used a gradual model over a 5-year period. They started with 
90% Spanish and 10% English at the beginning of the year, then it went to 80/20, 70/30, and so 
forth. It is my understanding that schools in Dallas will move toward a 3 -year plan, instead of a 
5-year plan. 

j 

Question: Do you have any concerns on the model being watered down? 

Response: Of course we are worried that the program will be watered down since it is a collabo- 
rative effort of universities, federal agencies, state-funded agencies, and a corporate foundation 
working together. The program could become too structured; either way is not good. Often 
people who have limited education will resort to tight structure in order to compensate; that is 
as much of a concern as watering down the project. 

Our plan right now is to strongly urge people not to use the curriculum without a training 
model. We have trainers that are going to be available across the United States; they are mostly 
in Texas at this point. The plan is to have a 3-day training and visit the site twice during the first 
year of implementation. That way we can provide support and encouragement and use the 
mentoring model where there is someone on-site to help the teachers. 



434 



440 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



Rice: The best assurance is to couple a good evaluation program with a curriculum, teacher 
training, and other components that you want to put in place. Be sure that there is a solid way to 
evaluate the results that you are getting versus what you expect to get. That is your insurance 
policy. 

Judith Swett: Have you included children with disabilities, and how? 

Response: At least 10% of our Head Start population is children with disabilities. There are 
children with disabilities in each center to which LEAP has been introduced. We work with the 
child's Individual Educational Plan (lEP) to incorporate specific activities in the curriculum 
since LEAP is done throughout the day. 

Swett: You are using LEAP and children with disabilities are being exposed to the curriculum. 

Response: Right. They are not segregated from the other children. As we work more intensely 
with those children we will be able to see what gains they are able to make. 

Response: We have worked with several classrooms in West Texas called Preschool Program for 
Children Disabilities (PPCD). We modify the same materials and ideas in LEAP to be more 
appropriate for these children, depending upon the disability. One of our trainers has a back- 
ground in PPCD. She conducts training on how to modify LEAP and what activities can be used 
in all areas, whether it is fine motor or language. 

Ochoa: I think that your topic is very important and becomes even more significant for bilin- 
gual or LEP preschoolers with disabilities. How do you differentiate between those students who 
have a disability versus those whose problem is language acquisition? In the Texas public 
schools there is no certification for bilingual special education teachers. A child's language needs 
must be addressed in the lEP, and school districts now realize that and monitor documents. 

Bilingual special education research shows that it is just as critical for those preschoolers who 
have disabilities to receive instruction in their first language. It has been found that Latino 
children are underserved greatly from 0-3 and from 3-5 years. I would argue that one reason for 
that is because many of those children may be LEP and the programs do not know how to 
connect with those families. They do not provide adequate services for those children. You 
would expect that a certain population that is LEP would be disabled. Texas is one of the few 
states that not only look for disability by ethnic group but also by LEP, under the monitoring 
and documentation required in special education. We should definitely examine LEP and 
disability in preschool. 

Flora V. Rodriguez-Brown: I am a psychologist specializing in language development, and I 
happen to be bilingual. When addressing language issues why not develop cognition and 
concepts in the language that children know best? 

Response: I guess we did not explain that well. That is exactly what we do. 

Rodriguez-Brown: Then my second concern is that in terms of early literacy development, I can 
see that adapting the English model that you have is not best way to go. Spanish reading is 
different from English reading and takes a different approach. In English we introduce vowels 
first, then consonants but in Spanish it is the opposite. 

Response: That is why we use the word adaptation. It is not a translation. It has to be adapted 
for a different style of learning. 




435 



SYMPOSIA/ROUND TABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Starting Strong: Understanding and Promoting 
Math Development in Young Children 

CHAIR: Juanita Copley 

PRESENTERS: Juanita Copley, David H. Arnold, Douglas H. Clements, Carole Greenes, 

Robert Balfanz 

Juanita Copley: Our discussion is on "Starting Strong, Understanding and Promoting Math 
Development in Young Children." It is a roundtable discussion. 1 am from the University of 
Houston, and 1 will be serving as the chair for this presentation. Our panelists are David Arnold 
from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, Douglas Clements from the State University of 
New York at Buffalo, Carole Greenes from Boston University, and Robert Balfanz from Johns 
Hopkins University. 

1 will give a brief, contextual introduction to mathematics and young children, both histori- 
cal, and will include some recent innovations. Three interventions will be presented, with each 
of the participants spending about 10 or 15 minutes discussing their particular projects and the 
exciting things that they are doing. As a group they will discuss the questions we all have about 
what we mean by research-based curriculum, how we measure that, and how we talk about that. 
That will be something that we, as a group, will talk about. 

Balfanz has written what 1 think is one of the most interesting articles about the history of 
mathematics and young children and about why we teach so little mathematics. He used the 
phrase minimalist curriculum, which is the idea of the last 60 years. If you asked teachers of 
young children what they teach, they would say they taught the four important shapes and how 
to count from one to ten. Those made up the entire mathematics curriculum. 

In 1998 1 was contacted by National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) to write a 
book for young children. Mathematics in the Early Years. It was the most amazing thing to hear 
people say, "You mean, really, mathematics for 4- and 5 -year-olds?" 1 also received e-mails that 
said, "Well, IVe never thought of that and what am 1 supposed to do? It was quite interesting. 

In 1999 we worked on Mathematics in the Early Years, Ae first joint publication of NCTM and 
NAEYC. In 2000, NCTM actually included prekindergarten in their principles and standards, 
which was very exciting for those of us who really love early childhood and mathematics. 
Clements spent a great deal of time writing the pre-K section. 

As you know, the Head Start outcomes include mathematics, and it is certainly much more 
than knowing four shapes and how to count from one to ten. There are many interesting 
developments that have happened recently to encourage mathematics in the early years. 

Young children are rather sophisticated math thinkers, they have potential to think in a rather 
sophisticated way, but the fact is we often do not tap into that potential. Those who work with 
young children and mathematics know how amazed we are at their information and the way 
they think; it may be very different. We are all amazed by what they believe, how they reason, 
and how they put ideas together. We know from many observations that children informally 
explore and use mathematics in play and their daily activities. Some of the buildings that they 
build, some of the perspectives, the patterns they create and they notice are rather amazing. 

Young learners benefit from having a variety of ways to understand. A child's answer often 
depends on how the question is asked. Different ways of asking the same question might 
produce very different responses. 

Researchers have identified some developmental learning paths for some mathematics topics. 
There are trajectories where we know or have an idea that children do one type of task first, and 
then they do the next task, and then the next; but certainly not everything at the same time. We 
do know curriculum needs to be coherent and focused on important math concepts, but the 
depth for each concept is different. The curriculum must be well articulated across grades, and it 




442 



436 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



needs to be connected from level to level. In my recent work I have been looking at the connec- 
tion between pre-K and kindergarten and how, if it is connected, it makes a difference. 

As the researchers make their presentations I would like you to focus on the methods they 
use in their work with young children and mathematics. We will also talk about the strengths 
and the limitations of our research. Then we will present the specific challenges with looking at 
young children; how they think, and how they reason in mathematics. 

David H. Arnold: I am serving as the spokesperson for our group, but I am definitely neither 
the brains nor the sweat of this project. The brains and the sweat are here in the front row; Paige, 
Britta, and Jen, my three graduate students, are the heart of this project. They deserve all the credit. 

In my 15 years doing research, I have never had anything work the first time I tried it — ever. I 
am glad I did not tell them this. When we began the math area was new to us. Our literature 
review led us to the names of all of the other panel members, so we are in awe of them. It is a 
dream panel and a pleasure for us to be able to meet the people whose work we were reading as 
we began to learn a little bit about math. 

Our local Head Start came to us asking for help in boosting children s early math skills. Since 
we did not really know much about early math development, we decided to start with some- 
thing we did know about, which is how children learn and how teachers teach. We began by 
listing some very basic but powerful principles. We were committed in this project to targeting 
both skills and interests. It is common sense that one's skill at something and one's interest in 
something are going to feed off each other and create a cycle. Yet in the research literature it is 
rare to see both included. 

We tried, throughout our project, to use ways to keep our program practical so it could be 
useful in the real world, to try to keep it fun, and to try to keep it adjustable. We gave teachers 
control over how to do it, when to do it, and what to do, so that they could adjust it to their 
students, since they obviously knew them much better than we did. 

Our implementation involved having teachers implement math activities in Head Start 
classrooms for 6 weeks. It turned out, from our informal observations, that there was very little 
math-oriented activity going on in the classrooms. In order to avoid making more work for the 
teachers we decided to incorporate the math activities into parts of the day already on the 
schedule. We did not have them add any new times to the day; we had them incorporate 
activities into parts of the day that were already on their schedules. For the first 3 weeks the 
activities were done during circle time, and for the next 3 weeks the activities were used during 
small groups, transitions, and meal times. 

My graduate students came up with 85 different activities from which the teachers could 
choose. That is an example of giving the teachers many choices and retaining our desire to have 
flexibility. We were trying to keep it fun and flexible, with everything from singing songs with 
numbers, matching a number to a number on a chair, baking pretzels in the shapes of numbers, 
adding paper ice cream cones based on the number on a dice roll, and counting the steps on the 
playground — everything we could think of to try and incorporate math into everyday activities. 

To try to determine whether this worked or not, we randomly assigned our eight classrooms; 
half of them were using our math activities and half were not. We collected information before 
and after the program on the Test of Early Mathematics Ability, Second Edition, (TEMA 2), 
which is a standardized assessment of emergent math skills. We also were interested in whether 
children were interested in math activities, and this was a little more difficult. The TEEMA 2 is a 
straightforward, solid measure of math interest but this measurement is much trickier in 4-year- 
olds. We went about trying to obtain this information in three different ways. We had teachers 
report how interested children were in math activities, we had a child report of how interested 
children were in math activities, and we videotaped the children in a structured task while they 
were playing with math toys. 

We also knew that the program would not work if the teachers did not like it. Therefore, we 



H3 



437 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



also had teacher surveys to try to assess teachers' attitudes about teaching math, how much they 
enjoyd it, and how good they felt they were at it. It was important to find out directly whether 
teachers liked the program, so we also had a program satisfaction questionnaire that we asked 
teachers to fill out. We wish that we had been able to do classroom observations. 

We found that teachers reported that they actually did use the activities. On average they said 
they did two of the activities a day. 1 think that is an underestimate and that math activities were 
spilling into many aspects in the classroom, but we are not sure because we do not have the 
observations. The teachers reported liking the program. On a scale of 1 to 10 the average rating 
was 9.5. This could just be teachers telling us what we wanted to hear, but they did not seem like 
they were putting one over on us. 

In terms of math skills, our effects were quite large. 1 believe that is due partly to the good 
choices that the group made in terms of the activities, and partly to how little math was being 
done in our control classrooms. On theTEMA, the experimental group increased their scores by 
about four questions compared to the control group, over 6 weeks, increasing by about one 
question. The experimental group was learning four times as much over that 6-week to 
2-month period. 

Of concern to us was that the difference between the experimental group and the control 
group was almost entirely accounted for by the boys in the experimental classroom. In terms of 
math quotients, which are similar to an IQ scale, the boys in ^e math program increased their 
math quotient by about eight points, while the girls in the math program did not increase their 
math quotient at all. Our intervention effect was accounted for, almost solely, by the boys. 
Another puzzle that we do not really understand is that the change was largely accounted for by 
increases in the African American and Puerto Rican children, with very little gain in White 
children. This is one other reason why 1 wish we had classroom observations. 

In terms of interest, we were especially pleased to find evidence that the math program made 
children like math more. This was based on the teacher report (taken with a grain of salt, 
because obviously the teachers know that they are in the program, they know that we want them 
to say that the children like it), teachers in the program did report increases in children's interest 
in math, compared to teachers in the control group. We were also excited to see that based on 
the child report children in the program liked math more than they had before. 

We are in the process of analyzing the observational data, which 1 think would be the most 
convincing piece of evidence. Thus far two of our assessments suggested that the program does 
increase not just skills, but also interest in math. 

Teachers reported changes in their attitude towards math, increasing their scores from four 
out often on how much they enjoy math activities in the pretest to eight out often at posttest. 
Teachers also reported that their math teaching skills increased from a three and a half to a six 
and a half. These were significant changes compared to the control group. 

The next step is to find out what our direct observations tell us. They are not classroom 
observations, but we do have the videotapes of the children playing with math toys, and that 
should be a key piece of evidence, especially with the question of children s interest in math. 

A related issue is looking at the relationship between interest and skills in children this age. 
Preliminary data are striking in suggesting that these 4-year-olds are already figuring out whether 
they are good at math or not and that is influencing their trajectory of interest. The children who 
start out low on skills are already showing a decline in interest, across even just our 2-month 
period. We need to complete that data analysis, but the first results on that are a bit worrisome. 

We need to replicate these results for a number of reasons. 1 would like to make the program 
longer; we tried to cram too much into too short a period of time. Making the intervention 
1 year or 4 months long, instead of 6 weeks would make a huge difference. 

It is going to be critical to get parents involved. We were only working with the teachers, and 1 
believe parents could be a tremendous boost to making the effect much stronger. 1 would love to 
try this with a combined teacher and parent component. 




4 4 4 



438 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



Next time we definitely need classroom observations. We need to find out what is going on 
with the gender findings. Maybe it was a fluke and would not happen again, or maybe there is 
something about the intervention we created that appeals more to boys, or maybe there is 
something the teachers are doing that helps boys benefit more than girls, or maybe it is some- 
thing the children are doing. We need to find out because the last thing we want to do is 
contribute to the gender gap in math and science. It seems that whatever we tried to do, we 
would get it right for the boys but not the girls; so we need to find the answer to that. 

Douglas H. Clements: In regard to what was just said, we do have evidence that in elementary 
classrooms, the teachers call on boys more. Classroom observations would reveal if teachers just 
think of it as a male domain and are engaging more scaffolding with boys. 

Tm presenting for myself and my colleague Julie Sarama, University of Buffalo, on our 
Building Blocks — The Language of Mathematics project. It is a prekindergarten through grade 
two software, print, and manipulative-based materials development grant funded by the 
National Science Foundation. 

Over the years we have formulated the idea that most curricula will claim to be research- 
based, but that claim is based on a number of arguments as to why it is research-based. We 
have come up with a schema in order to determine if indeed one is correcdy using the term 
research-based. 

1. Has an a priori foundation. This is when broad philosophy theories or empirical results 
are used as the basis for the curriculum; this is the most common one. 

2. Subject matter. People can look at the subject matter and say, what does research say 
already, a priori, before we start curriculum development. What does research say about 
mathematics, what can children learn, what do children know, what are the important 
and generative ideas of mathematics? 

3. Pedagogical. In our own curriculum we did research reviews to see what it was that 
children found interesting and engaging about computer activities so that we would have 
a general, pedagogical foundation. 

4. The learning models/learning trajectories idea. That is what I will emphasize today. What 
one does here is look at models of children's learning and ask what we know about how 
children learn, how they think about the subject, then carefully craft the model with the 
activity one makes for children, and invent those activities to pass through the learning 
trajectories we know about. What separates this from a priori is these things are almost 
always done dynamically. You make a little activity, then you try it with children, then you 
go back and reform it; this is kind of an interactive process. 

5. The main category under evaluation is market research, which tends to be commercially 
driven. Market research usually means doing focus groups or hiring an outside indepen- 
dent agency. Very often textbook companies do this and then they hide the results. This is 
the opposite of what research and scientific discourse is all about. Market research is the 
most widely used and the most ffequendy conducted method of research. However, it is 
the one that contributes least to the research community and the betterment of children. 

6. There are three formative research evaluation techniques, in which case one works with 
one or two children on an activity to make sure that it fits the learning model and 
learning trajectories. The next pass-through, you work with a single classroom. Then after 
that you go into multiple classrooms, and start giving it to teachers who do not know the 
curriculum ahead of time to see if the curriculum has appropriate supports for the 
teachers. The next step is doing summative research. We have not reached this stage yet. 

With our intervention. Building Blocks, we are at the multiple classroom stage; next year we 
are moving to the small-scale stage, and the year after that to the large-scale stage. 

I contend that if a curriculum development does not either consciously go through most of 
these stages, all but market research, the curriculum is not really research-based in a way that is 
complete or valid. 



O 

ERIC 



445 



439 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLE S/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Our basic approach in Building Blocks curriculum is finding the mathematics and developing 
mathematics from everyday activity. We help children extend and mathematize their everyday 
activities; from building blocks, to art, to songs, to puzzles. If we find the mathematics in 
everyday activities and bring that to the teachers and children's conscious awareness, we believe 
that is a very powerful approach to teach children about mathematics. It is based on children's 
experience and interest, with an emphasis on supporting the development of mathematical 
activity and even mathematical play within those environments. 

Building Blocks was developed from previous research that Julie and 1 did, with the addition 
of learning from the experts, including those at the table with me here. Our approach was to 
find what research says would be the a priori foundations in terms of subject matter for 
2-year-olds, 3-year-olds, 4-year-olds, 5-year olds, and 6-year-olds. Also, what does the research 
say about how these ideas grow over time? Then we tried to design activities based on what 
we learned. 

Now, an important caveat, before you think this is going to turn into a checklist curriculum, 
is that we tried to design activities that would cover multiple goals. There are games for the 
children to play that teach math concepts. 

[Videotape is played] The only reason 1 show that is because teachers told us and others told 
us that children will not like the part about having to ask, "am 1 right." We have not found that 
to be the case. Children like checking with each other, you heard, "come on, am 1 right, am 1 
right?" This creates more interactions and no child seems bored while the other is taking their 
turn. The most important point 1 want to make is that there are multiple goals even in the 
simplest game. 

[Video of a game being played] The teacher puts a certain number of pieces on a "cookie," 
hides it under a napkin, and then the child is asked to duplicate what the teacher had done. 

Then the teacher takes the napkin off and the child sees it. This is a skill that the average child 
develops at age I'/z or 3 V 2 . Many of our children in Head Start classes did not have that ability 
at the beginning, but can develop it very quickly. The nonverbal comes much quicker than the 
verbal counting or number. Then we take it to the computer and they do similar things. 

[Video of children playing with shapes, illustrations, the different learning levels of the 
children in composing and decomposing shapes] 

The curriculum provides children with shape puzzles, from very easy to the more difficult. 

The children who are piece assemblers have puzzles in which they can match, other puzzles are 
for children who are picture makers, and still other puzzles for shape composers. The last are the 
most difficult and the child has to think about angles and synthesizing shapes in order to fill the 
puzzles with no gaps. We also do that on the computer. 

On computers the children must use turn and flip tools, the computer supplies feedback, and 
can individualize in that it can make sure the shape composer gets a shape composer challeng- 
ing puzzle. However, if the child is having difficulty with that, the computer will just give the 
child a puzzle from the earlier-in-the-learning trajectory. 

Carole Greenes: I'm very pleased to be here with you. Balfanz will be discussing with me the 
research issues and the questions that we have after 1 present the program to you. 

What is Big Math for Little Kids? Big Math for Little Kids is a comprehensive mathematics 
program for 4- and 5 -year olds, prekindergarten and kindergarten levels, and we developed it for 
a number of reasons. Our other colleague. Herb Ginsburg, could not be here because he is 
speaking to a Head Start group in New York City today. He is a developmental psychologist at 
Teacher's College, Columbia University. Balfanz and 1 are mathematics educators. 

About 6 years ago the three of us met and we were talking about the great numbers of 
children who are entering school at risk of failure at 4 and 5 years old. These are largely children 
of poverty, and because of that there are a great number of minority students involved. We could 
not believe that they could be failing at math before they had even been given a chance to begin 
their study of mathematics. 



446 



440 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



Then we looked at what was available to help young children, ages 4 and 5, explore math- 
ematics. We found that there was a paucity of mathematics materials, and most of what we 
found were very fine activities, but contained no developmental sequence, no plan for how to 
develop some of the ideas that children already know a little bit about. 

Finally, we have some real important research that Ginsburg collected recently and did with 
funding from the Spencer Foundation. He studied 30 children who were in a low socioeco- 
nomic group in New York City, 30 in a middle SES group, and 30 at an upper socioeconomic 
level, with an equal number of boys and girls at each level. He attached microphones to the 
children and videotaped each child 15 minutes during free play so he could listen to what they 
were saying and watch what they were doing. 

He discovered that during free play, about half of the time children chose to do mathematical 
types of activities, and that there was no difference between boys and girls, nor between socio- 
economic levels in terms of interest in mathematics. All children like to do math. He analyzed 
what mathematical activities they did, what was the nature, the character of those activities, and 
found that they did more pattern-type of activities than any other during free play. 

Based on this that we decided to apply to the National Science Foundation for support to 
develop a mathematics program for 4- and 5-year-olds. There is a separate curriculum for each 
of these age groups. Children want challenging mathematics. 

We have five major guiding principles: 

1. All children are capable of learning mathematics at a young age, and in fact, they are very 
excited and eager to learn mathematics. 

2. Play is not enough. Adult guidance is necessary for children to reach the appropriate 
levels of achievement. 

3. An appropriate program should not be push-down curricula where we take what is done 
in first grade and push it into kindergarten. This is what has most frequendy been done in 
the past. 

4. Young children are capable of dealing with a comprehensive mathematics curriculum; the 
four basic shapes and counting is not sufficient. 

5. Children are capable of dealing with complex mathematical ideas. 

We began our curriculum development in 1998, and are now in the fourth year of our 
development. It was developed in the three sites where each of us is based. Balfanz's study was 
conducted in the Willie A. Ross Day Care Center, a program in the basement of an African 
American Church in the heart of Baltimore. Ginsburg did his work in two sites, the Corpus 
Christi School across the street from his office, and also at PS 207, a public school in Harlem. 

I did my work in the Chelsea, Massachusetts public schools, in an early learning center that 
houses 400 prekindergarten children, 500 kindergarten children, and 200 grade one students in 
the same building. This was a tremendous resource and opportunity for being able to follow 
children as they move from prekindergarten to kindergarten and to first grade. 

Chelsea, MA is largely Hispanic. Eighty-four percent of the children in pre-K and kindergarten 
classes come from families that are not native English speakers. The largest percentage are 
Hispanic (about 74%), about 8% are Southeast Asian, the other 2% percent are Somalian, 
Russian Serbs, and just about every group possible. This presented us with considerable chal- 
lenges to work through. 

We were at a school site at least 2 days a week, working with the teachers and working with 
the children. During year 1 we observed children during free play at each of our sites to identify 
interests, carrying out many studies similar to the one that Ginsburg did over a long period of 
time, but now with our specific children to find out what their interests were. We observed and 
interviewed all of the children who were involved in our development, and we observed them 
during their regular math activities and classroom activities, in literacy, music, and art; but we 
also put them in situations where they could bump into some interesting mathematical ideas 
and see how they responded. 




441 



SYMPOSIA/ROUND TABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



In the second year we continued with that and we began to build and evaluate our program. 

In the third year, the teachers at the sites where we did our development taught the program and 
talked with us about how to modify it and make a good instructional sequence, and how to 
change things. In year four we have been evaluating the program in five states and in England, 
and I believe we now have ten sites. 

There is a separate curriculum for pre-K and kindergarten. They are separate programs but 
they are connected so that at each level there are teacher resource books containing the whole 
program, the activities, and all the needed information. At the same time there is an evaluation 
to assess children's performance as they go through our program. Then there are storybooks that 
have mathematical themes so that children can talk and tell mathematical stories. 

There are coloring books for the teachers, and then we thought it was very important to give 
each child a bound, black-and-white copy of each of the storybooks. In these books some of the 
illustrations are missing, giving them an opportunity to draw in the pictures before they take 
them home and read them to their families. 

We wanted to use the TEMA as well, and since Ginsburg and Bumdi coauthored the measure 
we thought we would surely use it. However, the TEMA focuses on arithmetic and numbers and 
does not focus on measurement concepts, on geometry ideas, on spatial concepts, navigation 
ideas, and map-making. Also, it does not focus on patterns and does not have those other rich 
topics that children explore. Before we start we need to assess how much the children already 
know about each concept so that we can capitalize on their strengths. 

By the way, one of the things that I did not point out that I thought was really interesting was 
that in year 2 we eliminated all activities that the children mastered. We simply eliminated 
them, because if all children can do them, then there is no reason to do them — they are no 
longer challenging. 

We want to use activities that prompt the making of conjectures, we want to use activities that 
develop mathematical language, that capitalize on students' interests, that present different 
representations of the same idea concurrently, and we repeat core activities regularly and 
frequently. 

Robert Balfanz: I will talk about the research questions that guided us. First is the critical role 
of oral language and the potential for mathematics to enhance language and development. This 
was a critical finding for us, because it reduces the tension that exists between, "I would love to 
do math with the children, but I must do the prereading skills first, and once I do prereading 
skills there is no time for math." We found that the two go hand-in-hand. When one is doing 
mathematical activities, the children are describing what they see, using all concepts such as, 

"this is taller," "this is smaller", "this is on," "this is below." They are formulating questions, 
making conjectures, and talking math with their peers and teachers. Math, especially at this age 
and wonderfully so, is very verbal. It leads to serious preliteracy skills, and learning the basic 
important words, such as on top, below, bigger, smaller, but also more indepth conversations 
about if/ then situations. 

We are still left wondering in what ways children's language is changing over time. Certain 
activities can be more influential in language development. We want to know which mathemati- 
cal concepts are best for developing the connection between mathematics and preliteracy. 

It is still important to realize that repetition is necessary for digestion of key concepts and 
skills. It is critical during initial exploration to establish understanding, and it is important over 
long periods of time to maintain understanding. People told us that children have short- 
attention spans at this age, so our activities had to be short and quick or we would lose their 
attention. We found that not to be the case. We found that when things were connected and 
done appropriately, children can have long attention spans. Even in a chaotic environment 
where I was working, there were 2- and 3-year-olds in one comer, 4- and 5-year-olds in another, 
and a big screen TV playing. The 2- and 3-year-olds were watching Barney, and the 4- and 5-year- 




442 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



olds were trying to do work. They actually could do it; they could focus for long periods of time 
if we kept the situation stmctured and built in the repetition. What we do not know is how 
much repetition is needed. This is the age-old question in education: How much repetition is 
needed for different types of skills? Also important is that experiencing multiple modalities 
appears to assist concept acquisition and to stabilize concepts. That means a child learns about 
the number five in many different ways. 

The key point for us in Big Math as a program development project was that it should be 
about how to develop a curriculum that is engaging and joyful for 4- and 5-year olds. The 
purpose was not to document how children's thought process changed in the course of doing 
this. That will be our next big task. We found children in a mathematically rich environment, in 
minimalist environments where a great deal of research on children is done, and that gave us 
certain answers. We also want to know the role of games in developing critical thinking skills. 
These are some of our important research questions. 

Copley: I would like to quickly add some information about the project that I have been 
involved in, because it fits with all of the other studies. I spend my time trying to work with 
teachers from all different places and talk to them about good mathematics teaching. I have 7 
sites in Houston, with 28 different languages spoken. There are many children in pre-K and 
kindergarten classrooms; some are Head Start sites and some public school sites. 

As the presenters were talking I was struck by how similar their problems were to those I have 
encountered. Overarching issues seem to be, how do we really know what children know and 
how can we assess the effectiveness of the curriculum we are using if we do not really know what 
children know? Before we begin taking questions, I would like to show you some of the ways we 
have been doing assessments in our project. We have been looking at the work that the children 
produce. Every one of my sites uses different materials, whatever their particular school asks 
them to do, but I decided to have them bring children's work, and we talk about what we see. 

We ask, "What do we know about children based on this work? What if you asked this question? 
What if you asked this piece of information?" Here are some examples of the children's work. 

Dahlia brought me some of her art work. I asked, "Dahlia, can you tell me about this?" She 
answered, "This is one of those pattern things. Miss Copley, look, look, look. There's smiling/ 
ffowning/smiling/ffowning." As I talked to her about that I said, "Dahlia, is this a picture of you?" 
She said, "No, no, this one is me because this is the kind of hair 1 really want." That told me a lot 
about this little girl's thinking, some of which I did not like, if you want to know the truth. 

Some other pictures, which fit nicely with Carole's presentation, were drawn because we were 
trying to figure out how to get an elephant into the third floor of the hospital when the circus 
came to town. When I talked to the children about their pictures, I found out something about 
their understanding of weight. There were several other pictures where the children were actually 
pushing the elephant up the stairs. We have one that is a teeter-totter, where all the elephants 
were jumping on one side to get the other elephant up. Very interesting information can be 
found in children's art work. 

[Pictures are shown] 

We do many activities in the block center, because I find rich mathematics there. But teachers 
do not often see what the children are learning. I take digital pictures and then ask teachers to 
please tell us what it is they see, and then I talk about some other things that they might see. 

What I love about research in these settings is that this is real. My job is to be in real settings; 

I think everyone here has talked about real places, and children, and the joy of working with 
children in these studies. From the many challenges that all of us face, we find delight in 
listening to what they discover. 

What would you say was the biggest challenge you had in conducting your research on these 
projects? Would each of you talk about that? 




449 



443 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/ CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Arnold: My guess is that it has to do with getting the teachers started on the intervention. It is 
an interesting contradiction; on one hand the teachers love it, and on the other, it is easy to let it 
slide when you have a million demands on your day. My graduate students put a great deal of 
effort into getting the ball rolling. 

Greenes: Our biggest problem was that in the beginning we had teachers who were very eager 
to participate and agreed that they would teach math at least 30 minutes a day in prekindergarten 
from The Big Math, and 40 minutes a day in the kindergarten as a minimum. They do much 
more now, but they were fairly convinced that children could not sit still and participate that 
long, and they did not think that the children were capable of dealing with complex mathemati- 



To convince them, we asked them to just try the activities. We did not rush in and do them 
ourselves, we asked the teachers to try the activities and to let us know if they had to adapt the 
activity or modify it in any way. Once they tried it they found that a number of the children, not 
all of the children, but a number of the children could really grasp these ideas with very little 
assistance. 

Clements: I always observe just how dynamic children are at this age. I would be working in a 
classroom, and 1 would see a child who just did not seem to get it at all, but by the next week 
and he had gotten it. One wonders what happened, but one does not really know what hap- 
pened. The reverse also happens, where a child might seem to get it one week, but the next week 
is struggling. It is unstable knowledge at this age, and it is very difficult to get a firm grasp on 
what is solid and what is shifting. 

Copley: I have always been amazed at the after-Christmas phenomenon. I start out with 
children who have seemingly no clue about anything, and yet they come back after Christmas 
and suddenly they know the material. 

I 

Clements: I would say the biggest challenge is keeping them going. One can get teachers 
interested in the children's thinking, and they become interested in the children' activities. 

But if we left the school, and came back 2 years later, we often found it to be disappointing, 
in every single one of our projects how many loved the project, yet were no longer using it. 

Many of our programs were computer-based, and many no longer had the computers for the 
programs. Computers were too expensive to maintain so they locked them up. 

Someone has to pick up the ball and keep on worrying about all the supports teachers need 
in order to sustain their interest and their ability to do these things. 

Clements: In a study Julie Sarama did a few years ago, with primary grades not preschool, she 
found that what the teachers really needed was somebody from the district to come in and tell 
them that what they were doing was really good. It was nice for them to hear from us, the 
developers and researchers, that what they were doing was good, but what they really wanted 
was to have the district supervisor validate what they were doing. 

Copley: I think all of us who work with teachers of young children understanding the many 
levels of support teachers need to have, and the idea of sustained support is really important. We 
are on our seventh year on some of the sites, and what has been so nice is that when I go in to 
talk to the study groups now, they do all the talking. There are times when 1 do not even know if 
I am necessary, and that is my goal. 

Question: 1 would like to hear more about measures. 



cal ideas. 




444 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



Clements: As Greenes was saying, one of the disadvantages of the TEMA is that it is restricted to 
numbers and geometry, and all the rich information that she was talking about is not measured. 
Two alternatives that are coming down the road are a measure by Klein and Starkey called the 
Childhood Math Assessment. It is not sold or standardized yet. Likewise we have two Building 
Blocks instruments; one does geometry, shapes, patterns, and spatial sense, and the other one 
does numbers. The Childhood Math Assessment is numbers, spatial sense, and geometry 

Greenes: 1 just wanted to say that we have a clinical interview assessment for major concepts in 
each of our units, at the prekindergarten and kindergarten level. I have one more comment. You 
mentioned Klein and Starkey; there is one other NSF funded project in mathematics for kinder- 
garten-age children that should be identified. It is called Stories and was developed by Beth 
Casey at Boston College. It is not a complete curriculum, but it is a really interesting set of 
stories and math activities that come out of those stories. 

Clements: We left out Creative Publications Math Curriculum Resources. One more is Number 
Worlds. 

Greenes: I just want to say that we observed a number of things that we need to test further. 
There were many things that were very surprising to us based on the literature. For example, we 
know that many second and third graders have difficulty identifying a triangle if the baseline is 
not horizontal. If a vertex is on the bottom and it looks like it is on a plane, they will tell you it 
is not a triangle. However, our prekindergarten and kindergarten children have no difficulty 
identifying shapes in a variety of orientations. Whafs happening? Is it learned? Is it because 
triangles are frequendy drawn or pictured with the baseline horizontal? 

We found that children did not have difficulty counting objects that varied by size or color or 
shape or function, or even arrangement. Yet, when they get older, it seems to matter. What is 
happening? It seems there were many times, with different concepts, that the children who we 
worked with seemed not to be distracted by features that we are told in the literature they are 
distracted by. This is only anecdotal, observational information with small groups of children, 
we do not know what the answers are. 

Question: I would be interested in how you determine the specific goals. You all gave some 
goals for your curriculum. How did you do that for your intervention? How did you decide? 

Clements: We gathered a group of experts to talk about what we knew from research-based 
curricula. Which ones fit the criteria of being important mathematical ideas from the idea of a 
mathematician, important to children in terms of their interest, and then important in terms of 
its generative of further mathematical learning. 

Arnold: We used whatever you guys had written! Focusing on the fundamentals, the basics that 
the TEMA measures very well in terms of number recognition, understanding quantity, coming 
away from a preliteracy research base, showing that those core skills then free up mental capacity 
for some of the creative, more advanced concepts. 

Greenes: We recognized early on that children often knew a great deal about mathematical 
ideas but had a great deal of difficulty expressing themselves. 

Copley: If you cannot tell, we really do like this topic, and some people get very excited about 
math. There are so many questions to ask. Where do we go from here? I plan to spend the rest of 
my life looking at this, and I think that is probably true for everybody here. 




445 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Literacy for Preschoolers: 

When Learning to Read Is Vital 

CHAIR: Deborah J. Leong 

DISCUSSANTS: Ellen Frede, M. Susan Burns, Bob Stechuk 

PRESENTERS: Deborah J. Leong, Elena Bodrova, James Christie, Kathleen Roskos, 

Carol Vukelich, Myae Han 

■ Tools of the Mind — A Vygotskian-Approach to Early Literacy 
Development: Results From a Field Test in Head Start Classrooms 

Deborah J. Leong, Elena Bodrova 

How can Head Start classrooms provide good literacy experiences for young children? Some 
advise that we more or less ignore experiences with early literacy and instead turn to earlier 
exposure to formal instructional practices — such as whole group instruction or seatwork — 
initially designed for older children. The problem here is that young children lack the underly- 
ing cognitive, social, and emotional development that make it possible to use these strategies 
effectively, and the small gains, when accomplished, may come at the expense of long-term 
growth and resilience (Bodrova, Leong, & Paynter, 2000). Rather than drilling skills into the 
children, early childhood educators need another approach. We propose to address the problem 
using a "structured way" based on the work of Lev Vygotsky and his students that achieves high 
levels of early literacy without ignoring the child's level of development. 

The proposed presentation reports the findings from a field test of the "Tools of the Mind 
Approach" conducted in Head Start classrooms in Colorado. The "Tools of the Mind Approach 
is a Vygotskian-based early childhood innovation model that focuses on the development of 
early literacy while including self-regulatory, math, science, and social foundational skills of 
young learners. Results from previous small-scale empirical studies (in 1998 and 1999) showed 
promise. The instructional strategies and materials used in the program had a positive effect on 
the literacy skills of children (Bodrova & Leong, 2001). These results led to the inclusion of the 
program in the UNESCO database of promising educational innovations available at http:// 
www.ibe.unesco.org/International/Databanks/Innodata/inograph.htm. 

At the core of "Tools of the Mind Approach" are the Vygotskian ideas about how play, the 
leading activity in preschool, can be used both to foster underlying cognitive skills necessary for 
later school success and to promote literacy development. Teachers in the program learn how to 
scaffold play so that by the end of the year children can sustain play for 40 to 50 minutes — 
engrossed in the activity and capable of solving their own disputes. In addition to scaffolding 
the play of the children, special literacy tools were invented to scaffold the representation of the 
child's own message in writing, such as Scaffolded Writing and the Sound Map (Bodrova & 
Leong, 1998). 

In 2000-2001, the effectiveness of the innovation was evaluated in a quasi-experimental 
study of 10 Head Start classrooms (5 experimental and 5 control) that were first matched on 
teacher characteristics and then on child characteristics. Children were administered the pre- 
school version of the "Early Literacy Advisor" assessment battery (http://www.mcrel.org/ 
resources/ literacy/ela/) to provide pretest and posttest measures. 

Data for 228 children were analyzed using regression analyses that controlled for age, gender, 
special education, English language proficiency, and pretest score. Significant advantages 
(p < 0.01) for the children in the experimental classrooms were found on composite test scores 
for Early Reading Concepts and for seven of the nine Early Reading Concepts subscales, as well 
as for tests of Letter Recognition and Sound-Symbol Correspondence. Greater levels of imple- 
mentation of the curriculum in the classroom were associated with better outcomes for children. 




452 



446 



LANGUAGE, LITERACY, AND EARLY LEARNING 



References: 

Bodrova E., & Leong, D. (1998). Scaffolding emergent writing in the zone of proximal development. 
Literacy teaching and learning (Vol. 3, No. 2; pp. 1-18). Columbus, OH, Ohio State University, 
Reading Recovery Council of North America. 

Bodrova, E., & Leong D. J. (2001). The Tools of the Mind Project: A Case Study of Implementing the 
Vygotskian Approach in American Early Childhood and Primary Classrooms. Geneva, Switzerland: 
International Bureau of Education, UNESCO. 

Bodrova, E., Leong, D. J., Paynter, D. E., & Semenov, D. (2000). Early Literacy Assessments for the Pre-K 
Child. Aurora, CO: McREL. 



■ The Effects of a Well-Designed Literacy Curriculum on 
Young Children's Language and Literacy Development 

James Christie, Kathy Roskos, Carol Vukelich, Myae Han 

Wright Group's "Doors to Discovery" is a comprehensive pre-kindergarten literacy program that 
focuses on five areas: oral language, phonological awareness, print awareness, alphabetic 
knowledge, and comprehension. The program's basic design includes a variety of contexts — 
large group, small group, and discovery centers — that offer multiple encounters with language 
and print. 

Our evaluation of the Doors curriculum was conducted in two phases. First, we evaluated the 
design quality of the curriculum, using criteria based on the Standards of Effective Pedagogy 
(Dalton, 1998). In total, we made judgments about 26 indicators across these standards. We 
concluded that 22 indicators were fully met, 2 were partially met, and 2 were unmet. Overall, 
Doors appeared to be a well-designed early literacy program. 

Next, we conducted a small-scale research study of the curriculum. This study took place in 
five Head Start classrooms in a large metropolitan area in the Southwest. The classrooms were 
matched by language: two had English-speaking children, two had Spanish-speaking children, 
and one had a mix of English- and Spanish-speaking children. At the beginning of the study, the 
sampl^'consisted of 75 preschoolers, 3-5 years of age and from low-income families. By the 
conclusion of the study, the sample had decreased to 53 children. 

Teachers in the experimental classrooms used three units from the Doors program: Vroom, 
Vroom; Build It; and Tabby Tiger's Diner. Each unit was taught for 4 weeks. Teachers in the two 
control classrooms used the existing language arts curriculum, loosely based on the Creative 
Curriculum (Dodge, Colker, & Heroman, 2000). In order to check curriculum implementation 
and to provide data for subsequent qualitative analyses, video clips and field notes were col- 
lected during periodic visits to each dassroom. 

During the 2 weeks before and after the intervention, three assessments were administered: 
the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT; Dunn & Dunn, 1997), Get Ready to Read! 
(Whitehurst & Lonigan, 2001), and an eight-item measure of concepts of print (CTB/McGraw- 
Hill, 1990). 

Results indicated that Doors was effective in promoting Head Start children's language and 
literacy. Overall, the curriculum resulted in significant gains on the PPVT, Get Ready to Read!, 
and concepts of print measures. Analyzing the results in terms of the children's native language. 
Doors promoted English-speaking children's performance on the PPVT and concepts of print 
measures. The curriculum also increased Spanish-speaking children's performance on both 
literacy measures. 

A preliminary viewing of video clips filmed in the experimental classrooms and control 
classrooms revealed two major differences between the curriculums: 




453 



447 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



1 . Integration— The activities in the various components of the Doors program (large group, 
small group, and discovery centers) were usually connected, whereas the circle time and 
center activities in the control classrooms were usually unrelated. 

2. Explicit literacy instruction — The Doors program featured explicit instruction on vocabu- 
lary, concepts of print, and phonological awareness (rhyming), whereas the control 
classrooms featured very little of any kind of literacy instruction, other than storybook 
reading. 

These factors in curricula may have played an important role in the Doors subjects' enhanced 

performance on the language and literacy measures. 

References 

CTB/McGraw-Hill. (1990). Developing Skills Checklist: Concepts of print and uniting administration 
manual. Monterey, CA: Author. 

Dalton, S. S. (1998). Pedagogy matters: Standards for effective teaching practice. Santa Cmz, CA: Center 
for Research on Education, Diversity & Excellence, University of California. 

Dodge, D., Colker, L., & Heroman, C. (2000). Creative Curriculum for Early Childhood: Connecting 
Content, Teaching and Learning. Washington DC: Teaching Strategies, Inc. 

Dunn, L., & Dunn, L. (1997). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test [3rd edition). Circle Pines, MN: American 
Guidance Service. 

Whitehurst, G., & Lonigan, C. (2001). Get Ready to Read! An Early Literacy Manual: Screening Tools, 
Activities, and Resources. Columbus, OH: Pearson Early Learning. 



■ "Tools of the Mind" and "Doors to Discovery" in the 
Context of Research on Early Literacy Practice 
and Commonly Used Preschool Curricula 

M. Susan Burns, Ellen Frede 

The two symposium papers on "Tools of the Mind" and "Doors to Discovery" will be discussed 
in light of research findings on the literacy opportunities necessary for preschool children. 
Specifically we address the research underlying the joint position statement on early literacy of 
the International Reading Association and the National Association for the Education of Young 
Children (IRA/NAEYC, 1998) and the National Research Council's (NRC) "Preventing Reading 
Difficulties in Young Children" (Snow, Burns, & Griffin, 1998). 

Our guiding questions are as follows. What are the basic research findings that apply to early 
literacy? What content do "Tools of the Mind" and "Doors to Discovery" contain? What meth- 
ods are identified within each of the curricula? What is expected of the teacher? What is expected 
of the child? What is the nature of the interaction? To answer these questions we gathered 
information on the literacy opportunities listed in the program materials. We then examined the 
curriculum material with an adapted form of the Supports for Early Literacy Assessment for early 
childhood programs serving preschool age children and targeted points from the Head Start 
performance standards. Finally we did a listing of other curriculum content areas included in 
each of the programs. These programs will also be discussed in the context of commonly used 
preschool curricula such as the Creative Curriculum (Dodge, Colker, & Heroman, 2000) and the 
High Scope Preschool Curriculum (Hohmann & Weikert, 1995), and the literacy opportunities 
they provide in their materials. 

We add to this analysis an empirical study of classroom practices in one state. Over 200 Head 
Start, public school, and child-care classrooms that serve children in 30 low-income school 
districts were randomly selected. They have been observed for the past 2 years using structured 





448 



language, literacy, and early learning 



observations instruments including the Early Childhood Classroom Environment Rating Scale- 
Revised (ECERS-R; Harms, Clifford, & Cryer, 1998) and a literacy-specific instrument based on 
the IRA/NAEYC position statement. Results describing practices by auspice, by curriculum 
(including High Scope and the Creative Curriculum), and by teacher preparation will be 
presented. 

We end with an effort to find common ground among the programs presented while simulta- 
neously addressing the nature of early literacy opportunities that promote children's prepared- 
ness for later formal reading instruction. 

References 

Dodge, D., Colker, L., & Heroman, C. (2000). Creative Curriculum for Early Childhood: Connecting 
Content, Teaching and Learning. Washington DC: Teaching Strategies, Inc. 

Harms, T, Clifford, R. M., Cryer, D. (1998). Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale, Revised Edition. 
New York City: Teachers College Press. 

Hohmann, M., & Weikert, D. P. (1995). Educating Young Children, Active Learning Practices for Preschool 
and Child Care Programs. Ypsilanti, MI: High Scope Press. 

IRA/NAEYC (1998). Overview of learning to read and write: Developmentally appropriate practices 
for young children. Young Children, 53, 4, 30-46. 

Snow, C., Bums, M., & Griffin, P. (Eds.). (1998). Preventing Reading Difficulties in Young Children. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press. Available online: http://books.nap.edu/html/prdyc 



O 

ERIC 



455 



449 



Parenting/Families 



The Important Role of Fathers 
in Young Children's Development 

CHAIR: Lonnie Sherrod 
DISCUSSANT: Natasha Cabrera 

PRESENTERS: Vivian Gadsden, Catherine Tamis-LeMonda 

Lonnie Sherrod: We are delighted to have both this focus and our panel of speakers. Michael 
Lamb and I began graduate study at the same time, and having worked with Mary Ainsworth, he 
was just beginning to look at infants' response to fathers and the Ainsworth Strange Situation 
Paradigm. It was discovered that infants react to fathers very similarly to their reactions to 
mothers in the situation that presumably measured infant attachment. That was probably the 
first systematic research attention we saw to fathers in the child development field. 

Since then, this research has grown. The next phase of research that I found interesting and 
relevant was Lois Hoffman's research looking at working mothers in which she found that, in 
fact, working mothers looked much like fathers in regard to their interaction with young 
children. It showed that any differences we saw between mothers and fathers had more to do 
with role than with gender or a biologically based set of attributes. We also saw the work of 
people like Linda Burton, a sociologist at Pennsylvania State University, who was studying 
young, urban single mothers. She found that the fathers of young infants were not invisible, but, 
in fact, were very involved and important contributors to young children s lives. 

The panel today brings that line of research one step further by looking systematically at the 
role of fathers in the lives of young children, particularly the young children involved in Head 
Start programs. Our first speaker will be Catherine Tamis-LeMonda, who is an Associate Profes- 
sor in the Applied Psychology Program at New York University, where she also directs the 
Developmental Program. She is a member of the Early Head Start Research Consortium and the 
Early Head Start Fathers Group. 

Vivian Gadsden is Associate Professor of Education and Director of the National Center on 
Fathers and Families at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. She is conducting a 
longitudinal study with Head Start fathers in which the sample is primarily African American 
and Puerto Rican. She is now working with John Fantuzzo at the University of Pennsylvania 
School of Education, looking at literacy in Early Head Start families. 

Natasha Cabrera is an Expert in Child Development at the National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development (NICHD). She conducts research on fathers, child care, and poverty, 
and she coordinates initiatives at NICHD in those areas across the different agencies, a role that 
is very important given the lack of coordination that typically occurs across agencies. 

Catherine Tamis-LeMonda: The title of the talk is "Father Involvement; What Is It and Why 
Does It Matter?" The past 3 decades have witnessed burgeoning research on fathers, which has 



O 

ERIC 



450 



456 



PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



incited considerable dialogue and reflection on these two questions: What is father involvement, 
and why does it matter? My aim is not to answer these questions, because if 1 did, 1 would 
receive the Nobel Prize; rather I would like to raise some of the complexities that underlie 
research on fathers. 

I will start by highlighting perspectives from diverse scientific disciplines, to shed light on 
how complicated these two questions can be. Then 1 will focus on a developmental approach to 
provide the framework for presenting some of the research at NYU. Consider the first question: 
What is father involvement? For hundreds of years, we have had different ways of conceptualizing 
and characterizing those aspects that are subsumed under this constmct of father involvement. 

What does it mean to be an involved father? How involved should fathers be if they are to 
positively influence their children’s development? Are there thresholds of father involvement 
below which children's well-being is at risk? Does the nature of involvement change when 
different father types are considered? Is it different if one is a resident father or nonresident 
father, a biological father or social father? Should different criteria be used to assess involvement 
of these different types of fathers? 

It is agreed that father involvement is multifaceted, and defining criteria of the construct 
varies by scientific traditions. If we look at different traditions, the definitions change. Father 
involvement and what it is changes with children's and fathers' ages. It also varies with socioeco- 
nomic and cultural factors. Consider the second question: Why does father involvement matter? 
Once more, the outcomes of father involvement are multifaceted. How and why father involve- 
ment matters will depend on the dimension of fathering that we are considering and the person 
thought to be affected. Father involvement exerts meaningful change on children, fathers, and 
their families. Moreover, fathers can be seen as mattering directly as a source of direct input to 
children and families, for example through attachment relationships, as well as mattering 
indirectly. Fathers can affect mothers' own engagements or the engagements of other caregivers 
in children's lives, and they also indirectly affect children through their effects on household 
resources, financial stability, and the socioeconomic opportunities they afford. 

Finally, scientific discipline and the orientations and biases of researchers' discourse shape 
conceptions of why fathers matter. The meaning and outcomes of father involvement will not be 
the same for developmentalists, economists, anthropologists, evolutionary psychologists, or 
sociologists. I would like to think about what father involvement means from a 
multidisciplinary framework. We must begin to talk about fathering within and across the 
boundaries of scientific traditions. Multidisciplinary collaboration and emphases must begin to 
frame our thinking about fathers. 

Why is this? Obviously, if we expose ourselves to the scientific traditions of others, we begin 
to challenge and confront our own assumptions about what it means to be a father. We begin to 
expand our thinking to embrace a more integrative and complex model of family systems. Let 
me offer some examples of different scientific disciplines and the different ways they have 
thought about the meaning of father involvement. 

Developmentalists often focus on the quality of father-child relationships, and how such 
relationships develop and change over time, particularly in early childhood, because the idea is 
that we are la5nng the groundwork for attachment relationships and how they affect the trajecto- 
ries of children's lives. Researchers such as Lamb, Parke, and Palkovitz emphasize attachment, 
father's role in children's social emotional development, father-child connections, father's 
disciplinary practices, father's direct teaching, father-child activities, and father's sense of 
responsibility and commitment. Those are some of the ways we think of fathering from a 
developmental perspective. 

In contrast, economists often focus on financial provisioning and view child support dollars 
as a critical link to children's well-being. Economists, such as Garfmkel and Sigle-Rushton, often 
utilize cost-benefit analyses to understand and explain fathers' allocation of resources to 
children. For example, they note that nonresident fathers must allocate greater resources to 




ERIC 



j 



451 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



spend time with their children than resident fathers. Nonresident fathers incur costs associated 
with visiting arrangements, travel expenses, and sometimes arranging a venue for visits. 

Coresidency allows for the shared consumption of goods like housing, for example, thereby 
lowering the costs of involvement for resident fathers. The net effect of these patterns is that 
time spent with children is priced at a higher cost to nonresident fathers. Such formulae present 
one interpretation as to why fathers with fewer economic resources might not be as involved as 
either resident fathers or nonresident fathers who have financial resources. 

One of the most illuminating illustrations of the varied scientific conceptualizations of father 
involvement is evidenced in the evolutionary approach. Evolutionary psychologists refer to the 
term father investment rather than involvement, reflecting an orientation that links behavior to 
biology. Evolutionary psychologists seek to understand how, why, when, and under what 
circumstances men invest in their offspring. According to evolutionary theory, children benefit 
from fathers in a multitude of ways, and that is including, but not limited to, fathers' enhance- 
ment of their offspring's biological fitness and reproductive success. Therefore, thinking in 
evolutionary terms, father investment would be displayed by bearing many offspring. 

Sociologists and anthropologists emphasize the cultural settings of father involvement. 
Culture encompasses the norms, practices, language, and beliefs that are collectively shared in a 
community. Sociocultural ideologies and prescriptions about father involvement, togedier with 
the economic structure of communities and societies, affect fathers' roles. They determine the 
kinds of expectations we have about what fathers should be doing. 

Cultural perspectives are also critical for timeframes of fathering. Different cultures believe 
that there are different periods in development when fathers are thought to be most influential. 
In essence, what fathers do, when, and why, are integrally bound to cultural context. Fathers, 
mothers, and other persons in children's lives perpetuate the psychological and behavioral 
foundations of cultural communities through the context they create, the activities they engage 
in, and the attitudes they convey. Every day, fathers and mothers present their children with a 
series of cultural lessons unconsciously and consciously, subtly and boldly, direcdy and indirecdy. 

The research by Townsend demonstrates how cultural expectations determine what is 
appropriate behavior of men, fathers, and families. Townsend s anthropological research draws 
on intensive field work with men in the San Francisco Bay region of Northern California, 
compared to men from Tswana, a village in the southern African country of Botswana. In the 
Tswana cultural model, men provide economic, social, and emotional supports to a variety of 
children, including their own offspring, their grandchildren, and their nieces and nephews. 
Therefore, there exists what is termed "enabling collective shared investment in children s lives. 

Additionally, in Botswana, father involvement takes on different forms and intensities over 
children's life course as fathers pass through a series of culturally prescribed roles and relation- 
ships. In childhood, for example, children live with their grandparents while their mother is 
away working, and the father's role is not as salient as it will become later on in development. In 
adulthood in Botswana, fathers are expected to provide a home for their daughters and grand- 
children, at which point their importance increases dramatically. 

This contrasts with fathers from the San Francisco Bay area, who tend to focus on the well- 
being of their own offspring. These fathers, as many in middle class, Westernized societies, are 
expected to support their children early on and then to be less central as children grow into self- 
sufficient adults. A multidimensional view of fathering prompts reflection on this notion of 
tradeoffs in parenting. 

Fathers cannot be all things to children, but rather, fathers make choices consciously or 
unconsciously about where to direct their energies and resources. Moreover, these decisions are 
constrained by a limited set of perceived choices that are determined by many factors, including 
the number of children they have, their economic opportunities, employment conditions, the 
quality of the mother-father relationship, and personal characteristics. The decisions that fathers 
make have costs and benefits for children, fathers, and families. It is never always good. By 





452 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



investing in certain aspects of fathering, for example, the quantity of offspring one bears, fathers 
may be unable to invest in other ways such as giving personalized time to each of those offspring. 

The first example 1 draw from is economic theory. Economists note that the quality of father- 
child relationships might positively predict the time fathers spend with children, positively 
predict financial provisioning, and even positively predict the quality of the mother-child 
relationship. However, fathers who become more strongly attached to their children actually 
have lower bargaining power in the family system and also tend to bear fewer offspring. 

The second example is the breadwinner role. Fathers who are committed to their role as 
breadwinners may have to compromise other aspects of involvement, such as the actual time 
they spend with their children. Here I would like to use an example taken from a statement 
made by a participant in our study, of a New York City father with a low income. This exempli- 
fies the idea of tradeoff. In an effort to describe the various ways he involved himself in his 
infant's life, we asked him an extensive series of questions about the activities he shared with 
his child. 

We asked, "Do you diaper your baby? Do you feed your baby? Do you sing to your baby? Do 
you play with your baby? Do you hold your baby?" His responses to question after question 
about the frequency of his participation in all of our predetermined activities were "Not at all" 
or "Rarely." After continuing along these lines for some time, the father interrupted our experi- 
menter in an exacerbated tone and asked, "When do you get to the part of this questionnaire 
where you ask me about how hard I break my back working so that I can support this baby?" 

The third example is that of labor migrants in the United States as well as many poor men 
from developing countries who send remittances home but spend very little time with their 
children and families. Children of migrant workers benefit from an increase in resources, yet 
they do not receive the direct attention that characterizes more traditional father-present 
environments. 

The research being conducted at New York University focuses on a specific dimension of 
father involvement in children's first few years of life and falls within a developmental frame- 
work. Thus, this is to be conceptualized and interpreted within this narrow lens of my own 
scientific training. All the prior discourse was to say that we need to recognize that what we look 
at is a small part of the puzzle. Specifically, I am going to present some work on fathers with low 
incomes and their engagements with 24-month-old children in relation to children's communi- 
cative and cognitive competencies. 

This research evolves out of a larger ongoing collaboration among members of the Early 
Head Start Fathers Research Consortium. The Consortium's aim is to advance an understanding 
of the nature, antecedence, and consequences of father involvement in populations with low 
incomes. The Ford Foundation, NICHD, the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and 
Evaluation (ASPE), and the Administration on Children, Youth, and Families (ACYF) fund the 
research. 

In our research of father involvement, we have adopted Michael Lamb's taxonomy as 
an initial framework, and his theory conceptualizes involvement along three dimensions: 

(a) availability, which refers to fathers' presence or accessibility to children; (b) engagement, 
which is fathers' direct experiences, contact, caregiving, and the shared interactions fathers have 
with their children; and (c) responsibility, which refers to the extent to which fathers arrange 
for resources to be available to their children and their sense of commitment and responsibility 
for children. 

For purposes of this presentation, I will focus on the second component of Lamb's model, 
that of father engagement. Who are the fathers we have been observing? To date, the Early Head 
Start Consortium has been longitudinally following approximately 700 fathers. In the New York 
City site, we have seen over 100 fathers and their children, some between 24 months and 4 years 
of age. Other fathers are followed from the time of the children's birth. In all families, we also 
interview and observe mothers. Families are from many ethnic minorities, and our sample is 




453 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



primarily U.S.-born African Americans or Latinos of Dominican or Puerto Rican descent. About 
half of the fathers have their children with a teenage mother, so there is a wide age span in the 
fathers we see, from approximately 19-47 years of age. All families can be classified as having 
low incomes. 

The studies that 1 am going to talk about have four broad goals. First, our questions, the ones 
I am discussing today, concern the engagements of present fathers in children s lives. Rather than 
focusing on absence-presence, whether or not fathers see their children, we sought to explore 
variation that exists within fathers who do see their children regularly. Second, the fathers we 
talked to are from ethnic minorities and are largely poor. As such, we hope our research moves 
beyond general understanding to understanding underrepresented and often stereotyped 
fathers. Third, we are interested in behaviors and thoughts of fathers themselves rather than as 
caregivers to be compared to mothers. While many similar patterns of engagements do exist in 
the mother-child and father-child dyads, a comparative framework only is quite limiting and is 
not at the heart of our work. Finally, we seek to describe fathers language interactions and 
didactic stimulation, rather than emphasizing fathers' roles as playmates only whose contribu- 
tion rests in the kinesthetic stimulation afforded by their rough and tumble play. 

At NYU, we code various dimensions of father engagement from videotaped interactions. 

Our protocol includes a 3 -minute teaching task, 5 minutes of do as you wish, 10 minutes of free 
play, and 3 minutes of cleanup. All of these exist in the father studies protocol of the Early Head 
Start Consortium. These are the types of tasks we are using at 14, 24, 36, and 48 months of age 
with fathers and children. 

For purposes of today's presentation, 1 am going to focus on variables coded during free play 
at 24 months, which include Likert ratings of approximately 15 father items such as responsive- 
ness, intrusiveness, language amount, and quality. During the free play sessions, we transcribed 
father-child language, and that is incredibly tedious — it takes about 10 hours for 10 minutes. We 
then classified fathers' and children's speech into a number of functional semantic categories. 

We looked at fathers' language and asked if he is labeling, describing, repeating, questioning, 
imitating, expanding, directing action, and so forth. 

In children, we coded on 5-point Likert scales as well, of approximately 12 items that parallel 
those used with fathers, including responsiveness, language amount, language quality, play 
sophistication, positive affect, and negative affect. For fathers, all child utterances are coded from 
transcripts so that we could derive contextual information. That is used to classify each child s 
speech act, as well as each word within an act, into one of several linguistic categories or types. 
These include imitations, labels, descriptions, and words that express recurrence, actors, actions, 
patience, object of actions, recipients, locatives, and possession. 

Just as in the father component of this study, mothers and children are observed in various 
situations including free play, and global measures of mother behaviors are coded on tfre same 
dimensions as that for father. Mother-child interactions are transcribed so that mother's speech 
could be coded for their functional purpose. Finally, children's behaviors with mother as well as 
their speech with mother is coded using the same systems as the father-child interactions. 

We measured the total number of and diversity of meanin^l utterances made by each 
person in the interaction. Diversity represents the number of different language functions of 
meanings expressed. For example, a child who used language to label, indicate, and talk about 
action receives a diversity score of three regardless of how many times she said each of those, 
just to get an array of the ways children communicate. The reason we like to use this in our work 
is that it is not tied to a large vocabulary, so one could point to a cup and say, "Mommy, 
expressing possession, that is, a thing belonging to mother. This would be a sophisticated way of 
using the term "Mommy," so we are able to see how richly children use language, not merely 
how many words they have. 

From these various coding systems, we have identified two meaningful factors in the way 
fathers are interacting. The first, which is labeled the responsive didactic factor, reflects positive 




454 



parenting/ FAMILIES 



loadings and is quite strong, 0.45 or above, on measures such as language, play engagements 

^ didactic factor. The second fLor we have fdfntified in 

facers is labeled a negative intrusive or overbearing. It is sometimes called overbearing because 
e word negative intrusive sounds too negative, which receives high loadings for our measures 
verbal statements^^^ intrusiveness. In children we have three factors. "Playful 

receives nosit^^' 1 ^ J- loadings for play and language, a social factor which 

eceives positive loadings from items including participation and responsiveness to the caregiver 
and a child-regulated factor which receives positive loadings from ern^otional regulation, ^ ' 

nvo vement with toys, persistence, and low levels of negative affect. 

Next, we examined associations between these father and child outcomes. We found that 
InS?* on the responsive didactic scale had children who were more commu- 

fathprl^ interactions and more socially inclined. They were more responsive toward their 

athers as well, and scored higher on the Bayley Mental Development Index (MDI) We were 
also interested in the extent to which fathering predicted delay versus nondelayed status in the 
Bayley so we ran a senes of logistic regressions based on these findings, which included father 
and child items in the regression. We found that fathers who scored low on the factor of 
responsive didacuc were four times as likely to have children in the delayed range of the Bayley 

this IS not father absence. It is within fathers that we are seeing effects on this score 

7 1 lotions between father's language and children's language, both 

la^mi.i° in language predict children's total languagf^nd diversity of 

language use. The correlations range from 0.2 at the low end to close to 0.6 at Ae high end ^ 
More important is the fact that father's diversity, like the number of different ways he uses 
anguage to communicate, was significantly more predictive of children's language totals and 
i^rsity than was his sheer amount of language. This mattered in end regression^; diversity 

th^ hThT T®* important contributor to children's language. In mothers, we found 

that both lan^age total and diversity predicted children's language totals and diversity. 

However, there are a couple of points I would like to mention. First, mother's language 
^owed somewhat weaker prediction than father's language, and both total and divef^ity of 
mother lan^age showed equal predictability. The correlations for mothers were in the 0 3 
range which means there is 9% variance explained as opposed to over 25% variance explained 
for fathers lan^age That is a significant difference. Second, mothers' total language and 
others diversity of language showed equivalent patterns whereas for fathers it was the range of 
anmgs foat seemed to be most telling. Therefore, there exists some similarity, yet also some 
obse^ed LlSiage between fathers' and mothers' language and children's 

I have four final take-home messages for you. First, father involvement is multifaceted 
complex, and intimately ued to the biases of our specific scientific orientations Not surprising 
to someone trained in language development, I am focusing on what fathers mean for that ^ 
ject, but It IS a small piece of the puzzle. Second, for developmental psychofor^e construct 
o ngagement seems to be fundamental to capturing the quality of father-child relationships 

thatTth present fathers are doing. Third, in our work, we find 

children's Bayley scores. They seem to matter for 
^ delayed or not, language amount, and language diversity. Therefore 
stereotypes of fathers as rough-housers need to be expanded. Finally, through interdisciplinary 

presentation is about parent involvement, specifically fatherhood in early 
Hp ^ conceptual issues related to father involvement within the context of ^ 

Head Starts mission on parent involvement, and the possibilities for considering father involve- 




:461 



455 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLt5>/L-«JiNVtKaAiiwiN MUUKb 



merit in relationship to children's early literacy. Although a few Head Start studies, such as those 
by Fagan and Fantuzzo and others, have examined father engagement and children's social 
competence, multiple questions persist about the role of fathers in children's cognitive develop- 
ment, specifically their early literacy, reading, writing, listening, and oral language. 

At the same time. Head Start programs are encouraged by federal policy makers to engage 
fathers. Programs, by and large, aim to respond to this call to action while recognizing the 
potential advantages, complexities, and possible risks to relationships within the programs 
themselves— that is, among staff who may or may not be predisposed to doing this work, and 
the family members other than the father. A situation is exacerbated when the father is not a 
coresident in the household or when the family itself is in turmoil. 

There is a relative absence of a strong empirical base in father involvement and children's 
literacy. Remember that despite what we might consider the inherent relationship of literacy, it 
was 10-12 years ago when Head Start received a specific mandate about literacy. While we 
assume that that should be taking place, it has only been formalized for the last decade. This is 
the result, in large part, of the historically limited research base that focuses on fathers as active 
contributors to Aildren's daily development needs. 

As has been chronicled through countless articles over the past few years, the work of prepar- 
ing children, of getting them school ready, has typically been considered women's work. This 
reality of history offers, however, only a partial explanation for this limited attention. Some 
among them would suggest, and 1 would agree, that research in the field is still emerging and 
that even now we have limited data on child outcomes resulting from father involvement 
initiatives. Moreover, there is no systematic body of research that tracks these outcomes, al- 
though current policy studies such as the Early Head Start Study will undoubtedly provide such 
data over time. In short, it takes time for new areas of work to be integrated thoughtfully, 
systematically, and coherently into the diversity of knowledge bases. 

At best, we might expect only a few studies in any one area. Such is the case for father 
involvement in children's early literacy. We think the need for a conceptual framework is central 
to future research that attempts to link fathers' roles and early childhood education. Head Start, 
in my opinion, is an appropriate, if not the appropriate, context in which to consider and 
promote the study of these issues. It is one of the first formal programs children will attend that 
is specially designed to prepare children for kindergarten through 12th grade schooling, and 
which has a longstanding commitment to parent inclusion. 

There are two overarching issues. First, how do we determine the ways in which families and 
fathers can enhance young children's cognitive development, academic achievement, and social 
well-being? Second, how do we effectively utilize Head Start as a critical point of entry to engage 
fathers in families over time? How does Head Start engage families and fathers at present, and 
how do we respond to these families and fathers who do not have the literacy to support their 
children? Head Start is a critical setting, and we are looking to explore these parallel areas of 
work affecting children's early learning outcomes. 1 would also like to talk about father involve- 
ment within the context of Head Start's mission, and possibilities considering father involve- 
ment in relationships. We are interested in seeking the points of convergence, and that is what 1 
will attempt to do. 

Parent involvement has been a critical theme in Head Start since its establishment in 1965. It 
is prominently displayed, for example, in the Head Start performance standards, which make 
exclusive two mandates. The first is to enhance children's developmental competencies to 
prepare them to succeed in their present environments and with later responsibilities in school 
and life. The second is to partner with families and the community to enable, empower, and 
support families' efforts to enhance their children's development competencies. 

In highlighting parent involvement. Head Start draws heavily from ecological theories of 
human development. This suggests that the developmental potential of a specific setting is 
enhanced when there are many supportive links, that is, when there are shared goals, mutual 



ERIC 




456 



PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



between settings so that both can flinaion harmoni- 
faril^ f invo vement in Head Start, as is true of other educational settings, serves then as a 
faal tator that bridges the 3 years of the school program and family life to prLote positive 
developmental outcomes for children. *uicposiuve 

miS'SLon3^^.“hl't!L^^°^^ of engaging parents in order to mini- 

school-a problem that has been linked throughout the 
teracy literature. During the 1 990s, there was a msh of work on family involvement and parent 
mvcdvement. Those words are used interchangeably. It is my understanding that families arf 
more than parents, so part of what we need to do is think about what we mean by parent 

nprm?T'' involvement, thinking about the constelLion of 

people who contnbute to children's lives. 

These CMceptuahzations have attempted to build upon the premise that staff members and 
° ^ behalf of children, can construct relationships steeped in 

equality mutuality, and shared decision making. That each has respected rolL; thafthe typical 
toarch.es can be replaced with common goals; and that bo* hati the capadty and willTo 
gage in goal setting, goal achievement, and the reciprocity of knowledge and informaUon 
ver the past 10 years. Head Start has made efforts to move past the traditional focus on 
mothers only when considering children's parents. This way, it is attempting to think about 

what the constellation ofcontributions might be. ^ ommKaooui 

fondamental issues forming fatherhood research in practice, what we have 

u I ^ applications of what we know, and pathways 

for Jinking about it. l am begin with a conceptual stance, that parents are a cri deal coCr^nt 
of the micro system called families, and fathers have the potential to play a significant 3e as 
parems. As TamisJeMonda said, let us be reminded that sometimes LI is good romedmes 
Jat IS not as good, arid extended family members contribute to the broader concept of families 
econd, parents, families, and fathers can serve as proteedve factors, but they also might serve as 
barriers. Lasdy, we need to understand developmental competencies that are dependent on 
prease y operaPonalizing fathers m family involvement, and examining reladoLhips between 
culmrally-nch dimensions of both, as well as children's school readiness. 

whiA rdhert'^ThevT learnings from the Nadonal Center of Fathers and Families, 

^ ^ ^ pracuuoners who serve fathers direedy. They would sav 

that f dT expenence, and coupled with the literature, that there is a sense that fathers Jare 
that father presence matters, and that there are issues around joblessness and unemployment for 
a Jsproportionate number of fathers with low incomes. I might add that this is ti^e Xthl 
wi J ow incomes who live apart from their children, as well L those who hw w^them^ 
home. In particular, there is an absence of literature about the working poor 

*e and toe has been much discussion about 

about. While there are opportunities to talk with fathers, whether they live within the home or 
outside the home, and while we know transitions are important, we have yet to understand what 

feZr/" to father, Lm une^ 

XatTT"' tlifferent from their own past IpeLnees 

What they do now will have some impart on their reladonship. penences. 

The images of fa Jers are complex. The portrait of fatherhood itself, of the field itself is one 
of a forming and reforrning field with a past, present, and ftiture that is sdll to be eS w^a 
companion stoiy yet to be senpted. Some fathers have children who rely on public assistance 
O Jers have diildren with teenaged mothers whose families do not want thefr involvement Some 
are tejnically absent, but may provide support for child care, material goods hke Z mSaner 
and show their commitment to maintaining a strong, nurturing reladonship with thdr children ' 

By contrast, some fathers who meet the traditional definition of fatherhood by living in the 



ERIC 



457 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



home and providing for the family's material needs have children who feel unwanted. Tamis- 
LeMonda's example is a good one because this father saw his role, in part, as being the bread- 
winner. That is what we often hear from fathers with low incomes. Their construction of 
fatherhood is about being a breadwinner. It is interesting because much of what they do is the 
nurturing, love, and support, and there is a tradeoff that ends up happening when they make 
this transition to being responsible in terms of financial contributions only. 

I work with four men who are part of studies we have done in Philadelphia, Indianapolis, 
and San Francisco. I work mostly with African American and Latino fathers, so therefore my 
examples are from these populations. One participant is Carlos, a married father of three in his 
20s, who emigrated from Costa Rica. For 2 years, he has attended a male involvement program 
focused on fathering. His goals are not unlike those of thousands of other men who are fathers. 
He wants a good life for his family, his children, and for himself. He describes these goals with 
incredible deliberateness to demonstrate his increasing facility with English fluency and his 
marketability in the workforce. He talks about his visions, hopes, and images of a time when he 
can move his wife and children out of public housing, where they now live, into a good neigh- 
borhood. He talks about his unassailable aspirations to be a good father, to talk to his children, 
read to them, ensure that they receive a good education, and be there for them in ways that 
approach his most basic motivations for coming to the United States. 

Pedro is another father in the program, about the same age as Carlos. Although he echoes 
Carlos' sentiments, it is not clear that he is motivated by the same passions or with the same 
knowledge of possible goals and options for the future. He is separated from his son's mother 
and usually sees his son once a week. He is experiencing some difficulty gaining access to his 
son who, as a first grader, is having problems with classwork in school. His son attended Head 
Start. From his description, which he provided in Spanish, he is concerned. His description of 
his son and the problems he is facing in school are threaded with a clear query to the interview- 
ers about what he can, do to help his son in the face of opposition to his involvement and his 
limited knowledge of English and the school. 

The third father is Stan, who was a 23-year-old father married to the mother of his children at 
the time of this study. He dropped out of school in 10* grade and returned a year later. His 
experience of school was turbulent at best. After episodes in and out of school, Stan dropped 
out permanently at age 20. There is much talk about fathers acknowledging the children. At the 
point that he was having children with his present wife, she was still under the age of 16. He was 
only about 4 years older than she was, and he was still in high school. The statutory issue is 
particularly complex in this field, because it is different when one is 19 or 20 years of age and 
still in school, compared to when one is 45 years of age. Before he dropped out, he fathered his 
first child, a daughter, whose birth caused him tension: "I knew I needed to get my diploma, 
you understand, and things were bad between me and my girl and her family and I could not 
really take care of my daughter, you know, like a man. School became harder and it seemed like 
there was no place to go. I thought I might get a job." During 2 years of intermittent employ- 
ment and after several brushes with the law, Stan fathered a son with the same partner. 

At the time of the interview, he had begun to participate in a fathers program and had 
returned to school to earn his GED. Stan's daughter is now 5 years old and enrolled in day care. 
Stan has taken great interest in her literacy development. He reads to her and spends a great deal 
of money purchasing educational materials for her and his son. Although he is engaged in 
positive experiences with his children, his life circumstances are still tenuous. He fears that his 
children's schooling will not prepare them for the world they will enter as African Ameritans, 
and he feels ill prepared to question the quality of his children's schooling. He says, "I do not want 
them just going through the system with people thinking that they cannot be somebody." The 
question is whether Stan can ensure that his children are not forced to face the disappointments. 

The last person that I will tell you about is Parker. Parker is a bright, strong, determined, 
young African American father. He attended the Philadelphia schools where he got As, which he 



• 464 



458 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



challenges, because he was clearly not prepared. Parker has participated in a fathers program for 
4 years, not because he was unengaged or irresponsible towards his son, but because he wanted 
to strengthen his relationship with him, file for custody, and increase opportunities available to 
his son arid himself As a 20-year-old African American man, Parker provided for the daily care 
for his child. He gets a litde help from his mother. 

Over the years, Parker has tried to contextualize his life experiences, goals, dreams, despair, 
and hope within the history and culture of African American families, in which fathers sup- 
ported their children through care, nurturing, and economic support. Like millions of young 
mothers who are also and often invisible, he is balancing child care and responsibilities at work. 
Parker has a high school diploma, which enables him to get low-level jobs that can also expose 
him to dangerous circumstances. In one job, he was asked to do the drop-off and was robbed 
two times. He figured he had a child to take care of, so he better quit that job. Since he did this, 
he has commuted to New York to go to locksmith school. He did this after he worked 8-10 hour 
days and took care of his child. Now he is a locksmith. 

There is an abundance of data about fatherhood. Michael Lamb, Jim Levine, and others have 
put forth frameworks for looking at the dimensions of responsibility, availability, and engage- 
ment. There is also a good body of work on paternal caregiving. Caregiving may focus on 
feeding children and ensuring that they get sufficient rest and are protected from danger. It may 
also refer to attachment and security, generativity, and managerial tasks. What is interesting 
about the caregiving literature is that it tends to describe the frequency of care and the tasks 
performed rather than the quality of the father's care and the relationship to child's outcomes. 

There is an interesting body of work on fathers' involvement in children's academic achieve- 
ment. There are many ways in which fathers can have a positive impact on children's academic 
abilities, including fostering their intellectual and language development, attending school 
functions, making time for and helping children do homework, expressing interest in children's 
homework, reading to young children, and so forth. An increasing number of studies reveal that 
fathers have a significant influence on their children's intellectual development. Some of the 
work that we have done with Phil Beaumont suggests that fathers' participation in literate 
activities enhances their faith. A father's own illiteracy and perceptions of the role he can play in 
his child s literacy development may affect whether and how well children are prepared for 
school. 

Such factors also may influence the direct and subtle messages that fathers convey to their 
children about the value, achievability, and power associated not only with literacy, but also 
with schooling and knowledge. Even when feathers have limited school involvement, their 
involvement in children's schools and school life is still a powerful predictor of children's 
academic achievement. Lastly, more research has been done on poor African American fathers 
than all other fathers in the past few years. However, less research has been done on Latino 
fathers and fathers of other ethnic backgrounds, so we still have a limited body of knowledge 
for those populations. 

Nigel Anderson uses a framework that is both excellent and problematic, but he identifies 
the work of fathers within three domains; the street, the home, and the system. Although we 
question some of the explanatory stances of Anderson's model, we believe that urban spaces 
are somewhat analogous to simpler societies that maintain separation between women's and 
men s roles, and within these urban spaces, the issue of education and schooling are particu- 
larly tenuous. 

Every now and then, as Presidents come and go, we remember that literacy is important. 
Literacy is seen as developing specific competencies. Early literacy skills involve extracting 
meaning from printed samples and decoding printed words. There are several dimensions of 
this, much of which has been discussed in various national reports including the National 
Research Council's reports Eager to Learn, Neurons to Neighborhoods, and Preventing Early 
Reading Failure. 



O 

ERIC 



465 



459 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



One dimension is awareness of literature, that is, showing interest in stories. Another dimen- 
sion is print awareness, that is, awareness that print does not go away and that stories are 
accessible over time. For instance, there is an informal assessment that reading specialists often 
use in school. It is called retelling, and it is a fantastic way to understand what children actually 
remember and understand. Alphabetic knowledge, story sense, and awareness of the sequence of 
the story are critical, in addition to early writing skills, which is not talked about quite as much 
as reading. 

I also want to mention that we are doing work with John Fantuzzo, Paul McDermott, Doug 
Frye, and the array of wonderful students and former students who are now colleagues. We are 
including literacy in that framework because we think it needs to be an expansive framework 
that is not limited to reading and writing alone. Literacy should not be synonymous with 
reading. We need to understand how all these cognitive skills come to bear. 

There are other dimensions in literacy. Literacy is often considered an interactive process in 
which there are verbal language and literacy skills developed during the preschool period as 
children increasingly interact with others. Some people will call it the social process. We believe 
that literacy is a social process and a cognitive process. Cognitive and social are not exclusive; 
they are intersecting. Literacy is intertwined with children s social and emotional well-being, and 
literacy is relied upon in the development of the theories and learning behaviors. Literacy is 
occurring and being used in a range of contexts and being taught by a range of people in the 
young child's life. 

Regarding the relationship to effective early childhood, an important part would be a focus 
on oral language, which is the part that is often minimized in the programs. It not only concerns 
what happens at home, but also what happens within the workplace. The second is phonemic 
awareness, both reading and inclusion of families, and a focus on the cultural and social 
contexts for learning outside of Head Start. 

We have found that families create ways of "doing life." These frames of reference allow them 
to work through issues and help inform ^e degree to which these frameworks have allowed 
education to be positive experiences, and even the degree to which families and fathers, more 
specifically, are engaged. There are several areas of convergence for child well-being and success. 

During the school years, high levels of parental and maternal nurturing, sensitivity, reason- 
ing, and control are associated with proper social and academic functioning. This is slightly 
controversial, but it is very important because we find this repeatedly in our Head Start work. 
Over time, low-income families of children at risk of school failure often become distrustful of 
schools and educational programs' abilities to protect and engage them and their children. Head 
Start can interrupt this and help to eliminate such distrust, and that is much more pronounced, 
as my experience has been, with fathers who have had bad experiences in school, particularly 
African American and Latino fathers with low incomes. 

Some of the general considerations we should think about are first methodological. We have 
the family involvement questionnaire which looked at the multidimensionality of parental 
engagement, so part of what we are beginning to do is look more specifically at father engage- 
ment within that multidimensional framework. In a study of 5,000-6,000 parents in Philadel- 
phia, Fantuzzo found that parents' predictions of children's performance in Head Start were 
highly correlated with children's actual performance. One empirical study that focused on 
fathers and literacy found that both mothers and fathers overestimated children s literacy 
performance. While some parents had the better sense of how their children will come to be 
socialized within Head Start, in fact, we know far less about children s literacy performance. 
When we think more particularly about fathers with low incomes, we need to think about how 
they construct involvement and how literacy folds into that. 

I would like to read a list of commentaries. These come from our own studies as well as those 
by Aisha Ray of the Erikson Institute and Sydney Hans at the University of Chicago. These are 
commentaries from fathers who were asked specifically about what is important to them: 




460 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



1. I am committed. I realize what it is like to be grown and responsible. 

2. You have to make sure your child eats. He can go to bed hungry but he'll eat. 

3. It made me more responsible for my children and myself. I am usually at home with 
them. I cannot hang out. I help them get ready for school. I take them to school/ too. 

4. Be there to support them financially and give them a hand. Somebody else may try to 
teach them something different. He should be responsible, secure, and understanding. 

5. Make the children feel secure in love and financially. 

6. Do different activities with children. Take care of them, feed them, clothe them, help 
them with school, come home with surprises, and take them places. They need to get out. 

7. Teach them about school, their ABCs. Spend a lot of time playing with them when they 
have a problem. 

Here is my point. More than half of these commentaries, and these were the ones that were 
the most frequently cited, basically ignored teaching children literacy. This is not because the 
fathers find that it is unimportant, but because of their own issues and inadequacies around 
literacy. 

What can fathers specifically do? They can engage children in what they need to study. 

Fathers engage children through language and oral communication by having a systematic 
approach to helping them. Talk first about the importance, even when they are not speaking 
Standard English. The point is to engage them in the back and forth of conversation, and if they 
speak a nonstandard dialect, so be it. It is the cognitive process that we are concerned with right 
now. Help them with more specific knowledge about children who are sounding out words, and 
teach them different approaches, specifically about helping children learn about the alphabet. 

Give fathers a sense of the books that are engaging and the ways to read books. One assumes 
that middle-class parents actually do know how to do this. What one finds among fathers and 
mothers with low incomes is that both parents, when they have made a commitment to helping 
those children develop their literate abilities, in fact know to let the child see the whole page. 
There are some simple approaches to thinking about that. Engage children in practical tasks of 
literacy, like mapping out ways for children to do chores, and facilitate the relationship with 
school by teaching parents how to develop important relationships. Improvise with these 
approaches so that they can utilize curricula that focus on father-child activities without gender 
stereotyping. Be sensitive to diversity, and help fathers to identify the strengths of themselves 
and their children. 

Lastly, there are research considerations. Where fathers have limited literacy themselves, how 
do we realistically engage them in children's early literacy? How can programs help fathers 
become effeaive evaluators of their children's progress in literacy? How might we build on 
historical relationships that fathers have with Aildren? If play is such a breeze and all fathers do 
it, how can we integrate literacy into those activities and make it more of an experience? How do 
Head Start programs look at what is provided by nontraditional fathers, such as nonresidential 
or noncustodial fathers? In such cases, is there a role for fathers? What is Head Start's role in a 
different kind of transition? Is it helping schools prepare for father involvement? Is it also 
working to create a nexus with programs that are specifically designed for fathers? 

Currently, work in areas such as family literacy should be integrated with federal and state 
funded programs. As research in the field emerges, how do we begin to uncouple the role of 
fathers as similar to, yet different from, the role of mothers? How do we build upon the shared 
goals of fathers as parents? How do fathers contribute to the environmental and social develop- 
ment of early literacy and serve as protective factors to allow children to learn literacy? How do 
we understand, utilize, and build upon this knowledge? 

Natasha Cabrera: The presentations were insightful and provocative. I appreciated hearing 
about new work that is coming out in one of my favorite areas of research. I want to tell a father- 
son story before we go on, because it highlights some of the aspeas that were discussed. The 



er|c 



467 



461 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



Other day, my son said to my husband, "I'm very lucky I'm not a male ant." I was eating break- 
fast and thought to myself, "I am happy you are not a male ant, too. It would have been very 
difficult to give birth to a male ant!" He continued, "Male ants die when they mate and they do 
not get a chance to be daddies. When I grow up, I want to be a daddy." It is a cute story, and it 
illustrates that children pay attention. 

Before I begin, let me disclose some of my biases. I work at NICHD, and I have a mixed 
policy and research identity, so some of the policy/ research biases may come through. My real 
intention is to use the papers here today to make some general comments about what father 
involvement is and whether there are universals of involvement. Then I will talk about why it 
matters. How is it linked to child outcomes? I will also talk briefly about men. What does 
involvement do for them? 

What is father involvement? Is it universal for fathering? One of the issues that is important 
to consider when measuring something that is good for children is cultural sensitivity and 
ethnic awareness. How does one know what one is looking for? If a man from a different culture 
says hitting his child is okay and says he loves him, do we condone that? Is that part of our 
framework of thinking about father involvement? As we heard today, father involvement is a 
multifaceted term. It has multiple meanings for many people, given cultural and ethnic diversity. 
It has different meanings for different men. 

However, there are tradeoffs. Parents cannot be all things to their children. Fathers with low 
incomes probably have different tradeoffs to make than middle-class fathers. There is much 
variation in resident versus nonresident fathers, old fathers versus young fathers, especially 
taking into account the context in which they live and the children they have. Sometimes, 
children and fathers are matched a little better than others. Fathers engage with the children at 
other levels. We have heard that they can make an impact cognitively, socially, physically, and 
always in the literacy area. We have different disciplines to conceptualize father involvement. We 
do not have a model that integrates all these perspectives. 

Tamis-LeMonda talked about the many ways in which we can involve fathers, looking at the 
issue from different disciplinary angles. For example, if one is a nonresident father, the most 
important contribution is child support dollars, but other fields are telling us that money is only 
the beginning of a solution. We actually need the fathers to be involved with the children. 

Although we understand that fathers have these multiple roles, we do not know how it plays 
out in the family, especially from a research perspective. What do we not know? Although we 
have several models of father involvement— for example. Lamb and his colleagues provide one 
of them — we do not know how they work and for whom. This model, in particular, was de- 
signed for a different audience from the one with whom we are now working, but in an absence 
of an understanding of what it is that we are looking for, we rely on what we have. Lamb's 
model of engagement, responsibility, and availability says little about the quality of that 
engagement, so that we can have positive or negative engagement, responsibility or irresponsi- 
bility, availability or unavailability. We need qualitative videotaped data to take a look at how 
the quality of this constmct is playing out. In some ways, father involvement is being conceptu- 
alized in a nondynamic, inert way. 

How does the child affect the type of father one is? Some children are more difficult than 
others. Some children cry more than others. Some children are easygoing. How does that have 
an impact on what the father does or does not do? After being sprayed a couple of times in a 
diapering situation, some fathers might say, "You do that, and 1 11 do something else. It does 
not mean that he does not love this child. It just means that the interaction with the child is 
context-specific, and we have not captured that in our research. 

How does the mother affect the type of father one is? She might say. Do not change the 
diapers, I can do that. Do not feed him, you might kill him." Much of the competence that we 
gain as mothers comes from winging it, but we pretend we are good at it. Mothers tell fathers, 
"You're not very good at it. Stay away, you can't do this." As a result, fathers feel less competent. 
How do mothers contribute to the type of parent that the fathers can be? How does context 



ERIC 




462 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



determine father involvement? This is particularly relevant in school settings, where fathers and 
mothers are treated differently. 

One can see this in the health care arena as well. When my son or daughter had a doctor's 
appointment, the doctor's office would usually call me to check to make sure that the children 
would get to the appointment. There is an institutional bias regarding how we treat mother and 
fathers. Having said all this, do we need a new model of father involvement that can accommo- 
date the child, the mother, and the context? Are the models we have, that are basically coming 
from a different population, suited for families with low incomes? Can we modify them? That is 
one of the issues that we need to deal with before we make sense of what we are finding. 

I obviously do not have the answers to these questions, but I have some ideas of where to 
look. One of those might be qualitative data. Listening to the fathers speak, we get a different 
picture of what they do, what they can do, and the barriers to their involvement. We need those 
qualitative data to generate hypotheses. Some researchers are beginning to hear in the men's 
voices what it is like to be a father from that side of the fence, without our own maternal lens. 

We also need a theory and a model. We do not have a theory regarding what to collect, so 
when we go out in the field, we collect everything we can think of just in case it makes a differ- 
ence. We find correlations to many things, but we do not have a map. With more qualitative 
data, we might be able to learn about the quality of an interaction between a nonresident father 
who has a child for 2 hours every Saturday, versus a social father who is trying to get together 
with the mother and become a unit. We need that qualitative information to get a sense of how 
a child is relating to these adults. 

Children's language can also be attached to context. For a father who does not have much 
time with his child, is he going to miss some of the contextual reference? I am always intrigued 
when I listen to a child interact with a father. I was on the bus the other day and this 2-year-old 
was talking gibberish. I did not understand. The mother seemed to know everything he was 
saying. Oh, that was a green monster we read about yesterday. The father said, "Tell me— what is 
he saying?" The mother knew. She was there when the story was read. She knew the red monster 
and the green monster. The father was clueless. I knew his pain because I did not understand 
what the child was saying. 

Therefore, the quantity of time the child spends with the father is also important. How does 
that affect the type of involvement the fathers have with their children? Qualitative data can also 
help us to understand how couples make decisions regarding children, money, and so forth. 
Who picks up the child today? Who changes diapers? Who takes the child to the doctor? Who 
goes to the PTA? When we measure things one at a time, we assume that if the father is not at a 
PTA meeting, he is not making the doctor's appointment. He is going to score low on the 
responsible construct. We need to understand how couples decide how to manage work, life, 
and children. It may be unfair, but we do not have a sense of what it looks like from that 
perspective. Before we start counting the number of things that fathers and mothers do for the 
children, we need to understand how they divvy up their work. It may be different in nonresi- 
dential families or residential families. Qualitative research can give us insights into these issues. 

Another aspect of father involvement that we should consider is how the outside world — 
institutions, schools, work, hospitals — determines the ways in which fathers get involved. One 
needs flexible work hours if one normally leaves work at 6 o'clock and one's child care center 
closes at 5:30. Fathers out in the work force have told me informally that they do not get as 
many breaks as women. Women can say, "I am picking up my child," and they get excused, but 
fathers are immediately placed in the "daddy track." The assumption is that a father cannot be 
serious about work if he is leaving at 5 o'clock to pick up his child. There is some work written 
on this, especially in the corporate sector. Men cannot afford to be considered being on the 
"daddy track." As I said earlier, a school's policies can also hinder or promote parental involve- 
ment. Usually for parent-teacher conferences, meetings, or other school events, it is fine if only 
the mother shows up, making it seem as though the father is dispensable. 




463 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



How do children view father involvement? We need more qualitative data to understand 
what they think when the father lives in Nicaragua and the child lives in the United States— he 
still gets to love his father, and he knows that his father is sending money. How do these 
children love their fathers when these fathers are not scoring well in the father involvement 
measures? How do a father and child negotiate a constructive relationship? How do these 
fathers forgive a child? How do they respect each other? All these ways of understanding father 
involvement are linked to measurement, data, and method. 

Why does father involvement matter? How is it linked to child outcomes? Is it something 
about being a man, being a father? Can we replace this person? This is usually the million-dollar 
question for research and for policy. We are measuring many things, but we do not have a 
theoretical understanding of how these things are linked to child outcomes. When one looks at 
economic theory and child support dollars, the children of men who pay child support on a 
consistent basis have access to resources and are doing okay. 

However, when one is looking further at those correlations, one finds that they do not 
explain everything. In fact, when one takes into account the father and the mother relationship, 
everything is better. If one looks at some of the legal research, courts have been considering joint 
custody in certain cases as well as family therapy to help the two parents coparent after their 
relationship has dissolved. The idea is that if the conflict is low, even divorce can be happy. 

Further, we do not know how father involvement works. 1 need to emphasize that because we 
have much information from different fields — domestic abuse and child neglect that there are 
some parents who do not do well by their children. Positive father involvement has consistent 
links to social competence, self-regulation, language, cognition, and emotional connection. 

What we do not understand is how that works. What is the mechanism? What role does a child 
play in this relationship? How does one make changing diapers or hugging a child a cognitive 
experience? We have a very dynamic model that can help us understand. 

1 will not say much about literacy. One cannot argue with literacy; reading is important. 1 
would like to mention the work of Paulo Freire, a Brazilian educator, who talked about his 
function in literacy. In Brazil, he was on a quest to make sure that all the peasants learned how 
to read. At the end of 10-15 years, peasants were functionally literate. However, they were still 
socially and economically marginalized. My point is that in addition to focusing on reading, we 
also need to focus on text, comprehension, interpretation, and critical reading. How do we 
accomplish that? Include the adults in the family — the literacy of adults is important. If one is 
not looking for books, like all the methods that Gadsden suggested, one is not going to be 
exposed to important, complicated, challenging print. 

The multidisciplinary approach is important. We still do not know how it fits. For example, 
look at evolutionary psychology. Men usually invest in their offspring. If one takes that theoreti- 
cal stance, we can say that the social father cannot invest in other people's children, yet we have 
examples in our society where fathers adopt children and become great stepfathers. How does 
that happen? We need to challenge this vertical assumption. In Botswana and other cultures, 
men invest only in their biologically related kin. In this country, the social father is common. 
Different theories can help us to understand what a social father is. 

What about men's development? Most mothers will tell you what it is like to be a mother. It 
is the most amazing experience in the world. It is exhausting, exhilarating, joyful, and scary. A 
mother feels competent one day and the next day she thinks she cannot take care of a plant. 
How is this process for men? What is it like for men to father when they do not have this 9 
months of metamorphosis, when we are sort of keeping them away from the child? How is the 
process of becoming a father for a man? What does it mean to a man to have responsibility for a 
child? How does that process happen psychologically and physically? 

We have some ideas, and qualitative data are telling us that some men want to take fewer 
risks when they become a father. They do not want to die right away. They want to stick around 
for their child. We heard some of the men saying, "If 1 want to see my kid, the only way is to 



■ 470 



464 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



bring money to my child's mother. I do not have any problem selling drugs. I will do it just so I 
can have the money to pay. 1 want to be a good dad. I want to see my kid." What is that process? 
How do men resolve these issues? Some people have written about procreation and how it is 
tied to this evolutionary psychology idea. We do not know how the process of becoming a father 
is related to being a father. 

Sherrod: 1 have never done research on fathers, but I have always been interested in fatherhood 
because I am a father, and my daughter is almost an adult now. One major source of compatibil- 
ity my wife and I have with each other — one reason we stuck together for 25 years — is that we 
have relatively reversed gender roles. She likes sports and cars, and I like cooking and decorating. 
I was very involved in my daughter's upbringing, in part because I am trained in child develop- 
ment, so I knew what to do. I was not nervous, and I just liked doing it. Nonetheless, our 
daughter still comes to my wife for motherly things relating to nurturing and so on, and to me 
for fatherly things relating to practical advice. Somehow, despite our reversed gender roles, 
despite my heavy parental involvement, she still sees two roles of father and mother. There is 
something real there that these people are on to that is interesting and important. 

Bob Bradley: What are the things that fathers do that are necessary but not sufficient for child 
outcomes, and what do they do that is sufficient, but not necessary? What have you found in 
your research that would enable us to better understand how fathers have an impact on chil- 
dren? 

Cabrera: It used to be that if one paid, one stayed. If one paid, that was necessary, and in some 
cases sufficient. We have gone beyond that to say fathers are needed around for other things. 

Tamis-LeMonda: That is the million-dollar question, and obviously none of us here has the 
answer. However, it is even more complicated, as one could imagine, when we think of develop- 
ment. Are we talking about what are necessary or sufficient aspects in infancy or during periods 
of emergent language? What about in adolescence? What about in adulthood? As adults, we talk 
rarely about the role of our fathers, so that becomes incredibly dynamic, because the answers to 
that vary by the age period as well as by the domains. If we are talking about language, fathers 
sharing language experiences with children might be necessary or not. It might be enough that 
there are other sensitive caregivers talking and reading to children. I would not think that their 
language development would be thwarted because fathers are not there talking. Some have 
argued that fathers are particularly necessary for emotional regulation for boys, and others do 
not agree. It is age-based, domain-based, and incredibly complex. 

Cabrera: At NIH, we put out a new file on how to understand this sandwich generation when 
children or parents make investments early on for their own children. Then the parents get 
old — who is going to take care of these parents? In terms of resources and time, it is an amazing 
thing. How do we allocate resources later on as children become adults to our own parents? 

Gadsden: Much of our work around caregiving has been general — what it means and whether it 
makes any contribution. It seems to me that we need to look at the different periods. Some have 
attempted to do that, and the presentations here are an example of looking at these stages of life 
and the nature of involvement. When one looks at those age stages, one gets a sense of what that 
might be, but I am not sure that we are clear about what we actually want. We talk in general 
terms about child outcomes, even those of us, including myself, who should know better. 

What do we want? What are the socioemotional effects that we want to be able to see? What 
are the school outcomes that we want to see? What are the literacy needs and what are the 
approaches that we can use? In the literacy field, we have not done a good job of addressing 




471 



465 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



those issues, even in relation to mothers and other family members. It is also hard for us to 
disentangle what fathers, mothers, and other family members bring. It is something that we can 
look at, requiring a multimethod approach, one in which we have opportunities to map 
qualitative data against quantitative data. 

Pamela Raya-Carlton: How do you test for variance between mother and father? 

Cabrera: One needs good data, asking the same question of fathers and mothers. We were eager 
to start this father research. It is a learning field. We do not have the same wording for mothers 
and fathers, so it is a nightmare to even compare the two. We spent hours and hours thinking. 

We are not asking the same thing. Fathers and mothers respond differently. However, that is a 
good point if we had the data, but we do not. 

We have been working with Lamb on how parents diverge and converge. When one looks at 
most studies of middle-class research, one sees that middle-class families generally agree, and 
the father will agree with whatever the mother says, and everybody is happy. However, families 
with low incomes have more disorganized unions, and the arrangements are more chaotic. 

There is much disagreement about everything. 

Tamis-LeMonda: That is a great point. 1 would like to add two more points. One is the diver- 
gence/convergence issue. We asked what we thought were the most fundamental questions. Are 
you a resident? Do you live with your child or not? We asked that of mothers and fathers. At our 
site, we have fathers who say yes, 1 live with my child, I am a resident father. The mother says he 
is not or vice versa. When one moves beyond that to asking whether reading is going on, and so 
forth, the concordance is an important question and incredibly complicated. We were shocked 
to find out that partners do not even agree on if they are living together. What does that mean 
for when we are modeling residency versus nonresidency? Who do we use as the determining 
person when we run those analyses? 

A second point is that we also have to be careful about imposing maternal templates or ways 
of thinking about what mothers do as a framework to begin thinking about that subject. We 
need to make sure that we do not leave out unique aspects — that having a priority framework 
might circumvent broader, flexible thinking about fathers. 

Gadsden: 1 would like to share one point. This was mentioned in a talk several years ago, 
illustrating the idea that one does not ever get the same reports from two groups of people. A 
divorced father was asked, ^ Do you feel as though you have as much access and enjoy as much 
time with your children now as you did before you divorced?'^ The father said, 1 miss them so 
much. It is just so painful. 1 never get to see them anymore. I had so many opportunities before, 
while 1 was still married." The children were asked and they said, "We have never seen him so 
often." The reason that they thought that is that the quality of their interaction is different. 

While he was physically in the house before, he was not interacting with the children on a 
daily basis. 

My point is that there are these nuances and complex, intricate issues that are hard to 
disentangle. This is where the anthropological work might come in. The construction of mascu- 
linity and womanhood in Western society is complex. The image that society has of fathers as 
men is one that says they do certain things, and so it argues for thinking about these different ^ 
approaches to understanding the issues. That issue is noteworthy and worth considering, as is 
thinking about the inherent complexities. My early work was just on mothers, and the reason I 
became interested in fathers was that 1 realized that even when they were not there, they were 
there. 





466 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



Julia Mendez: I wanted to remind us that the men, particularly minority men, who are visible, 
who are involved fathers, are taking a tremendous risk to be in that place because of the lack of 
support. One of the outstanding things that Head Start could do is to bring together men who 
are not involved and show them that there are others acting on behalf of their children, because 
they feel so isolated, more so than mothers. 

The challenge I wanted to pose is: Do you think as language researchers one of the easiest 
concepts to teach in undergraduate developmental courses is the notion of a critical period for 
language acquisition? Do you think that there is any utility to using the concept of critical 
period in the development of the father-child relationship, particularly for men? One sees the 
pain in older children who lack that understanding of who their father is. Why do they not have 
a relationship with their father? Is there some link? It strikes me that because you are doing such 
amazing language work and also fathering work, that could be a converging theme. 

Tamis-LeMonda: I believe the attachment researchers would say that certainly those formative 
times are important. I want to distinguish the term "critical period" from the term "sensitive 
period." It is a very important distinction. Critical period would suggest that if something does 
not occur during that period, a person is forever doomed. It is a sensitive period of heightened 
saliency, when early formative skills and relationships are being founded. However, sensitive 
leaves open a potential for other points in time to also be meaningful or to modify or alter those 
earlier foundations. Thus I would be a proponent of a sensitive period while others would have 
more of a life course or life span approach; but certainly attachment theorists would suggest 
sensitive periods. 

Gadsden: I agree with a sensitive period, and in talking to the fathers, they articulate the 
importance of the early years in terms of their participation. They understand the importance of 
getting children engaged in literacy activities early on. They watch television and hear things 
from other sources, and they know some about the importance of literacy. Then they try to 
reconcile what they actually are able to do and their ability to gain access and make a difference. 
However, I would also say that schools in many environments take on a critical period stance. 
There is a statement of the difficulty of teaching literacy past grade five or so and getting chil- 
dren to read if they have not, in spite of the fact that we have programs for adolescents and for 
adults. The expectations are relatively low for that. 

While we are talking to these fathers, it is also a matter of thinking about the policy, systemic, 
and systematic issues of reconfiguring the ways in which institutions that are supposed to be 
providing services rethink the opportunities to engage them. If educational institutions cared 
about children and parents, they would take into consideration that these fathers, often with 
low incomes, often do not have the educational preparation to be able to support their children. 
Therefore, they pull back from opportunities to engage positively with them. 




473 



467 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Fathers and Early Head Start: Methodological 
Issues in Research and Implications 
for Program Involvement 

CHAIR; Hiram E. Fitzgerald 
DISCUSSANT: Helen H. Raikes 

PRESENTERS: Robert H. Bradley, Jean Ann Summers, Lorraine M. McKelvey, Lori A. Roggman 

Hiram E. Fitzgerald: Although the study of fathers has increased steadily over the past diree 
decades, researchers have rarely generated unique methodologies or theories to guide this work. 
Generally, theories of parenting are conceptually limited to providing explanations related to 
mothering. Similarities and differences in mothering and fathering have yet to be adequately 
explored, but as the 21st century opens, it is clear that researchers are dissatisfied with the 
mother-child relationship as the normative standard for the parent-child relationship. 

There may be similarities in father-infant and mother-infant relationships that are guided 
more by infant actions than those of the parent. For example, either mother or father can meet 
the need for a diaper change, however, the nature of the interaction between parent and infant 
may differ, depending on the person who is changing the diaper. The same can be said of playful 
interactions between parents and toddlers. The toddler may initiate a playful interaction and 
receive different responses from whichever parent is the target of their playful behavior. 

Similarities and differences between mother-child and father-child interaction are only part 
of the story. Four fundamental challenges confront investigators who wish to study the impact 
of fathers on infant and toddler development; (a) engagement (identifying and contacting the 
individual who fulfills the father role for a particular child), (b) involvement (convincing the 
father to participate in the research), (c) understanding (examination of one's biases about men 
as fathers and partners, and examination of the literature underlying theory and measurement), 
and (d) sustainment (maintaining the father's presence over the course of the research project). 

The following papers explore aspects of these challenges and highlight parallel challenges for 
Early Ffead Start (EFFS) programs. Thus, at the program level, the challenges are the same, that is, 
programs must address the issues of engagement, involvement, understanding, and sustainment. 

Robert Bradley draws attention to historical approaches to the study of parenting and notes 
issues related to these challenges. FFis paper examines instmments used to assess fathers, 
including at the item level for particular tools. Jean Ann Summers follows this by discussing 
qualitative interviews with fathers, noting that if we allow fathers to tell their stories it may affect 
their relationships with programs like Early Head Start. Lorraine McKelvey focuses on father 
characteristics, assessing the similarities and differences between residential and non-residential 
fathers, and biological and social fathers. She also asks how functional fathers change over time 
and what impacts such changes can have on child development. Lori Roggman looks at differ- 
ences in how fathers and mothers interact with their toddlers asking questions such as. Do 
parent-toddler interactions contribute uniquely to toddler behavior and development? Are some 
types of interaction more likely to help engage, involve, and sustain father involvement? Finally, 
Helen Raikes, the discussant, picks up the challenges described in these papers from a 
practitioner's point of view. 





468 



PA RENTING/ FAMILIES 



■ The Importance of Measuring Fathers From a Male Perspective 

Robert H. Bradley 

As we move into the 21st Century, there is renewed interest in understanding the role that 
fathers play in the lives of children. A key difficulty researchers face is that much of the literature 
is framed by a conception of caregiving built around maternal parenting, or what is called the 
maternal template. 

In our study of Head Start fathers, we have grappled with how to measure key attitudes, 
behaviors, and beliefs in men. For many of the constructs we wished to assess there were 
measures developedvfor mothers, but not for fathers. As a matter of practicality, we looked at 
possible start-points. Every measure carries assumptions about the experiences, dispositions, and 
competencies of the person being measured. Therefore, we asked "Are most fathers likely to 
meet the assumptions for the measure?" Frequently the answer was "No!" The content was 
wrong, the set was wrong, or the response choices did not fit. For example, if fathers do not 
commonly perform certain caregiving activities, having response choices such as "almost 
always" or "daily," though strictly accurate, may result in inadequate (or unrealistic) involve- 
ment, perhaps leading to invalid responses. For most of the attitudinal measures chosen, we 
either modified or deleted items, changed the set-up somewhat, or altered the response choices. 
Partly as a hedge against accidental over-reliance on measures currently available, a series of 
open-ended questions were included. These questions were designed to allow men to define 
their perceptions about being a father in their own words. 

In an era in which families are often formed without fathers and family dissolution is 
common, men find themselves in diverse fathering roles; non-resident biological father, step 
father, and traditional residential biological father are a few of these roles. Different roles, 
responsibilities, and demands may mean that two fathers think, feel, and act differently, while 
being equally committed to the well being of their children. Thus, the challenge is to measure 
the same, or at least similar, constructs in men who play very different fathering roles. 

One might ask if "sensitive fathering" is reflected ih the same behaviors for both resident and 
nonresident biological fathers, or if sensitivity in non-resident fathers includes more attention to 
indirect and supportive behaviors, and more consideration of the on-again/off-again nature of 
contact between father and child. For some parenting constructs, there are a small number of 
typical behaviors that adequately reflect maternal parenting. A much more extensive array of 
indicators may well be needed, since behaviors typical for mothers are not always typical for 
fathers. In order to discern men s different parenting roles, we asked about their involvement in 
a broad array of different activities. 

Finally, we attempted to structure a data collection experience that suited the general disposi- 
tions and proclivities of men. Men tend to be less tolerant than women of activities they do not 
consider relevant or legitimate and are also less likely to engage in activities that are repetitious. 
Sensitive to response burden and inconvenience, we limited the number of measures used, and 
were flexible in the times and places where data were gathered. In addition, we allowed fathers 
ample opportunity to tell their own story in their own way, rather than completing numerous 
paper-and-pencil measures. We also arranged for fathers to provide data apart from the child's 
mother, on the grounds that the other parent's presence might constrain the fathers' responses. 
These efforts to meet men on their own terms have been successful, resulting in an experience 
that most men found acceptable, and many even found pleasant. 





469 



SYMPOSIA/ROUND TABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



■ Methodological Issues in Qualitative Research With 
Low-Income Fathers: Switching to the Paternal Lens 

Jean Ann Summers, Gina Barclay-McLaughlin 

Although Head Start has been a pioneer in promoting parental involvement with cJiildren and 
with the program itself, the historic emphasis has been on women. Changing policies and 
evolving roles of men and women have led to increased efforts to encourage father involvement 
in Head Start services. For the same reasons, researchers have begun to look more at the roles of 
fathers. The embedded qualitative study, within the larger Early Head Start Research Consortium 
effort, is intended to learn more about the meanings and perspectives of fathers in order to 
understand the barriers and facilitating factors related to father engagement. The challenge was 
to design study questions and choose data collection methods that departed from mother- 
oriented investigative frameworks. Understanding how to shift from this perspective to a father- 
friendly lens is a critical aspect of learning how to meet the needs of fathers more effectively. We 
learned that successfully engaging fathers was not as simple as using male interviewers. 

One framework for understanding how men interpret questions and, therefore, how we 
might engage them and understand their answers comes from the work of Deborah Tannen 
(1990; 1994). Tannen proposes that men use communication primarily to establish their 
credentials and convey facts, while women use communication primarily to establish connec- 
tions. Viewed in this light, the very relationship between interviewer and respondent creates a 
"one-down" threat for men who are being interviewed. Our approach to interviewing needed to 
be organized around establishing the respondents sense of equality in the relationship between 
himself and the interviewer. Tannen also suggests that men may make connections more by 
action and presence than by words. 

This may explain fathers' emphasis on "being there" for a child, and acting as the child s role 
model. Also, Tannen s research suggests that men may not view a circumstance that they cannot 
fix as a problem, whereas women tend to talk about these circumstances as a way of making 
connections. Thus, when asked to identify barriers to parenting, some men may find the ques- 
tion threatening or meaningless if the barriers cannot be changed. These and other attempts to 
change the lens of our perspective on men's responses to qualitative interviews were discussed. 

References 

Tannen, D. (1990). You just don't understand: Women and men in conversation. New York: William 

Morrow, Ballantine. 

Tannen, D. (1994). Gender and discourse. New York: Oxford University Press. 



■ Residential Status of Biological and Social Fathers: 

Impact on Father-Toddler Interaction 

Lorraine M. McKelvey, Rachel F. Schiffman, Hiram E. Fitzgerald 

Researchers studying the father's impact on child development must determine who takes the 
father role for a particular child. This determination is often dictated by the child s mother, who 
may control access to fathers, particularly the child's putative biological father (Fitzgerald, 
Mann, & Barratt, 1999). Furthermore, relatively little research attention has been given to the 
ecological factors that impact the father's connectedness to his family and his direct interactions 
with his children (Roggman, Fitzgerald, Bradley & Raikes, 2002). 

The purpose of the current study is to address questions about biological and social fathers' 
interactions with their toddlers. The sample consisted of 121 fathers who participated in an 



er|c 



470 



476 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



ongoing longitudinal research study of Early Head Start. The source of data for parent-child 
interaction is an observed teaching episode, the Nursing Child Assessment Satellite Teaching 
Scale (NCAST). The NCAST is a 73-item binary scale created to measure parent-child interac- 
tions and consists of four, parent behavior-related subscales, two infant behavior subscales, and 
the total scores. 

Results taken from NCAST data collected at the child's second and third birthday indicated a 
general increase in the interaction scores of men and toddlers. Further analyses were conducted, 
using a subsample [n = 55) of men for whom data were collected at both time points, to 
determine the effects of fathers' residency status on father-child interaction. These results suggest 
that resident social fathers' (n = 8) behaviors improve significantly across time, specifically in 
responding to distress signals from the toddler and fostering their child's cognitive growth. The 
change in behaviors of resident biological fathers (n = 34) is irregular across scales, demonstrat- 
ing increases in behaviors that foster cognitive development and decreases in response to 
toddler distress cues. Furthermore, the interaction behaviors of non-resident biological fathers 
(n = 13) appear quite consistent and demonstrate stability across the year from 24 to 36 
months. Results from the child subscales demonstrated that children significantly improve over 
time in the clarity of their cues and their responsiveness when interacting with resident biologi- 
cal fathers. There was a trend toward an increase in toddlers' responsiveness to their non- 
resident fathers as well. There were, however, no significant changes in the child's behaviors 
when observed with resident social fathers. These results indicate that the interaction behaviors 
of men and their toddlers change in complex ways in relation to residency and father type. These 
differences in behaviors may be the product of the amount of involvement and investment in 
the family and are demonstrative of the more intricate relationships within the family. 

References 

Fitzgerald, H. E., Mann, T, & Barratt, M. (1999). Fathers and infants. Infant Mental Health Journal 
20, 213-221. 

Roggman, L. A., Fitzgerald, H. E., Bradley, R. H., & Raikes, H. (2002). Overview of methodological, 
measurement, and design issues in studying fathers: An interdisciplinary perspective. In C. S. ! 
Tamis-LeMonda & N. Cabrera (Eds.), Handbook of father involvement: Multidisciplinary perspectives. 
New Jersey: Erlbaum. 



B Observational Data on Father Play With Infants: 

Challenging to Get but Valuable to Have 

Lori A. Roggman, Lisa K. Boyce, Gina A. Cook, Andrea D. Hart 

Fathers are often recognized as infants' playmates (Lamb, 1997), spending more time playing 
than caregiving (MacDonald & Parke, 1986) and playing with infants in different ways than 
mothers (Parke, 1996). Fathers' play may offer unique and valuable contributions to infant 
development (Grossmann, Grossmann, & Zimmerman, 1999). 

To include fathers in our Early Head Start (EHS) research, we faced challenges in identifying, 
contacting, scheduling, and setting up observations with them (Roggman, Fitzgerald, Bradley, & 
Raikes, 2002). Goding and interpreting the observations was also challenging because the 
behavioral definitions used for observing mothers did not always fit the behaviors observed in 
fathers (Tamis-LeMonda, Roggman, Bradley, & Summers, 1999). In spite of these challenges, we 
were able to videotape and code father-infant play sessions for 94 of our research families at 14 
months, 80 at 24 months, and 69 at 36 months. 

In our casual observations, fathers did many things similarly to mothers: They read books, 
played with toys, and showed affection to their children, but they did these things more physi- 



O 

ERIC 



477 



471 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



cally, with more teasing and less talking. Observer ratings of mother and father response 
behaviors during play were coded for the local study at 14 months (% agreement > .90, Kappa > 
0.75) and for the national study (Mathematica Policy Research) at 24 and 36 months. Mother 
and father sensitivity, positive regard, engagement, intrusiveness, and cognitive stimulation were 
positively correlated at 24 months, and their engagement and cognitive stimulation were 
positively correlated at 36 months. Fathers showed more negative response than mothers at 14 
months, less positive response at 24 months, and less sensitivity at all three ages. The children 
showed more negativity toward fathers than mothers at both 24 and 36 months, and showed 
less sustained attention to the toys when playing with fathers at 24 months. 

The cognitive level of children's play (Belsky & Most, 1981) was coded as an indication of the 
development of symbolic representation (% agreement > 0.90, Kappa > 0.75). Children playing 
with fathers (vs. mothers) showed a similar (and correlated) mean cognitive level of play at 14 
months, a lower level at 24 months, but a higher level at 36 months, and more variability 
overall with fathers than with mothers. Our research suggests that this variability in complexity 
of play with fathers may influence development, because peak level of play with fathers (but not 
mothers) at 14 months predicted cognitive and language testing scores at 24 months (Bayley 
MDl total score and language factor score). Our results suggest a unique role of father-child play 
in supporting long-term pathways to future cognitive and language competence. 

Research on fathers is challenging and sometimes frustrating. Nevertheless, the efforts made 
to obtain data from fathers in our EHS research has rewarded us with a clearer picture of the 
factors influencing early development. We still need to know what predicts variability in father- 
infant play behaviors and what supports their involvement in playing together. 

References 

Belsky, & Most, R. K. (1981). From exploration to play: A aoss-sectional study of infant free-play 
behavior. Developmental Psychology, 17, 630-639. 

Grossmann, K. E., Grossmann, K., & Zimmermann, P. (1999). A wider view of attachment and 
exploration: Stability and change during the years of immaturity. In 1. Gassidy & P. R. Shaver 
(Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (pp. 760-786). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

Lamb, M.E. (1997). Fathers and child development: An introductory overview and guide. In M.E. 
Lamb (Ed.), The role of the father in child development (3rd ed., pp. 1-18). New York: lohn Wiley and 
Sons, Inc. 

MacDonald, K. B., & Parke, R. D. (1986). Parent-child physical play: The effects of sex and age of 
children and parents. Sex Roles, 15, 367-378. 

Parke, R. D. (1996). Fatherhood. Gambridge: Harvard University Press. 

Roggman, L. A., Fitzgerald, H. E., Bradley, R. H., & Raikes, H. (2002). Overview of methodological, 
measurement, and design issues in studying fathers: An interdisciplinary perspective. In G. S. 
Tamis-LeMonda & N. Gabrera (Eds.), Handbook of father involvement: Multidisciplinary perspectives. 
New lersey: Erlbaum. 

Tamis-LeMonda, G., Roggman, L, Bradley, R., Summers, 1. A. (1999, April). Definitions of father 
involvement: A multidimensional conceptualization. Society for Research in Ghild Development, 
Albequerque, NM. 



DISCUSSION 

Helen H. Raikes: 1 reviewed the challenges presented by these papers, looking at them from the 
practitioner or program viewpoint. Many of the methodological challenges to studying fathers 
have parallels with involving fathers in programs. Programs have also sometimes relied on 
equating parents with mothers. Qualitative research aids in further understanding the motiva- 




478 



472 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



tions and aspirations of fathers in Early Head Start, which can be applied by incorporating 
fathers into program activities. 

As research in this field has had "missing men," so too have some fathers been invisible to 
Early Head Start programs. As research seeks to generate unique methodologies or theories to 
study fathers, so too does the practitioner world seek to develop unique ways of programming 
for fathers. Some traditional ways of thinking about program theories need to be modified; it 
doesn't work to superimpose a mother-centric model onto father involvement 

A number of examples were identified in these papers. As researchers attempt to study parent- 
child interaction from the father-child perspective, practitioners need to rethink desirable 
outcomes and supports when it comes to father-child interaction. As researchers study the 
differences between biological and social fathers, so too are programs required to consider that, 
within the population of Early Head Start children, there are many types of fathers. The needs of 
these fathers must be considered for programs to successfully involve them. 

As programs learn from the methodological challenges of research, research can also learn 
from the challenges and successes of programs. A study of father involvement in 261 Early Head 
Start programs revealed a number of challenges to father involvement, as well as strategies used 
by programs to help involve fathers. Two lessons from the program study are (a) that father 
involvement is a dynamic feature in programs and is likely to be so in the next decade, with 
implications for both programs and research; and (b) that father involvement has a very strong 
cultural component, the knowledge of which can only enrich programs and research in the future. 



/ 




479 



473 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Promoting Family Relations 



CHAIR; Gloria Johnson-Powell 
DISCUSSANT: Natasha Cabrera 

PRESENTERS: Lorraine Blackman, James Bray, Michelle DeKlyen for Sara McLanahan 

■ The African American Marriage Enrichment Program: 

Empowering Family Leaders 

Lorraine Blackman 

■ Love, Marriage, and Parenting in Diverse Families: 

Influence on Young Children 

James Bray 

■ Strengthening Fragile Families 

Sara McLanahan 

Gloria Johnson-Powell: I am from the University of Wisconsin Medical School. Our presenters 
are Lorraine Blackman, James Bray, and Michelle DeKlyen. 

Lorraine Blackman: 1 would like to begin out of my cultural tradition by first thanking my 
ancestors who bore the bullet of slavery so that 1 could be here and my parents in particular who 
put up with me so that 1 could be here as an adult. 1 would also like to thank giants like Gloria. 1 
have read her work through the years and want to publicly thank her for paving the way for 
those of us who are following behind her. 

1 also want to express my thanks to Ralph Smith at the Casey Foundation, Theodora Ooms at 
the Center for Law and Social Policy, Dianne Sollee at Smart Marriages, and John Pride at the 
Administration for Children and Families. They have called me from the field to come and tell 
you about the work 1 have been doing to strengthen marriages in the African American commu- 
nity. 1 have been telling them 1 am not ready, but they said, "We need what you're doing and we 
need it now. We do not want to wait until the work is perfected. Please come and tell us about it 
now." 

I am proud to have an opportunity to share my work with you. 1 have been talking with 
people from Head Start for about a year about this work and find that we have much in com- 
mon. One of the things that we have in common is the goal of this conference: to improve 
services for children and their families. 1 come to this work after 30 years in the mental health 
and domestic violence fields as well as working at the Veterans Administration and being in 
private practice. Most of my clientele, until 1 made a concerted effort to find others, were 
middle-class and blue-collar people of European descent. However, when 1 went to church on 
Sundays, 1 found that people were wailing at the altar with the burdens of their lives, and yet 
were not coming for mental health services. 1 have, therefore, made a concerted effort in my 
clinical life to find my brothers and sisters and invite them into the clinical arena, because help 
is available. 1 have also tried to listen to them because all of my professional training has been in 
predominately European-oriented schools and out of European theoretical models. 1 made good 
grades in those schools and in those models, but 1 found that in listening to my people that 1 
needed to do some things differently. Both my life as an African American woman and my 
practice as a clinician, therefore, inform my research now. 

We need to improve services for various populations out of concern for where they are in 
their lives. 1 will talk briefly about that in a moment. This conference set up some interesting 
objectives. The first objective focuses on examining the developmental trajectory, because we are 



474 




PA RENTING/ FAMILIES 



concerned about the future success and well-being of children, not just about getting children 
through life on a daily basis. The parents who have informed my work are focused on day-to- 
day survival, regardless of social class. When 1 ask them about the dreams for their own futures 
or the dreams for their children's futures, their eyes glaze over. 1 am glad that this conference has 
asked us to look at children's futures, and think of them as people on the way to becoming 
adults. We will look at what it is going to take for them to become happy, healthy, successftil, 
productive citizens, not just what is it going to take to keep them alive and out of traffic for the 
day. Our attention is drawn to family, community, and educational settings as a part of helping 
children prepare for their futures. It is not something that families can do alone and it is not 
something that educators can do without parents. This has to be a village effort. This makes me 
proud that I have been invited to a conference with this kind of focus. 

Unfortunately, in the field of early childhood education, the importance of families is a late- 
coming part of the discussion. I want to point out for those of you bom after 1960 that the 
conversation will sound a little different from the way that it sounds to those bom before 1960. 
The cultural shift that has occurred over the last 40 years gives us different perspectives on the 
same world, so it can be difficult for us to talk. As an older person, it seems strange to me that 
educators of the last 20 years have assumed that they could rear children without family 
involvement or that family involvement is today being defined as parents coming to volunteer 
in the schools. I hear of educators who ignore the children whose parents cannot come and 
volunteer in the schools. If they would look at the research on this issue, parents do not have to 
be volunteering in the school for their children to succeed. They do have to instill in children a 
love of learning and a love for themselves, discipline, and make sure that they are well-fed, 
clothed for school, and have done their homework. That is what is important in terms of parent 
involvement. However, we have lost some things as we have shifted in the culture over the last 
40 years. I am glad the importance of families is being brought back to the center of the discus- 
sion now. 

Family diversity is also coming late to the discussion. We have generally wanted to see 
families as all the same. I have taken a lot of flack in the last 10 years since I have been doing 
this work on strengthening marriage in the African American community, as they say, playing 
the race card again. It has never been offensive to me as a Black clinician working with people of 
European descent to get into their cultural paradigms, understand the world from their perspec- 
tive, and learn to use their language. I am from Tennessee so I can talk Southern when I have to. 

I am not offended when a White person says, "Hey, girl, how you doing?" because I have gotten 
accustomed to living within that paradigm. Some people of European descent find it offensive 
that I am asking them to understand the cultural perspective of Afncan Americans. It should not 
be offensive. I want to understand you and you need to understand me and the people that we 
are working with or we are going to do them harm. 

Now we are also focused on building strong family relationships. You may remember the 
good old days when mothers and fathers lived in the same house, either legally married or by 
common law. I only found in the last couple of years that common law marriage is now illegal 
in most states. That used to be a way of adding decency to what people were doing. They did not 
call it cohabiting. If a couple lived together for 7 years, had children together, and used the same 
surname, at the end of that 7 years, they had all the rights and privileges of marriage. That is no 
longer the case. We are now pointing fingers at people who have been doing something for a 
long time and have done it decently. Our children have no idea about how to have happy, 
healthy, strong marriages, because since the 1970s, we have watched divorce rates increase 
astronomically. We will talk about some of the reasons underlying that because until one 
understands the people and why they are the way they are, helping them is out of the question. 
As a scholar, I want to form the research by what we loiow about the people. 

The work that I have done since 1987 as a doctoral student has come to be called the Afncan 
American Family Life Education Program. There are two empirically based curricula that are 



ERIC 



481 



475 



symposia/roundtables/conversation hours 



based in our culture and have sensitivity to issues of gender. Many of the models of marriage 
enrichment are wonderful models; however, the critique of them is that they have not been 
sensitive to the needs of women. It has been clear from studying the people that if we are going 
to develop a model that they can appreciate, it must be both ethnically and gender sensitive. It is 
also an empowerment-oriented model. When people ask me about playing the race card, I am 
not suggesting that African Americans come to understand who they are historically so that they 
can moan and groan about how awful life has been and how they can never overcome it. It is an 
empowerment-oriented model, so that once they understand who they are and why life is the 
way it is for them, there are some strategies for making life better. 

Martin Luther King tells us that unless we are engaged in struggling for our own benefit we 
will be crazy. Even if one dies in the struggle, it is better to die struggling than to simply let the 
burdens of life fall upon one. I come to the work with an empowerment orientation out of the 
social work traditions that say we must teach people the knowledge, skills, attitudes, and values 
that they need so that they exercise more control over their lives. We have to open access to 
resources that they need so that they can control their lives. That is what empowerment means 
to me as I come to this work. It is also a family life education model so it is not therapy. We are 
excited about taking a public health orientation to issues that are relevant to families because it 
means that we want to start early. We want to begin educating people about marriage and 
parenting early in their relationships and in their children s lives so they are not waiting until 
they are at divorce's door or until they have already been involved with the legal system because 
of domestic violence. 

Family life education is an entire field of practice. To learn more about it, look at the website 
of the National Council on Family Relations (NCFR). It is the accrediting body for family life 
educators, but one will get an orientation to the field of family life education. They have an 
annual conference. 

The work that I have done has been designed for African American family leaders. The 
assumption has been that unless one prepares people for marriage, parenting, and citizenship, 
they will not know how to do it. There are no clear markers. There are no clear paths towards 
success in the United States anymore. When we were growing up, there were models at home 
and in the community. There were models on television that taught one how to become a 
successful parent, woman, man, adult, and so forth. Those models are not there so we are 
concerned about training future family leaders. 

I have talked briefly about what it means to be ethnically and culturally sensitive. I want to 
underscore that I looked at the literature on what the troubles seemed to be in African American 
couples and why they were not able to pull together effectively to rear their children. One of the 
issues that came up repeatedly in men s as well as women s writings was the issue of fairness. 
Women felt that it was not fair, particularly African American women who have always been in 
the labor force in larger numbers than other groups of women. They did not feel that it was fair 
that they had to go to work and then come home and bear the larger portion of the burden at 
home, with child care and taking care of other relatives. All of that became women s work and 
they did not think that was fair. 

African American women have not played a proportionately equal role in the women s 
movement because of issues of race within the movement. However, the issues have been just as 
salient for African American women as they have been for other women in terms of gender 
relations. As we moved together through the 1950s and 1960s on civil rights issues, the gender 
split became increasingly evident within African American families. The argument went some- 
thing like this: If we are going to fight for justice for African Americans as a people, then we need 
justice in our relationships as well. Fair is fair. Again, Dr. King would tell us that injustice 
anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere. This gender issue, therefore, does involve a struggle. 

There are some very powerful writers like Maulana Karenga who have said the problem with 
Black men and all the rage that they carry is that Black women will not get out of the way and let 
them be men. In one of his pieces, he wrote that if women would get out of the way and let men 

O 476 

ERIC 



482 



PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



be warriors we would have less rape, robbery, and pillaging in the community. It is hard to hear 
that. However, as I have tried to understand what this hostility is about — and there is a tremen- 
dous amount of hostility between African American men and women — I have to understand 
how men and women feel about issues and then be able to bring them together so that we talk 
about these subjects with civility and get past them. Social justice also informs this work. 

Two curricula have come out of this research. The first is the "African American Marriage 
Enrichment Program — How to Make Your Good Thing Better." People seem to connect with the 
subtitle. Some of what they come to class with and call "good things" I would not call good 
things. But, it is a good thing to them and they want to preserve it. When they arrive, it is often 
with scores in the clinical range on the instruments that we use to look at levels of marital 
distress. They do not look very different on those instruments from people who used to come in 
for marital therapy. African Americans are much more likely to come for educational programs 
than they are for traditional therapeutic interventions. These are held in the community in a 
community center. Social work students who are learning to work with children provide child 
care. We have a caterer who knows how to make soul food and transportation is provided for 
those people who need it. It is an 8-week curriculum. They come and learn how to change the 
way they think, the way that they behave, their ideas of what a relationship is supposed to look 
like, and what the constraints are in the environment that prevent them from having the good 
things they dream of. It is capped with a commitment ceremony that is a wonderful, Afrocentric 
evening. They actually stand and read their vows to each other publicly. About one third of the 
couples have been not married. Some people find it offensive that we have invited unmarried 
couples to the table, but we will not ever get them back into the center of community life if we 
keep ostracizing them. These are often couples who already have children. We invite married 
and unmarried couples with or without children, who may or may not live together, and who 
may or may not attend church. 

The second curriculum that one of our funders asked us to develop is a parent training 
program specifically for African Americans. I will not take time to talk about that now but know 
that there is a curriculum out there for African American parents as well. 

We have to talk to the post- 1960s people about what marriage is about and why we even 
need it anymore. When we look at traditional functions of marriages, we see companionship, 
raising children, a sustained love life, safety for women, help with housework, and financial 
security. The post- 1960s people say, "I do not need marriage for that. I can have children by 
myself. I can have a companion who comes and goes. I can take karate classes. I do not need 
marriage for those things." However, we are finding that the kinds of relationships — the hooking 
up and the hanging out that we are finding among the post- 1960s people — is not beneficial to 
them in their mental or physical health or their children's well-being. Once they learn what a 
good marriage is supposed to look like, the benefits are clearer to them. We found that some of 
the couples get married after completing the class. We do not pressure anybody to get married; 
we simply talk about what good relationships are and let them make decisions for themselves. 

The men in the class are not willing to be pressured into getting married within that 8 weeks. 
The sisters come and they see that there is a commitment ceremony and they start thinking 
about a dress. The men are not going to be pressured in that way. They want to do it when they 
are ready to do it and they want to make sure that this is the right woman to do it with, al- 
though they have children together. The men who come to us often have children by more than 
one woman so this is a much more convoluted decision for them. They think, "Which woman 
do I want to make a commitment to? Is it anybody that I have children with or is it someone 
altogether different?" They do not know going into this what marriage is for, what a good one is 
supposed to look like, or how important it is for children's futures. 

James Bray: I am a psychologist in the Department of Family and Community Medicine at 
Baylor College of Medicine where my primary job is to train family doctors about psychosocial 



O 

ERIC 



483 



477 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



aspects of medicine. The work that I am going to talk to you about I have been doing for the last 
15 years. It was supported by a number of grants from the federal government, two from the 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, and two from the National 
Institute of Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse. 

Some of the ideas that we thought were interesting 15-20 years ago are just commonplace 
now, so bear with me as I quickly go through some of those. At the end of my presentation, I 
would like to discuss some demographic trends that have been seen in the United States during 
the last 30 years. There are several that lead up to the divorce and remarriage phenomenon that 
we are seeing right now. 

There is growing racial, ethnic, and cultural diversity. Household composition is changing. 
There has also been a big change in cohabitation rates. Marital rates, ages, and marriage dura- 
tion have definitely changed. Divorce was on the rise — it is actually on the decline now. That 
leads to much more remarriage. There is also a decreasing number of children born outside of 
marriage. We know from the 2000 census that we have a change in the makeup of the United 
States population: The percentage of non-Hispanic Whites has decreased and we have a larger 
Latino and African American population. In particular, the Latino population has grown dramati- 
cally in our population. There are actually slightly more Latinos than African Americans now. 

There is a growing foreign-born population. We have a greater share of Americans who speak 
a language other than English and who have no intention of making English their primary 
language. I am from Texas and one needs to be bilingual to function effectively in Texas because 
so many people speak only Spanish and have no intention of learning English. However, we 
have many other languages too. For example, in Houston we have a large Viemamese popula- 
tion. In our community health clinics our signs are in English, Spanish, and Vietnamese, 
recognizing the diversity of our population. 

We also know that there are fewer married couples, and more people are living alone than 
before. Oftentimes people are cohabiting, but we also know that people are just living by 
themselves more too. There are more unmarried-partner households today so people are 
increasingly having children outside of marriage. There are more multigenerational households, 
and much of this is due to immigration. Additionally, 2 million grandparents are caregivers for 
children. One of the big changes that we found in terms of marriage is that people are not 
marrying — they are living together rather than marrying, and that has increased in the last 20 
years. 

The data I am presenting are all about women because the government has determined that 
women are more reliable reporters than men are. For most people, cohabitation is not a perma- 
nent place; it is a weigh station rather than a destination. Only about half the people who 
cohabit end up getting married. People are in a number of relationships rather than getting 
married and staying married, which leads to the decline in the percentage of people who are 
getting married. Since 1950 we have had a fairly steady decline in the percentage of people who 
are getting married. These are the latest census data indicating the trend is continuing. We also 
know that people are postponing the age at which they are getting married. In 1970, the average 
age was about 22 for women and 24 for men; now the average ages are about 25 for women and 
27 for men. People are postponing marriage for longer periods of time. What are they doing? 
They are cohabiting or they are living at home with their parents longer. When I was trained as a 
family therapist in the 1970s, there was a belief that there was something wrong with people 
who stayed at home, that they had a problem with individuation. We now know that that is not 
the case most of the time, and oftentimes people have to live at home for economic reasons. 

The average length of marriage varies dramatically. Here there are many cohort differences. 
For example, my parents have been married 53 years, and in their generation that is common. In 
my generation, it is about 11 years on average for first marriages, 7-8 years for second marriages, 
and 5-6 years for third or more marriages. There are some ethnic differences. For example. 

White, African American, and Latino populations have a higher propensity toward divorce than 
Asian populations. Asian couples are more likely to stay married. 

. 484 



478 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



The divorce rate is basically mimicking the marriage rate. There is a general decline in the 
marriage rate. There is a decline in the divorce rate, particularly in the last few years. People are 
living together, but they are married— therefore they are "not getting divorced." One hears in the 
popular media that the divorce rate is about 50%. The most current estimates look like it is 
somewhere between 33-42%. There is varying discussion, but it is definitely not 50% anymore. 

I look at this a number of ways. One can take a slice of the American population since 1960 and 
not find more than 33% of the people divorced. What escalates the divorce statistics sometimes 
is the number of people who get married and divorced repeatedly. 

Often other people are involved in the divorce. Hell hath no ftiry like the lawyer of a woman 
scorned. All of us need to be aware of the context in which divorce as well as marriage occurs, 
because there are other social systems involved. People are more likely to get divorced after a 
second marriage than a first marriage. The increase is about 10%. That is the best estimate that 
we have, although currently we do not have great estimates because the federal government 
stopped collecting this data about 5 years ago. 

The only way to stop divorce is to stop marriage. Divorce has existed since before biblical 
times. We also know that people do not stay divorced; they tend to remarry. About 65-75% of 
women remarry and about 75-85% of men remarry, most within 3-5 years. In some cases, 
people do not get divorced. They just separate and then they begin a relationship with some- 
body else and that relationship looks like a remarriage. There is a higher percentage of African 
Americans that do that, and mainly that is because of the cost of divorce. However, they separate 
for long periods of time and then get involved in stable, cohabiting relationships that look 
relatively like a remarriage or a stepfamily. 

We know that one of the things that is leading to increased numbers of stepfamilies and 
remarriage is the increase in the number of children bom to unwed mothers. Since 1980, the 
percentage of all children bom outside of marriage has increased from about 18% to about 
33%. There are differences in terms of ethnic background, with about 11% of White children 
increasing to about 22% in 1999. For African American children, it was about 55% in 1980; in 
1999 it was almost 69%. The percentage has increased for Latino children as well. 

What types of factors contribute to children doing well after divorce? I want to review some 
of those briefly and then talk about remarriage, because there are many consistencies, but 
differences, as well. We know that psychological adjustment of parents has some impact. 

However, psychologists often give too much weight to this. They frequently conduct psychologi- 
cal tests that do not predict very well how good a parent one is and how well one's children are 
functioning. One extreme case is that we know that schizophrenic mothers or fathers can raise 
healthy, happy children. We have documentation of that. Just because one may have a severe 
mental illness, be an alcoholic, or an abuser of dmgs does not necessarily mean that one cannot 
also be a good parent. The likelihood is that one is probably not going to be quite as good, but 
that person can, in fact, raise healthy children. We know, though, that there are certain people 
with characterological problems, what are called personality disorders, who frequently have 
more trouble with raising children and often have more conflict, making it harder for children 
to be raised. When people are married or in cohabiting relationships, if there is a problem in 
one parent, the healthier parent can often buffer the negative effects. If they are separated, one 
finds that the children are dealing with the parent who may have some psychological problems 
and they are not buffered and, subsequently, have more difficulties. 

Parenting skills and practices are probably the primary influence in how well children do 
after a divorce. Parenting skills is the strongest predictor of postdivorce adjustment. Parenting 
changes dramatically, particularly for men, after divorce. The correlation between men's 
parenting practices pre- and postdivorce is zero. That means that it changes dramatically. Some 
men who are very involved with their children before drop out of their child's life. Other men 
who were not very involved when they were married suddenly become super fathers and get very 
involved. On the other hand, women tend to be more consistent. About 90% of the time. 




485 



479 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/ CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



children live with their mothers after divorce, even though fathers have gotten more involved 
and are increasingly having custody. 

There are interpersonal factors. The parent-child relationship is very important. The nonresi- 
dential parent-child relationship changes. Men are more likely to remarry faster than women 
are, and when men remarry, their contact with the children is more likely to decline over time. 

One of the key factors in terms of children having problems is whether parents have a lot of 
ongoing hostility that involves the child. Believe it or not there are some adults who can fight 
and not include their children. There are not very many of them, however, so they usually 
include their children. If it does not involve the child, it does not seem to impact them very 
negatively, but if it does, that is a strong predictor of children having increased behavior problems. 

We know that there are socioeconomic factors. All things being equal, if there are more 
resources in the family, for example, and they live in a safe environment, then children do 
better. We know that many children, when they live with their mothers, are likely to move to a 
smaller home and that can cause some difficulties. Continuity of care is also important in terms 
of the child care arrangements. In the last 15 years, with more women in the workforce, there are 
fewer changes in continuity of care because women have been working all along and the 
children are often in day care already or grandparents are raising them. It is not such a big shift. 
Thirty years ago when there were fewer women in the workplace, it was actually much harder for 
children of divorce. They not only lost their family but they often lost their primary caregiver 
because the mother was then forced to go into the workplace and was not able to take care of 
the children. 

In divorced families, people do not coparent; they parallel parent. This means that the father 
does his thing, the mother does her thing, and they rarely work together. However, if people are 
going to work together, these are the key things: live close to each other, decrease conflict, have 
an agreed parenting style, and talk civilly with each other. If there are disagreements, do not put 
the other person down— just recognize it as a difference. 

What about stepfamilies? Most people do not stay divorced; they get remarried. That leads to 
an increased number of stepfamilies. What are some of the outcomes? Children in stepfamilies 
have more behavior problems, more externalizing problems, and lower social competence than 
children in first-marriage families. That is both early in remarriage and 5-7 years later. In our 
study, we tracked children in stepfamilies longitudinally and found they have more behavior 
problems. If this is compared to national data, one sees that 75-80% of children in stepfamilies 
and in single-parent families function just as well as children in first-marriage families but the 
risk is double. In terms of other types of problems, 14-15% of children in intact families have an 
emotional problem compared to 30% in stepfamilies. In a recent longitudinal study of high 
school students, we found that children in single-parent families have more behavior problems. 
However, there is no difference in drinking behaviors. They all increase over time, but there is no 
difference based on family structure. We have done this in terms of ethnicity as well and there 
are also no differences. 

There are four factors important in remarriage: parenting, marriage, dealing with the nonresi- 
dential parent, and different kinds of stepfamilies. The key issues about later remarriage are 
dealing with family identity, developing family rituals, and dealing with the nonresidential parent. 

Michelle DeKlyen: I am presenting the work of Sara McLanahan, one of the principal investiga- 
tors for our study. I would like to thank and acknowledge Sara for inviting me to work on this 
study and for her enormous contribution to the conceptualization of the paper that I will 
present today. I would also like to thank the Administration for Children and Families, the 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, and the National Science Founda- 
tion for crucial financial support. I was trained as a child clinical psychologist, although my very 
first work experience was in a poverty center under the Office of Economic Opportunity. I have 
also been a preschool teacher, directed a child care center, been a child and family therapist, and 



ERIC 



480 



486 



PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



N 



a special education teacher. I am currently at the Office of Population Research at Princeton 
University but a year ago I came from the University of Washington where I was in the Depart- 
ment of Psychiatry. 

I am relatively new to this particular subject area, although the concerns have followed me 
since my earliest postcollege work experience. Given our theme today of promoting family 
relations, a prime focus of concern is the group of families who are the subject of the Fragile 
Families and Child Wellbeing Study. Let me explain what we mean by fragile families. As we 
have defined them, these are families that consist of unmarried parents and their children. They 
are families who are fragile for economic as well as social reasons. On average they are less well 
off than other parents. They are more likely to have marginal or no employment. 

Why should we be concerned about these families? These families are of concern for at least 
three reasons. First, they are significant because of their number. As Bray already pointed out, 
about one out of every three births in the U.S. today is to an unmarried parent. Second, their 
children are potentially at risk because these families are more likely to live in poverty and to 
belong to a minority group and are less likely to be stable than marital units. Finally, they are 
the focus of major national and local policy decisions, which in the past have often been made 
in the absence of much factual information. The number and rate of births to unmarried 
women has increased geometrically in the past 40 years for the entire population, but in 
particular within the minority community. 

The United States relative to other industrialized countries is in the middle range in terms of 
percentage of children bom outside of marriage. However, American children of unwed parents 
are probably less likely to spend their childhood living with both parents than are children in 
the Scandinavian countries, if we can judge from the statistics about the percentage of children 
who live with their biological fathers as teenagers. However, until recently, no large-scale study 
had attempted to identify and track these families. That is why the fragile family study was 
proposed. The questions that it was designed to address are many: What kinds of relationships 
do unmarried parents have with each other? Why have they not married? Who are these fathers? 
How do the children fare? How do social policies affect these families? Do they strengthen them 
or undermine them? Do they make it more or less likely that couples will stay together or that 
children will thrive? 

The fragile family study identified about 4,900 births in 20 large cities in the United States. 
Thirty-seven hundred of these births were to unmarried parents, and, for comparison purposes, 
1,200 births were to married couples. The sample was chosen to be nationally representative. 
The cities were selected to represent a variety of governmental policy regimes so that the effects 
of welfare mles, child support enforcement, and employment opportunities could be assessed 
over time. The study spans 48 months with four waves of data collection, beginning when each 
mother was approached in the hospital shortly after her baby's birth. Parents, both mothers and 
fathers, are interviewed at each wave to gather information about a variety of subjects and there 
are supplemental studies on child health, neglect, and child care to provide some observational 
data as well. 

We know that as a group these unmarried parents tend to be poorer and niore likely to come 
frorh a minority ethnic group. However, they are still a heterogeneous mix, including some 
middle-class, college-educated men and women with good jobs. I am going to limit my com- 
ments to that subset of unmarried parents most likely to be eligible for an early Head Start 
program, namely, those who fall below the poverty line, the most fragile families. This amounts 
to about 41% of our total sample. 

Who are the poorest fragile families? Let me start by presenting some basic demographic 
facts. Then I will describe the kinds of relationships these parents are in. Finally I will talk about 
why these families may not be stable. The poor, married families in our sample are compared to 
the poor, unmarried families. The unmarried parents are somewhat younger than the married 
parents. Both, by the way, are younger than their counterparts who are not poor. A large propor- 




487 



481 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



tion, nearly two thirds of the poor married parents, is Latino; in contrast, hilly half of the poor 
unmarried couples are African American. 

Looking only at the unmarried parents, what kinds of relationships do they describe with 
their coparents? We gave them a whole array of options of how to describe themselves. They 
could describe themselves as living together, which, as shorthand, 1 call "cohabiting. They 
could say that they are romantically involved and that they occasionally visit each other and 
spend the night with each other or that they are romantically involved but they do not spend 
much time with each other. They could say they are just friends. They could say, "Well, we have a 
little contact." They could say, "We have no contact" and so forth. 

At the time of their baby s birth, 39% reported living together. Another 40% indicated they 
had a romantic relationship, often spending time with each other though they did not share a 
home full-time. Of the group that 1 have labeled "other," about 10% described themselves as just 
friends, and the remainder said they had little or contact. 1 might add parerithetically that only a 
small minority of mothers refused or were unable to identify the father. 

Within this poor, unmarried group there are ethnic differences in how parents choose to 
partner. Remember that a significantly higher percent of African American parents than White 
parents are unmarried when they have children. However, if they are unmarried, African 
American parents are less likely to cohabit or to describe themselves as cohabiting and more 
likely to describe themselves as romantically involved than either White parents or Latino 
parents. Nonetheless, the total proportion who consider themselves involved with the other parent 
of their child is almost the same across ethnic groups. About 80% of all unmarried parents 
consider themselves to be involved with the other parent at the time of their child s birth. 

Is this misleading? Does it indicate more commitment than actually exists? We looked at 
other indicators of father s involvement at the time of birth such as whether the father contrib- 
uted money during the pregnancy, whether his name was on the birth certificate, whether he 
visited the hospital when the mother had the baby, whether he said that he wanted to be involved, 
and whether the mother wanted him to be involved. It is clear from these data that most fathers, 
even in this poor, unmarried sample, wanted to be involved. In fact, these numbers are virtually 
indistinguishable from the responses of more advantaged parents. There are no real differences 
among the different ethnic groups. Even in this economically disadvantaged sample, most couples 
were involved at the time of their baby's birth and most fathers wanted to remain involved. 

What barriers stand in the way of enduring relationships between these parents? What are the 
obstacles to their getting married or at least living together as a family with their child? Four 
major barriers have been suggested in the literature and in the popular press. Some think that 
attitudes are the problem. One version of this, for example, blames the Murphy Brown Syn- 
drome where parents do not believe that marriage is very important or desirable. Others raise 
questions about financial viability. Can these parents afford to live together? Do they have the 
economic resources to support themselves and their children? Still others worry about indi- 
vidual attributes of the adults in these families. Perhaps behavioral or mental health issues, 
criminality, depression, and substance abuse make these parents undesirable partners so that we 
should not press them to form permanent unions. Marriage may not be good for either the 
partner or the child. Finally, maybe it is a question of social policy: Do welfare rules, taxes, and 
child support laws undermine or discourage the formation of stable families? 

Our baseline data address the first three issues. The fourth 1 will defer. 1 have opinions and 1 
am sure that many of you do as well, but we should be getting some more information over the 
next few years as we follow these families over time. That is one of the main objectives of this 
study. With respect to attitudes, we asked mothers and fathers a number of questions about 
marriage. For example, we asked whether they thought marriage was better than just living 
together and whether marriage was better for children. The majority agreed with both of these 
statements. Of interest and perhaps counter to what one might have guessed, fathers 
were more likely to endorse the value of marriage than mothers were. African American parents 




482 




PARENTING/FAMILIES 



were more likely to do so than White parents were. However, these mothers were not so confi- 
dent that they would marry these fathers— only a third thought the chances were very good. 
About half of the mothers thought there was at least a 50/50 chance. In contrast, fathers were 
quite optimistic. 

These parents rate the desirability of marriage just as high as their economically advantaged 
counterparts do. However, the mothers indicate poorer chances of getting married. Why might 
this be true? We also asked these parents to rate how important various factors were to a 
successful marriage. Almost all said that it was very important that the husband have a steady 
job. The second highest ranking was given to emotional maturity or psychological functioning. 

A steady job for the wife came in third and good sex a distant fourth. 

Now how likely are these parents to find what they are looking for in a partner? The employ- 
ment prospects for these families are not good. Most have less than a high school degree and 
nearly one third of the unmarried fathers versus only 14% of the married fathers did not have a 
job in the week before their child was bom. Looking at the rest of the data, this does not seem 
to be for lack of interest or lack of trying. Over 90% of the fathers said that they had worked at 
some point in the previous year, and over 80% of the mothers said this. However, for various 
reasons, they were having difficulty in maintaining regular predictable employment. 

How about emotional and psychological functioning? The unmarried fathers generally had 
more problems than the married fathers. More were in jail both at the time of their child^s birth 
and a year later, and more reported problems with substance abuse; depression, and anxiety. 
However, it is equally important to note that most fathers did not have such problems. These are 
data that I have not totally finished with, but when one looks at the issues of depression, 
anxiety, and particularly alcohol abuse, one finds it is in the White population that these rates 
are by far the highest. 

There was one unexpected finding. More of the poor married mothers reported that fathers 
had hit or slapped them than we anticipated. This rate was higher than that of the poor unmar- 
ried mothers or that of the more economically advantaged married or unmarried mothers 
(unmarried includes cohabiting). At 12 months, the poor married mothers minus the few who 
had dropped out of the study by that time report a much lower rate of hitting. Frankly, I am still 
exploring the meaning of this. I should note that there is a fairly small number of these married 
poor families in the sample. One starts out thinking that, with 5,000 families, this is a big 
sample, but when one starts slicing it up, the numbers get smaller. 

Data on mothers conditions are not included here. We analyzed this and the trends are in 
the same direction but not nearly as strong as the differences for the fathers. My preliminary 
guess is that the effect between marriage, cohabitation, and no contact primarily seems to be 
carried by the father s behavioral and mental health issues. 

We are still finalizing our 12-month data so findings are not complete yet. However, I will 
give a preview of where these families were a year later. Focusing again on the unmarried 
parents, seven percent had married, but more had slipped into the other groups of "just friends" 
or little or no contact. The group that was most stable was that which originally indicated litde 
commitment to a stable relationship. The group that changed the most was the romantically 
involved group, with about half becoming less involved, but a quarter becoming more so. 

In summary, these most fragile families may be characterized as having high hopes, some- 
what more realistic expectations, and relatively low resources. They believe in the value of 
marriage, especially for their children, and most want it for themselves. It does not seem to be 
their attitudes that are the problem. However, their resources for building and maintaining a 
stable family are poor in terms of education, employment, behavior, and, in some cases, mental 
health. They recognize those elements as crucial to a successful marriage. Education, job training 
and placement, and treatment opportunities would appear to be the logical target for interven- 
tions to strengthen these families. Another fact that stands out is that the time of birth is when 
almost all fathers are involved and hopes of building a family are high. This may be a magic 





483 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



moment, a moment when intervention has the greatest potential for helping these families find 
their way to a happy ending for themselves and their children. 

Gloria Johnson Powell: Now we will have a discussion of the three papers. 

Natasha Cahrcra: 1 am a psychologist and 1 work at the National Institute of Child Health and 
Human Development in the demographic branch. We fund mostly demographic kinds of 
studies, but also we focus on child development issues. My own personal interest is on research 
on fathers, child care, poverty, and the intersection between research and policy. 

First, 1 want to thank all the presenters for all the wonderful and insightful presentations. It is 
a pleasure to hear information on how people in the trenches deal with this issue versus those 
of us who look at the numbers, and how they try to interpret what is happening. Marriage, 
healthy families, and children s well-being are critical national topics. Perhaps it is late coming 
to the table, but obviously it has always been on our minds. 

Let me say a couple of things that have emerged from the three papers. How to promote 
healthy families is a very important theme and is based on the assumption and consistent data, 
at least at the national level, that children in married-couple families do better. They look better 
on cognitive outcomes and social competence. They become healthy adults and do not drop out 
of school. In general, they do better. The only qualifier that I would like to add is that we do not 
have much good data on the quality of the marriages. We like to say that healthy good marriages 
are good for children. The other side of the coin would be perhaps that good divorce could also 
fare well for children. 

Let me return to some of the comments and findings that were presented. One of the keys to 
having healthy marriages might be low conflict. How do parents get along, either when they are 
living together or when they are not living together? That seems to be one of the common 
threads, but how does one keep families from not tearing each other apart? It is difficult to be in 
any kind of relationship. One always wants to be right. How does one resolve conflict in a 
positive way? That is very important for children. We have to model this behavior so we also 
need to worry about what type of marriages we have and what type of adults the children will 
become in terms of their own relationships. 

The other interesting issue for me is this issue of recombined families. They get married, 
divorced, and then they divorce again and maybe fall apart. How do children do over time? 

Some interesting national data were presented, but those data do not take into account some of 
those recombined families. It is going to be difficult or at least interesting to see a child who 
may have had two fathers over time. How does a mother combine the relationship with the 
biological father and the social father into a healthy one? There is a case in California in which 
the social father was given custody of a child who was not his own by the courts. This is an 
historical case because generally biological parents have the premier right to children and here is 
this man who claimed that he became the social father because he had been with this child (it 
was his girlfriend's child) from the beginning. It is interesting to take a closer look at how 
recombined families stay together and what it means for children. 

Another interesting issue is attitudes toward marriage. Why do people marry and why do 
people have children? I am not sure we have the answer to either of those questions. Why do we 
marry? The white dress sounds nice. The cake for me was nice. What is it about marriage that 
people want to do it? When one looks at ethnographic data, we see that mothers are saying 
things such as, "Why should I marry? I do not need a man to help me do that? I can do battle 
myself." Why would one want to be together when there might be many hassles involved, such 
as unemployment and education? Many mothers who are in cohabiting, common-law relation- 
ships and have children are saying "I want to get married. We are going to get married, but 
cannot do it now. We need money." However, they are living together, and they have a child. It is 
the idea of what marriage is that is interesting. 



490 



484 



PA RENTING/ FAMILIES 



These attitudes towards marriage are interesting because they also reveal some gender 
differences. Women seem to be more realistic Men, as you heard in the fragile family study, 
want to get married, but obviously it is not panning out at 12 months. 

I like the common-law point that was brought up. We used to call them common law and it 
was a respected and even expected way. In fact, in other countries, such as Canada, there are still 
common laws where if people live together for 3 years, share an address, and file their taxes as 
cohabiters — even if they do not have children — they are considered common law. Is that 
different from cohabiting? Cohabiting seems to have an unstable kind of sound to it, as if they 
are only living together for now, but maybe there is a suitcase packed somewhere. Our terms, 
therefore, for explaining how people are in unions, how they stay together, and what unions are 
more stable are interesting in themselves. We do not have good, national data on cohabiting. We 
do not know the average age, why they do it, why they do not, and why it falls apart. 

The interesting issue for me, as I have a child bias, is what does it do for children? How do 
the children fare who have grown up in stable, cohabiting relationships that last 7-8 years? How 
do they look versus the children in the marriage relationships? Is lack of conflict the variable 
that we need to look at? Is it that good, healthy cohabiting relationships and good, healthy 
marriages are good for children? That is an interesting question. As the trend for cohabiting goes 
up, divorce does not look so bad because we are not getting married as much. How does it 
strengthen families? It is the point of much of our research ideas and national agendas lately. 
How does one make a healthy marriage? What is a healthy marriage? I know that we do not 
like to talk about divorce, but is there such a thing as a healthy divorce if there are children 
involved? Can there be a relationship where the conflict is minimized? Can the parents be 
helped to coparent? 

The trend in the legal world had been to award custody only to the mother. She decided who 
the father was and who could see the child and how often. Now the courts are beginning to 
acknowledge that fathers want to be and can be involved, and that they can be good for the 
children. We are beginning to see a trend in joint custody for fathers. It is not universal, but it is 
a trend that I hope continues to increase. 

It would seem that if we want to have healthy marriages then the interest would be on 
focusing on the mother/father relationship and how we do that. From a research point of view, 
we have very little data on how mothers and fathers resolve conflict. In fact, if you look at some 
of the national data, we do not even have a good way of asking other than "Do you slap your 
wife?" or "Are you mean to her?" or "How do you resolve conflict?" Questions like these or ones 
about who takes out the garbage, who does the mundane tasks, or who does the most important 
tasks are not good indicators of how families resolve conflict on a daily basis. The point is that 
we do not have good data. I would love qualitative research informing the larger studies. How 
do we ask these questions to get meaningful data? 

The selection bias is a big issue. Are those who marry different from those who cohabit? 

What is the difference? What is driving the difference? Is it a personality trait that says, "When I 
am in it, I am never getting out. I do not care how bad it is. I made a commitment. I am stay- 
ing," or is it something else? Is that something else good for children and for the families? The 
selection bias in marriage and cohabiting is difficult to tease out. We do not know what is 
driving the relationship. 

The other interesting point for me was the involvement of nonresidential fathers. When one 
looks at the national data, one finds that about a quarter of the children do not live with the 
fathers. If one looks at this national trend, it seems that these children have no fathers when, in 
fact, they might have fathers. The fathers do not show up in the national trends because if they 
are not in the household, we are not getting data from them. How absent are these fathers and 
what effect do these fathers have on their children s lives? It is very difficult to find these men 
and collect data on how these nonresidential fathers are involved with the children. For ex- 
ample, Irwin Garfinkel has done some analysis and works with Fragile Families. He found that 




491 



485 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLE S/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



the fathers with lower incomes who are nonresidential must spend much more money to see 
their children than their counterparts. They may travel more, make arrangements, and buy other 
extra things. If one is down on his luck and does not have a job or much money then that is a 
big barrier to being involved. It may not mean that they do not want to; it is just that they are 
notable. 

1 was curious about the married fathers in Michelle DeKlyen's study. Married fathe;rs look 
better than unmarried fathers, except for domestic violence. Is marriage making them better or 
do they arrive already better? What is it about these fathers that they look good? If one looks at 
her numbers on domestic abuse, it was higher for the married fathers. That is why 1 ask if the 
unmarried group is broken into ''not living together and living together, which group would 
get similar numbers? 

DeKlyen: You find that the ones with little or no contact have much higher rates on virtually all 
of those dimensions. The cohabiters in many cases look about the same as the marrieds, except 
for substance abuse where they look a little worse. Otherwise the real fall off is when one gets to 
the romantic relationships, and certainly for the little- or no-contact relationships. 

Cabrera: If a father does not live with his wife or partner all the time and sees her once in a 
while, there is more of a chance for romantic bliss as they are not going to have much time to 
display conflict or negative feelings. Returning to your other comment, we find that in other 
data, too, domestic violence is a big issue. Because we worry about jeopardizing our response 
rates in the studies, we have not found a good way to ask about conflict resolution and its role 
in marriage and cohabiting. 

DeKlyen: 1 am sure that those are all underestimates, in every case. 

Cabrera: Moving to the final issue, how do we define parental involvement? DeKlyen had 
interesting data where fathers are involved with the "magic moment." Every human being, 
regardless of race, culture, ethnicity, or socioeconomic status, wants the best for his or her child. 
Nobody sets out to be a failure. No one says, "1 want to have a child and abandon him." We all 
have good intentions. How do we build on that? Is it enough to say, yes, 1 want to be involved 
with you, yes, here's two hundred dollars for something, put my name on the certificate? What 
does it mean 12 months later? How do we define involvement? Defining involvement is 
important because it will give us an idea of how to intervene to help fathers stay involved. 

Johnson Powell: Now we are going to open it up for some questions from the audience. 

Question: This question is for Ms. Blackman. What is your response to critics of programs that 
promote marriage among African Americans, particularly those who are poor and receiving 
public assistance? What do you consider is the knowledge or the value base of promoting your 
skills program? 

Blackman: There is a lot of criticism about promoting marriage among the poor. As 1 sit in 
bipartisan policy discussions, there is some warranted concern there. There are those who 
believe that marriage is a good way for us to live as a society. 1 am in agreement with that camp, 
particularly for people who want to be married. 1 do not think that we ought to force anybody 
to be married. The "behind-the-closed-door" discussion that concerns me and concerns many of 
the onlookers is whether marriage is the solution to poverty. 1 do not agree with that. As the 
keynote speaker for the Smart Marriages conference last year 1 gave a comment from my mother 
that reflects on why some people are opposed to the marriage movement. My mother said that 
two broke people are still broke. Marriage is not a solution for poverty, though some of the 



486 



492 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



discussion about economic efficiency makes sense. If we love each other, it is cheaper for us to 
pay one rental payment or one mortgage than two. We can buy a certain quantity of groceries 
more cheaply than eating separately every night. These are some of the efficiencies involved in 
living together. However, the discussion about forcing poor people to get married as a solution to 
poverty is offensive to many people and we have talked about that openly but behind closed 
doors. What we find repeatedly in talking with people and in the literature is that most people 
want the companionship and the context of marriage for raising children anyway. As you have 
heard from all of our work, you do not have to force people to get married. The issue is how do 
you remove the barriers either in their own heads or in their social context so they can be married. 

Question: I was wondering if you have looked at any nontraditional families, like gay families 
and lesbian families. Are they included in this or are these just traditional families? 

Bray: I work with mainly heterosexual couples so there are very little data about gay and lesbian 
couples. Lawrence Kurdick has done a wonderful longitudinal study on gay relationships. To my 
understanding of the literature, he is about the only one who has done suA a high quality 
study. Some smaller scale studies have done some limited work on this. 

DeKlyen: The Fragile Families Study does not address that. We are very aware of that, but you 
can only do so much. 

Cabrera: Not even the census collects data on gay couples. There is a box where it asks if you 
have a parmer, but if the partner has the same sex as the respondent I do not think that it is 
counted. 

Blackman: We have had requests from gay and lesbian couples that they be allowed to come to 
the classes as they are structured now. However, African Americans tend to be very conservative 
in their views on sexual orientation, particularly African American men. We decided to not 
include gay and lesbian couples because of the homophobia within the community. I have a 
couple of graduate students who are interested in developing family life education modules 
specifically for gay and lesbian couples. Some of them are gay or lesbian themselves and say they 
have these same issues and also need help. I am interested in having students at the beginning 
of their studies who are willing to work with me to develop those offerings. 

DeKlyen: Clinically I have worked with gay couples around parenting issues and relationship 
issues and they look relatively similar in many ways. 

Blackman: That came up in some of my discussions with some Head Start people in Indianapo- 
lis. They do not want to exclude gay and lesbian families if they get into this marriage issue. We 
are talking about ways to configure things to include them. 

Question: Bray talked about the mobility issue for the child when families are divorced or 
divorcing and reconfiguring. Do you have data on that? 

Bray: We found in our work with stepfamilies that most of the time when people get remarried, 
they move, usually to a higher socioeconomic setting. From a parent's perspective, it is a positive 
stress because there is more family income available. From a child's perspective, it is usually a 
negative stress, because they do not see the moving as necessarily better. They often have to 
change schools and make new friends. 

Some of the work out of California found that children were traveling 100-150 miles every 
other day or every other week to be involved with both parents at the same time because they 




493 



487 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



did not live in the same city. That put a lot of stress on children. It raises all kinds of other safety 
issues. For example, children are more likely to be in an automobile accident. One has to weigh 
what is better for children. Besides the moving around, the high divorce rate for stepfamilies is 
high, oftentimes occurring in the first few years after remarriage, and then children are impacted 
again with income frequently dropping at that point. 

Question: I am from south Florida and in south Florida the families with whom we work are 
culturally diverse. How do you define African American? 

DeKlyen: We let the families make the choice of identifying themselves as African American. We 
did not break that down further, although we do have several different categories by which we 
could subcategorize. We look at background, for example, we have some mixed couples in the 
sample, but not enough for most of these analyses. For these cases, because it gets so compli- 
cated, I was looking only at mother's ethnicity. There are a few couples who would have been 
considered mixed couples. This is a good question, which we as social scientists face when we 
deal with the numbers. When there are many small subsets, one cannot generalize, but when we 
are working clinically or personally with people it is crucial. 

Bray: In research, one must also think about what the outcomes are that one is considering. For 
example, in the alcohol literature we know that the way ethnic groups drink varies. Within the 
Latino subculture and within the African American subculture there are actually differences 
depending on whether one is from Puerto Rico, Mexico, or South America. In other areas, 
however, there are not many differences in terms of outcomes. If one looks at only behavior, 
there are not many of those types of differences. We need to be sensitive to understanding and 
continuing to do research as to where there might be differences and where there might not 
be differences. 

Comment: If you know how parenting patterns and styles vary across different cultures, it 
becomes a primary factor. 

Blackman: That is quite right. One of the major things that goes on in the research, especially 
when it comes to African Americans, is that there is no attempt to desegregate the group. 

Because that has gone on, in health and human services we have a skewed perspective of African 
American diets in the United States. We are embarking on a national study of African immigrant 
families, a group of people who seem to be invisible within the African American or Black 
community. They have some differences because of their cultural background, the ways of 
believing and thinking in the world, and where they come from. That is extremely important to 
understand. We do not carefully desegregate the data on African Americans according to 
whether or not they come from the Caribbean. There have traditionally been some differences 
between Caribbean and U.S.-born African Americans. Indeed one needs to look at the whole 
diaspora in terms of understanding the varieties of marital relationships across the African 
Diaspora. 

Johnson-Powell: I took a considerable amount of time in my dissertation, which was published 
in 1992 , to lay out that very point because often it is a point of conflict within couples, lust 
because we are all of the African Diaspora does not mean that we see the world in the same way. 
In fact, one of the couples that comes to mind out of the study was a woman from Nigeria 
whose brother was bom in Indianapolis. They were having a terrible time with world views. 

When we began the project, we had a full day in-service on religious diversity within the 
African American community, because the staff who were joining the project were largely 
mainstream Protestants. They did not realize that if we invited people from the community, we 




488 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



were likely to get a broad array of religiously diverse people. It was a wonderful day to spend 
with the staff and clerks from those religious groups represented in Indianapolis because we 
do not always recognize the diversity among us and how that could bring us into conflict with 
each other. 

Blackman: One more aspect to understand about the African American population is that 43% 
of all Muslims in this country are African Americans. There are differences in the role of a 
woman as well as other issues in these families, so this is important to know. If one is going to 
do any research in Boston on the African American community, one has to understand that 
Black Protestants never speak to Black Catholics in Boston. I have some friends who grew up 
with me who are very prominent now but I never knew them as a child because they were 
Catholic. Understanding some of those differences that go on within the African American 
community is extremely important so that we do not develop racial profiling of who African 
Americans are. In terms of the Latino population, it is also important to know the differences. 
For example, it is important to know that the word Hispanic is referring to those who speak 
Spanish, and, for example, people from Brazil speak Portuguese. We have to begin to desegregate 
the data and look at some specifics. 

Comment: I would say though that when we look at diversity, it is important also to look at 
what is basic human process. There is much research addressing our similarities as humans as 
well as our diversity. Making the assumption that it is all the same or all different puts blinders 
on us. We need to open our eyes and say there are some differences, there are some similarities, 
and here is where we need to be unique about this. That is an important research agenda as well. 

Comment: Personally, I like to look at every relationship that I have with a person as a marriage, 
which is going to give me the chance to have training for marriage. In work, I see my relation- 
ships in the context of being married to the firm. I am learning how to deal with coworkers in a 
way that might apply to marriage. There is a spirit of uniqueness in knowing how to use this for 
this and that for that. 

Question: What are the marital patterns of children of divorce? 

Bray: The data indicate that one of the risk factors for divorce is if you come from a divorced 
home. It is not a huge effect, but it is a consistent predictor. There are not good data about 
whether people are more likely to postpone marriage and more likely to cohabit or not. If you 
look at Wallerstein's data, she claimed that children of divorce have fears about being married 
and that is a strong effect. However, if you look at other people's data utilizing children from 
first-marriage homes (i.e., non-divorce-homes), you find that people in general have worries 
about being married and potentially getting divorced. There are not huge differences, but it is a 
risk factor. 

Question: First, what you have said is extremely relevant to the work in strengthening families, 
and I appreciate all of it. Based on the data that you presented, do you have any predications as 
to what might be happening in the near future with changing demographics, in particular the 
increase in the Latino family population in the United States or any other trends that you might 
be aware of? 

Bray: What we know is that people are more likely to get married and stay married now. This is 
a real shift in the last 5 years. There are a lot of reasons. Some of it is the marriage movement 
and the work that people have talked about in pointing out that being married and staying 
married is good for children. We also know from our research on divorce that getting divorced 



495 



489 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



and remarried is no panacea. Often people carry the same problems into the next relationship 
and end up getting divorced again. The popular press in my opinion has done a good job of 
educating the public as to what the trend is. 

Then we also have HIV/AIDS, which we have not talked about. HIV/AIDS is changing 
marriage in a subtle way, why one wants to be married and why one wants to be in a safe 
relationship. Now it is not only about wanting to love somebody or be loved and taken care of, 
it is a matter of life and death. This is particularly the case for fragile families where there are 
higher rates of HIV/AIDS and where having sex with somebody can lead to a deadly disease. 

Comment: 1 wanted to add that women are getting married at an older age. When you are older, 
you have less time. You do not waste time with someone whom you think might not be appro- 
priate. For women of all races, cultures, and ethnicities, if they are getting married when they are 
older, the likelihood is that they have more education. They will look toward a mate that is 
more like them. If we are leaving a good portion of minority men behind, then you have an 
issue of all these women who want to marry and have no one to marry. 

Blackman: A group of us middle-aged women were talking about just that very thing. In the 
women's movement, everybody was talking about doing your own thing. We kept wondering 
how much further out we could go. Then came the 1980s when people started to look more 
conservatively at life. Then we have gone through the era of hip hop and now we are dealing 
with varieties of STDs that we never knew of before. Yet the young people, the 30-year-olds and 
younger, are looking retro even in their fashions. We are going to come back full circle to some 
more conservative views on relationships. Things are coming back to a more centrist position. 

We just elected an administration that can talk forthrightly about marriage and religion. Can 
you imagine we did that? With controversy, yes, but we did that. People are endorsing more 
retro views right now. I do not know where we will be with the next election, but I do not think 
that we are going to go far out again. There were some New Yorkers at breakfast yesterday who 
were talking about how in their city, people are behaving more communally, valuing relation- 
ships with neighbors and family members, and wanting to settle down a little more. 

DeKlyen: I would add that the immigrant situation is one that we need to watch to see how it 
will change things. We have not had a chance to look carefully, but it is clear from our initial 
examination that there is a real difference between the immigrant Latinos and the non-immi- 
grants. Latino couples with low incomes had a much higher rate of marriage than any of the 
other groups. That may be more driven by the immigrant element of the population. Attitudes 
across the population are different, but then as they come and assimilate, where do they go from 
there? 

Question: In the fragile family study, is there any distinction made between people who 
indicate their pregnancies were planned versus unplanned? 

DeKlyen: I am virtually sure that it was asked, but it is a piece of data I am not familiar with. I 
have done other research where we have looked at this question and it tends to be very interest- 
ing. However, there are many births in happily married families that are unplanned, so it is not 
necessarily a neat distinction. 



ERIC 




490 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



Children of Incarcerated Parents 

CHAIR: Gloria Johnson-Powell 
PRESENTERS: Arlene Lee, Carl Mazza 

Arlene Lee: I am from the Child Welfare League. This year the League entered into a cooperative 
agreement with the federal government to establish the first federal resource center for children 
of prisoners. Before I started with the League, I was Youth Strategies Manager with the governor's 
office in Maryland. I also have 15 years experience as an attorney representing children in child 
welfare and delinquency cases, and contested custody cases. The children of prisoners were ever- 
present in that work, yet no one was paying attention to the special needs of this population; 
how they were interacting in their social settings, school settings, communities, and families. I 
am delighted to be part of the "groundswell" now addressing the needs of this population. 
Before I talk about this particular group, it is important to talk about where we are with children 
in general in this nation. It is sort of good news-bad news, but mosdy good news. Drawing on 
the Casey indicators used by Kids Count, which collects data nationwide on how children are 
doing, in most areas we are seeing significant declines in troubling indicators and increases in 
positive areas for most children. Nationally, we are still having problems in the areas of low 
birth-weight babies and single parent families, which are both increasing. However, teen births 
have fallen over 20% to their lowest level in 60 years. Adoptions have been steadily going up 
and are at the highest level in over 10 years. Juvenile crime has been declining. There was a 68% 
decline in juvenile homicide in the last 10 years, which is at the lowest rate in 20 years. Child 
poverty is at its lowest rate since 1979. 

As we address the needs of all children, we are impacting those most at risk. After a while we 
reach a plateau, and in order to bring the numbers down further we have to address the special 
needs of particular populations. 

Children of prisoners have been a neglected population for a long time, primarily because 
the criminal justice process does not look at the needs of children. The systems that deal with 
families affected by incarceration — the criminal justice system, the child welfare system — are all 
overwhelmed; and there are negative public attitudes and stigma regarding being incarcerated. 

We do hot have a common database in most states, much less nationally, to allow communi- 
cation back and forth between agencies. You can have a child with a parent in prison and not 
have the school system know, not have the child welfare system know, unless they are dealing 
direcdy with that parent. These children fly under the radar. There are services that would 
otherwise be helpful to them that are unavailable. 

Currently, 2.3 million children in the United States have a parent in prison or jail. We 
estimate close to 7 million children are affected, if you include parents on parole or probation. I 
think most people do not even realize we are talking about such a large number of children. 

We have seen a significant increase in the incarceration of women. That means we have more 
children coming to the fore; people are starting to recognize that we have a population of 
children who have been separated from their primary caretaker, the person they look to for 
emotional stability and financial support. As we saw the number of women going into prison 
increase, we saw people beginning to pay attention to the needs of those children. 

As women were entering prison pregnant and therefore having children behind bars, it forced 
the prison system to think about dealing with children. They had no choice. Shortly after we 
started having a significant number of women delivering behind bars, parenting programs 
became popular in prisons. "Popular" meaning that more and more systems are adopting them, 
and it has become a requirement in the federal system. 

The majority of parents are incarcerated for more than a year. That is significant because if 
children are separated from their parents and in the foster care system for 15 consecutive 
months or 15 out of 22 months, they are automatically considered for termination of parental 





491 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



rights. Now we are not only talking about children separated from their parent because of 
incarceration, but we may be talking about children who become legal orphans as a result of 
incarceration. They are placed for adoption, but depending on the age of the child, they may or 
may not be adopted into a permanent family. 

It is reported that 10% of children of female prisoners and 2% of children of male prisoners 
are in foster homes. This is probably low: these statistics are based on a survey of prisoners. The 
data are probably skewed, because parents assume if their children are with a relative they are 
not in foster care. However, if the caregiver is receiving foster care payments, then the child may 
be considered to be in foster care, which then impacts the termination of parental rights 
timeline. We think that number is more like 30 to 40%. That still means the majority of children 
are operating or living outside of the child welfare system. 

We know that these children are impacted by incarceration. Small pieces of research from 
around the country have told us a lot about what happens. We do not have major research yet, 
although it is being started. The research tells us that Aildren are impacted by incarceration in a 
variety of ways, depending on a number of factors: age at parent's incarceration, length of the 
separation, health of the family, how disruptive the incarceration was, strength of the parent- 
child bond, whether they had been separated previously, the parent's crime, length of the 
sentence, and whether or not they have supports from family or community. All of these factors 
come to bear on how they are impacted. 

We know from research that the trauma these children experience has a significant impact on 
them at different stages. It could be that they experience the trauma at a young age but do not 
display the effects until later. In other words, these children suffer from post-traumatic stress 
syndrome. The trauma can divert children from developmentally appropriate tasks; they may 
start suddenly sucking their thumbs or wetting their beds. Their language development reverts. 
Their coping strategies are suddenly impacted so that they are more withdrawn; they become 
clingy or begin soiling their pants. Taken out of context these behaviors may indicate a number 
of factors, but this population of children can demonstrate them as a result of trauma. 

The trauma can vary according to age, where young children for example may display 
disorganized feelings. Children in their later years might display some maladaptive behaviors. 
Teenagers might display truancy or substance abuse. These outward expressions, diminished 
academic performance, or behavior difficulties are important to look out for because parental 
incarceration can result in significant impacts. 

We know that while trauma is always present for children of incarcerated parents, its severity 
can vary due to a number of factors, including whether or not they receive intervention. Inter- 
ventions that are successful with other children can be successful with these children as well: 
strengthening the child-parent relationship, having supportive adults around, being able to 
intervene early and often. These interventions can all help with this population of children, so 
that the following last piece of data can be avoided. 

These data are specifically to show the cost of not doing anything. The cost of not doing 
anything is that these children are three to six times more likely to end up in our juvenile justice 
system, and 40 to 75% of them are likely to end up in our adult system. The single most 
expensive solution is to do nothing and allow these children to go through the juvenile system 
straight into the adult system. 

These children have unique features because of the multiple traumas they experience. In 
other words, they are not just impacted by their parent's incarceration. They are impacted by 
poverty, parental substance abuse, parental mental illness, history of abuse or family instability, 
exposure to criminal activities either on the part of their parent or within the community, and 
child maltreatment. When you take a child out of their family and put them in foster care or any 
kind of institutional placement, the risk of maltreatment actually increases. Child maltreatment, 
therefore, is not necessarily abuse that may have occurred within the family home. 



492 




PARENTING/FAMILIES 



These children experience a combination of risk factors. They have the trauma of probably 
being present during their parent s criminal behavior. They may have witnessed the arrest of their 
parent which can be a significantly traumatic event and then they have all of these other factors. 

Over the years, a small group of professionals around the country have been doing good 
work in this field. Based on their work we have learned a lot about how to help this population. 
Promising programs are targeted toward assisting the parent-child relationship, because the 
more effectively we intervene with the parent, the more likely we will be able to impact the 
child. The most effective programs, encouraged through the correctional system, as well as the 
school and mental health systems, have taught parents how to parent their child and have 
allowed parents to develop good parenting skills. 

Girl Scouts Beyond Bars is an interesting program that started in Maryland, which takes a 
group of girls whose mothers are behind bars and creates a Girl Scout troop with them. They 
bring the girls in to have a troop meeting with their mothers once a month. Three times a 
month they meet outside in the community. They have a regular Girl Scout experience, and in 
the time between the monthly troop visits to their mothers, they are learning skills, using the 
skills, teaching the skills, and developing a bond with their mother. This program has been 
going on for a long time and is now in 24 states. 

Strengthening Families is a center for substance abuse prevention and juvenile justice, as well 
as a delinquency prevention program. It has been researched and replicated and has been 
effective. The way it works is they have children come in to visit their parents for 14 weeks. They 
spend half an hour having dinner, then break apart for an hour to be in groups that are age- 
appropriate. They learn new skills. They come back together for an hour as a family and are able 
to practice those skills together. This is a program that has been researched at a variety of settings 
and is now being piloted in a prerelease unit. 

Project SEEK is a case-management wrap-around program that has been in place in Michigan 
for the last 10 years. It has been demonstrated to improve academic performance, decrease 
delinquency and substance abuse, and strengthen the parent-child relationship. Again, it works 
on developing the parent-child bond to reduce the trauma the child is experiencing. It also 
builds community support for the child, works directly with teachers, social workers, and child 
welfare workers, and connects the family to various services in the community. It allows the 
whole family to experience the supports necessary to be successful. 

MotherRead and Long Distance Dads are effective programs because they allow parents who 
are separated by long distances to still have some kind of bond develop with their child. Both 
programs allow parents to utilize technology. 

In MotherRead, mothers read a book into a tape recorder, and the tape and book are sent to 
the child. The caregiver then uses the book with the child, who experiences the voice of their 
mother reading to them. We are developing the bond, improving literacy, and involving the 
caregiver, so it is a wonderful, effective program. 

Long Distance Dads allows contact by fathers who may be separated by many hours. In fact, 
in federal prisons people come from all over the country, so you may have individuals on 
different coasts — family on one side of the country and father in prison on another side. It uses 
chat rooms to provide real-time communication. The fathers are also taking a character develop- 
ment program and learning literacy skills so they can write letters to their children. We are trying 
to find ways not only to strengthen the bond but allow them to learn new and effective skills. 

At the Center we are trying to pull together pieces of information and let people know there 
is work going on, there is research going on, and that these children are in our communities and 
their parents are coming home at some point. We know that 500,000 inmates per year are being 
brought back into communities. If we do not have a good relationship with them, if they do not 
have a good relationship with their children, there are a number of problems that we are going 
to experience. 



ERIC 



499 



493 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



More important is the long-term impact on these children, and that is the message we are 
trying to convey. We are trying to spread as much information as we have and let people know 
what we need. We need people to join together because no system can do this on its own. We 
need educators to be working with parents, social workers to be working with education, school 
psychologists to be involved, and juvenile justice to become involved. We need to work across 
systems, because the children are impacted by so many different systems. 

The bigger question is what to do about the children who are not in any system at all. That is 
most of the children that we are talking about. For them the advocacy starts with education. 

They are the ones that are going to experience the initial behavior problems, the developmental 
issues. Teachers are the ones that are going to need to figure out the first intervention. We asked 
education to be aware of the child's family situation. Teachers may not be able to do something 
directly, but they need to be able to know what is happening with that child and be able to 
communicate that with those who might be able to bring in services to help. 

The resource center is collecting research, conducting evaluation, and disseminating informa- 
tion to be a resource to those frontline people working directly with children. It places an 
enormous responsibility both on the community and on the Center to make sure that we are 
working to address the children's needs. 

First, we are working on public awareness. Letting people know this problem is out there, that 
this is a neglected population of children, and that every one of us has something we can 
contribute. We are coming up with Best Practices Toolkits; people can get in touch with the 
Center, and we can give them tools that they can use directly. 

We are also working on the ASFA (Adoption and Safe Families Act) brief, to highlight what 
the timeframe for termination of parental rights means for this population of children and what 
the system might be able to do to ensure that we do not create a population of legal orphans. 

We are conducting training programs to help people be more effective and sensitive. Law 
enforcement personnel need to be sensitive to the fact that children are often present at the time 
of an arrest. It behooves them to work quickly to get children connected with a relative or to 
time the arrests so that children are at school. We are working to train agencies to communicate 
to each other that a parent has been incarcerated so that support services can be put into place. 
We are working with corrections to increase visitation and communication opportunities. 

We are doing more research on what is going on with these children. There are pockets or 
pieces of research, and it is good work. However, we want to conduct a longitudinal study to see 
what happens to the children over time. 

Carl Mazza: I teach social work at Lehman College, which is part of the City University of New 
York. I have worked in prisons for the last 22 years. From 1980 through 1995, New York State 
had a massive prison college program. I taught social science classes for a Bronx community 
college. In 1995 George Patald, as the new governor of New York, put in effect a campaign 
promise that was to eliminate all college programs in prison. He could not stop schools from 
coming to prisons, but he stopped all financial aid if you were in prison, which effectively 
stopped all the programs. 

I have always loved teaching in prisons; it is a unique population. In 1995, 1 was hired by the 
Osborne Association to teach a parenting class at Sing Sing. At that time, it was the only 
parenting class of more than one session to incarcerated men in New York State. Our class was 
16 weeks; in fact, tonight someone is covering my last class of the current session. 

After that, I expanded my role at Osborne and started working with men transitioning from 
prison back into society. The third part of my background is that I have worked with families of 
incarcerated men: their wives, girlfriends, and especially their children. 

All my experience is based on the prison system in New York. New York is a big state in terms 
of bulk, population, and geography. It has an enormous number of prisons. Last count was 68 



500 



494 



PA RENTING/ FAMILIES 



State prisons, not counting county prisons. It has a lot of people in prison, and policies tend to 
be a bit more liberal than other states. New York is a good example because, despite the so- 
called pseudoliberalism, there is an enormous number of programs you cannot do with parents 
in prison, including the programs Lee spoke about, MotherRead and Long Distance Dads. 

Prisons around the country do not like outsiders coming inside, particularly with a camera. 
You are allowed a camera in the visiting room, because it is much more open and there are no 
offices around. I wanted to get a camcorder into the visiting room to videotape each of the men 
in the parenting class reading a story so that their children could have a copy. That way, they 
could see their fathers reading them a story even when they are home. The administration said 
they were absolutely not going to allow a camera. We took it all the way up to the Commis- 
sioner for the Department of Corrections for the State of New York. They consistently backed up 
the administration. We then tried asking to make a cassette with a tape recorder. We were 
refused again and ultimately we were unable to do it. 

A couple of years ago I was suspended from Sing Sing, which I wear like a badge. My students 
have to do a lot of written assignments. One night they had given me the assignments and I was 
leaving. Every now and then the officers do a spot check. They checked all my belongings and all 
my papers. 

Often I have the men write personal experiences, particularly about their boyhood. I assure 
them confidentiality. Often the men put them in sealed envelopes to make sure others do not 
see them. The officer started opening some of the envelopes. In one of the envelopes was a copy 
of a man's court transcript, which he had put in with his assignment. Obviously I did not know 
about that. That was considered contraband, because I was there teaching parenting, not as an 
attorney. They took the transcript and held a hearing. It took about 2 weeks, during which I was 
not allowed in the prison. The man was convicted of child molestation and wanted to tell me 
about it. In prison, men convicted of child molestation are very low on the social pole. He 
wanted me to know about it, but could not talk about it in class. Apparently his way of doing 
that was to give me a copy of his court transcript. 

To be reinstated I had to go for a hearing with the superintendent of security for the prisons. 

It is kind of like going into the principal's office. He reprimanded me. I acted contrite and very 
sorry about it. The meeting lasted about half an hour. He shook my hand and gave me back my 
ID card, then said, "Before you leave, I want you to step over by my window." I stepped over to 
the window that overlooked the yard in Sing Sing. It was free time. 

He asked me, "What do you see out there?" I told him that I saw about 2,000 men. He said, 

"I see 2,000 uniforms. That is the difference between people like you and people like me. You 
see individuals; I see uniforms. When you start individualizing inmates, you start making 
exceptions to the mles. When you start making exceptions to the mles, you become a threat to 
security." He said that everything "we"— the Department of Corrections— do is to ensure 
security. They are not particularly concerned about the rights of individuals. 

That helped me understand the environment in which I was working. Despite all my work 
with men in transition and their children and families, it helped me to understand that it is an 
uphill battle and you have to take small victories when you get them. 

the following happened to me a couple months ago. A B'A-year-old boy's father had been 
incarcerated since August. His rriother had seen a dramatic change in the boy's behavior; an 
increase in bedwetting; he also was increasingly moody. At times he was very clingy to her; at 
other times he wanted to disassociate himself from her. He spent an inordinate amount of time 
in front of the TV set, almost oblivious to everything going on around him. 

The mother and the father were not together at the time of his incarceration, but they lived in 
the same neighborhood. Both of them worked. She worked during the day; he worked at night. 
The father would pick up their son, who would spend the day with him. He would drop off the 
boy at his mothers about 6 p.m. The father would get a few hours sleep and go into work about 
11 p.m. 



501 



495 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



The mother was the first one to say that her son had a better relationship with his father 
because he spent all of his time with him. The parents were not particularly fond of each other, 
but had apparently been mature in working together for their son. 

The second time I saw Anthony, I asked if he wanted to draw a picture. He agreed to draw me 
a picture if I would tell him what to draw. I said. Okay, why not draw your family. He told me, 
"This is Mommy. This is Daddy. This is me." He also told me "This is the baby on TV," and then 
he said it was a Teletubby. The mother was about 4 months pregnant, and the baby on TV was 
the sonogram picture that Anthony had asked to carry in his pocket. 

In the picture, Anthony and his father were exactly the same except for size. Both of them 
could see the world. They could not run away because they did not have bodies. They could not 
scream for help because they had no mouths. They could not hear what was going on around 
them because they did not have ears. They kind of floated around, vulnerable to the environ- 
ment. Both of them had no power or control over the world to react to it. Both of them had no 
control over their lives. 

The mother was very similar, but the mother had a mouth. Even though it was kind of 
crooked, the mother was smiling. The mother was engaged at the time, happy with her fiance, 
happy that she was pregnant again, and had a rather good job. While she was still not in control 
in her world, she had more satisfaction than either Anthony or his father. 

He is only 3 V 2 , but Anthony has a good sense of what the world is like for his father and 
himself. His father was taken from him, not because his father walked out, but because the 
police came and took his father away. His father cannot come back to Anthony, Anthony cannot 
live with his father. It is beyond the control of both of them. 

If I may limit my comments to what happens in New York: When Rudolph Giuliani was first 
elected mayor on a platform of being tough on crime, he changed a long-standing process of 
arrest in New York. Prior to this, before the police entered a person's home, the children would 
usually be taken to another room so that when the handcuffs were placed on the adult they 
would not see that. Giuliani made this procedure one of his first changes. The police are now 
expected to put handcuffs on the person to be arrested as soon as he or she is seen. Thousands 
of children in New York Gity have seen the arrest of their parent by uniformed people in their 
home, which is the only safe place they generally know. TTiey also have seen their parents 
mostly fathers — go from being "Daddy" to being a criminal. 

If you are watching TV, reading a book, or listening to the radio, and all of a sudden people 
come storming into your house to arrest a loved one, your sense of security and well-being is 
absolutely shattered. It is almost permanently shattered: If this happens to father today, what is 
to prevent this from happening tomorrow to mother? What is to prevent this from happening to 
grandmother? To me? To anyone that I love? 

Once a person is sentenced in New York, the Department of Gorrections can assign them to 
any place they want or any place there is room. New York is a big state geographically. A family 
in Brooklyn may have a father sentenced to a prison at the Ganadian border, a 7 to 8-hour car 
ride away. The geography makes it almost impossible, in terms of time and money, for face-to- 
face visits on a continuing basis. 

To go into prison, a child has to go through metal detectors; he has to take his shoes off; he 
has a magical wand scanning his body; and he has to show ID, proof of who he is, just to get in 
to see father. Visiting rooms in state prison are generally alike. They look much like school 
cafeterias with smaller tables. Generally when the family comes in, they are assigned a table. 

One seat is reserved for the inmate; all of the inmates face forward. In the front of the room on a 
tall desk is a corrections officer, who oversees everything. 

There are different rules. For example, in some prisons in New York State, almost all inmates 
are allowed contact visits where you can touch a loved one. However, in other prisons, a father 
cannot hold his child on his lap. You can hold his hand or kiss him, but you cannot hold the 



PA RENTING/ FAMILIES 



child on your lap. In many prisons, you cannot bring in anything from the outside, so the child 
cannot bring in a drawing or a Father's Day card. If the child is older, he cannot bring in a report 
card. Anything that would be done to encourage the father-child relationship is forbidden. 

In New York you cannot bring in food, but you can buy food from vending machines in the 
room. The inmates are not allowed to cross the big yellow line in front of the vending machines; 
they are not allowed to touch money. It is bizarre to witness. A father and his child walk up to 
the line, then the child walks up to the machine, inserts the money, and selects the food items. If 
they need to be heated, the child walks to a microwave, and then serves the father. It is a 
complete role reversal. With young children you often see looks of confusion: "I used to go to 
the store to buy candy with Daddy and he always had the money; I picked the candy, but Daddy 
paid the man." In prison, it is the opposite. The child becomes the adult. 

A child also picks up nonverbal cues in the visiting room. At different times during the day, 
they have what is called the count, where everyone in prison has to be counted to make sure 
that nobody escaped. If you are in the visiting room when they have a count, all inmates must 
stand and everybody else must sit. This means your father along with all of the other men 
dressed in green stand up. It is a rather humiliating process that goes on for 2 or 3 minutes until 
they count all the people there. The child starts picking up nonverbal cues between the father 
and the officers, very often anger or fear. The child associates the father's anger or fear to other 
people in uniforms. 

Almost 100% of the children I have worked with, from very young children to adults in their 
20s, talk about an absolute terror of people in uniforms. The closer they are to their fathers— I 
am speaking of fathers because that is where my experience is — the more that fear exists. Young 
people have to work to overcome that fear, particularly when they become adolescents. It can 
become self-destmctive. I worked with a young man who at age 16 decided to smoke marijuana 
literally around the comer of a police station. He was caught and arrested. His mother went 
down to see him and bail him out. She said, "What were you thinking?" He said, "I just wanted 
to show the cops that I could do whatever I wanted." 

There are two major ways of communicating between parents in prison and children. First is 
telephone calls. In New York State and almost every other state, phone calls are done through a 
contract system. The State Department of Corrections contracts with a phone company to 
provide all the phone services within the state. The phone companies pay a fee and vie for the 
contract. They are also supposed to give a certain amount of money to the communities where 
the prisons are located. 

The only way a parent can contact a child is by making a collect phone call. They cannot pay 
for it; it has to be collect. You cannot bypass the contracted company; you have to use the state 
system. It is usually 3 times more expensive to call from prison than calling from a street phone. 
It is 8 to 10 times more than if you were calling from someone's house collect to another house. 
Phone calls add a huge burden to families that are already strapped financially. This also causes 
more tension and stress between the parents. The mother, who has to raise the children alone, 
deal with the stigma of the father's incarceration, and carry all the financial burdens and child- 
care responsibilities, has to now incur a tremendously high phone bill in order to have her 
children speak to their father. 

Often the phones have a timing mechanism. It is kind of like Russian roulette, depending on 
who is working the phone system in the prison that night. A father can be in the middle of a 
sentence and the phone will just click off. Occasionally a little beep will let them know they 
have 30 seconds, but that is not guaranteed. A child can be talking to her father and in the 
middle of saying something gets cut off. The child's sense of abandonment is reinforced again. 

The other major form of communication is letters. I personally find letter writing the better 
alternative because the child has something tangible. Children whose parents are in prison often 
sleep with the letters under their pillows. Letter writing assumes that die fathers are comfortable 
writing. Many men come to prison barely literate. For an adult who is unsure of their writing 




497 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



ability, to write a letter is an emotionally draining task. Often letters are stamped with a red 
stamp saying that this letter was generated from a prison in the State of New York. It is a large 
stamp, taking up almost half the letter. If you live in an apartment building and your mailbox is 
not secure, this red stamp sticks out. It adds to the social stigma and can be embarrassing for 
children and their caretakers. 

In my classes, the men often say that they write their children, but the children do not write 
back. For a child who is 10, 11, or 12 years of age, writing is seen as a chore, as an extension of 
homework. Think back to when you were 12 years old and your mother asked you how your day 
was. You said, "Okay." If she asked, "What's new?" you said, "Nothing." Not only does the child 
hate writing, he has nothing to say when he does. 

During conversations between incarcerated fathers and their children, children will often ask 
when their father is coming home. The Number 1 answer is "Soon." Children have a different 
sense of time than adults do. 1 tell my classes to think back to when they were little and waiting 
for Christmas, their birthday, or the last day of school. It never came. Time moved very slowly. 
The parent is constantly raising the child's expectations. "Soon" to a child means this afternoon 
or tomorrow morning or at the very most, on Saturday. A more honest answer is, 1 don t know. 
Few people are sentenced for an exact time. Most get out on parole, which is beyond the 
decision of an individual inmate. 

Fathers have this need to tell their children there has been a mistake, and they are innocent. 
Whether true or not, it is extremely dangerous and damaging for the child. The children learn 
that if their father did not do anything and still ended up in this place, they can end up in this 
place as well. Or, mother can end up in this place without doing anything too. It makes the 
sense of abandonment from the lack of security when the father was arrested become an ever- 
present wound. 

Lee: Not only do parents lie about how long they are going to be away, some lie about where 
they are. There are many children whose parents simply disappear, and mother, grandmother, or 
the caregiver simply says that the parent has gone away, and the children literally have no idea. 
There are many children dealing with a variety of lies centered on their parents incarceration. 

Question: We have an Early Head Start program serving women incarcerated for drug and 
alcohol abuse. The Early Head Start program is on the site of the in-patient program. Our staff is 
experiencing challenges in terms of how they view the mother and child versus how the system 
views the mother and child, in terms of not allowing the mother to visit as punishment. The 
mothers experience lockdowns, and there is no contact. Do you know of training resources, to 
work with ^e prison people toward mutually acceptable ways of dealing with this? 

Lee: 1 can send some information to you. Some correction systems have begun to understand 
that training staff on the importance of the parent-child relationship helps with safety and 
behavior. There is anecdotal evidence that if prisoners have visits with their children they are 
more manageable. If you approach it from the angle of what is in it for them, you are able to get 
them to buy into it. There is training you can do with correctional staff to help them see what is 
in it for them. It also has to come from the top. You have to have a warden who is willing to 
support it, so that is where you start. 

Question: Who are the inmate parents accepted into the program? How do you choose which 
parent is going to be allowed to see their children more or be more involved? 

Mazza: In our program, it is any inmate who wants to participate. The facility generally has a 
cap of 40. Usually 1 start out with about 50, but in prison you lose a lot of men to attrition; 
some get transferred out, some get paroled, and so forth. We are the only program at Sing Sing, 




498 



PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



and Sing Sing has 2500 men. Many of the men start the program without any contact with their 
children; part of their personal goal is to reestablish contact. 

Lee: Most of them are volunteers. There is a waiting list to get into the parenting programs just 
so they can have contact with their children. The only screening that 1 am aware of has to do 
with whether or not they were abusive with that child or murdered a sibling. 

Question: What about killing a parent? Or anything like that? 

Mazza: Usually with the killing of a parent, it is left up to the child whether they want contact 
with the father or not. 

Lee: 1 know a great story of a father and child who were recently reunified. He had murdered the 
mother, and the child was placed with the maternal grandparents. The reunification process 
started with the maternal grandparents, and then the child was brought in. A lot of healing was 
going on. 1 think that is important. 

Question: Do you find there are differences within each group, for the children and their 
responsiveness to these programs with their parents? Younger children, I assume, just want to be 
close. As a child grows into adolescence and wants separation and independence, how does that 
affect reunification with parents when there are already abandonment issues? 

Mazza: My sense and my experience is that those relationships that were strong when the child 
became an adolescent continue pretty well. It is more difficult for a father who has not seen his 
child in 13 years to start a relationship with a 15-year-old. 

Lee: There are a lot of children who are growing up without their parent ever being part of their 
childhood. They are going into prison at 18 or 20, getting 10 to 20 years; so literally the children 
are toddlers when the parent goes in and adults when the parent gets out. 

Mazza: 1 worked with three people in their early 20s, all of whom grew up with their fathers in 
prison from the time they were 2 or 3 years old. All of them had close relationships with their 
fathers. When they turned about 19, they started getting extremely angry at their fathers. 

Two of them went away to college; one got his own apartment and worked. As they became 
adults, they saw how difficult their childhood was because of the incarceration of their father. 

All three stated that they knew it was a stage they were going through and their relationship 
would improve, but for now, they just could not stand him. 

Question: Going higher than the warden: If there is evidence that children with good relation- 
ships with their incarcerated parent are less likely to have problems, how has this impacted on 
people making policies about incarceration? 

Lee: As with everything, policy lags behind. It will take a while before policy makers respond to 
the research. Right now we are doing this in individual situations, settings, and communities. As 
the voices become louder, you might have policy makers responding. 

Mazza: I have worked with people on the state level. I am always amazed at how incredibly 
candid they are when you meet with them individually. They say that to be reelected, they have 
to be tough on crime. Anything that gives the slightest perception of being soft on crime, their 
opponent will grab. Intellectually, they know these programs work and that they are helpful, but 
their job— and they honestly say this— is to get reelected, and they will not change it. 



O 

ERIC 



505 



499 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Lee: For whoever you are approaching, think about what is in it for them. For the policy makers, 
focusing on the children as opposed to the incarcerated parents may encourage them to make a 
change or support something different; because we can all support what is happening with 
children. You are not going to be doing something nice for a prisoner; you are doing something 
important for children. 

Question: DC is unique in that our male prisoners are in all 50 states; female prisoners are only 
in 5 states. We do not even touch our prisoners until they come back to the District of Colum- 
bia, and that is a challenge in itself I am sure there are people in DC who would love to travel 7 
or 8 hours instead of 2 or 3 thousand miles. How do you keep children in the District of 
Columbia connected to their fathers, when the latter are incarcerated in Anzona? 

Lee: Again, look to the dedicated professionals that have been trying to meet these challenges. 

In DC, Hope House and Family Ties have both been trying to break down barriers. Hope House 
set up a video-conferencing system with a prison in North Carolina and one in Ohio, so that the 
children can see and talk to their fathers. Certainly, closing DC prisons created significant 
hardship for families. The federal prison system is, however, trying to address this problem. They 
recognize that the DC population is unique. 

You can also work with the decision makers. Talk about what is important to them: how to 
get people out of their overloaded system. Talk to them about how you can support their work 
and reduce their numbers, reduce their behavior problems, increase their success while getting 
access to inmates on behalf of their children. I would work at it from two angles, looking at 
what is working and how we could build on that, and looking at the policy and decision makers 
within the system. 

Mazza: I had a student who was incarcerated near New York City. His daughter was about 8 
hours away, and she was about 4 or 5 years old. He decided to work on weekly projects with her. 
Their first project was ^Things That I Love to Eat." He went through magazines, made a collage 
of his favorite food, and mailed it to her. She did the same and mailed her collage back to him. 

It is certainly not the same as working on a project with your child, but it was an exchange the 
daughter looked forward to. She liked organizing them for her father, and it helped strengthen 
the bond between them. 

Question: Is there any correlation between the new federal fatherhood initiative and the work 
you are doing? 

Lee: The President and his administration are looking at how to strengthen fathers roles in 
children' lives. The President talked about this population of children in his State of the Union 
address in January 2002. People are starting to pay attention to how you can strengthen that 
relationship and why it is important. 

Comment: I am director of a Head Start program in Seattle. We find that, when we do an 
activity that is meant to include fathers, brothers, grandfathers, and a wide variety of other males 
come. We have never taken into consideration how we can minister to children who do not have 
a father or whose fathers are incarcerated. 

Lee: People get creative. Mazza just gave an example of people within prisons finding creative 
ways to parent. Here is another story: A mother and father who were dealing with an adolescent 
with a lot of behavior problems set up a behavior modification program. If he did everything he 
was supposed to do during that week, he got the 15-minute phone call all to himself That was 
very successful. 



500 



506 



PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



We need to find ways to encourage one-on-one activities or facilitate visitation. The barrier in 
terms of transportation is not just distance; it is physically how to get from here to there. Is 
public transportation available? Most prisons are out in the middle of nowhere, and families 
living under the poverty level do not have cars. If you are looking for opportunities to facilitate 
those relationships, getting them there is half the battle. 

Question: Can either of you offer assistance about how to explain to a child why the parent is 
not there? 

Mazza: We spend an enormous amount of time on that. There is no concept of family secrets. 
We often ask fathers to think back to when they were children and their parents kept secrets 
from them. It is healthier and more honest for children to know that father is in jail, and he has 
to stay there, because he did something he should not have done. Keep it general. If it is a 
horrible crime, there is no need to tell the child the specifics. However, they do need to know. 
One day some aunt, uncle, or in-law who does not like the father is going to tell the mother. 

You know, that bum has been in jail for 5 years."" The child needs to know beforehand. 

That is an issue right now with Anthony. Both parents agreed that he should be told. He is 
going to a private grade school and the mother is afraid, because he is so chatty, of him telling 
everyone in class and being stigmatized by the other children. Because everyone else in the class 
is White she does not want to reinforce the image that Latino men are all crooks. She under- 
stands it is important for him to know, but she is fearful of the consequences. We are going to 
try to work on that in a family session. 

Lee: The most successful parenting programs start with taking responsibility. That is session 
Number 1 . 1 was at a federal prison last week where the inmates talked about why it was 
important to take responsibility for why they were there and be able to communicate that to 
their children. 

Question: Is there any coordination between what the incarcerated father would say and what 
the mother says to the child? 

Mazza: There has to be. It is confusing enough to the child. Despite how the mother and father 
feel about each other, they have to coordinate their efforts together and give the child the same 
message. If there is a difference of opinion, I usually negotiate that individually. I usually do not 
have a family session. I am doing a session with Anthony"s family because there is an issue of 
why the mother does not want to tell the child. The reality is that the parent who is caring for 
the child generally has the final say. We talk a lot about that. The father is in prison, the child"s 
mother has the child 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The fathers cannot give back-seat advice of 
how they want the child raised. 

Coininent: I work with Head Start in Montgomery County, Maryland. Each year we have an 
estimated dozen children with an incarcerated parent. Our psychologists generally work with 
the mother to help her know what to say. However, we never know what is happening in prison; 
the only way to get to that is through the family. 

Question: I am curious about programs that help the parent and child when the father or 
mother is released from prison. Like the case of Anthony where the father was the primary 
caregiver, he has problems adjusting to his father leaving him. Are there programs that help 
people in that transition? 




ERIC 



501 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Mazza: I just received a research grant on this issue. I am studying seven families for 6 months. I 
am looking at the expectations of the incarcerated parent and the expectations of the families 
and how these adjust in the first 6 months. 

We tell the men they cannot make up for the lost time. Lost time is lost time. Second, they 
cannot walk into the household saying, "Daddy's home. Things are going back to the way they 
used to be." They have to adjust themselves to the way the household has become, whether they 
like it or not. Once the family starts reconstituting itself, all of the relationships are going to be 
affected and change will happen, but the change cannot come initially. They cannot decide there 
will be a different bedtime just because they want a different bedtime. 

Lee: We are only just looking at reentry programs in general. The first glance was employability. 
How do we make sure people coming back into communities have jobs? Now they are starting 
to look at how to reintegrate them into their communities and families. People are starting to 
look at how they can do that, but there is no broad-based work taking place. It is an opportunity 
to be able to shape that effectively. 

Question: In the research, the teacher component is coming up. Teachers have to learn to talk 
to and support children who want their teachers to know what the family may not want them 
to. How do you deal with those levels of communication? The next step will be that of including 
teachers as part of a system of care for children. 

Mazza: Teachers have to become insightful and honest about what that stirs up within them. 
People tell me all the time that I am crazy, or that they admire the fact that I teach in a maxi- 
mum-security prison. These people have never been in a prison. It is probably the safest class- 
room I have ever been in in my life. People have this image of what prison is like, what prisoners 
are like, what families of prisoners are like. We need to come to grips with our own potential 
prejudices, because that is going to influence our relationships with the children. 

Lee: One of the best ways to put this is, "Why punish the children?" Our reaction to them and 
the stigma being attached to them is punishment of an innocent victim. We need to start there 
in our support of children of incarcerated parents. 





PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



Perspectives From Providers of Services to Families 
and Their Children Experiencing Domestic Violence 

CHAIR: Harry Wright 

PRESENTERS: Sandra Graham-Bermann, Alicia Lieberman, Joy Osofsky 

Harry Wright: Welcome to the session on Perspectives from Providers of Services to Families 
and Their Children Experiencing Domestic Violence. We have a wonderful panel who has 
experience working with children and families who are affected by domestic violence. I will 
introduce the panel in the order in which they will speak. 

Sandra Graham-Bermann is a professor in the Department of Psychology at the University of 
Michigan. She is also Director of the Interdisciplinary Research Program .on Violence. She has a 
recent book titled Violence in the Lives of Children. 

The second speaker will be Joy Osofsky, Professor of Public Health and Psychiatry at the 
Louisiana State University Health Science Center. She is also Director of the Harris Program and 
currently Vice-President and President-Elect of the Zero to Three organization. 

The third speaker will be Alicia Lieberman, who is Professor of Psychiatry at the University of 
California, at San Francisco. She is Director of the Child Trauma Research Project at the univer- 
sity and her expertise is working with children with trauma. 

Sandra Graham-Bermann: Thank you. I am going to talk about an intervention program for 
children exposed to domestic violence. I want to start by addressing the prevalence of domestic 
violence in the lives of children, some of the effects, and then, the intervention program that 
I directed. 

The first studies that were conducted on the topics of domestic violence in the lives of 
children were in the 1970s. The research examined the issue of violence, particularly hitting or 
physical violence and childhood aggression resulting from childhood exposure to that form of 
abuse. The outcome data showed that an association existed between aggression and exposure to 
violence in the home. A direct effect model characterized those studies, however, we now know 
that there i^ more to the picture. An expanded model, still with a direct effect paradigm, shows 
that domestic violence includes a number of factors, such as physical violence, emotional 
maltreatment, and sexual assault, and that trauma may exist whether the child has been an 
eyewitness to these events, or not. 

Outcomes can also be expanded to include whether the child who has been exposed to 
violence becomes more aggressive and if he or she suffers lags in general social-emotional 
development, for example, in social relationships with others, emotion regulation, regulation 
when exposed to trauma, and the development of resiliency. Are there some children who 
manage to survive relatively intact? Among those who have trouble in the beginning, do some 
become resilient? Are they better able to cope over time? Is there any way we can evaluate that 
aspect of the problem? 

One of the first studies on battered women and their children, who were not living in 
shelters, consisted of a sample of people from the greater Washington community in Michigan. 
There were 221 families with children between 5 and 13 years of age. They were mostly low- 
income families, but there was variation between those who had no money and those who 
could get by. There was a range of ethnicities represented in the study, but half of the children, 
48%, were from minority families; that is, African American, biracial, or Latino families. The 
average age of the children was 8 V 2 years. The average age of mothers was about 33 years. Most 
of the mothers had completed high school and often they had some additional training, 
including technical training. 




509 



503 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



The measures of domestic violence exposure used for the study included the Violence Against 
Women Scale, created by Linda Marshall (1992), which is the gold standard for assessing 
violence in the lives of women. The evaluations were completed at three separate time points at 
five sites. We wanted to know whether children who had witnessed the abuse had experienced 
traumatic reactions, as there is a difference between having witnessed the violence and being 
terribly upset and damaged by it. 

We then examined the violence demographics, which is a new area. How many violent 
partners has the mother had? Did the mother of the child become injured during the violence? 
How long was the relationship? How much did the violence affect the child? Is there still 
contact? We found that mothers may leave the abusive partner, but that the children often 
remain in the relationship with the abuser. 

These were some of the significant findings. Mothers reported that 96 times in the last year 
there was an incident of coercion, that number breaks down to approximately twice a week. 
Again, the children are witnessing the coercion. Threats occurred 46 times a year, about once a 
week. Now realize, a threat can have the same effect as continual abuse by someone. If you raise 
your hand to someone after they have been abused or beaten, it can retraumatize the person and 
have a terrible effect. Sexual assault, ranging from unwanted touching to rape, happened about 
every other week. Mild violence, meaning pushing, shoving, slapping, or hitting happened 19 
times a year. The number of events of severe violence, that is, beaten up or injured, was 11 times 
per year or nearly once every month. 

Our sample of mothers were those who were severely exposed to violence, which is unusual. 
Often, people study domestic violence and they include arguments that all of us have in our 
relationships. We should, therefore, be cautious about what is being measured. Interestingly, the 
length of the relationship was almost the entire life of the child. The average age of a child in the 
study was 8 V 2 years and the average length of the relationship with the abuser was about 10 
years. Eighteen percent of the mothers were still living with a violent partner and 69% had 
contact every other day on average. 

Even though the mother has left the batterer it does not necessarily mean that the child is no 
longer exposed to the violence. Some mothers told us that the abuser was the child's babysitter, 
so how could they ask him to leave. The fathers are part of the picture, whether or not the 
mothers consider themselves to have separated from the abuser. 

There are many types of exposure to violence. Thirty-six percent of the children in our sample 
were physically abused and 4% were sexually abused. The history of family violence as well as 
the context of ongoing mild violence, coercion, and threats creates an environment for the child 
that is difficult to cope with and that hinders the child from recovering. People talk about post- 
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as though the traumatic event happened once and then ended. 
That is a misnomer. PTSD is a chronic condition for children who are growing up in families 
with violence. What is the impact on the mother? We know that a number of women die when 
they are beaten and abused. Eight women in Michigan die each month from domestic violence. 
That number has not fluctuated significantly over time and it is not unusually high. 

We are beginning to study injuries— the effects of injuries and the kinds of injuries that 
women have as a result of domestic violence. Numerous studies by emergency room care 
workers are starting to document domestic violence injuries, and certainly anxiety. Seventy 
percent of the mothers and 12% of the children in our study had an injury that required 
attention, 0.05 % of the partners did. So, when we read that there are equal amounts of conflict 
between men and women the results of those conflicts are hardly even. 

Most battered women are emotionally traumatized, particularly in the more severe cases. 
Women who are battered tend to have lower self-esteem and the violence they experience 
negatively impacts their parent efficacy. It is much harder for them to maintain a household. 
Imagine trying to save your own life on top of trying to keep order in the house and trying to 
keep things quiet. In that context, parenting becomes incredibly difficult and stressful. Mothers 
are depressed and they are often socially isolated. I had a graduate student who did her disserta- 




510 



504 



PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



tion on the work of battered women. She found that many of the women were restricted from 
leaving the home to make money and advance their lives. 

We have come a long way in understanding the impact of domestic violence on the child. At 
least half of the children exposed to domestic violence show symptoms in the clinical range for 
internalizing problems such as depression, low self-esteem, and anxiety. There are trauma 
symptoms and actual PTSD. PTSD victims tend to have more difficulty with social skills. The 
ways that these children have seen conflict resolved is unproductive and inappropriate when it is 
transposed to the school setting. 

In our current study of 3- to 5-year-old children enrolled in Head Start programs in Jackson, a 
town in Hillsdale County, Michigan, approximately 40% of the families were affected by 
domestic violence. About 38% of these children are also exposed to severe violence in their 
communities and these are small cities and urban rural communities. Therefore, it is a salient 
issue for children in Head Start, as well as for their families. 

Children who grow up in a family with violence have different expectations about their 
future than children from better functioning families. They have an unusual perception of what 
it means to be a man or a woman, a mother or a father, and a boy or a girl. Most children in the 
intervention program present a rosy picture when asked to describe their families in the future. 

However, we also have children who are traumatized by what they have experienced. They 
cannot imagine a normal family in the future. One 8-year-old girl who lived in a shelter in Ann 
Arbor told us that she did not want to get married because she was afraid that she would pick 
the wrong man. There was a 6-year-old boy who drew a picture of his family with two people in 
it. We asked him who the people in the picture were. He answered that is was he and his mother. 
We asked him what they were thinking. He told us that his^mother was happy because she had a 
nice family. He said that he felt silly because it was weird to be dead. When asked what his 
mother was feeling, he said that his mother was sad because he was dead. We asked him how he 
felt, and he said that he was mad because he was dead. We asked what happened before, and he 
said, "I was alive. I was happy. I died of cancer and my mom got hit." There is this conflation of 
negative things happening in the family. 

I want to discuss the results from two studies of traumatic exposure. The first study was with 
children living in shelters in the community, a combined sample. The second study was an 
intervention study of children from families afflicted by severe domestic violence. We asked 
mothers to talk about 1 7 symptoms that are listed in the DSM-IV to describe their children s 
traumatic reactions. This is not the most reliable measure, but it is one way to obtain relevant 
data. Since then, we have begun to develop more age-appropriate measures. 

The DSM-IV criteria for PTSD are based upon mothers' reports of children exposed to 
violence and disturbed by violence and the symptoms that persisted in the children past 1 
month. According to these criteria, we found that 52% of the children in study 1 and 77% of the 
children in the intervention study had symptoms of traumatic reexperiencing. These symptoms 
included nightmares, flashbacks of events they did not want to remember, intrusive play, 
suddenly having themes of violence occur, and being able to complete a given task. 

It is difficult for children to avoid being exposed to domestic violence because they are taken 
to places by their parents and are ultimately under their parents' supervision. They do not 
riecessarily choose or decide where they want to go. We have found that they avoided people or 
situations that reminded them of the violence. In one of our studies, 60% exhibited avoidance 
behaviors. Think of the children who witness abuse every other day. They do not have a chance 
to recover or avoid the circumstances. 

For studies 1 and 2, 42% and 85%, respectively, experienced traumatic arousal. They were 
physiologically aroused and startled easily when reminded of circumstances related to the 
violence. To put these numbers in perspective, 13% of the children in the first study and 51% in 
the intervention study had full-blown post-traumatic stress disorder, which is defined as people 
who have seen horrific events outside the realm of normal human experience. These children go 
to school everyday and they try to move on and deal with their lives. This makes the case for 




ERIC 



505 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/ CONVERSATION HOURS 



specific forms of intervention that are curtailed to each child and their needs. Some children 
seem to be coping. Others are in trouble. How can we make sense of that? 

We clustered particular outcome measures of child behavior, checklist scores, the Child 
Development Inventory (CDl), depression, and positive outcomes of self-worth and social self- 
competence from children's self-reports. Teachers and mothers evaluated their children on the 
Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL). We found five different profiles of child adjustment. Younger 
children are more at risk for having severe problems because of their age. They cannot make 
sense of the abuse and they cannot get away from it. 

Twenty-four percent of children in the study of 221 families had severe problems. They had 
high internalizing problems, high externalizing problems, moderate levels of depression, and 
low competence. This is compared with about 2% in the national average. Eighteen percent had 
moderate-level problems. Nine percent had only depression. These children had low internaliz- 
ing and externalizing problems, low competence, and they were clearly depressed. A number of 
these children were suicidal. You may not think about young children as having this t)^e of an 
outcome, but it is possible. 

About 25% of the children in our study appeared to be doing fine. They did not show 
particularly high self-regard, but they did not appear to have many problems as well. Although 
we cannot predict their future, at the time of the assessment they were managing. Twenty-two 
percent displayed high regard, but they also had some serious problems. This is an interesting 
group of children; They had false positives. They report that all is going well even though this is 
not supported by their scores. 

To determine if a child needs help is not a straightforward task. When assessing the effects of 
violence on a child's adjustment, there are numerous factors that determine the outcomes in a 
child. The risk factors can include temperament issues of the child, poverty, community, expo- 
sure to violence, and lack of resources. 

Our intervention program consists of 10 sessions and a parenting component. We are 
currently adapting a few more sessions for children who are in shelters. In the Kids Club, a 
program with a component for both 3- to 5-year-olds and school-age children, we try to 
improve children's social skills and help them to identify their feelings and their fears. We want 
the children to enhance their coping skills and safety planning skills. We help them understand 
conflict resolution, placing an emphasis on the fact that the abuse is not their fault. The self- 
blame issue is a salient one. We try to help them think a little bit about families and what they 
can be like in the future. 

For these children, having a chance to share their issues and receive support from others is 
important. In one study, 52% of the mothers reported that they did not talk to their children 
following a violent episode. These children receive no information about the event. About 10% 
of the mothers implied that the child was to blame. In my opinion, in addition to working with 
parents, the group paradigm is essential for working with children. 

In our children's group sessions there are two group leaders, five to seven children in each 
group, and the groups mn about 45 minutes to 1 hour. There was real success when the mother 
was included in the treatment. We were with these families for a number of years and we learned 
much about their lives. The children were assessed at three time points: (a) before the interven- 
tion, (b) at the end of the 10-week program, and (c) 9 months later, which is approximately a 1- 
year follow up. 

We were able to reduce the children's internalizing symptoms such as anxiety. There was also 
success with externalizing symptoms. Trauma symptoms decreased significantly for children 
who participated in the intervention. They were able to identify their anger, although this 
technique is considered controversial. The children were more cooperative, able to show more 
support for the people in the group, more likely to be included, and more likely to show 
empathy towards other individuals. These are all important social outcome variables. 

However, we were not able to affect depression. The high-regard group displayed a significant 
change over time, where their problems replaced the high esteem that they had reported prior to 



ERIC 




506 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



the intervention. That was something to examine and consider further. These children do not 
present with many problems, they look like they are doing well, but they may get worse. In 
a 1 on, there were some areas related to temperament, such as impulsivity, reactivity to other 
people, and getting frustrated, that the intervention program did not address. Overall, the 
program ma e significant changes in children's behaviors and their emotional outcomes It 
reduced severe problems by more than half and affected approximately half the children who 
had moderate problems. 

The results to the longitudinal study with preschool children are not available at this time 
Ihe study examines community violence and media violence as well as family violence. 

Joy Osofsl^: The tide of my presentadon is "Community Outreach for Children Exposed to 
omes 1 C lolence: Relevance for Head Start." I will begin by talking briefly about the broader 
^olence mte^ention program I am involved with in order to provide the context and, then 
discuss specific aspects we focused on in our work related to education, consultation, treatment 
m child care, and Head Start programs. I will finish by talking about an unusual program in 
Miami for which I am a consultant. This will give you a sense of the different types of activities 

The Violence Intervention Program (VIP) for children and families uses a systems approach 
o prevent violence VIP works with the whole community: (a) schools, (b) parents, (c) child- 
are centers, (d) police, (e) religious institutions, and (f) community agencies. The underlying 
belief of the program is that there must be change in communities in order to prevent violence 
The program started m 1992, and it has been 10 years since our initial needs assessment of 

police, children, parents, and teachers in which we attempted to measure the level of violence in 
tne community. 

A program for educating police about the impact of violence on children was developed 
based on the needs assessment. Most of the training is done during their roll call and when we 
talk to them about how violence impacts children. We use the officers' experiences of going out 
on calls m which children have been traumatized; it has been an effective approach. We also 
have a 24-hour hotline for families and members of the community. 

In 1998, VIP joined Cops for Kids, a summer program that was started by the police 
They were concerned about the children who were out of school and contributing to juvenile 
crime. The pr^ram is based on what the police officers had heard during our talks— how 
fo ' violence and what can be done to help them. The children in the Cops 

for Kids program range ffom 6 to 17 years of age. In the morning, they work on academics or 

^eTwhere foey^fv^*'^ afternoon, they are taken on trips to places outside of the 

Over the first two summers of the program's implementation. Cops for Kids found a remark- 
able decrease in juvenile cnme. During the first summer they found a 45% decrease and in the 
second summer there was a 55% decrease in the additional areas impacted by the program The 
police said it was a result of the children's raised level of awareness about violence In 2000 the 
program was expanded through Safe Start. 

Safe Start is a program designed to reduce and prevent exposure to violence ffom 0-5 years. It 
provides training for police officers, community agencies, and child-care providers There are 
services for young, traumatized children, especially those exposed to domestic violence We 
trained professionals working with the program to pay more attention to the children who were 
pr^en when responding to a call and not only the women. If they identify a child who has 
ifficulues, foey can refer the child to us for treatment or overall case management and services 
We also have an initiative with the child abuse unit of the police department where we 
provide training consultation, and services. Most of the child abuse cases handled by the unit 
involve young children, so this program has an early impact on the child. In addition to training 
units m the New Orleans police department, we conduct training sessions with school resource 



513 



507 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



officers. We have given presentations with trained police officers at the Department of Justice 
and we also provide national consultations for Safe Start and violence prevention programs. 

Recently, we have expanded our work with the police and have become involved with the 
Early Trauma Treatment Network. This network has four sites around the country and is pio- 
neered by Alicia Lieberman in San Francisco, Betsy McAlister-Groves in Boston, and myself and 
Charles Zeanah at two sites in New Orleans. We are attempting to develop state-of-the-art 
assessment and treatment protocols for young, traumatized children. The other area of expan- 
sion comes from a Packard Foundation grant, and studies the co-occurrence of child maltreat- 
ment and domestic violence. We are attempting to develop protocols that can be used within 
police departments to gather the information that will allow us to identify and reach children at 
an earlier age. Our interventions with young children who have been identified take place in our 
infant and child clinic as well as schools. Head Start, child-care centers, and other locations in 
the community. The aim of the intervention is to decrease violence through early intervention, 
counseling; services to victims; and education forums for police, parents, children, teachers, and 
child-care providers. 

1 want to share some of our police data from 1999. The majority of the 464 police officers we 
surveyed made referrals to VIP. Only 43% of the officers had not made a referral. We provide all 
of our services free of charge. Usually the police go into the community and hand out VIP cards 
and hotline call cards. Then, the families will call in, which is the most appropriate way to 
receive referrals. Fifty-five percent of the police said that most of the time children were present 
during the violence and only 22% said children were rarely present. 

One of the purposes of the Packard Foundation grant, where 1 am working jointly with John 
Fantuzzo and Wanda Mohr, is to adjust police protocols to obtain more information about 
children who are exposed to domestic violence. The revised protocol that we have submitted 
contains the following questions; (a) Are the children present? (b) What is the age and sex of the 
children who are present? (c) Are the children in the same room when they wimess the event? 
and (d) Are the children also victims? The answers to these questions give us better data from 
the police department in order to provide optimal services. 

When we asked the police if children who wimessed domestic violence show the same signs 
of distress as children who are physically abused, 64% stated that this is the case. They agreed 
that domestic violence has as significant an impact on children as child abuse. Seventy-five 
percent of the officers disagreed with the statement that babies are not affected by wimessing 
violence, as they are too young to understand what is happening. It is not clear if this perception 
resulted from the training, but it does appear that with training the officers become more aware 
of the effects on violence on children. 

Our training for Head Start parents and staff included the following: (a) reviewing t)T5es of 
violence and how children are exposed, (b) discussing the impact of violence on young chil- 
dren, (c) addressing how certain factors will influence the intensity of children's responses, 

(d) teaching how to respond to an exposed child, and (e) learning when and where to refer for 
professional services. We feel that Head Start is a highly appropriate group to train as there are 
many young children in Head Start centers who are exposed to violence. Through Safe Start, we 
conducted 15 training sessions with 115 staff members, including 16 home visitors, 30 directors 
and supervisors, 42 social workers, and 27 teachers, and 99 parents at eight different centers. 
After the training our qualitative evaluation found that 72% of the staff said they were much 
more aware of the effects of violence on children and 66% found the information useful. Sixty- 
five percent of the parents reported that after the training they were better equipped to protect 
children from exposure to violence. Almost the entire group of parents and staff understood that 
if children are affected by violence, they should talk with them about it. 

Those of us who have been working in the area of trauma know that what happened in 
New York City and Washington, DC was awfiil, and a huge number of families and young 
children were traumatized. Children who live in communities with violence are traumatized 





508 



PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



every single day of Aeir lives. It is a different type of experience, but terror does exist in their 

communrnes. People need more education about how to identify trauma in children and help 
tJiese children earlier. ^ . 

Starting Secure, a program funded by the Louisiana State University (LSU) Tulane Medical 
Centers, IS another program that provides intervention and services for child-care facilities It is 
essentially an intervention, evaluation, and treatment program that provides an array of clinical 
services, sue as individual treatment, consultation, and close observations. About 75% of the 
Stamng Secure work is with eight Head Start or Early Head Start centers. At these, many of the 
children, approximately 580, are considered high risk. All the services are provided on site 
I want to talk briefly about Safe Start in Miami, because it is a unique program. The project 
irector IS )mn Katz, and Judge Cindy Lederman provides the court oversight through the 11th 

implementation plan was to establish and maintain the first juvenile 
court and early intervention collaborative program for infants and toddlers who have been 

^posed to inolence. The program works with a Head Start program that is devoted to children 
who come through the court system. 

Many of these children are referred to Dependency court, which is for children who are 
abused and neglected. The majority of the children are under the age of 5 years with an over- 

Tvef ^ is to expand services to the 

over 300 Head Start children and their families. The program includes several components; 

■ 1 ^ integration of the Safe Child Program (an education program) 

into the Head Start curricula, (c) resources for mental health referrals to Head Start clinicians, 
c f support of the site activities in Head Start centers countywide. 

I he Safe Start model involves the training of Head Start staff on the Safe Child classroom 

S^TnfamA^^^^ ^ tTi?''? k administration of a 3-hour training module 

rh lH ^ f developmental issues, and effects of exposure to violence on 

children They have built m a research component for these court-referred cases and there is IRB 
approval for pre- and postevaluations. The results are shared with the Head Start social worker 
for case planning. This training model has been disseminated. The Safe Start team and the Head 
Start team work to connect eligible children with Part C services. They also work on a smooth 
transition from Early Head Start to Head Start. 

I want to leave you with a few points in regards to working with young children exposed to 
dcmes„c volence. Firs, of all, patience is needed. Traunta requires patience; IlaZaTo 
requires a supportive group of coworkers because the work itself can be traumatizing to the 
caregivers, to the day-care center providers, and to all the individuals working with the children 
^so, reco^ize that survival is the initial issue for mothers, so the initiative to help the children 

Sable In f r' 7 >-^^^^ber that services should be made 

S Ih n r • across the continuum of events and points of contact with police, courts, 
and shelters that involve a domestic violence case. ^ 

immediately after a domestic violence call, 
hSnl^ 'T T to ’■eqoest services. In this case, our services should 

IhP>n^ If I"" children and families you have to go out into 

the community. If you wait for them to come to you, then you risk the cost of delay It is best to 
reaA a traumatized child within a few months of the trauma, especially if they are young 
tervene and help the family and keep into consideration the support stmetures already in place 
This way, we are less likely to see 8-year-old children with condua and antisocial disordLs. ^ 

Alicia Liebeman: As I was listening to Drs. Graham-Bermann and Osofsky, I was reminded of a 

rsXtXriiS IhTmM h ^ her 3-year-old daughter and told 

us that during the past year, she had become increasingly more withdrawn, had developed 

to^siv^inn?h ' become frightened of separation. The child found it increasingly difficult 

to say good-bye to her mother when she went to preschool. 



O 

ERIC 



5.15 



509 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLES/ CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



As we talked about how all this began, the mother told us that she had experienced a horrific 
battering at the hands of her boyfriend, who had subsequently left. The mother became de- 
pressed by the violence in the relationship and, then, by the loss. The mother sought psychiatric 
help for her symptoms. She told the psychiatrist that she was worried about her child who had 
witnessed the violence. The psychiatrist said that it was better to leave her child alone and not 
discuss the incident with the child because she was so young and she would forget. 

This story is a reminder of how it is not only parents who, in order to protect themselves 
from tremendous guilt or responsibility, will try to believe that children do not understand, will 
develop resilience against, or will forget an episode of violence. Some professionals want to 
deny that young children can suffer to the extent that they do when exposed to traumatic 
situations. 

I direct The Child Trauma Research Project at San Francisco General Hospital. It is located in 
the heart of the mission district, which is a neighborhood composed primarily of immigrant 
families from the working and lower classes. The San Francisco General Hospital is the trauma 
center for all of Northern California and there are referrals for both physical trauma and for 
psychiatric trauma. 

The program is mandated to develop and evaluate different forms of intervention for chil- 
dren of 0-5 years of age who have been exposed to a variety of trauma. Currently, our focus is on 
the specific trauma of witnessing domestic violence. When the families are referred to the 
program there is a prevalence of maternal depression, punitive parenting, chaotic or violent 
family relationships, parental mental illness or substance abuse, and family trauma. By family 
trauma I mean intergenerational difficulties where, for example, the grandparents have wit- 
nessed domestic violence or had a history of abandonment, physical abuse, or contact with the 
foster care system. 

Every immigrant generation has experienced some kind of exposure to violence. Sociocultural 
dislocation occurs among these families for many reasons; some have witnessed war in their 
native countries while others suffer the difficulties of being dislocated from their cultures of 
origin. As these immigrants come to this country they try to adjust to difficult circumstances and 
pervasive poverty, which I believe exacerbates exposure to other risk factors. Poverty in this 
country is not moderated by a safety net that protects families from exposure to crime-ridden 
neighborhoods, inadequate schools, inadequate housing, and lack of transportation. 

In addition, environmental risk factors have an effect on the children in particular areas. One 
is the disruption of biological rhythms. We have found that the youngest babies referred to us, 
who are 3 weeks old, show an inability to regulate their states. TTiey may exhibit inconsolable 
crying, difficulty sleeping, vomiting after feeding, lack of appetite, or turning away from the 
bottle instead of turning towards the bottle even after crying for hunger. In a chaotic environ- 
ment where there is unpredictability and inconsistent care, these babies are unable to develop a 
secure, predictable relationship with their own bodies. That, in turn, is manifested in the 
disruption of their biological rhythms. 

Disturbances in the quality of attachment are a second manifestation of early trauma. One 
point we need to remember is that the parents are also traumatized. Parents who are trauma- 
tized are sometimes unable to get out of their own self-absorption in order to look, understand, 
and respond appropriately to their children's needs; the parent's psychological manifestations of 
trauma can include preoccupation with self, survival, and personal well-being. Another manifes- 
tation of adult trauma is a tendency to get easily overwhelmed by emotional responses. These 
parents are often so busy trying to cope with the demands on themselves that they cannot 
tolerate their own children's demands on them. As a result, they respond either by ignoring their 
children's efforts to get support from them, or by reacting in a violent and punitive fashion, 
which in turn, leads to the children feeling that they cannot rely on their parents. 

Another environmental factor disturbing quality of attachment is the way the parent, instead 
of being a source of protection and security, becomes the source of danger due to the 



er|c 



510 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



unpredictability of domestic violence. A behavior that we have observed in the children and 
families in our program is that parents can suddenly change from being empathic and loving to 
being irritable and punitive. The child never quite knows when to relate to the parent or when 
the parent will change. That is one of the main ideological factors for recreation of disorganized 
and anxious attachments. 

The combination of disruption of biological rhythms and disturbances in quality of attach- 
ment leads to social/emotional difficulties including impassive and uncontrolled behavior, 
aggression, defiance, multiple fears, and hypervigilance. These children always need to monitor 
what is happening in the environment for signs of danger. There is also a constriction in the 
range of affect where these children show a predominance of withdrawal, fear, and anger and 
diminution of the developmental milestones of curiosity, pleasure, joy in living, and joy in 
learning. This lack of affect leads to impaired readiness to learn. 

In our present study with preschool children, we are finding that the mean IQ of the children 
exposed to violence is 90, which is 10 points lower than the normative IQ of 100. How did we 
know that this was a result of exposure to domestic violence and other traumas rather than a 
result of the loss of socioeconomic status of the children? We had a control group and a com- 
parison group matched for ethnicity, maternal education, and family composition. The children 
that we were studying were exposed to violence and living in the mother-headed households 
where the perpetrator had left the home. The children in the control group were also living with 
single mothers. 

We found that the children who were equally poor and lived in equally violent neighbor- 
hoods displayed the same range of risk factors. Yet those children who were not exposed to 
domestic violence had an average IQ of 100. We concluded that exposure to domestic violence 
represents a specific risk factor that impairs readiness to learn. 

We developed a form of intervention called Child/Parents Psychotherapy, which acknowl- 
edges the parent's integral role in the treatment we deliver to the children. In the majority of the 
cases it involves joint sessions with the mother and the child. We are expanding our present 
model to include fathers and in some cases, mothers, fathers, and children together. At this time, 
the core of our model is mother/child psychotherapy where the child has been exposed to the 
mother's battering. 

The primary goal is to promote normal development by encouraging an engagement of the 
mother and the child with present activities and ftiture goals. Sixty-five percent of the mothers in 
our sample had a diagnosis of PTSD and 85% presented clinical levels of depression. These 
women find it difficult to engage in the normal activities of waking up, worWng, going outside, 
taking their children to day care, and making a life for themselves. A great deal of the focus in 
the treatment is going back and forth between the needs of the mother and the needs of the 
child and trying to be simultaneously available to both members of the dyad. 

We talk to the mothers about their strengths, their achievements in the past, and the opportu- 
nities that are available for them. We often go with them to sign up for courses or to teach them 
how to interview for positions. We try to create an atmosphere of hope and possibility. We 
remind them that they can do things to feel better, maintain regular levels of effective arousal, 
and find ways to cope with their unpredictable isolation of affect. We talk about activities that 
we all engage in to make ourselves feel better when we are losing control, such as exercise. 

We establish trust in bodily sensations. Many of these children and their mothers are afraid of 
feeling because it is associated with anxiety and panic. We sit and talk with them as they 
experience feelings and provide emotional support. We intervene in the mother/child relation- 
ships to translate to the mother and the child what each of them is feeling. This approach 
softens misunderstandings, misconceptions, and negative attributions. There is a capacity to 
look at each other from a more empathic point of view. 

Some of the other goals specifically related to trauma include: (a) accurate assessment of 
danger, (b) differentiation between reliving and remembering, (c) normalization of the trau- 




517 



511 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



matic response, (d) placing the traumatic experience in perspective by balancing it with the 
positive aspects of life, and (e) creating a safe environment. 

There are six main modalities of the intervention. We often model protective behaviors 
because of the tendency to underestimate or overestimate danger. Unstructured developmental 
guidance involves talking to mothers and children as they become able to use language to 
express their needs. What is normal development? I cannot overemphasize that when we talk to 
the mothers it is heard by the child, and so, in the process of conversing with the mother we are 
also doing an intervention with the child. We use play, physical contact, and language to achieve 
developmental goals. Interpretation of linking past and present is certainly an important 
component, but it is one that can be used judiciously. We provide emotional support and 
concrete assistance with case management and crisis intervention. 

Much patience is necessary during the intervention because often we make slow progress and 
get discouraged with the existent amount of emotional support. I think that cooperation ^ 
between mental health professionals, teachers, and important people in the child and parents 
lives is necessary to help children overcome the effects of trauma. Thank you very much. 

Wright; We have time for a number of questions. 

Hiram Fitzgerald: My question is for Graham-Bermann. Are there phenomena that require 
more time in order to show substantive changes? Secondly, what is your responsibility as a 
researcher relative to that setting? 

Graham-Bermann: Good questions. Essentially, children present with numerous problems 
regarding how they think about families; how they act socially; how they regulate their emo- 
tions; and what they know about violence, normality and abnormality, expectations and so 
forth. There are, therefore, many approaches to intervention with children. Some are focused, 
such as the programs around trauma where a specific set of symptoms are addressed, but there 
are still underlying issues. Though it is complicated, the broader goal is to include the entire 
community into the solution to the problem. 

There is a complex set of problems to address with each individual child. It is not expected 
that every single child will have the same problems on entry, the same level of problems, or the 
same duration or history. It is also not expected that the program will be able to help every child 
with every problem. It is important to know that there are few evaluations of interventions for 
children exposed to domestic violence. 

There are some interventions that have been done with sample sizes as small as 10 subjects. 
Others are conducted without control groups or comparison groups. How do you know these 
children are different and in what ways? How do you know it is the treatment that makes the 
difference? The circumstances differ for each child; it may be that they just moved or it may be 
that the batterer left. 

Evaluating is essential because we need to know whether our program is effective in general. 
Global measures such as total symptoms are used to assess effectiveness, but for whom the 
treatment has been effective remains a question. Who in those clusters is going to get help and 
who will be left out? Trying to find out whether certain conditions can be addressed is not 
definitive, so it is important to be able to just identify them. It is enough to say that you can 
help most of the children to improve some aspect of their difficulty. You might be able to ease a 
child's severe problem into a moderate problem. But a child's situation still needs additional 
forms of assistance. 

Identifying who is in trouble is what we look at in the parenting intervention part of the Kids 
Club Program. Part of our program attempts to identify additional needs and sometimes it takes 
the whole 10 weeks with the family and child to get the picture. For example, using standard 
measures in an evaluation study you can obtain scores on suicidality to find out who is in the 



512 



518 



PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



clinical range. We had suicidal children in the Kids Club, and this became evident immediately 
instead of at the end of the 10-week program. There should be clinically trained evaluators and 
clinically trained intervention specialists working with the children. We included clinical 
training m the evaluation of this program to ensure that parents get feedback and mental health 
services beyond what is offered at the program. 

These people need help in a number of areas and so referrals should be made for lawyers, for 
psy latric evaluations, for hospitals, and so forth. Since our program was implemented in a 
community setting with exisdng shelter programs, mental health programs, and Catholic Social 
Services, there was a network of places where the resources were available to get the job done. 

Osofsky: I have a comment about that issue as well. One of the interventions that we did was in 
response to a shooting at a preschool involving a domestic violence situation. We did an 
immediate interventiori, talking about the trauma that the children had experienced. For the 
most part the trauma diminished within a week, except for family members of the perpetrator as 
well as for several teachers who had been severely traumatized. 

It may be that the data are being affected by the people who have had more trauma, severe 
ttauma, me chronic kind of loss mat has gone on over time. Differences in a person's affect can 

be a confounding factor in situations where mere is domestic violence, which is difficult to 
control for. 

William McGuigan: I have two questions. In Oregon, it is against me law for domestic violence 
to occur m front of a child. It warrants an automatic arrest for bom parents and is catalogued as 
child abuse. l am wondering if any of your sites operate under mis rule. If so, how well does 
police discretion work? What we have found in Oregon is mat, aimough we have passed mis 
law, me police have a lot of discretion to decide what "in front of me child" means. If me child 

was m me omer room, or if me child was asleep, is me domestic violence still considered in 
front of me child? 

My second question refers to some work mat I have done in an evaluation of a home-visiting 
program. We have looked at families mat have experienced domestic violence over time and 
found mat bom rnomers and famers in a domestic violence situation developed progressively 
more negative views of me child. Have you looked at me parent's view of me child in some of 
me research mat you are doing? 

Lieberman: I would like to answer yes to your last question. I have read a lot about negative 
parental attributions. For me parents, children often represent aspects of mernselves or of a 
situation mat mey cannot tolerate, and mey project mat onto me child. We have seen children 
enacting what me rnomer is saying about mem. I mink mere is a tremendous need for children 
to believe mat me parent is right, to believe me parents. So, it becomes an extraordinarily 
complex clinical problem. One of me interventions mat we do is to talk wim me rnomer about 
how her son or daughter is only a child. It takes a long time because mese are often manifesta- 
tions of deep-seeded mental heaim problems in me parent. 

Osofslty: 'The dual-arrest policy varies state-by-state. It is an issue mat has come up recently, and 
certainly, me domesdc violence advocates are concerned. Often, me rnomer is implicated for 
failure to protect when she is a victim herself I am suspect of mat policy and wonder what kind 
of training police officers have when mey must evaluate mese situations. In our community, as I 
menUoned earlier, mere are trainings for police, however, police are not allowed to make dual- 
arrests wimout a supervisor present. We have domestic violence detectives in each of our police 
distncts. On me one hand witnessing violence traumatizes me child, but on me omer hand, a 
policy like mis can create a situation where children experience double loss, mey lose bom 
parents. Certainly, me training of police officers is very important under mose condidons. 

519 



513 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Graham-Bennann: In Michigan we have not had this particular crisis with the law, though the 
government has posed difficulties in other ways. I want to address the issue of parenting. The 
parenting support groups that are part of the Kids Cluh Program take a much different approach 
to solving the issues around parenting for mothers exposed to domestic violence. We have the 
women meet in groups to talk about their struggles, their concerns, and their hopes. It is 
sometimes hard to keep them focused on the topic, because they are trying to find places to live, 
jobs, and a way out of a difficult situation. But we find they are interested in talking about the 
parenting stresses they experience. They are full of ideas, thoughts, and advice about what works 
and what does not work. We try to bring the women together so that they can support each 
other and receive education from group leaders. It is a different paradigm in that it comes from 
the women and empowers them to go out and try something new. 

Question: I have two questions that relate to this. First, is there any way that we can utilize the 
vast clinical work that Graham- Bermann is doing to help our teachers? Most of the children I 
work with need help with these strategies. The second question relates to the staff that are 
working at Head Start programs. We have found that the staff in Early Head Start programs are 
often victims of domestic violence themselves. How can this clinical material be used to help 
them as well as the teachers? 

Osofsky: It is very difficult sometimes. Even police officers have personal experiences with 
domestic violence. Working with clients on these issues in the way that Lieberman described is 
difficult to administer except by skilled clinicians. In our programs we have skilled clinicians go 
out, do training, and work with the children on-site as well as with the child care providers. 
There is a continuum across and between service providers. What are your thoughts about that 
Alicia? 

Lieberman: I believe in the concept of creating a continuum across service providers and the 
importance of having a range of interventions. These children need an environment that is 
going to be responsive to their symptoms not reactive, where the solutions are not to expel the 
child or make him/her feel "nobody wants me." This probably has a lot to do with the dropout 
rate in school in later years. Sometimes preschools have an active program of mental health 
consultation with day care; a dialogue between the classroom teacher and the mental health 
provider can be important. To echo what Osofsky said, we need that continuum, we need to 
borrow from each other's skills and we need to Imow when to refer as well. 



Question: I was interested in Lieberman's comments regarding work with the fathers. I was 
wondering what kinds of programs of which you are aware that might work with fathers not just 
as an intervention, but as a way of continuing to deal with their family relationships? 

Lieberman: The Family Prevention Fund is a national organization that runs a program located 
in San Francisco. They are interested in the question of prevention and helping men and boys 
talk with each other about issues of anger management and how to express anger and distress in 
their relationships. They are in the process of developing intervention programs that can be 
disseminated in communities. There are, at least in San Francisco, several anger management 
programs for men that are beginning to incorporate components that alert clients to the impact 
of domestic violence on children. The programs also teach ways of speaking with children about 
anger. These are new steps in this direction though I agree, as you say, that much more is 
needed. 

Osofsky: Oliver Williams, at the University of Minnesota, is working to develop programs for 
African American men. His program works to connect the men with leaders in their communi- 



er|c 



514 



520 



PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



ties who can guide them, give them some feedback, and join with them in trying to make 
changes in their families. His paradigm stresses that it is useful that men give the message to 
each other. I think some of the police programs work well because of that component. If a 
policeman says, "This is not acceptable" to the abusive husband, it goes much farther than a 
female therapist sitting down with the wife. It is a different approach. I think his idea of bring- 
ing it back to the community is important. It is the community's responsibility to provide 
resources for families who are struggling with domestic violence, as well as with other issues. 

Question: I was interested in Graham-Bermann s category of high regard and how those 
children appear to get worse as they are exposed to an intervention. 

Graham-Bermann: People cope in a number of ways with tragic events, trauma, and difficult 
circumstances. We all cope and deny in our individual ways. We all have our intellectualizations. 
We manage to get through tough times, and children are no different. 

The children in the high-regard group tend to move to the moderate-problems group, 
meaning that they do not change in the amount of problems they experience. That they lose the 
illusion that everything is going to be fine is part of the intervention; that is, we help children 
recognize and talk about what is happening and how they feel about it. 

What has happened is that the children are not getting worse; they are just getting more in 
touch with what is going on. They do not tend to slide into the severe group. Many of them 
actually went into the "doing-okay" group, where their problems were reduced while their 
defenses dropped. One could say that they have in fact become stronger. 

Interestingly, the groups were not differentiated by the amount of violence that occurred or 
the history of violence in the family. One of the big differences is whether the child witnessed it 
and had a role in it. Did they call 911? Did they try to stop the fight? Was this the kid who got an 
injury? Those were the children with the more severe outcomes. 



O 

ERIC 



52 



515 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Assessment of Parental Emotional Availability: 
Ramifications for Children 

CO-CHAIRS: Kathryn Barnard, Harry Wright 

PRESENTERS: Jo Ann Robinson, Harry Wright, Rebecca Shahmoon Shanok 

Kathy Barnard: Jo Ann Robinson is going to talk about a constructive emotional availability 
that she and several other people have been working on. Rebecca Shahmoon Shanok will 
discuss her work in providing mental health consultation to child care and Head Start agencies 
in New York City. Harry Wright is going to present work that he is doing in his agency, both with 
the rehabilitation center and the hospital, and also in working with autistic children. 

I was interested in looking over the findings the national study of Early Head Start with 17 
sites that some of us having been involved in. I found it interesting that in terms of mental 
health services there was no difference between families use of mental health services in the 
control group and in the intervention group. Twenty percent of them had access to mental 
health services. Yet we know from working with these populations that probably well over half 
of them have mental health issues. 

We have to learn how to address this issue in terms of the resources within our community 
and within our programs of care. Therefore, we have tried to select for presentation some of the 
areas that might be of help toward that end. We thought that it might give you some ideas about 
where resources are available for doing further thinking and training among your staff. 

One of the areas that I have found particularly fascinating in the past year is the concept of 
assessing the emotional vulnerability of both the parent and the child. It seems to me, in ^e 
work we have done in Early Head Start, trying to influence relationships attachment, that if you 
do not have emotional availability of the dyad with each other, it is hard to get anywhere. We 
asked Jo Ann Robinson to give us a summary of the work that she has been doing on emotional 
availability, particularly in thinking about the construct about how to inform front-line workers 
in public health and child care on making observations that will help them understand emo- 
tional availability. 

Rebecca Shanok: I am going to lay the groundwork for the discussion on emotional vitality. 

The program I have been mnning for several decades will serve as the context for discussing 
what relationships mean. We often talk about relationship building in Head Start, but what do 
we mean? What do we mean by relationships that build and grow over time? 

We are now working in three Head Start agencies in New York City on a project called 
Relationships for Growth. I am going to share what the work has taught me. I will include what 
it is that we are all striving for when we work with children to help them get ready for the rest of 
their lives, after they leave us at around the age of 5. 

I would like to begin by having you focus on some young children that you know, children 
that you have confidence in, that you think are going to "make it." Begin to visualize them in 
your minds, and then call to mind that child's primary relationships. Just picture him or her, 
allowing your mind to drift in and out as you are following the sound of my words. Picture the 
interactions between that child and their primary care givers, from the mother diapering the 
child, to a tantmm in a supermarket, and anything in between. Picture the day-to-day events. 
The child that you are calling to mind could be your own child. 

Emotional availability is the foundation of relationships. It is, as we are defining it, vitality. It 
is communication. It is what makes for meaning and it is what brings children into the human 
community or not. It is alive. I decided to name my presentation "Circles of Vitality: Relation- 
ships of Meaning." 





516 



PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



Head Start-Early Childhood Group Therapy; Relationships for Growth Project. The Early 
Childhood Group Therapy (ECGT) program is 36-years-old. It began in New York as a way of 
bringing mental health services into day care centers, and eventually Head Start agencies and other 
preschools. We have worked with just about every ethnic group there is in New York as well as 
inner-city Chicago. Over 5 years, we have had the chance to integrate Early Childhood Group 
Therapy into the Ounce Of Prevention Fund's Beethoven Project in the Robert Taylor Homes. 

We did not have any research until recendy, when we formed a partnership with the Adminis- 
tration for Children's Services in New York (ACS). Therefore for the last 3 years, we have been 
able to run a pilot project with all evaluation components to demonstrate what we have 
believed was true all these years. 

Our mission is to seamlessly interweave mental health that is individualized, developmental, 
and relationship-based into Head Start on a demonstration-basis to benefit both at-risk and 
typically developing children and their families. 

We are trying to take mental health knowledge and transfer it to Head Start staff at all levels: 
family workers as well as teachers and teacher assistants. We are training staff members and also 
placing some of our staff in Head Start centers for many hours per week. One of our staff 
members is there 12 hours a week, another worker 10 hours a week, bringing reflective supervi- 
sion and reflective practices to the Head Start programs. 

Ninety-nine percent of parents, from all the intervention groups served by the three Head 
Start agencies, who were offered peer play groups for their children accepted it. Traditionally, if 
there was a child who was having difficulty, that child would be assessed and then referred for 
outside treatment. Frequently, those referrals did not work well. The statistic— 99% of families 
of all ethnic groups accepting referrals to an onsite peer play group, with virtually no withdraw- 
als— is in itself, remarkable. In Year 1, we treated 95 diagnosable and at-risk children; in Year 2, 
91 children, and in Year 3, 125 diagnosable and at-risk children. The parents, families, workers, 
teachers, and directors work closely with our staff and with the Head Start staff who receive 
training. 

Our program evaluation team is composed of researchers from LaSalle University and 
Columbia University, Mailman School of Public Health. Preliminary analyses of the research 
indicate that children who were selected for the groups had, as one would expect, lower scores 
on protective factors, attachment, initiative, self-control, and play interaction. They also had 
higher scores on problem factors — behavioral concerns, disruptive play behavior, and discon- 
nected play behavior — than their non-group peers. Change scores for girls participating in the 
play groups showed, on average, significantly more change in the desired direction on discon- 
nected behavior play interaction, initiative, attachment, behavioral concerns, and total protective 
factors than girls not participating in the play groups. 

Let me tell you briefly about the play groups. The modality that we use is small peer play 
psychotherapy. We call it peer play groups in Head Start and the families do not have to pay for 
it. To them it seems like it is an extension of Head Start center and the classroom because it is a 
small group. 

Parents like the idea of helping their children and they feel that they are getting personal 
attention, but it is not coming from "your child has this problem and therefore, he needs to get 
this diagnosis." Our emphasis is not diagnosing, although for ourselves we are certainly evaluat- 
ing and trying to see what it is that the children need. However, based on classroom observa- 
tion, we ask, who is not making it in the variety of ways that children need in order to succeed? 
Who is not paying attention? Who does not have friends? Who is irritating the teacher? Who is 
wild? Who does not have language? Who is lying on the floor and not able to arouse himself? 

Whatever the range of difficulties, we take the children into a group. We may not know, when 
they come into play group, exactly what the underlying problems are. We continue to evaluate, 
and engage the parents and the teachers as we are beginning working with the children. The 



O 

ERIC 



523 



517 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



children accompany a person who has become familiar because they have been sitting in the 
classroom watching them. They attend a small group twice a week for 1 hour. 

That is the basic intervention. Of course, we are also working with the teachers and parents in 
the classrooms. We are setting an irresistible context for change, because the teachers are 
beginning to understand children's needs. They come to understand them more intimately and 
more constructively. 

Parents also come to better understand their children's needs. Some parents who are initially 
resistant to having contact with us come to like us because their children like us. The children 
love to go to group. They cannot wait to go once they get to know it and they get to know the 
person who is leading it. Many times parents, who have been wounded by their own earlier 
school experiences, come to see the person who is their child's group leader as a person who is 
there for them and their family. They come to tmst us through the children. 

It is different than the typical mental health model where we say we need the parent before 
we can work with the child. We are not waiting for the parent. We have had the experience that 
even getting written permission from parents does not guarantee accessibility. 

We do outreach in all possible ways, but we do not always get every parent to join in the 
work. Yet, we have been able to see that we can make profound differences for children with this 
modality. We have the impression that when the child grows, he/ she sometimes can find a 
different relationship within his/her own family. 

Let me finish telling you about the preliminary results of the evaluation. The change scores 
for boys participating in the play groups also showed, on average, significantly more change in 
the desired direction on self-control and behavior concerns, with change in total protective 
factors not quite reaching significance, compared with boys not participating in the play groups. 
The girls seem to be taking advantage of this modality more than the boys. However, these are 
preliminary data only. 

To my mind, not being a researcher, even more critical than the evaluation instruments we 
are using, are the impressions of teachers and parents. The teachers and parents unanimously 
feel that their children are growing, and that they are growing in appropriate ways. They feel 
optimistic about the children's potential, and their chances for making it when they get to 
kindergarten. It is the way that we talk about our work and it is the way that they understand it. 

We are also documenting what we call the "ripple effect." We are trying to not only mentor 
staff, but also train them directly. We are also having trainee staff mentor other staff. The goal is 
that over time these mental health attitudes will become seamlessly intertwined with classroom 
practice so that there will be more individualized work with all children in a classroom, not just 
with the children who have designated challenges. 

As I think back on the numbers of children that I have seen over my years being associated 
with this program, I have sometimes wondered to myself, why does peer play psychotherapy 
work as well as it does? We have always thought that if children were going to get therapy, they 
ought to get individual therapy, because that more closely replicates the original attachment 
relationship, particularly for young children. I have been struck repeatedly that many of the 
children make profound developmental leaps in a relatively short period of time. Additionally, 
we are a training program that works with professionals who have little therapy experience. They 
come from all different backgrounds, so they are not only mental health trained people; they are 
also coming from occupational and speech and language therapy, special education, and early 
childhood education. 

I began to realize over time that when there are other children in the therapy, the adult needs 
to control much less. Children fight with each other, grab from each other, pull each other's hair, 
pinch each other, get in each other's faces, and get jealous of each other, so that the atmosphere 
in a peer play psychotherapy room is nothing if it is not alive. There are events happening all the 
time, and it can be quite intense. There is something about that intensity and vitality that often 
does not happen between an adult and a child alone. It does in a family, but traditionally we are 
constantly trying to avoid that. 



O 

ERIC 



518 



524 



PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



Parents, educators, and therapists often prefer to work with children when they are calm, 
pliable, and responsive; when they are in a well-regulated state. However, several types of 
troubled children, by definition, find it difficult to achieve such a state while others maintain 
calm, or they do so at a great cost to their emotional expression. New clinical data indicate that 
it is growth promoting, at the level of brain functioning, for children to communicate and relate 
while in states of high affect, in part because that affect is their intentionality and initiative. This 
is what the terrible two's are about. That struggle could not be there in everybody if it was not 
serving an important purpose. There is something about the vitality of those exchanges that 
is critical. 

Many times when we talk about vitality in relationships, and certainly when we talk about 
attachment in relationships, most of us fade into, "things are nice and calm and everything is 
sweet and loving between people." However, we all know from our own families that the 
argument is just one step away. Terrible or terrific, volatility or vitality— it all depends on how 
we look at it. 

Particularly for the younger the child or the more vulnerable the child, what I am saying is 
true. If we think our job is to help children become pliable, to help them to sit still, pay atten- 
tion, to eat, and to rest on schedule with 10 to 20 peers of the same age, we will definitely think 
that some of them are going through a terrible stage. Even worse, we are going to think some of 
them are terrible. However, if we recognize that every child is different, that every child needs to 
discover her own boundaries, his own creativity, her own patterns within relationships available 
to her on a daily/hourly basis, then we are on our way to recognizing what is terrific in each 
child. Children are supposed to be filled with gusto, animation, triumph, the discovery of 
boundaries, and the play of language, which we call symbolism. 

The last two are the hallmarks of what it is to be intentional. I work with autistic children in 
my private practice. There is nothing more chilling than to see a child who has no intention or 
does not want to do anything. 

An intentional child does not want to wear her jacket when it is freezing out. She is alive. 
There is something about intentional children that is vibrant. The interchanges that are going to 
take place with a caregiver are going to be alive and vital. We want that kind of intentionality 
and vitality. They are supposed to have that gusto and animation. These are hallmarks of what it 
is to be an engaged and intelligent human being. You cannot imagine somebody having 
curiosity and intelligence, unless they have drive to do something and they want to go for 
something. We want people who are curious, and who can grow up to love learning. 

This cannot happen by being constantly docile. Think of what we expect in our classrooms. 
Think about the wonderful children I asked you to picture in your heads. They do not always 
want to sit still at circle time. They do not always want to follow directions. The younger they 
are, the more vulnerable they are, and the less they will be able to achieve what we are expecting 
in many of our classrooms. It can be messy, noisy, bumpy, and it feels alive. It is fair to say that 
the early years of life may bring children safely into the human community or not. 

Between people there will always be mismatches, misunderstandings, and conflicting desires. 
One person wants the shade up, the other wants the shade down. It is too hot for some, too cold 
for others. I think he is driving too fast. He thinks I drive too slowly. What do we do with the 
mismatches? With children, what they need are adults who are dedicated to repair and who 
have the capacity to respect the child. These adults must be willing to negotiate over many 
issues, although not over everything, and not in every circumstance. There is something about 
the vitality of negotiating, which helps children discover their boundaries, helps them push 
through to their language, and helps them drive through to what they want to figure out about 
how to deal in the wider world. 

In these intense exchanges, each child feels that he has an impact, even if his behavior has to 
be limited. It is the depth of engagement of these highly motivated negotiations which often 
propel children towards more organized expressive and communicative abilities. If one is having 



O 

ERIC 



525 



519 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



an argument with somebody, they are dosing drdes of communication. That communication is 
going back and forth and the child must think about how he will reach his objective. In an 
argument, one is sharing attention in a vital way. We take the attachment, warmth, and 
supportiveness part for granted. 1 am not suggesting that we live only in the worlds of arguments 
and volatility. 1 am suggesting that our dassrooms need to be responsive enough and individual- 
ized enough that these kinds of human dimensions can emerge. We cannot constantly try to get 
children to behave because that squeezes the life out of them. When we value children s inten- 
tions and help them find acceptable ways of getting what they want, there is no reason for them 
to develop aggressive, angry features. r u i j- « 

1 would like to close by briefly discussing "The Emotional Foundations of School Readiness, 
which is a Zero to Three publication. It is a policy publication, but in the development of the 
publication, people on the board and staff spent several years trying to come up with what we 
think children need to have in order to be ready for kindergarten. There are the seven emo- 
tional/social characteristics that people from many different perspectives agreed upon as being 



critically important. . • u i 

Making a difference in the lives of children ultimately means helping them succeed m school. 

Seven competencies were identified as critical to learning in school: (a) relatedness, (b) the 
capacity to communicate, (c) cooperativeness, (d) confidence, (e) curiosity, (f) intentionality, 

and (g) self-control. n u- i r 

1 want to call your attention to one competency in particular: confidence. We usually think ot 

this as something people have within themselves. 1 particularly love this lists definition of 
confidence: a sense of control and mastery of one's body, behavior, and world. A child's sense 
that he or she is more likely than not to succeed at what he or she undertakes, and that adults 

will be helpful. . . . . < , . j 

None of these characteristics exists in a vacuum. They exist in relationship to the world outside, 
and children need to feel that the adults around them know them and know what it is they are 
intending— what their goals are for the moment, for the hour, for the day. They need to feel that 
the adults will partner with them in ways that feel alive, even when the adult has a different idea 
than they, and that the adult will be respectful enough to let their individuality emerge. 



Jo Ann Robinson: Shanok and 1 share a core set of beliefs in the importance of emotional 
vitality. 1 will try to hit on that periodically as 1 take you through the framework that I have 
adapted from a series of scales created by Zeynep Biringen, Robert Emde, and myself in the late 
1980s and early 1990s. 1 call this a clinical application of the Emotional Availability Scales 
because it is a much more holistic and dyadic way of considering relationships. It was adapted 
from a set of scales that were developed for research. 

First 1 am going to give a little background about emotional availability, and discuss those 
scales. 1 will take a dyadic approach of conceptualizing the concept. Emotional availability has 
been written about for quite some time, originally by Margaret Mahler, referring to the support 
or presence of the mother as evident during the practicing sub-phase of development of the 
child going away. That involves turning around, coming back, looking for mother, looking for 
reassurance, coming back, and then getting that support. The mother is emotionally available to 
the child during that time, and she communicates this to the child. That is, the child has the 
confidence that she will be there and that she will be open and supportive upon return. 

Emde began talking about emotional availability, initially discussing the importance of 
emotional availability as reflecting the emphatic presence of the therapist. The role of the 
therapist is to convey that emotional availability, that sense of acceptance to their client, shaping 
them in a way that is constructive, and does not continue to repeat the harmful experiences that 
they may be dealing with. 

Emde began thinking about the importance of the mother's availability to the child and 
wrote a couple of papers. He did some manipulations where mothers read newspapers, and he 



526 



520 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



observed what the children were doing during that imposed unavailability. One of the innova- 
tions introduced, when referring to emotional availability, was the concept that it is a dyadic 
construct. It is not the property of an individual. It is the property of a relationship and it is 
being continually recreated, rebuilt, and re-experienced in a relationship. 

It is important to know that while I may think of myself as an emotionally available person, I 
am not emotionally available all the time, with all people, in all situations. There are some 
people and some circumstances in which I can be highly available, and others in which I feel 
more threatened and my availability is retracted. It is not extended so easily. It is important to 
have that in mind when we begin looking at relationships, , either with co-workers or between 
mothers and children. There are circumstances that support availability and there are circum- 
stances that detract from it. It refers to the openness and acceptance of the dyad to emotional 
communication. I have already alluded to that when I mentioned Emde's work in the therapeu- 
tic context. But this is very much a part of parent/child relationships — whether or not an adult, a 
parent, or a caregiver is willing to hear negative affect and negative communications. Those are 
the kinds of communications that adults tend to want to shut down, to quiet, to calm because 
they arouse emotional experiences for themselves that they may be less comfortable with. 

The dyad's interest and pleasure of engaging each other is the hallmark of an emotionally 
available relationship. You see children getting into a playful rh 3 Thm with their mothers, 
whether it is introducing peek-a-boo in late infancy, or catching their mother's eye in order to 
communicate a desire for food or drink. 

They are delighting each other. They are acting in ways that they know are going to make each 
other happy. One only does that in a relationship in which one expects that to happen. If one is 
not certain of whether or not one can bring a smile to someone's face, one might not take the 
risk to do it. If one knows that it is not acceptable, one will not do it at all. Those are features of 
dyadic behavior on which I am particularly intent when observing a relationship. 

I want to talk about the dyad's motivation to be in the interactive space. The interactive space 
is the space between you and me. It is not here with me or there with you, but rather, it is this 
space in between. I am in it and I have a vitality that I am trying to bring into it to keep the 
other person there with me, reacting to what I am doing, giving me some feedback. What is 
happening between us is in the interactive space. If I turn away, and I start working on my 
computer, that is not particularly of any importance to our relationship, except insofar as it 
keeps me out of the interactive space. We want to have the space between two people as our 
focus, not necessarily one person or the other. 

A second feature is the expression of affect in the dyad. We are looking at the timing and the 
rhythm of affect as it is expressed by the two partners, either sequentially or jointly. A paper that 
I published in 1993 in Memll-Palmer Quarterly looked at the issue of maternal sensitivity with 
sons and daughters. One of the more interesting findings was that more sensitive mothers of 
sons tended to follow their son's lead in matching affect. Little boys got excited and tlieir 
mothers got excited. That happened over and over again when mothers were more sensitive. 

However, more sensitive mothers of daughters actually let their daughters match them. The 
mother would show something to the little girl and she would get delighted. Then, the mother 
would move onto something else, and the daughter would become delighted again. What was 
particularly interesting in those data is that we repeated observations 6 months later, 18 months 
later and, then 24 months later. 

We found that daughters matching mother's affect was predictive of mother's later sensitivity 
above and beyond what her sensitivity already was at 18 months. Daughters were really helping 
to create the emotional availability, and the sensitivity of their mothers. 

In a similar but differently patterned way, mothers and their sons were creating a different 
pattern, which many women will resonate with when they think about their adult relationships 
with men and how much they applaud, support, and encourage the men that they are with. This 
is something that may be predictable and expected from men who have had sensitive mothers. 





521 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



The third feature is the dyad's ability to sustain rhythmic and pleasurable interactions. The 
hallmark of a sensitive mother and an available child is that they can engage in little rituals, games, 
or moments of shared pleasure. The child is initiating something that she predictably knows will 
bring joy to the mother, and the mother, similarly, will act in ways that delight the child. 

I am going to show you a videotape to illustrate these three ideas: motivation to be in the 
interactive space, expression of affect in the dyad, and the ability to sustain rhythmic interaction, 
give and take, [referring to the videotape] That is a 12~month-old girl. She is the first-born for 
her mother. This is a moment of shifting agendas. The child is becoming interested. Mother is 
starting to focus in on the sorting toy. Is mother going to come back and follow the child's lead 
or is she going to persevere? Mother is still trying but she is not being intrusive about what she 
wants to do, and she finally goes to where the child is. 

What you were seeing in terms of rhythmic interaction we would call "closing communica- 
tion loops," where the mother would say something, the little girl would echo, and the mother 
would come back one more time, and provide a coda to that communication. The mother saw 
something, the little girl echoed, and the mother put closure to it. When the squeaky door 
opened, the little girl turned around and mother was right there commenting on it, and giving 
her a feeling of being with her while she was wondering what was going on with that door. 

The mother was more often following the child. She spent a few moments preparing the 
sorting task. Were we to watch further, we would see the mother gently bring the child's interest 
to the sorting task. They were never out of rhythm. There was a period of time where the rhythm 
slowed down, as they were both directing their attention elsewhere, but then they came back, 
with the child turning the page and the mother making these wonderful gentle comments on 
each page. 

Now other dyads are much more of the sort to which Shanok was alluding: highly expressive, 
very emotive, and quite vibrant. You are seeing the gentle version of emotional availability, 
particularly the little girl's use of these interesting bids to mother about what she was seeing in 
the book. 

In the research scales that were developed there are five sub-scales: three parent and two 
child. I want to highlight the parallel between parental sensitivity and child responsiveness. We 
are looking at parent sensitivity to actions that the child initiates, child responsiveness to actions 
that the mother initiates, parental structuring, child involvement of parent, and child coming 
into the interactive space. 

We are always looking at coming into the space — the initiations of it and then the responses 
to it in the dyad. When we talk about parental sensitivity at its highest or more optimal level, we 
are talking about expressions of genuine positive affect ^at are congruent across verbal and 
non-verbal channels. With families that are in distress, often words and affect do not match, or 
actions and words do not match. 

However, when we are talking about sensitivity, they are congruent, so that there is an 
accurate reading and contingent responding to the child's expressions and feelings. There is 
acceptance of the child's ideas and expressions that are reflected in imitation. There was much 
imitation in this dyad of the mother commenting on the book and the child echoing a slightly 
hybrid response. 

The mother would pick up that rhythm and she would imitate it back to the child. When I 
am concerned about mother sensitivity or father sensitivity, I am looking at whether I am seeing 
any imitation and elaboration of the child's actions or expressions. Parental sensitivity also 
includes ideas about timing, and this mother had beautiful timing with this child. It was not 
hurried nor was it so spacious that one wondered when somebody was going to do something. 
Rather, there was a clear motivation to continue interacting with each other. 

There is an ability to negotiate and resolve conflictual aspects of interaction. This is particu- 
larly true in the therapeutic play situation, where children are brought to a sense of trust and 
security when they realize that there is a way out of conflict that is not necessarily hurtful or 



522 



528 



PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



punitive. They realize that one can move through conflict and come back to have pleasurable 
interaction with somebody again. Of course, that requires a fair amount of flexibility. 

WL .n we think about parental structuring, we are talking about the extent to which the adult, 
or the caregiver, can scaffold activities for child success. When this mother was playing with her 
child, she was not asking very much of the child. The child opened the book pages at her own 
pace, and then the mother would give a little comment that might sustain the child's attention. 
Or the child might make a comment, and then the mother would elaborate or imitate, again 
sustaining interest. The mother followed the child's lead in play. 

We look to limit setting to regulate behavior. In Shanok's tape, the therapist said, "Oh, not so 
hard." That was limit setting. She did not want the behavior to continue to escalate and repeat 
some hurtful experience for the child. We also look at parental hostility: primarily covert and 
overt. With covert, we see this frequently with depressed mothers, where they will be impatient 
with the child and be fairly abmpt in the way in which they handle materials. There may also be 
some teasing of the child. With overt sarcasm, we are seeing teasing with an edge that is making 
us uncomfortable as observers, and we may see physical roughness. 

Turning to the child side, we are looking at the child's acceptance of parental bids. Are they 
eager and interested in what the parent or the caregiver has to offer? The little girl, especially in 
the first few minutes, was watching wherever her mother's hands went. When they went near the 
bag, she was looking and ready to be interested in what came next. They did have a period of 
less engagement, but then they came back together. We see in the responsive child, in the 
emotionally available child, an eagerness to engage with the parent. That eagerness is reflected 
in pleasure and the sustaining of interaction, as well as a willingness to be involved. When we 
share visual contact with someone, we are doing something that is quite intimate, and we do 
not tend to do that with people from whom we are disconnected. We only do it with people 
with whom we are trying to have connection. That leads to the child involving the parent, and 
the question of whether or not the child makes the parent an audience. This child is very verbal, 
although she is not using words yet. She has a lot of jargon, and even if that jargon is not 
directed to the mother or caregiver, it is a way of making the parent an audience to them. It is 
saying, "I am making a comment. Do you hear it?" A sensitive parent will hear it and reflect it 
back, so that almost anything that the child utters can become an intentional moment of 
communication. It is the parent that communicates the intentionality because if the parent 
ignores it, the child's interest in creating that moment with the parent slowly fades away. Do 
they use the parent as a resource when help is needed? Do they use clear communicative bids 
that include visual, vocal, and gestural cues? 

I am going to talk briefly about the dyadic way of thinking about these scales. I have taken 
you through the individual way, which is what we had to do in order to get reliability for 
research purposes, so we could have reliability for each of the five sub-scales. For clinical work — 
and I am viewing clinical work as training with therapists, public health nurses, educators, early 
childhood educators, and social services workers— I want you to grasp a general idea about what 
the dyad conveyed. This dyad was communicating high emotional availability to us, the first 
categories. They appeared to be motivated to interact. They had an abundance of positive affect. 
We did not see negative affect, but when it happened in a high emotionally available dyad, it did 
not derail the interaction. They were able to sustain rhythmic interactions that included mo- 
ments of shared pleasure. No hostility was observed. 

I have this philosophy. It is kind of reductionistic, but it is basically that two-thirds of the 
world's parents are good enough in terms of emotional availability. They are not necessarily 
spectacular. They may not have a completely consistent motivation to interact with their 
children, but they are often, sometimes too often, ready and able to be there with the child. 

They may have lots of neutrality in their interaction, but they may also have these moments 
where the light goes on, and you can see that the child enjoys those moments with the parent. 
They may be occasionally able to sustain rhythmic interactions, and brief shared pleasure is 



529 



523 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



observed. There have to be some of these moments of delight in an interaction in order for that 
experience to be good enough for a child. They do not have to be all the time but they must be 
enough to sustain development in a positive way. This is the good-enough emotional availabil- 
ity category. 

The third category is mixed emotional availability. We are heading into the zone of families at 
risk and families and children who are struggling at a particular point in time. With a mixed 
dyad, they may appear to be mismatched. I see this most commonly in foster parent and child 
relationships, where you may have a child who feels turned off and a foster parent who is 
working hard to be sensitive and available to the child in a fairly therapeutic way. Similarly I 
have also seen children who are working with a foster parent to engage them and to make them 
available to them, and the foster parent is fairly turned off. 

Another hallmark of mixed emotional availability is the mixture of affects that may include 
some pronounced negativity, particularly of the child having an explosive moment of frustration 
directed at the adult, or the adult having an explosive moment of irritation or frustration with 
the child. Rhythmic interactions are only attained briefly, if at all, and the interaction falls apart 
when either of the members challenges it. Both covert and overt adult hostility can be observed. 
This category for clinical practice or for intervention is particularly interesting because we can 
identify where the points of strengths and vulnerability are in the relationship, and begin to 
work with the strengths that we are seeing. 

We are highly concerned about a dyad that falls into the last category, low emotional avail- 
ability. We are concerned about the lack of motivation to interact with each other, the flatness of 
affect, the abundance of negative affect, the inability to sustain rhythmic interactions, and/or the 
level of hostility. If they are not in some kind of therapeutic context, we will want to recommend 
that they begin therapy. These interactions cause great pain to observers and, therefore, are quite 
easy to identify. More difficult are some of the distinctions between a good-enough dyad and a 
dyad that is quite high on emotional availability, or alternatively, a good-enough dyad and a 
dyad that is showing mixed emotional availability. With this clinical framework, I can become 
much more descriptive and intentional in adapting them for use in clinical practice. 

Harry Wright: I am going to talk about the clinical applications of some of these concepts in 
different settings. The overwhelming majority of our families will probably fall into the category 
of mixed or low emotional availability. Very few of the dyads that we see in our settings would 
fall into the high emotional availability cluster. Much of what we want to do with our trainees is 
to help them understand something about emotional availability and how to intervene to 
increase the emotional availability within the dyad and address the parenting issues. In our 
training and our teaching, most of this is discussed through the parenting aspects. 

Also keep in mind that in our setting, most of the trainees are physicians and others who 
have had a lot of experience with individual children. However, they have hardly any experience 
with parents and no experience with dyads. Much of the work we do is to help them gain an 
understanding about the dyadic relationship and what is happening in it. 

That is the background, and I am going to talk about a situation in a preschool that is 
somewhat similar to what Shanok discussed. Our preschool is in a pediatric rehabilitation 
center, which is a different situation for how we go about trying to infuse mental health con- 
cepts into the work with therapists who work with children with significant developmental 
difficulties. Most have not had much experience with young children. Therefore, we talk about 
how there is an interactive process between parents or caregivers and children and how that 
impacts the child. The other issue is that most trainees, particularly physicians, want the answer 
for how to do it. One of the issues we have to work on is talking about how there is no single 
cohesive theory about this. However, there is some consistency in how people think about 
adequate parenting versus inadequate parenting. Additionally, the parent/ child relationship is 
distinct from the characteristics of the individual parent or the individual child. Certainly a 
majority of our work has to do with the major goal of our programs, which is to improve the 





PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



quality of the parent/child relationship. We also talk about the separate observations that people 
have of the parent's and of the child's behavior. 

However, we want them to learn how to observe the dyadic relationship, which they have not 
been accustomed to looking at — the relationship between the individual parent and the indi- 
vidual child. We do it in a way where some people are in the room and some are behind a 
rotating mirror. If one is behind the mirror, he or she will get the advantage of being able to 
have a dialogue while the process is going on. They also spend some time in the room. This is in 
the context of sustenance, a categorical way of looking at parents and children, and trying to 
help them think about the dyadic relationship. 

These are issues that they normally think about, as well as physical care, and social and 
cognitive stimulation. We want them to think about the relationship with the caregivers, the 
parents, the preschool teachers, and the other care providers (e.g., in the rehabilitation centers 
where therapists provide services to parents). All of this is getting our particular population of 
trainees to focus on the dyadic relationship rather than the individual child and the individual 
parent. 

Let us move to thinking about the various components of our assessment, in looking at 
culture and subculture, and how that impacts economic adversity. A large percentage of the 
children in families we see are from poor families and are influenced by the larger family system 
as well as by siblings and by others. We have a group situation in our therapeutic program and 
so there are peers present who are preschool children. Genetic influences are certainly an issue 
for us in our medical setting. 

I am going to discuss several of the clinical settings in which we see young children, specifi- 
cally, the therapeutic preschool programs and the pediatric rehabilitation center. Our preschool 
(this is our 26th year of having a preschool program) is a program for children 2-5 years of age 
and it is usually skewed in one age direction or the other at any particular time. It is usually hot 
the whole age range. It is 3 hours a day and the children stay up to 12 weeks in the program. 

Most of the children are also involved in another program because they are often referred from 
Head Start, a child care program, a preschool program, or a pediatric or mental health clinic. 

The program includes a range of features similar to what Shanok discussed earlier: primary care 
providers within the preschool, and a number of other people who come in and out to provide 
various services for the parent, for the child, as well as for the parent and child together. Our 
trainees are involved in every aspect of the process. 

The best way to talk about some of this is to talk about it within the context of two different 
cases in the preschool program. The first is a 3V2-year-old African-American boy diagnosed with 
autism. He has an older brother of 7 who also has a diagnosis of autism. This is a family that is 
fairly stressed, having two children with autism. This child was referred from a preschool 
program when he was just turning 3 because he had significant difficulties in participating with 
other children, and was also having tantrums every 5 minutes. 

Basically they were at a loss for what to do with this young boy. The mother saw him as not 
having severe difficulties at the preschool because the older autistic brother was much more 
severely affected. In terms of looking at the younger son, she saw his behavior as much less 
problematic and was befuddled by the preschool's comments. He had no or few verbal words, 
although he communicated non-verbally reasonably well. However, the preschool and others 
did not appreciate this non-verbal communication and that was one of the issues around the 
tantrums that he had— people missed his non-verbal cues. They were not sufficiently observant 
to see his attempts at communication. When he came to our setting, we had a staff of two 
people in a group of typically five or six children. Our staff was not appreciating this child's 
attempts to communicate non-verbally and in other ways either. We worked with our staff 
because we wanted them to be at a point where they could work with the mother and the other 
preschool. We did this as part of our process of looking at the interactions between the child, the 
parent, and the caregivers. That was our first effort to look at that. 



ERIC 




525 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Our staff understood the importance of giving him time to respond, and then looking for the 
response. Once they began to do that, it became clear that many of the tantrums were related to 
the mismatch between observing his responses and what he was trying to communicate. When 
that happened, his tantrum behavior went from every 5 minutes to once or twice a day in our 
setting. However, it was still happening in the other settings at a significant rate. The next step 
was to work with the mother and the preschool program to find ways to enhance the communi- 
cative process. Over a period time they were able to do that and improve. 

Over a period of 6 weeks, he went from being a child who was having tantrums all the time 
to having, maybe, one tantrum a day. He approached people when they came into the preschool 
program and communicated in the way he knew how, non-verbally, by being excited and 
showing people the activities that he was doing. Our staff was amazed at the dramatic iniprove- 
ment that he made. The emotional availability of people and the corresponding responsiveness 
is the concept around it. Just working in that setting with this young boy was more helpful than 
anything else we could have discussed. That is one example. 

The other example in the preschool is a 4-year-old who did not talk. She had elective mutism. 
She would talk at home with her parents. One of the most difficult experiences for professionals 
who work with young children is dealing with the children who do not talk or do not eat. The 
person has no control over a child that neither eats nor talks. Often, others speak for a child 
who does not talk. It is hard to be able to look at what is going on with a child who is not 
talking. Many times you begin to see it as oppositional behavior, when in fact, it is anxiety. Part 
of working with staff and parents is that it usually is not an issue because the child talks with 
parents. In working with the staff of the preschool and our own staff, it was important to get 
them to think about the idea of "not talking" in a different way. Instead of seeing the child as 
being oppositional, they had to consider that the child could be feeling anxious for some 
reason. We had to address why the child was anxious in those settings. 

In this situation, the mother was also very anxious, and in settings where the child did not 
talk, she was so anxious that she would not look at the child's attempt to communicate and the 
child's anxiety. Part of our work with the mother was to help her look at the child's anxiety and 
lok at how her own anxiety interacted with the child's anxiety, which created a situation where it 
was less likely for the child. 

In our situation, we were trying to create an environment where there was a better match. In 
other words, we were trying to change the emotional availability of the parent/child dyad and of 
the other caregiver/ child dyads. 

The next example is a slightly different group, a pediatric rehabilitation center where young 
children who have cerebral palsy and other developmental problems come for speech and 
language therapy, occupational therapy, and physical therapy. The therapists have been trained 
to work with children in this setting. We got involved with the rehabilitation centers because of 
a research project that we had done earlier to identify the major problem that parents of 
children with behavioral and developmental problems were having. 

A second issue for the parents was that they had multiple appointments each week with their 
child. Our idea was to try to work with therapists to help them address the behavioral and 
developmental issues that came up during therapy in a way that would be positive for the family 
and for the therapists. We surveyed therapists and they said that mental health problems always 
came up. However, they would usually change the subject to something else because they did 
not want to address the issue. They thought that they would have to fix it immediately. Conse- 
quently, a big part of our work with therapists had to do with helping them look at the relation- 
ships that they had with the child and with the parent, and with the parent and child in the 
therapy setting. It took us 1 'A years to work with therapists so that they felt comfortable being 
able to address mental health issues that came up. We also created a situatiori where they were 
no longer out there alone. They always had a backup person to call if something came up that 
they felt they were not qualified to address. 

O 53,2 

ERIC 526 



PA RENTING/ FAMILIES 



We also created a situation where they could easily refer families to a mental health setting. 
However, that rarely occurred over the long-run, as Shanok mentioned. Over a period of time, 
we would have meetings with the therapy group twice a month to talk about the families and 
their therapy. Initially, there were many questions and conversations between those of us who 
were the consultants, and the therapists. Over the course of 1-2 years, it became a situation 
where the therapists were problem-solving for each other. The consultants were there, but we 
were observing. This was the ideal situation to get to, in terms of their feeling comfortable in 
that setting. Their relationship with the parent, and their relationship with the child, also im- 
proved the relationship of the parent and child. We did a research project there and one of the 
interesting results was that we thought there was going to be change in the problem situations. It 
turned out there was no change over the course of the therapy in the number of problem 
situations, but in looking at the relationship in parent/child relationships, parents (about 68%) 
had an increase in their comfort level in dealing with the situation with their handicapped child. 

We thought that was great even though we had no change in the number of problems that 
children were presenting over the course of time. Trying to get our trainees to focus on the 
relationship was the major focus of both these programs. 

Barnard: We have heard about constructive emotional vitality and emotional availability, and 
how they have been utilized in peer play, as well as in terms of looking at parents in a popula- 
tion of community cases and in a rehabilitation center. 

Question: Do you think it is possible to adopt this kind of training for parents whose children 
are involved in abuse? 

Shanok: We do not think of the work that we do with parents as training. We think of it as 
outreach. We come to parents from a strength-centered perspective. For example, to parents who 
consider their child to be aggressive, we would say, "Your child is filled with energy and get-up- 
and-go. What is it like for you at home?" However, we do not do the introduction ourselves. The 
introduction is made by whomever in the center knows the parent best and then we come on 
the scene. We try to understand how the parent feels. They may bring it up as a problem, in 
which case it is easy to say we have an intervention that will help. However, if they do not, we 
stay where they are. That is the beginning. Then we try to help parents to want to come to us. 

We see a wide range of children and a wide range of parents. With some of the cases, we find 
that before long we identify that the reason that the child has problems — and this is an extreme 
situation — is that the child is being abused. How we do outreach with that kind of a family, 
where we are increasingly aware that the child is between a rock and a hard place and that we 
have to take legal action, calls on us to respond in a different way. 

We are working with parents as individuals, and increasingly working with the Head Start 
centers as they are getting to know us and trust us enough. We are hoping to begin doing more 
general parent programming, parent meetings, activities with fathers, and so forth. I do not 
think of it as training, and the population of parents— the sub-group within Head Start that we 
are identifying — are all people who have some specialized challenges. Either there is something 
that is happening with them that is part of the reason that the child is having some difficulties, 
or they have a child with significant constitutional challenges that have been relatively ignored. 
They are living with the problem in their house, and we are trying to find a way of helping them 
to be as responsive as they can to that child. One of the reasons that we can sometimes be quite 
successful is that we get to know, from the parent's angle, what they are struggling with. Then it 
becomes easier to pass on guidance, because the guidance is something that you know is working. 

Sometimes we move into working with the parent and child together. Let us say there is a 
situation where both the parent and the child witnessed some sort of trauma, which is not an 
unusual situation for us to find out as we get to know the parent. Many times they have not 




527 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLES/ CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



digested it— neither one of them alone and certainly not as a couple— so they are unable to 
support each other. We work with the parent and the child. Then we offer to work with the 
parent and the child together, to begin to acknowledge that somebody went to jail or whatever 
the loss or trauma was. We work with them so that they can bring communication into their 
relationship. 

We are working with different ethnic groups. 1 learned some things about new immigrant 
Chinese that startled me: In New York City, a fair number of the people with whom we are 
working have their infants here. Then they send their infant to China at the age of a couple of 
months with somebody who is a stranger to the child. The family knows them, but the child 
does not. They send the child to one or another set of their parents. The child is raised by those 
people for 2-272 years. As soon as they get a place in Head Start, the child is sent back with 
another person who is a stranger to them, they arrive in the United States with no English, and 
they are in Head Start the following week. 

Just imagine! Those children do not know their families. They are coming in and living in 
one room of a several room apartment that is being shared with other families. One must be 
aware of this history, and then begin to work with the child to get some language. Then we work 
with the families so that they can come together and acknowledge some of the history, supply us 
with a photograph and a book about their history, and so on. 

Barnard: It is quite common in China for the grandmother to come and take care of the infant 
because the women in China all work. They do have this particular history. 

Shanok: Yes, but to send them to China and then bring them back. It is a series of profound 
separations for the child, which do not get digested. 

Barnard: In China, there are overnight preschools where children are dropped off on Monday 
and then go home on Friday. Is it right or wrong? It is a cultural way. 

Shanok: 1 was astounded. They are just abruptly removed from one place and put somewhere 
else without it making any sense to them. There is sense to it, but not particularly to them. They 
are removed by a stranger and placed with people who are virtual strangers to them. I would riot 
say that all of those children end up with problems. They do not all end up with problems. It is 
digestible at some level, and many of the children can bounce back. However, small group work 
would help them make that transition more smoothly. 

We have had much success with children who have communication challenges, whether it is 
elective mutism, lack of speech development, or a different language. The language tends to 
come in because they want to communicate with their peers so much. 

Barnard: It is certainly my sense that in Early Head Start and Head Start programs, we will 
probably get much further in meeting mental health needs of families and children by working 
within the program, rather than expecting referrals to an outside mental health facility. 

Shanok: My background is in early childhood education. I got my degree in social work and 
then in clinical psychology. Although I did not quite know why I was studying all these different 
fields, I think it was because I had the sense that none of the professions knew enough. Each 
time I had the inspiration to do some more studying, I wanted to go somewhere else. Mental 
health workers need to learn about education. It is not a one-way street. Many people come in 
to do mental health consultation as experts who have knowledge, and that knowledge is only 
shared up to a point. There is not the sense that anybody else can have it. That is something that 
we are trying to shift. 



528 



534 



PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



Comment: Regarding emotional availability on the part of the therapist, including the profes- 
sional, when he comes in, he needs to think about emotional availability issues. As a consultant, 
that is the bridge that one is trying to build within a certain group. 



Comment: I have been in Head Start for a long time. We started a mental health on-site service 
in our program in the last 5 years. At any rate, I see it as an outreach model, but in the naturalis- 
tic setting of the Head Start right after the program ends, or as an at-home visit, building these 
relationships, being available, and having patience. It takes a lot of effort. There is a lot of pain 
involved in just being there through some of these difficult times. Many people that I meet may 
be in the mixed emotional availability range. That is maybe where the change could come. So 
they go from mixed to good-enough and that is thrilling. 

Robinson: Clinically, most of^us have only used it to take a family up to good-enough. Nobody 
is going to pay you to take a family to high emotional availability, but to get them to good- 
enough — it is a wonderful place to go with them. 



O 

ERIC 



535 



529 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Depression in Mothers in Low-Income 
Families: Implications for Children 

CHAIR: Martha J. Zaslow 

DISCUSSANTS: Jane E. Knitzer, Sandra Graham-Bermann, Rena Mohamed 
PRESENTERS: Mary Jo Coiro, Martha J. Zaslow 

■ Maternal Depression and Family Stress as Predictors 
of Child Behavior Problems Among Low-Income Children 

Mary Jo Coiro, Anne W. Riley, Marina Broitman 

Children of parents with major depression are at increased risk for psychopathology, behavior 
problems, and impairments in social and academic functioning. However, some of this correla- 
tion between maternal depression and child well-being may be due to factors associated with, 
but not unique to, maternal depression (Fergusson & Lynskey, 1993; Hammen et al., 1987a, 
1987b). This paper examines the extent to which levels of life stress may be more important 
than maternal diagnostic status in explaining behavior problems and social competence among 
children of depressed mothers. 

This issue is addressed with a sample of low-income, minority mothers and their 4- to 10- 
year-old children. Eighty-six mothers had major depressive disorder, while the remaining 50 had 
similar socioeconomic status yet did not have depression. Mothers were participating in a 
randomized controlled trial of the effectiveness of treating depression among low-income 
women (Miranda, 1996) and a longitudinal study of the effects of these treatments on their 
children (Riley, 1997). Mothers were on average 29.4 years of age and primarily minority (52% 
Latina immigrants, 44% Alrican American). Ninety-four percent were receiving some form of 
income assistance. Children were on average 6 years of age and 46% were boys. 

Women were screened for depression at several primary care clinics and in social service 
settings serving primarily low-income families. Following the screening, the Composite Interna- 
tional Diagnostic Interview (Robins et al., 1988) was administered by phone to confirm either 
the current diagnosis of major depression or that the woman had never had depression. Next 
mothers and children participated in an in-home interview that included a checklist of stressful 
life events and a measure of child behavior problems and social competence (Behavior Assess- 
ment System for Children [BASC]; Reynolds & Kamphaus, 1998). Children's fathers or father 
figures and teachers were interviewed by phone and administered the BASC. 

The following hypotheses were examined: (a) Children of depressed mothers will have more 
behavior problems than children of nondepressed mothers; (b) Children of depressed mothers 
will have experienced more stressful life events; and (c) Much of the association between 
maternal depression and child behavior problems will be accounted for by stress levels. 

As expected, bivariate analyses indicated that children of depressed mothers had significantly 
higher behavior problems and significantly lower adaptive skills on the BASC compared to 
children of nondepressed mothers, according to mother, father, and youth report (but not 
teacher report). Depressed women and their children also experienced significantly more 
stressful life events in the prior year. However, in regression analyses the effect of maternal 
depression on BASC scores was only slightly reduced and remained significant when life stress 
was accounted for. There was also no evidence that life stress moderated the association between 
maternal depression and child behavior. At the 6-month follow up, mothers whose depression 
had remitted reported a decline in the number of stressful events experienced, but this decline 
was not related to children's behavior problems or adaptive skills. Implications for preventing 
and treating behavior problems in this high-risk group of children are discussed. 



O 

ERIC 



530 



536 



PARENTING/ FAMILIES 



References 

Fergusson, D. M„ & Lynskey, M. T. (1993). The effects of maternal depression on child conduct 
disorder and attention deficit behaviours. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 28(3): 116- 
23. 

Hammen, C., Adrian, C., Gordon, D., Burge, D., Jaenicke, C., & Hiroto, D. (1987a). Children of 
depressed mothers: Maternal strain and symptom predictors of dysfunction. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 96, 190-198. 

Hammen, C., Gordon, D., Burge, D., Adrian, C., Jaenicke, C., & Hiroto, D. (1987b). Maternal affective 
disorders, illness, and stress: Risk for children's psychopathology. American Journal of Psychiatry, 

144, 736-741. 

Miranda, J. (1996). Treatment of depression in disadvantaged gynecological patients. Unpublished grant 
application, Georgetown University, Washington, DC. 

Reynolds, C. R., & Kamphaus, R. W. (1998). BASC: Behavior Assessment System for Children. Circle 
Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 

Riley, A. W. (1997). Effects on children of treating maternal depression. Unpublished grant application, 
Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland. 

Robins L. N., Wing, J., Wittchen, H. U., Helzer, J. E., Babor, T. E, Burke, J., Farmer, A., Jablenski, A., 
Pickens, R., Regier, D. A., et al. (1988). The Composite International Diagnostic Interview: An 
epidemiologic instrument suitable for use in conjunction with different diagnostic systems and in 
different cultures. Archives of General Psychiatry, 45, 1069-1077. 



H Child Outcomes in Light of Maternal Depressive Symptoms and 
Low Literacy in a Sample of Families Receiving Welfare 

Elizabeth C. Hair, Martha J. Zaslow 

As welfare caseloads decline, it is increasingly important to understand the characteristics of 
families continuing to receive public assistance. In this study, we focus on two characteristics of 
mothers receiving welfare that may impede the transition to employment: maternal depressive 
symptoms and low literacy. Previous research suggests that these characteristics are more 
prevalent among mothers receiving public assistance than the general population (Danziger et 
al., 1999; De Temple & Snow, 1998; Moore, Zaslow, Coiro, Miller, & Magenheim, 1995). Among 
potential barriers to employment, there is some evidence that these factors may be the most 
prevalent (Olson & Pavetti, 1996). 

Factors characterized as "barriers" to employment in the welfare literature often emerge in the 
developmental literature as risk factors in children's development. We seek to build on existing 
research by asking whether such potential risk factors have implications for the development of 
children in these families as well as for the employment outcomes of the mother. We also ask 
whether the co-occurrence of these risk factors is associated with particular patterns of outcomes 
within the two generations. 

Data come from the JOBS Observational Study, a study of mother-child interactions embed- 
ded within the Child Outcomes Study of the National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work Strategies 
(McGroder, Zaslow, Moore, & I^eMenestrel, 2000). Children in the 351 families of the sample 
were between 3-4 years of age at the start of the study. Outcomes for both mothers and children 
were examined in a 5-year follow up. 

When examining the role of maternal literacy and depressive symptoms, we found that those 
mothers with low literacy and moderate to high depressive symptoms were the least likely to 
have ever worked during the follow-up period. In addition, we found that children of these 
mothers scored lower on reading and math achievement tests. Furthermore, we found that 
children of mothers with moderate to high depressive symptoms had more internalizing 
behavior problems. 



er|c 



537 



531 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Structural equation models provide evidence that parenting behavior mediates the relation- 
ship between the maternal literacy and depressive symptoms and child outcomes. For example, 
we found that high maternal literacy through the active and supportive engagement of the 
mother and child produces children who score higher on math achievement. In contrast, we 
found that maternal depressive symptoms activate a less supportive relationship with the child 
and, therefore, the children tend to score lower on math achievement. In addition, we found 
that the pathways from depressive symptoms through parenting to child outcomes are stronger 
when maternal depressive symptoms co-occur with low maternal literacy. 

The findings raise the possibility that it may be important to examine maternal depressive 
symptoms in combination with other key factors rather than in isolation when considering 
child outcomes and mother-child interaction in families receiving welfare and other low-income 
families. The co-occurrence of depressive symptoms and low literacy may be a particularly 
important combination. Head Start programs seeking to address issues of mental health and 
literacy among parents may want to consider how these two factors operate jointly and how 
they affect both the parent and the child generations. 

R^cvcticcs 

Danziger, S., Corcoran, M., Danziger, S., Heflin, C., Kalil, A., Levine, Rosen, D., Seefeldt, K., Siefert, 
K., &Tolman, R. (1999). Barriers to the employment of welfare recipients. Ann Arbor, MI: University of 
Michigan, Poverty Research & Training Center. 

De Temple, ]., & Snow, C. (1998). Mother-child interactions related to the emergence of literacy. In M. 
J. Zaslow & C. A. Eldred (Eds.), Parenting behavior in a sample of young mothers in poverty: Results of 
the New Chance Observational Study (pp. 114-169). New York: Manpower Demonstration Research 
Corporation. 

McCroder, S. M., Zaslow, M. L, Moore, K. A., & LeMenestrel, S. M. (2000). The national evaluation of 
welfare-to-work strategies: Impacts on young children and their families two years after enrollment: 

Findings from the Child Outcomes Study. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Administration for Children and Families and Office of the Assistant Secretary for 
Planning and Evaluation, and U.S. Department of Education. 

Moore, K. A., Zaslow, M. J., Coiro, M. J., Miller, S. M., & Magenheim, E. B. (1995). How well are they 
faring! AFDC families with preschool-aged children in Atlanta at the outset of the JOBS evaluation. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 

Olson, K., & Pavetti, L. (1996). Personal and family challenges to the successful transition from welfare to 
work. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute. 



DISCUSSANT: Sandra A. Graham-Bermann 

This symposium addresses an important topic, understanding contributions to young children's 
social and emotional adjustment. The two studies have selected maternal depression as the lens 
with which to view children's adjustment. Previous work in this area has not focused on 
mothers in low-income families, on minority families, or on mothers with children in Head 
Start programs. The first study highlights the role of family stress and mothers diagnosed with 
major depressive disorder in accounting for child adjustment. This study relies on a comparative 
design with a second group of nondepressed but similar mothers. The second study relies upon 
depressive symptoms, broadly construed, and mother's parenting and level of literacy to predict 
child behavioral problems. 

Each study takes a different approach and, hence, offers a different explanation of the ways in 
which maternal depression influences children's problems. They also come to different conclu- 
sions— in the first study there was a direct effect of maternal depression on children's problems. 
In the second, there was no direct effect but an interaction effect of depression and maternal 
literacy on children's problems. What can account for these differences and what is left out of 



538 



532 



PARENTING/FAMILIES 



the picture? The sample in each study is sizeable and well selected. The populations are all low- 
income families. In one study the mothers have already sought and/or accepted treatment for 
depression. In the second they are in work-related programs. Yet each study has selected one or 
two additional variables to include in the analysis and they are quite different variables at that — 
mother's literacy, family stress, and parenting skills. 

There are many more possibilities that could be used to account for children's adjustment in 
the face of maternal depression and that could better help us to understand the course of 
appropriate intervention with these families. By applying an ecological systems perspective with 
a developmental psychopathology approach, we can understand both the risk and protective 
factors at each level of the child's environment that serve to mediate and moderate children's 
adjustment. That is, there are individual child factors, such as intelligence or temperament that 
can affect the outcome for a child with a depressed mother. Similarly, there is a host of family- 
level factors (beyond family stress) that are important contributors to both maternal depression 
and child adjustment problems, such as social support or family violence. At the community 
level, the child s and the mother's exposure to violence but also to community resources can 
make a difference in how mothers and children fare. Individual, family, and community 
strengths also work to ameliorate the effects of risks to the mother and the child. 

A much broader and more balanced perspective could allow us to get the full picture of both 
the risks and the strengths of individuals, of families, and of communities that, in concert, 
contribute to the welfare of both mothers and their children. Without this additional informa- 
tion we may be overlooking crucial data, which can render our services less effective. 




539 



Quality Early Education and Child Care 



The Real Question About Home Visiting: 

What Happens? 

CHAIR: Carla A. Peterson 

DISCUSSANTS: Jon E. Korfmacher, ReNae Torbenson 

PRESENTERS: Gayle Luze, Kere Pond Hughes, Lori A. Roggman, Carla A. Peterson 

Recently, Guralnick (1997) suggested that in the effort to enhance program effectiveness we 
needed "second generation" research focused on determining which components of early 
intervention are most beneficial for individual families. 

Home visits are being pervasively used as a vehicle to deliver interventions to young children 
and their families (Gomby, Gulross, & Behrman, 1999; Roberts, Akers, & Behl, 1996; Roberts, 
Wasik, Gasto, & Ramey, 1991) and, therefore, are particularly in need of this "second generation" 
research. Interventions provided via home visits have targeted many different populations and a 
variety of goals. Despite pervasive use of home visiting as a model of service delivery for preven- 
tion and intervention efforts, the efficacy of home-visiting programs for children's future success 
and well-being has been questioned in recent reports (e.g., Gomby, Gulross, & Behrman, 1999). 
However, few studies have provided information about the actual process, content, or quality of 
specific intervention services delivered via home visits. Researchers seem to assume home 
visiting is provided by program staff and received by families in a homogeneous manner. 

Evaluations of home-visiting programs have produced equivocal results. Some studies suggest 
that parent-directed programs are not as effective as child-directed interventions (Gomby, 

Gulross, & Behrman, 1999). Other studies have found the parent-mediated intervention to be 
superior to the therapist-implemented intervention (e.g., Kaiser, Hancock, & Hester, 1998). 
Home-visiting models, however, continue to be critically important. Many Head Start and Early 
Head Start programs use home visits because they are the best service delivery option for 
particular communities and/or families. A program's philosophy regarding the most effective 
ways to assist families and children in meeting their goals may lead to the incorporation of 
home visits. The question, following Guralnick's reasoning, should not be whether to engage in 
the home-visiting intervention model, but rather how to make this model effective 

This symposium presented new methodologies and instmments designed to document the 
implementation of specific interventions, the responses by families, and the associated out- 
comes. Specifically, the first presenter will provide information about observation instruments 
developed to examine the complex interactions that occur within home visits. The second 
presenter will describe a study attempting to implement routines-based early intervention in a 
program serving infants and toddlers with disabilities. Here, implementation was assessed using 
a Fidelity Ghecklist designed for observers to determine the degree to which the home visitor 
utilized components of the model. The third presenter will provide information on (a) the 
process of defining "program quality" within a home-visiting program, (b) the use of that 
definition to guide program implementation and evaluation efforts, and (c) the enhancement of 








534 



540 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



E>1 f resulting data. The fourth paper will present findings regarding the 

relauonships between specific intervention processes and outcomes. Discussants will reflect on 
the implications of this work for program improvement and fiiture research efforts. 

References 

^.®^hrman, R. E. (1999). Home visiting: Recent program evaluations- 

Gu^mck, M. (1997). The Effectiveness of Early Intervention. Baltimore, MD: Paul Brookes Publishing 

""'^Ton of ® ' u co-interventionists: Research on applica- 

D K T D ^ ‘ language teaching procedures. Infants and Young Children, 10, Ml. 

°vU P " ^ ' Family-level service coordination within home 

Siting programs. Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, 16, 279-301. 

Roberts, R. N Wasik, B., Casto, G., & Ramey, G. T. (1991). Family support in the home: Programs, 
policy, and social change. American Psychologist, 46, 131-137. 



■ The Process of Home Visits: Different Views of What Is Happening 

Gayle Luze, Carla Peterson, Su-Yuen Wu ^ 

Providing services to families in their homes is a common model of service delivery for many 
wstf young children and their families. Home-visiting programs oftei^use a 
systems-theory model of interventions that views child outcomes as resulting from parent-child 
nteractions and the experiences that the family provides. Programs working from Ts plpel 

anlSildTir^^^ interrctio^ns! 

nvp!!n of models and programs are utilized, few models have corresponding data on 

overall effectiveness, let alone on the effectiveness of specific model components with Imilies 
of different characteristics, strengths, or needs. Interventionists may plan to implement a 
program but meet with barriers when attempting to turn plans into action. Additionally 
peTted w^>^^ ^ interventionists' efforts as intended and thus respond in unex- 

indicates that while early intervention has been generally found to be more 
tio^l than no intervention, a specific understanding of which components of early interven- 
tion are effective for whom are not yet known. Many recent evaluations of home-visiting 
rnn?pn!T"f^K used rigorous experimental designs but have failed to document the actual 
content of home visits and the populations being served (Gomby, Culross, & Behrman 1999) as 

a program works (Weiss, 1995). A more systematic study of how 
te^ention activities and contexts are related to outcomes is needed to guide intervention 
implementation and policy development (Connell & Kubish, 1996). 

I presents preliminary results from an examination of Early Head Start home visits 

Head^Sta^%mi° and research participants were 95 families enrolled in an Early 

Head Start (EHS) propam that serves families in a rural area. In this program, both a Child ^ 
Development Specialist (CDS) and a Family Development Specialist (FDS) made home visits 

observed during that time to analyze the 

amount of services as well as the type and intensity of services provided for families 
^ observation system was developed to examine three components of home visits: the 
primary interactors (e.g., interventionist, mother, child), the content of the interaction (e.g.. 



ERIC 



535 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



child's development, functioning of family members, employment), and the nature of the 
interventionist's role (e.g., direct teaching with the child, coaching and supporting the parent- 
child interaction, listening, paperwork). 

Analyses of these data examined the amount of time spent in various activities with the 
families as well as how the interventionist worked with the families to implement the interven- 
tion. Preliminary analyses show that most home visits involve the parent and interventionist 
talking about child development with the CDS and family issues with the FDS. There was little 
modeling or coaching of parent-child interactions even though this was an important goal of 
the program. 

References 

Connell, I. P., & Kubisch, A.C. (1999). Applying a theories of change approach to the evaluation of 
comprehensive community initiatives; Progress, prospects, and problems. In K. Fulbright-Ander- 
son, A. C. Kubisch, & I. P. Connell (Eds.), New Approaches to Evaluating Community Initiatives: 

Theory, Measurement, and Analysis. Washington, DC: The Aspen Institute. 

Gomby, D. S., Culross, P. L., & Behrman, R. E. (1999). Home visiting: Recent program evaluations- 
Analysis and recommendations. In R. E. Behrman (Ed.), The Future of Children: Home Visiting: 

Recent Program Evaluations, 9 (pp. 4-26). Los Altos, CA; Center for the Future of Children, David 
and Lucille Packard Foundation. 

Guralnick, M. (1997). The Effectiveness of Early Intervention. Baltimore, MD: Paul Brookes Publishing 
Co. 

Weiss, C. H. (1995). Nothing as practical as good theory: Exploring theory-based evaluation for 

comprehensive community initiatives for children and families. In J. Connell (Ed.), New approaches 
to evaluating community initiatives: Concepts, methods, and contexts. Washington, DC: Aspen Institute. 



■ Examining the Fidelity of Routines-Based 
Intervention Practices During Home Visits 

Kere Hughes, Jean Ann Summers 

The routines-based model for early intervention with infants and toddlers with disabilities 
embeds learning opportunities within the activities and routines of everyday life. It is analogous 
to activity-based approaches in curriculum instruction. Lave and Wenger (1991); Ballard (1986); 
and Dunst, Hamby, Trivette, Raab, and Bruder (2000) describe these learning experiences as 
"situated learning." The basic premise of this approach is that family members can provide 
ongoing intervention to their child if they see it as functional and easily embedded within the 
daily routine (Woods-Cripe, Hanline, & Daley, 1997). The concept is quite compatible with 
Early Head Start's emphasis on helping families learn to incorporate strategies for being in- 
volved with their children into everyday family routine. 

The routines-based approach has not been adequately evaluated, primarily because we do not 
know the degree to which it has been successfully implemented (the "fidelity of implementa- 
tion") in programs adopting this model. Carta and Greenwood (1987) point out that it is not 
possible to make statements or policy decisions as to the value of an intervention when the 
fidelity of its implementation is unknown. This study examined the fidelity of implementation 
of routines-based strategies in a local early intervention program and investigated potential 
barriers. 

Twenty-five interventionists participated in a routines-based intervention training conducted 
by the Family Guided Routines-Based Interventions (FACETS) program (Lindeman & Woods- 
Cripe, 1997) and were observed during home visits over the course of 30 months (189 visits 
across 51 families). Interventionists were rated with a Fidelity Checklist, a checklist containing a 



ERIC 



536 



542 



quality early education and child care 



series of 22 items that focus on both general, effective intervention strategies and strategies 
specific to family routines and parent collaboration. 

Results indicate that strategies relating specifically to parent collaboration and routines were 
not implemented with the same quality as items relating to direct child teaching. While there 
was variance among the interventionists, on the whole they remained child-centered rather than 
family-centered in their approach. Transcripts from eight staff interviews were analyzed to 
produce themes on the barriers that prevented facilitators from incorporating training into 
practice. These fell into three categories; (a) interference or resistance to change due to previous 
training, experience, and expectations, (b) practical or administrative barriers, and (c) expecta- 
dons and beliefs about the parents they were serving. In the case of the last barrier, intervention- 
ists feared they might lose parents as clients if too much were expected of them, or, they believed 
parents might not always be capable of engaging in interventions. In regard to this specifically, 
the study found that perceptions of low parent engagement were not supported by the data and 
that ratings of parent engagement during home visits (as part of the fidelity measurement) were 
relatively high overall. Furthermore, the study found no relationships between level of parents' 
^riS^gement and family risk factors, suggesting that staff concerns about engagement in more 
challenged families were not necessarily warranted. 

References 

Ballard, K. D. (1986). Child learning and development in context: Strategies for analyzing behaviour- 
environment interactions and a proposal for research into everyday experiences. Educational 
Psychology, 6, 123-137. 

Carta, J. J., & Greenwood, C. R. (1987). Process-product analysis; An approach for studying critical 
variables in early intervention. Journal of the Division of Early Childhood, 12, 85-91. 

Dunst, C. J., Hamby, D., Trivette, C. M., Raab, M., & Bruder, M. B. (2000). Everyday family and 

community life and children s naturally occurring learning opportunities. Journal of Early Interven- 
tion, 23, 151-164. 

Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cam- 
bridge University Press. 

Lindeman, D. P, & Woods-Cripe, J. (1997). Family-Guided Approaches to Collaborative Early-Intervention 
Training and Services (FACETS) [Outreach Training Bulletin). Available: http:// 
education.valdosta.edu/facets. 

Woods-Cripe, J., Hanline, M. E, & Daley, S. E. (1997). Preparing practitioners for planning interven- 
tion for natural environments. In P. J. Winton, J. A. McCollum, & C. Catlett (Eds.), Reforming 
personnel preparation in early intervention: Issues, models, and practical strategies (pp. 337-362). 
Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing Co. 



■ Home Visit Quality: Changes Over Time 
in Relation to Future Child Outcomes 

L. A. Roggman, G. A. Cook, L. K. Boyce, A. D. Hart 

Few studies have assessed home-visit quality within home-visiting programs, and even fewer 
have examined changes over time in home-visit quality. Many Early Head Start (EHS) programs 
use home visits to individualize services or to target long-term changes in parent behavior. 
Whatever the reasons for using a home-visiting approach, evaluating home-visit quality is 
valuable for both programs and policy makers. For individual families, changes over time in 
home-visit quality may affect the impact of the program. 

Bear River EHS (BREHS) is a home-visiting program serving low-income Utah/Idaho fami- 
lies. This program's primary goal is to influence parenting and child development by developing 



er|c 



543 



537 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



positive home visitor and parent relationships. BREHS home visits were evaluated in multiple 
ways; staff report, program documentation, and direct observation by researchers. Staff ratings 
were obtained from paper and pencil instruments completed annually by each home visitor on 
each family. Program documentation was obtained from forms completed after each home visit. 
Direct observation ratings were obtained by coding videotaped home visits. 

Home-visit data revealed wide variations and, after feedback to program staff, year to year 
improvements in the quality of home visits. Researcher observations of home-visit videotapes 
showed average increases on a 5-point rating scale from 2.7 to 3.6 in home visitor facilitation of 
positive parent-child interaction and from 3.6 to 4.1 in parent engagement during visits. 
Researcher observations also indicated increased average duration of interactions involving 
home visitor, parent, and child together from 41% to 48% of home-visit time. Program docu- 
mentation showed increases in average visit duration from 64 minutes to 89 minutes and for 
average time spent on child development topics from 69% to 76% of home-visit time. 

Across individual families, staff ratings of home-visit quality were related to more complex 
symbolic play by children, more supportiveness of children's play, more trust in close relation- 
ships, less depression, and more use of social support by mothers when children were 3. The 
average changes in staff ratings of home-visit quality over time indicated only small, and not 
statistically significant, increases. However, increases in home-visit quality for individual 
families were related to higher cognitive-test scores, more complex symbolic play, less aggres- 
sion, fewer behavior problems in children, and more parent involvement in play. An aggregate 
home-visit quality score (alpha = .86) that was computed using multiple variables (number of 
home visits, number of groups attended, visit duration, child focus of visits, family participation 
in EHS activities) was correlated with less maternal depression and more maternal 
supportiveness of the child's play at age 3. 

These results suggest that EHS program staff can benefit from feedback on home-visit quality 
to improve their program. Furthermore, better quality home visits lead to the increase of 
positive outcomes in young children and their parents receiving this service. 



■ Relationships Between Home Visiting Intervention and Outcomes 

Carla A. Peterson, Gayle Luze 

Home visiting has become a pervasive model of service delivery for prevention and intervention 
efforts with young children and their families. According to a recent survey, 86% of early 
intervention services include at least some home-visiting component, and many of these early 
intervention services are provided exclusively through home visits (Roberts, Akers, & Behl, 

1996). A strong rationale for intervening in the home is provided by developmental theories 
(e.g., Bronfenbrenner, 1977) and empirical research findings demonstrating that optimal child 
development occurs within the context of home environments where all family members have 
adequate instrumental and social support to function adequately. This would suggest that if 
home-visiting programs are to foster Ae child's development effectively, they must include two 
essential features. First, intervention strategies must address a wide variety of family needs 
including social support, family member development, meeting basic needs, and parenting 
information. Second, specific parent-child interaction behaviors should be targeted for interven- 
tion. This comprehensive, yet flexible approach is based on an ecological model that views the 
parent-child relationship as embedded within the context of other social relationships and the 
personal well-being and development of the parent/ family as interrelated with the child s 
development and well-being (Halpern, 1993). 

This presentation describes efforts being made to document various aspects of home visits as 
well as examine the relationship between amount and scope of intervention services received 



O 

ERIC 



538 



544 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



and outcomes realized. The Mid-Iowa Community Action, Inc. (MICA) Early Head Start (EHS) 
program serves 75 families in a rural area of central Iowa. The MICA EHS Program has embraced 
a two-generational approach to delivering services targeting both parent/ family and individual 
child outcomes via services delivered by both a Child Development Specialist (CDS) and a 
Family Development Specialist (FDS). 

Observational data to describe the process and content of home visits was collected via the 
Home Visit Observation Form (HVOF) that enables coding of three aspects of the home visit 
during each 30-second observation interval: (a) primary interactors, (b) content of the interac- 
tion, and (c) nature of the interventionist's role. EHS program staff members have also docu- 
mented the amount of time spent in home visits with each family. Data from these two sources 
have been combined to describe the overall amount of time that families have received services 
directed at specific goals. 

These data reveal few systematic relationships between early indicators of child and family 
functioning and content addressed or processes utilized during home visits. However, interven- 
tion efforts directed at child development content are related systematically to better child 
outcomes in cognitive and language development at 36 months. Conversely, intervention efforts 
addressing family's basic needs is related to less optimal child-development outcomes at 36 
months. These results suggest that interventionists could benefit from training to facilitate their 
collaboration with families on setting goals and keeping intervention efforts directed toward 
those goals. In addition, home visitors could benefit from supportive feedback regarding how 
they allocate available intervention time and resources. Implications for research efforts to 
document the intervention delivered (the independent variable) when examining intervention 
outcomes will be discussed. 

References 

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1977). Toward an experimental ecology of human development. American 
Psychologist, 32, 515-531. 

Halpem, R. (1993). The societal context of home visiting and related services for families in poverty. 
Future of Children, 3, 158-171. 

Roberts, R. N., Akers, A. L, & Behl, D. D. (1996). Family-level service coordination within home 
visiting programs. Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, 16, 279-301. 



545 



539 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



Perspectives on Quality Child Care — 

Does It Matter Who You Ask? 

CHAIR: Lisa Klein 

PRESENTERS: Helen H. Raikes, Susan M. Hegland, Jean Ann Summers, Michael Godfrey, 

Lisa Klein, Doris Hallford 

Lisa Klein: Research has shown that there are strong systematic relationships between quality 
child care and developmental outcomes. We also know that even in these days of tight budgets, 
there has been increasing public investment in child care. Unfortunately, over 80% of our 
children are in either low or poor quality care. Today, we have four presentations frotri represen- 
tatives of the Four-State Midwest Research Childcare Consortium. They are going to discuss 
quality child care from four perspectives: (a) the provider, (b) the director, (c) the parents, and 
(d) the children themselves. 

Helen Raikes is an early childhood and youth research specialist with the Gallup organization 
in Lincoln, Nebraska. She also serves as a visiting scholar with the Society for Research in Child 
Development and is a special research consultant on the Early Head Start Research and Evalua- 
tion Project through the Administration on Children, Youth and Families (ACYF). She will speak 
about the correlates of quality indicators from the provider perspective, based on data from 
direct observation and self-report of providers. 

Helen Raikes: I would like to speak to you on provider perspective. I will discuss our study and 
address the issue of learning about quality from the provider's point of view, from at least three 
different angles: (a) what we can learn by observation about quality at the provider level, 

(b) what we can learn about quality from providers through self-reporting of their practices, and 

(c) what we can learn about quality through other available indicators on providers. Some 
demography-related issues we have seen are either proxies for quality or at least indicators for 
quality. Overall, there are many different ways that we can learn from providers. 

Before beginning this discussion, I want to point out the many ways to define "provider." 

One can define provider at the level of the program, classroom, teacher, or home provider. One 
can even define provider as the director, so it is necessary to focus on exacdy who the provider 
is. In our case, we zeroed in on the person who is working with the children, which was the 
home provider or the teacher in the classroom. 

I also want to give a brief overview of the child-care research we are conducting in the 
Midwest Childcare Research Consortium. This four-state consortium represents the Department 
of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Region 7, which includes Kansas, Nebraska, Iowa, and 
Missouri. We have consortium representatives both on the panel and in the audience, and I want 
to acknowledge Kathy Thornberg and any others who represent our consortium. We have a 
rather large consortium of researchers and program partners who are child-care providers in the 
four states where we are involved, as well as some early childhood divisions. The consortium is 
into its second year. We have a 3-year child-care research partnership grant, and we are funded 
by the Childcare Bureau with additional support from the Kauffman Foundation. 

In addition to learning about quality, I want to share the purpose of our research. In Year 1, 
we wanted to learn about quality across our four states from a representative sample of all 
providers, to establish a baseline understanding. In Year 2, our current year, we want to learn 
about quality from a parent's perspective. In Year 3, we hope to do something rather magical. 

We have not determined quite yet how to do it, because we have a need to track quality over 
time. What we had originally intended to do was to develop a set of indicators that our states 
could use to monitor quality on an ongoing basis. At this point, we want to measure it one more 
time and then help them do it. Our states are generating creative proposals, such as developing a 
list of risk and protective factors that they might use on licensing visits to collect data. 



540 



546 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



For our sample, we started with the child-care state licensing lists in all four states, with a 
pool of 40,000 names. We then focused on the month of October 2000. From that point, we 
selected 10,000 names that were stratified according to state, type of care, subsidy or no subsidy, 
and whether or not they were Early Head Start partnerships. We sent letters to these 10,000 
names, alerting them that they might be called and asking them to participate in the study. Then 
the Gallup organization called 2,022 of those providers and completed 12'/2-minute interviews 
on basic indicators of cjuality. Most people cooperated with us, and 88% completed the survey. 
We then conducted in-depth interviews with those survey respondents willing to participate. 

For quality measures, we reviewed factors such as education and wages that had been 
associated with quality in previous child-care quality studies. We included a number of self- 
report quality factors in order to learn more about what providers are perceiving in terms of 
their own quality practices. We completed observations of quality in 365 of the sites and used 
the gold standards: the commonly used Infant-Toddler Environment Rating Scale (ITERS), the 
Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale (ECERS), the Family Day Care Rating Scale (FDCRS) 
and the Arnett Caregiver Interaction Scale. We also pilot-tested and created initial validation data 
for an informal child-care observation form that was developed at the University of Missouri, 
because we are not sure if the FDCRS is the best way to measure quality in family and formal 
child-care settings. 

When we used traditional forms of observation in measuring quality, we found fairly compa- 
rable quality across four types of care. The average ITERS score was 4.39, which is quite good for 
infant-toddler center-based care. The average ECERS score was 4.56 across four states, which is 
fairly common for ECERS scores today. We had a 4.38 average for FDCRS scores for licensed 
family child care, showing that it was fairly comparable and consistent with the other forms of 
care. Our score for unregulated care was 3.61, which is not unexpected for unregulated care. We 
did not have a good sample or a good response rate in our unregulated care sector, so that is a 
factor to consider. Encouragingly, from the figures Klein quoted earlier, 20-40% of the care that 
we observed was good quality; the rest was in either the mediocre or poor quality categories. 

A benefit of using observations as the provider's source of data is that the ECERS/ITERS/ 
FDCRS are great global assessments of quality. They are well-validated, associated with child 
outcomes, and used in many studies to compare one's findings with those of others. There is no 
question that these measures are at the heart of quality assessment today. A "con" is that the 
assessments are expensive to administer and gaining reliability is no small matter. It is difficult 
to get an adequate sample size in order to answer all the questions that you want to ask. Since 
important information emerges from subgroups, a larger sample size is needed. Another 
considerable factor is who refused to participate in the study, which can skew the results toward 
higher quality based on the respondents. We sometimes found that providers did not believe 
that the things we were measuring were the important components of quality, so there is face 
validity to those people who are involved in the study. 

In terms of self-report, we had good cooperation in the 12'/2-minute phone interview, 
learning from providers by asking them to report on their own use of quality practices. Several 
people had conducted telephone interviews in the last couple of years with varying levels of 
success. We took some of our items from this work. I regret now that we did not ask people 
directly how good they think the quality is that they are providing. We thought the social 
desirability of that question would preclude people from giving us honest answers, but I am not 
sure they gave us honest answers anyway. We asked participants 14 questions and formed three 
factors from those questions. 

I will tell you which ones worked and which ones did not. The factors that laid out beauti- 
fully we called reading and learning centers." We had one item oh parent communication and 
another on space and materials. Items that were positively associated with quality were re- 
sponses to the following statements: "Every day, every child in your care is read to," "At least 
once a year, you are able to talk formally to each parent about the child's progress," and "In the 



547 



541 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



child-care setting where you work, there are areas set up for learning." The factor that incorpo- 
rated reading and learning centers and that was also associated significantly with observed 
quality dealt with space, toys, materials, and the number of children in the provider s care. 

A positive aspect of using self-report of quality is that it is easy to measure and allows for 
large samples. Four of our items correlated with quality, but interestingly enough, four of the 
items going beyond even the list that 1 gave you correlated with observed quality on the FDCRS. 
Gaining access to family child care is difficult, so there might be some possibility for using self- 
report of quality in those situations. A negative aspect, however, is that we did not have much 
variance, and there was a social desirability report factor. We had enough variance that we could 
see relationships, but none of the significant relationships were large. Our reporting may not be 
the same thing as quality; we may not yet be tapping into what we were asking about. 

There are many things about providers that we know are good predictors of quality or that 
associate highly with quality. We were eager to learn in our own states whether we could 
measure these things over time and have a read on whether the quality was going up in our 
states, particularly as a function of some new training initiatives implemented by the states. 

With some of these proxies, we learned that certain initiatives seem to impact some providers 
more than others. Overall, there were still some things that tended to cut across all the states 
and all types of care, which we are now beginning to think about less as proxies for quality and 
more as risk and protective factors around quality. Therefore, if several of them are clustered 
together, they might provide a good context for quality. 

In our sample, the things we found to be positively associated with quality were similar to 
findings from other samples. Education tended to associate with quality more for family child 
care than for center-based care. Training hours at certain levels — up to 12 hours which most of 
our states set as the requirement — was associated with a jump in quality. We thou^t maybe 20 
hours would have a better result, but we had to wait until reaching 24 hours of training before 
we saw another jump in quality. An interesting discovery in our Midwestern states was provider 
participation in U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) food programs, because whether or not 
the provider had a CDA was one of our strongest predictors of quality. Another predictor of 
higher quality was provider participation in an Early Head Start or Head Start child-care partner- 
ship. Three of our states are implementing these kinds of partnerships. 

Other factors included (a) if the provider had recent first aid training; (b) if a center-based 
provider received employee benefits, particularly health insurance; (c) if the provider worked in 
an accredited program; and (d) if the provider would do something differently if he/she 
We also asked the question, "If you could do something else, would you?" A response of "no" 
was highly associated with positive quality. 

Higher quality is also associated with having a portion or none of the enrolled children 
receiving subsidies, as opposed to 50% or more of the children as subsidy-receiving in one 
particular facility. Other factors include attitudes and views in the workplace and if the provider 
participates in certain types of training. There were a few types of training that seemed to be 
notably associated with positive quality such as if the home provider participated in a program 
known as EduCare that exists in Missouri and Kansas. Basically the program involved a mentor 
or trainer coming into their home and providing a reward for training. There were some kinds of 
training that seemed to more highly associated with quality than others, but most types of 
training accounted for small increments in quality, which make a difference as they accumulate. 
Another factor is earnings, in which there was a curvilinear relationship. Variables that did not 
have much effect on quality were age and how long providers had been in the field, except for 
very new providers. 

Klein: The next presenter is Susan Hegland. She is an Associate Professor in the Department of 
Human Development and Family Studies and serves as the coordinator for the Child Develop- 
ment Laboratory School at Iowa State University. With a particular focus on the impact of adult 





QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



behavior on the development of children's academic and motivational skills, Hegland will speak 
about the director's perspective. She will be reporting on data from a survey of over 400 child- 
care directors m Iowa who addressed preferred qualifications, salary ranges, benefits, turnover, 
m-service and staff training needs, and the barriers to accessing that training. 

Susan Hegland: This project was fimded by the Head Start collaboration grant. In Iowa we are 
^ng to get a professional development system established. The survey I am reporting on was 
funded m order to get a baseline idea of the needs and the professional qualifications of the 
people caring for Iowa's children. This study was our first effort; we focused on directors of both 
part-time and full-time programs. The entire project is on a website for the Community Devel- 
opment Data Information Analysis Laboratory (CD DIAL) at Iowa State University. 

We obtained names of centers from various lists, the child-care resource and referral agencies, 
e epartment of Human Services, and so forth. We sent a mail survey to directors of centers, 
with a 50% return rate. We adapted a survey that had been used nationally, since the original 35- 
page survey was too long. Our version was cut down to about 20 pages, and it was still too long. 

e result is that our returns came from higher quality programs. We know this because 21% of 
our respondents programs were accredited, and we know the rate in Iowa is closer to 9%. 

We analyzed the data in many different ways. We asked programs to self-dassify whether they 
were for profit or non-profit and whether they were child care, preschool, or both. We have an 
Iowa-funded program like Head Start that we call Shared Visions. Rather than seeing huge 
1 erences between profit and non-profit programs and huge differences between preschool or 
c^ild-care programs, we saw the huge differences between these publicly operated programs and 
the nonpubhcly operated programs. For example, compared with staff in the publicly and 
nonpubhcly operated programs, the staff in the publicly operated and accredited programs 
earned significantly higher wages, had far more employee benefits, had more formal education 
m ^ild development and early childhood education, and had significantly lower staff turnover 
Twenty years ago. Head Start salary and benefits looked more like the child-care sector; 
owever, we now see wages and benefits that look more similar to public schools and other 
publicly operated programs. In Iowa, few formal contractual partnerships exist between publicly 
operated programs like Head Start and nonpubhcly operated programs such as child-care 
programs' where any public subsidy comes only in the form of buying a slot for a child If the 
child leaves, the dollars leave. 

We asked a series of public policy questions. What was striking to us as we compared groups, 
saw ditterences, and looked for things that were statistically significant was that differences were 
small— 1.65 versus 1.59— but they were all in the same direction. Over 90% of the directors 
agreed that compensation levels in their program should be tied to levels of knowledge skills 
education, and experience despite the fact that average wages were so low. For example,'in my 
hometown of Ames, workers in the local convenience store start at $8.00 an hour with sick 
eave, retirement, and other benefits. Our child-care workers are starting below $6.00 an hour. 

Over 90% of the directors in the field believe that a professional development ladder would 
make it easier to educate parents and policymakers about the link between quality and trainine. 
Many directors believe that compensation levels are inadequate. 

Over 75% of the directors agreed that reimbursement rates should be tied to program quality. 

In Iowa, we do not have a tiered system linking subsidy rates to one's accreditation status or 
qu^ity standard. Over 75% of the directors agreed that reimbursement rates should be tied to 
start training qualifications. The same proportion agreed that it is a public responsibility to pay 
tor some part of gaining for caregivers, and over 75% agreed that quality is enriched when there 
IS a variety of start qualification levels. When tied together, individual questions about public 
responsibility, reimbursement rates, the professional development ladder, and compensation 
eve s suggest that we ask a set of questions about the extent directors favor increasing quality 
levels through regulation and compensation. 




549 



543 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



For the study, we asked a set of questions on what type of staff qualifications directors use, 
and which they think are important in hiring teachers. Over 50% of the directors agreed that it is 
very important for teachers to have some college credits in child development and/or early 
childhood education. Over 50% agreed that teachers need on-the-job training and prior work 
experience at a high-quality early childhood training program under a qualified supervisor. 

During data analysis 1 was astounded by the staff-child ratios in these programs. At the 
study^s outset, 1 expected the staff-child ratio would be 1 teacher and 1 assistant teacher to 16 
preschoolers. Instead, 1 found the directors were reporting ratios of 1 teacher to 60 children. 

That is out of line with licensing regulations, and 1 thought, "What is going on here?!" 1 realized 
that the survey defined teacher-director versus teacher. A teacher is the person responsible for the 
educational program for a group of children. The data analysis reflected that these teachers were 
responsible for the education of 60 children, and each of those groups of children had two 
assistant teachers. As we construct and distribute these surveys, it is important to remember that 
no matter how we define it, we are describing one person with many assistant teachers who earn 
close to minimum wage and who are actually in the classrooms with the children. That distinc- 
tion can be made more clear in future surveys. 

Not surprisingly, we found that less than 50% of the teachers had any kind of retirement 
pension plan, and less than 50% had any health insurance. 1 am not going to report the statistics 
on staff turnover, because they were very confusing. I was expecting to see a bell-shaped curve in 
our turnover rates, but instead we had a "W" pattern. The few agencies with no turnover during 
the past 2 years were mostly publicly operated programs providing health insurance and 
retirement plans; these showed a bell-shaped curve in the middle. At the other end, some 
programs reported 100% turnover in the past year to 2 years. During analysis, a W^ pattern 
remained even when 1 dropped out the summer programs. If 1 am going to report a mean and 
standard deviation, I am assuming a bell-shaped curve; the "W" pattern does not allow me to do 
that. My suggestion is that 1 have no reason to believe our turnover rates are different from the 
rest of the country. 1 suggest that we need to look closely when we are looking at means, 
standard deviations, and even medians of turnover rates. We see enormous differences between 
types of programs and their funding. We distort these differences when we collapse them all into 
a mean. 

There are much greater differences between publicly operated versus nonpublicly operated 
programs and between accredited and non-accredited programs; there are fewer differences 
between preschools and child-care centers or between profit and nonprofit programs. This 
suggests that we need to look at the new types of relationships that are being forged such as the 
partnerships to which Raikes referred. The three of the four states with those strong partnerships 
did not include Iowa; those programs may make data patterns like this look different. 



Klein: Next, we will hear from Jean Ann Summers, an Associate Research Scientist at the 
University of Kansas Institute for Lifespan Studies. She is the co-principal investigator for the 
Kansas Early Head Start project and for the Kansas partnership in the Midwest Child Research 
Consortium. Summers will speak today about the parent's perspective. She will present prelimi- 
nary data from a study of over 1,000 families in the four-state consortium. The data will speak 
directly to their choices for child care, their understanding about quality, and their satisfaction 
with care. 

Jean Ann Summers: Thanks to the Kauffman Foundation, we have data from a pilot study 
using a series of focus groups with parents and providers to investigate perceptions of quality in 
child care. We also conducted some qualitative interviews with Kansas Early Head Start parents. 
The findings I will describe in this session come primarily from families with low incomes, and 
there might be some differences in responses if we talked about families from middle- or higher- 
income groups. 



544 



550 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



As I looked at the qualitative information collected, I could see patterns of the factors parents 
had described as important in the selection of child care. The responses fell into two large macro 
groups — practicalities versus intangibles. In terms of practical considerations for families, cost 
was a very high consideration for some families. Families frequently switch child care when they 
lose subsidies or start having to pay larger co-pays due to higher costs. Location, convenience, 
child-care hours are important to the families, particularly for low-income families where 
members may work late afternoons, evenings, or night shifts. Additionally, safety and cleanliness 
were important issues cited by parents in our focus groups. 

I would like to provide sample quotes offered by parents on some of these issues. Concerning 
available care and available hours, one mother said she cannot utilize child care because child- 
care centers tend to demand regular schedules, whereas her job has a rotating shift. She also 
does not trust the 24-hour centers: "I know my kids; they would be up." For families working 
the night shift, it is important to think of their preferences about how they would like their 
child in a more family-like environment at bedtime. Cleanliness is another important issue for 
parents, and they felt it is important to know that their child is going to stay clean and well- 
ordered throughout the day. 

The families also discussed intangible factors, and trust was strongly emphasized. Whenever 
one interviews someone who chooses not to use child-care centers, concerns of stranger involve- 
ment always comes to the top. This concern feeds off media reports about abuse in child-care 
centers and issues of that nature. Relationships, continuity, warmth, and caring were important. 
The people who specifically mentioned continuity were part of an Early Head Start program, 
and they valued keeping their child with the same person over time. Communication — knowing 
what is happening during the day while the parent is at work — is also very critical to parents. A 
final factor cited was whether the caregiver herself or himself is a parent. 

Let me offer some excerpts from the interviews. This mother provided a typical sentiment 
about strangers: I don t trust nobody but family with my baby. They know her; she knows 
them. You hear in the news all the time about things going on in them day cares." Here is a 
quote about warmth that I thought was particularly interesting. I had asked this mother how she 
came to choose a child-care option when it was time to return to work after her child's birth. She 
said that she took her child with her on visits to various people she thought would provide child 
care. Only one person actually asked to hold the infant, and showed interest while the mother 
was there, so she gave the job to that provider. This quote is from a Missouri Early Head Start 
parent. She said, "I chose family care because the center wasn't open yet, but now I can't take her 
out because she's been there, and they know her, and I do not want her to keep changing 
places." Regarding communication, there are parents who want to get a report every day about 
their children and want to see more about what is going on specifically: "The only thing I don't 
like is the comments page. I want it filled out top to bottom." 

Participants in the focus group did not trust caregivers who had not had their own experi- 
ences as a parent. In the eyes of many parents looking for services, one can have any number of 
degrees, but if one is not a parent, one is not qualified to provide child care. 

Turning to implications, there were some similarities to Raikes' and Hegland's presentations 
in terms of what providers and researchers think of as quality. The providers' perspective on 
communication indeed was similar regarding quality. Perspectives about continuity and many 
of those tangibles— safety, cleanliness, and so forth— are bottom-line, bedrock indicators of 
quality as far as licensure is concerned. 

Differences in relationships were a key factor. The parents want something more in the way of 
warmth, relationship, and caring. In real estate, the key factors are location, location, location; 
in child care, the key factors for parents are relationship, relationship, relationship. We need to 
think about this in terms of what this means for us and for parents. When judging the differ- 
ences between how providers and parents perceive quality, it seems that we need to train parents 
on the importance of well-trained and qualified caregivers. If we view parents as the customers 




5S 1 



545 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



in a child-care setting, and if we were in a private industry with these focus group results, we 
would conclude that we need to gear our product toward our customers. We need to start 
thinking about how to provide that warmth, caring, assurance of safety, familiarity, and trust 
that the parents seem to be wanting in our training, development, and stmcturing of programs. 
From the perspective of researchers, that encourages us to figure out good measures of quality 
and to learn to what degree a child-care provider is warm, caring, and developing good relation- 
ships with families. 

Klein: Michael Godfrey joined the faculty of Iowa State University in August 2000, after having 
spent 5 years as an Assistant Professor at South Dakota State University. His research focuses on 
child perceptions of care including the development of an instrument, the Child Assessment of 
Childcare. Godfrey will speak about children's perspectives. 

Michael Godfrey: I am going to describe five studies where I have joined the data sets together 
to ascertain what a larger number of children think of child care. This sample has approximately 
235 children, all of whom attended one of three forms of child care: (a) large child-care centers 
including Head Starts generally, (b) some home child care or family child care, and (c) what the 
state classified as preschools, including university preschools. To measure children's ideas of 
child care, I developed a game. Instead of playing house, one plays child care. It is not a play- 
house; it is a play child-care center. One sets up the child-care center as one would set up a 
playhouse with tables and chairs. Then the children themselves go around the center and 
describe what they do during the day. 

There are specific questions asked as they are going around the child-care center, such as 
"What does your face look like when you get to go outside? What does your face look like at 
snack? Is it a mad face? Neutral face? Smiling face?" These questions make the exercise concrete 
and actively engaging instead of just an interview. This technique does not work with all 
children, and sometimes they get too excited. Generally, 4- and 5-year-olds can handle it, 6-year- 
olds get bored, and 3-year-olds usually cannot do it. The children in the sample answered fixed 
response questions with yes or no answers, rating scale questions, and some general questions 
such as "Where do you like to play most?" The last category is generally a lead-in to the other 
type of questions. The instmment has 59 questions that are divided into four scales. The four 
scales are (a) suitability to the setting, (b) children's perceptions of how they fit in with the 
child-care setting, (c) care provider discipline and negative care provider behaviors, and (d) the 
children's perception of their time spent there. 

One of the studies looked at whether there was a difference in the children depending on the 
form of child care— whether center-based, home-based, or preschool. There are no statistically 
significant differences regarding the form of child care. What makes the difference in the 
children's perceptions is the particular site, not the form of child care. 

Question: Was the home-based child care licensed or unlicensed? 

Godfrey: Most of the child care in this study was licensed, so they were all generally providing 
higher quality care. We did not do the FDGRS in those home care centers, but they were gener- 
ally licensed. 

I want to go over what children think of child care. Generally, most children are happy to 
come to child-care centers, whatever the form. They see themselves going to child care like Mom 
and Dad go to work— that is their work. 

The home-care children were slightly different and had a more realistic expectation about 
going there because their parents were going to work, but they still enjoyed going. About 60- 
65% would rather come to child care than stay at home all day. Do children like stmctured 
activities such as table time or unstmctured activities such as free play in the block area or 




546 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



playing outside? The results are mixed, though there is a slight tendency to prefer the tables. 
When asked reasons for their preference, children consider themselves like their older brothers 
and sisters going to school and sitting down in order to learn. Are the care centers usually messy 
or clean? They are generally messy. Do you like the center messy or clean? They like it messy. The 
children noticed if the centers were dirty, but they liked the clutter of playing and do not want to 
have to clean up every time to be presentable. They liked to be able to play and feel at home. 

Like adults, the majority of children like to be alone at times. I asked some parents about that 
and one of them said, "I do not pay good money for my child to go to child care and be alone." 
However, like adults, sometimes they need time alone. There needs to be a place where they can 
hang out and not be socially bombarded with other children. 

Children generally see providers as happy people, although once in a while, the care provid- 
ers do get mad. Eighty-two percent of the children reported that the care providers get mad. 
Seventy-two percent of children reported that the care providers make them feel bad sometimes. 
When talking to the care providers, they report that they do get mad on occasion and the 
children probably do feel bad sometimes. 

Another reminder from the study findings is that children like to eat, and they like it when 
providers say it is time to eat. It is a question that I asked the first 100 children; almost everyone 
said macaroni and cheese is their favorite dish. Another question raised by the panel was 
children's concern with the lack of privacy in their bathrooms, but overwhelmingly, children do 
not care; 92% of them did not care, whether they were boys or girls. 

How do children feel when they get to play outside? By far most of them chose the happy 
face, even more than when asked whether they like to come to child care or get to go home. I 
tried to analyze this question based on the season of the year, since South Dakota can be cold, 
but children seemingly are unfazed by the weather. 

Children do feel bad when another child gets punished, but they feel it is important to have 
the discipline and to follow through with punishments when necessary. They like it when care 
providers have time to listen to them. By far most of them agree that the care providers make the 
rules for the benefit of the children, but they also think they have a hand in making the rules. 
When asked if the child-care center was a good or bad place to come, 82% of children say their 
center is a good place to come. The implication for parents would be to ask their children what 
they think of the child-care setting, and if they do not like it, to find another place that may be 
better. The children picked up on the importance of having a continuity of care, as long as in 
their minds it is a quality place where they can be happy. Most of them chose the happy face 
when it was time to go home. They are happy to come but then are happy to go home. 

As the providers were more age-appropriately permissive in their discipline and in the choices 
they gave the children, with less punishment and less control, the children's perceptions 
increased on those scales. They had higher scales as the providers were more friendly toward the 
children. If the providers were more warm and balanced and did not bring a lot of excess 
baggage to work with them, those children viewed their child-care setting as a much more 
positive environment. Many of the state licensing regulations look at physical things, but 
children do not notice those so much. I never had any children talk about the teacher-child 
ratio. Almost everywhere I went, the ratios were within regulations, so perhaps the children 
would have remarked on it if the ratios had been bad. They did notice if the care provider was 
warm and fiiendly with them, which held great importance to the children. Quality of care, not 
the form of care, makes the difference, whether parents choose Head Start centers, home child- 
care centers, or another form of care. 

It was also important for the children to have at least one good friend at the setting, some- 
body that they can look forward to seeing and playing with. We can provide them a quality 
setting that they perceive as quality and not just the adult-defined quality. We talked about 
gearing the product to the customer. Even though the parents are paying the bills, the child is 
the ultimate customer and are the ones who need to perceive this setting as a place that is 



553 



547 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



worthy of coming to. The sociometric status of the children, whether they are popular among 
their classmates, is also important to them. 

Some additional things to study include family measures that may inform what the children 
think of child care. Some children were very negative, while others are very positive. These 
results could be due to individual variation, partially based on what the parents said about the 
child-care center. All in all, children's perceptions are far more dependent upon their interac- 
tions with the child-care provider than the actual setting itself 



Klein: Doris Hallford is the Assistant Deputy Director in Missouri's Division of Family Services. 
She has been there for 23 years and has been involved with early childhood work for the past 9 
years. She will speak from the state administrator perspective. 

Doris Hallford: Our primary funding sources for early childhood programs in Missouri are the 
state Childcare and Development Fund and gaming funding. The entrance fees to riverboat 
casinos help provide many of the quality pieces. In Missouri, cetain issues currently impact our 
funding and prioritizing of decisions. We are relatively typical of most states around the couritry. 
First, we have a serious budget cmnch. Making do wiA less is the battle cry these days. Agencies 
and programs compete for the limited amount of general revenue that exists. We also currently 
have 1,500 families that, in this month alone, will reach their 5-year time limits for Temporary 
Assistance to Needy Families (TANF). We need to figure out how to best use our resources to 
support them as they move into the workforce. We also have the ongoing struggle that I hear 
from state administrators around the country about quantity versus quality. There are people 
who need child care in order to work, but one also needs to make sure that this child care is of a 
certain level of quality. Unfortunately, all the money typically comes out of one pot, so we do 
that balancing act of choosing whether to invest in quality or quantity. 

We also have the parental choice issue. As Summers was saying, parents choose child care for 
a variety of valid reasons. We have to offer parents training on how to choose quality care, as 
well as offer provider training so that parents have a good selection of providers from which to 

choose. u; 1 u 

National numbers are good, but we know that state numbers are always more powerful when 

one seeks funding from the legislature. Legislators do not care as much about national numbers, 
but when they see numbers and data that are pertinent to their area and their constituents, most 

of them sit up and take notice. . 

In Missouri, we also have the issue of unprecedented turnover. Term limits are kicking m in 
our state, and we will lose about three-four^s of our House and about two-thirds of our Senate. 
This type of research will be increasingly important in Missouri when talking to new legislators, 
and we have to use our data to tell the story effectively. First, however, we must use the data to 
figure out what our story is. The data give us a better understanding of what the issues are. For 
example, what are the issues in the metro area versus nonmetro areas? One of the things that we 
heard from the state relates to our EduCare program. There are issues in mral areas, and our 
EduCare program is addressing many of those training issues that we are finding are very lacking 
around the state. That is one policy implication; we probably need to look at expanding our 
EduCare program. 

The demographics in Missouri are changing. We have a large and growing Latino populauon. 
How can we utilize this data to tell us what we need to know about that population? The 
Department of Social Services has decided to focus on birth to 3 years with our education 
department focusing more and more on the 3- and 4-year-olds. What are the differences 
between those two age groups, and how do we need to address them in policy? How do benefits 
play a part? How should we take those into account as we make policy decisions? 

We also need a better understanding of what providers, parents, and children want and need. 
From our perspective, oftentimes we think we know what they need, and until we talk to them 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



and learn that our original estimations are not exactly accurate. It is the same way with legisla- 
tors; sometimes the legislators think they know what is needed. We need the data and numbers 
to tell the stories of the children and families with whom we work. 

In order to target resources, we also need to pinpoint what we can impact and where we can 
have the most impact with our limited resources. For example, at what point does training 
impact quality? I have heard that 24 hours of provider training has more impact than 12 hours. 
Subsidy proportion sounds as if it will play a large part in that. For example, in Missouri we give 
a disproportionate share incentive to providers that serve more than 50% subsidized children; 
they get an additional 30% in their subsidy rate. The reason we did that was to help provide a 
more stable base for providers that serve large numbers of children from families with low 
incomes. Is that having an unintended consequence of forcing children into subsidized facili- 
ties? Are providers intentionally recmiting subsidized children to get the higher rate? How does 
that impact these children? 

As investors, we want to know how to protect investments we make. We are investing huge 
amounts of money in training, but then we have huge provider turnover as they move into the 
education s}^tem or other places that pay higher wages. How do we stop that turnover from 
happening? Which incentives work and which do not? As a state administrator, one can imple- 
ment requirements that people must fulfill, or one can implement incentives to encourage 
them. If one is trying to influence the legislature, incentives are more attractive than require- 
ments. 

We know that state budgets will be tight for the next couple of years. Whether we are success- 
ful in our efforts depends on the quality of the available data and our ability to analyze and 
utilize the data to better target our limited resources. It is imperative that people like those on 
this panel help us, as state administrators, to interpret those data. 

Often we simply look at the numbers, but I am frequently told that I must know the meaning 
behind those numbers. Without people to help us interpret the findings, we would often take 
off in the wrong direction. We need to keep in mind that the data collected are not just data for 
data s sake, but they provide useful information to better serve and provide opportunities for the 
children and families with whom we work. 

®^®***‘ clearly important to have state administrators with that kind of passion and commit- 
ment to what they do. I will now end this session by offering some brief comments that will 
mirror some of Halford's because they also represent a funder's perspective. In this case, it is a 
perspective from a private foundation. We will then have a period of discussion and open sharing. 

A foundation is based on the public will and the public trust. We exist to serve the public. At 
the heart and soul, we have all spent time on visions and missions, some of them more articu- 
lated or lofty than others. At the core, foundations exist to serve the public and make the world a 
better place. The Kauffman Foundation has a history of wanting to do that in the area of young 
children and families. In fact, our benefactor, Ewing Marion Kauffman, read a lot as a child. 
Without the benefit of being a researcher, he was a consumer of research. It did not take him 
long to figure out what Keynote Speaker James Heckman discussed earlier in the Opening 
Session; if one wants to have the biggest impact, then one needs to start early with the youngest 
children and families. 

As a Foundation associate, one of the things I am responsible for is convincing and influenc- 
ing our board to make decisions about investing the foundation's money wisely for the public 
good. As we present possibilities to the board, such as a proposal from the Midwest Research 
Consortium, it is incumbent upon me to find out as much as I possibly can so that their 
response on investments is an affirmative vote. 

A foundation basically does four things. First, because of special Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) status, foundations can embark upon demonstration projects that carry greater risk than 
others might be able to carry. A demonstration project is one thing that foundations are known 



555 



549 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/ CONVERSATION HOURS 



to start up and sometimes support, though we cannot do this for an extended period. Our 
funding for children and families is miniscule compared to what the federal public budget 
spends on this group. We have very limited funds. Second, in order to say that this is the 
proposal we should invest in, we study whether this type of investment is worthy in and of itself, 
and if it can be disseminated and scaled up to a much greater use. Dissemination is something 
foundations can do; they can invest in things to get the word out. Third, foundations can 
convene for the purpose of disseminating information. Though we have very limited funds, the 
funds we do have usually get people's attention, and people will come to the table if we call. 

Finally, foundations invest in research and evaluation in order to have something to dissemi- 
nate, particularly in this day and age of accountability. Much as Hallford spoke about policy 
makers and the need to provide them with the strongest evidence possible, foundation boards 
and tmstees are by and large made up of people from the public corporate business sector. They 
need the same type of rigorous evidence, and they are asking for it more and more. Research and 
evaluation efforts are critical. 

Demonstrations are now happening in multiple states, including data camps. I went to a data 
camp one afternoon and walked away thinking that I had sold this investment because we said 
we would disseminate— get the word out and have strong, research-based information to share 
in order to influence policy. Research and evaluation are attractive investments for foundations. 

There are challenges. When we think about supporting these efforts, there needs to be a good 
blend of work to provide short- and long-term results. Foundations will require both. Private 
investment has a short attention span and requires information quickly. If they do not get it, we 
lose them. Short-term indicators, proxy indicators, and immediate results are important. At the 
same time they are going to say, "Well, that is not really what we want to get. Remember we are 
here to save the world and make the world a better place for young children and families, so we 
want to know whether they are now productive members of society as a result of this early 
childhood program." We Imow that takes years of longitudinal research, but there has to be a 
careful balance to provide immediate results as well as sketch out the longer-term study. Foun- 
dations can provide some ongoing investment, but with the limited funds we have, we probably 
cannot do what the public can do in terms of multidecade longitudinal projects. 

The final challenge I would put to you all from a foundation perspective is that as much as 
research and evaluation are important, as much as accountability is important for influencing 
public support and investment in young children and families, there must be careful attention 
paid to the translation of research into good programming, practice, and policymaking. Cmcial 
decision makers in foundations need to know not only that you have rigorous and reliable 
information, so that when they quote it, they are perceived as experts, but also that the findings 
are useful. That is ultimately what they are responsible for, and we will put that challenge back 
to you. 

Carol Mooney; I am from Concord, New Hampshire. Could you elaborate on the criteria for 
higher reimbursement rates for quality? Exactly what does that mean and how is that done? 

Hegland: Our data shows that people stated a preference for higher reimbursement rates related 
to either the quality of the center or the qualifications of the provider. For example, North 
Carolina implemented a five-star system. One star is for basic licensing for safety and custodial 
care. One can move up to five stars based on scores on the ECERS scales. They have trained 
people through many of the universities in North Carolina, and the University of North Caro- 
lina at Greensboro has taken charge of this training, administering the ECERS in their area. They 
review the agency turnover from year to year as one determinant of the number of stars granted. 
When we put in a survey question about whether or not reimbursement rates should be tied to 
quality, people were familiar with the North Carolina model and were using that. I believe that 
Missouri has higher subsidy rates if one is accredited while meeting three or four other catego- 



er|c 



550 



556 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



ries. Several states have had systems whereby the state will pay a higher subsidy rate for enrolled 
children from families with low incomes, if a program meets certain quality levels. 

Raikes: In two of our four states, there is a higher reimbursement rate for subsidy pa 3 nnents for 
accredited people. This is true for Missouri and Nebraska. An interesting finding in Nebraska is 
that we found comparable quality in center-based care between subsidy- receiving and 
nonsubsidy- receiving providers. In family child care, there was a big differential. Our subsidy- 
receiving providers were providing care that was of much lower quality than were our 
nonsubsidy-receiving providers. 

We had this incentive on the books for them intended as an incentive for quality. For ex- 
ample, if they were accredited, they were assumed to provide care of higher quality and thus get 
paid more. In fact, what we found was that hardly anybody was cashing in on that because in 
our particular state, the usage was defined such that subsidy-receiving clients could not be 
charged more than other clients. Because of the market, they received no bonus, and it did not 
help as an inducement for quality. We have since corrected that flaw in the system. Missouri just 
gets a bonus for subsidy that does not necessarily move with the market, so if one gets accred- 
ited in the rural areas, one can realize some monetary benefit. 



Mooney: In New Hampshire, there is a direct incentive for programs to become accredited. 
Upon receiving that accreditation from the National Association for the Education of Young 
Children (NAEYC), they get a $1,500 bonus. Recendy, a commission to discuss that issue heard 
providers raise the question that it seems we are rewarding the people who already had more 
financial resources with which to provide better programming. This issue has given me a great 
deal to think about in looking at who is accredited in our state; it is primarily lab schools with 
the universities and colleges. Head Start programs, the programs associated with Phillips Exeter, 
and places that have money. It is a dilemma. What do you do about that? 

Raikes: In some of the states, there is support given" to providers who seek accreditation. 
Remember that in the Midwest we did find higher quality associated with accredited programs, 
even though the percentage is less than 5%. We do not know what is causing this effect, but it is 
a driver of quality. 

Barbara Rudlin: lam from Caliber Associates. We talked about the important qualities for 
parents being warmth, caring, and kindness. Then we talked about research-supported quality 
indicators such as cleanliness, safety, as well as other things that are not as important to parents. 
How do we bring this knowledge together in a way that meets the needs of all users in the 
system? 

Summers: First of all, the findings were basically from families with low incomes, so we might 
have different answers for parents with higher levels of income and education. On the one hand, 
we, need to think about incorporating the wishes of families and children into our training, 
CDAs, and other kinds of child-care certifications. We also need to turn it around and explain to 
parents the benefits of well-trained, highly qualified staff. It needs to be a two-way street of 
communication. It would also be more important to figure out how to measure those things. 
Another intriguing thought is whether we say that child-care providers must all be parents 
themselves. Parents seem to be saying this as consumers of child care, so we may need to have a 
reciprocal discussion about that topic. 

Raikes: We are now in the field with a second parent survey to enable a comparison of our 
observations of quality ratings with parents' perceptions of quality, to see where the 
discontinuities lay. 




557 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Godfrey: The two are coming more closely aligned, especially with the Arnett Caregiver Interac- 
tion Scale. The children's own perceptions predict more than the ECERS or the NAEYC stan- 
dards. Those standards are still important and are getting better with each iteration, but they just 
need to be broadened. 

Carla Patterson: 1 am from the Queensland University of Technology in Australia. 1 would like 
to talk briefly about some early initiatives occurring in Australia in regard to health-promoting 
early childhood centers, which have experienced some conflict between quality standards and 
parents' desires. In essence, they have taken on board some of the issues raised by the last 
speaker regarding children's perceptions, but the mles were made primarily by the teachers. 

In the health-promoting setting, the children are permitted to make some of the mles. The 
parents and staff are integrated into the mle-making process, so one is tmly empowering all 
three components of the center to make decisions about how the center is operating. We 
currently have many pilot studies in this child-care approach going on in areas with low-income 
populations. 

Summers: I have a thought about the issue of child-care quality and indicators for quality at 
different times of day, when parents work evenings and night shifts. Perhaps developmentally 
appropriate" ought to be applied to diumally appropriate thinking in terms of what is appropri- 
ate for children at a center where they need to be put to bed or where they need to spend time m 
the evening rather than during the day. 

I liked Godfrey's comments on children thinking of themselves as going to work or going to 
school when they go to the centers. That is appropriate for the time of day if you go to school 
during the day, but what about evening care? What does that mean in terms of quality? Is there a 
different definition of quality when one is caring for children during evenings and night shifts? 

Klein: Would someone explain data camp? 

Raikes: At a data camp, we come together to review our data across our four states and within 
each of our states, to begin addressing state policy questions. What we are finding across our 
four states is not the same. In Kansas, everything seems to be about the same, whereas in 
Nebraska we have providers who are providing low-quality care. In Iowa, perhaps there was 
lower quality care in infant and family care, but preschool and center-based care was quite high, 
so there was also variability. At a data camp, we look at these issues, put our heads together, and 
attempt to provide interpretations of what we see. 

Summers: Data camp involved sitting at a table with our state partners and hearing the data. 
One of us had a laptop with the software package SPSS, so we could work with the data while 
another of us had a laptop to keep notes. It was intense but resulted in a real partnership with 
the state representative accessing immediate answers to data questions. 

Comment: I got an invitation to data camp. I was expecting to eat S' mores and sing Kum Ba Yah! 

Klein: In all seriousness, I asked the panelists to highlight the data camp experience because it is 
an incredibly valuable component to this consortium. Another big value to investors is concepts 
of "leveraging" and "partnership." Data camp has been a way for this group to look at analyses, 
questions, and a wealth of information that otherwise would not have come up had they just 
been involved with their individual projects. It is leveraging human brain capital as well as 
potentially leveraging other economic capital and resources. I applaud this group for doing that, 
it is an interesting, seldom-seen process. 



552 



558 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



Raikes: I want to make a plug for conducting random selection of child-care providers in your 
states, if given the opportunity. The power of going to original licensing files, which were 
monsters to draw from, was still worth it. Think about the categories of providers that can be 
sampled in your own state and then pull from those randomly. 

The story about who those providers were just rolled off those surveys from 2,000 people 
because we had about 500 in each state. I learned some things that I had never anticipated. 
Perhaps there may be one unstable sector, but we found strong sectors of stable providers in our 
states, including people who have been at it for 10 years and believe it is a personal calling. This 
experience changes the way one thinks about providers, and I think one cannot know that 
unless one does it randomly. 

I did want to mention that more states seem to be getting into this business. I just talked to 
Mark Greenberg from Pennsylvania. He said that their state is financing a random survey and 
are actually paying their providers $ 100 a survey for observations, because they are determined 
to fill all the cells and may need monetary incentive to get at some of the harder-to-assess 
questions. 



SYMPOS I A/ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



What Choices Are Available to Parents 
for Child Care and Education Services? 

CHAIR: Gerald Sroufe 

PRESENTERS: Barbara Bergmann, Janet Hansen, Rachel Schunnacher 

Gerald Sroufe: I am the Senior Advisor on the Program Committee of the American Educa- 
tional Research Association. We will begin the conversation with each of the three presenters 
talking briefly about their perspective on this issue. Then we hope there are questions and 
observations from all present. Our first presenter is Janet Hansen, who has served as a Senior 
Program Officer at the National Academy of Sciences, responsible for reports on school finance, 
international comparative studies in education, and education and Uaining of the workforce. 
Hansen has also been a Director of Policy Analysis at the College Board and an Academic 
Adminisuator at Princeton and Claremont Universities. She is currently Vice President and 
Director of Education Studies at the Committee for Economic Development, where she oversees 
early childhood education as well as K-12. 

Janet Hansen: 1 am with the Committee for Economic Development (CED), a nonpartisan, 
nonprofit, public policy research group. The Committee is composed of 250 trustees, primarily 
business and academic executives who come together in working groups to consider issues of 
public policy related to economic development and individual opportunity, globally as well as 
nationally. They write reports and make policy recommendations, which they then go out and 
mobilize support for within their constituencies. The CED trustees have had a long-standing 
interest in issues related to the development and education of young children. In fact, CED was 
the first business-related group to be interested in this area. 

Initial reports going back almost 20 years highlight the importance of the nation developing 
a strategy that views investments in young children as essential to the country. These reports talk 
about the importance of having an investment strategy that views child education beginning at 
birth. The social, physical, and cognitive development of children is important for the long-term 
health of the nation, as well as to the individual opportunities of the children themselves. 

I would like to talk about a new report that was issued last spring by CED, called Preschool For 
All: Investing in a Productive and Just Society. The last report before this one. Why Child Care 
Matters, focused exclusively on a range of issues related to child care. When our tmstees decided 
to take up the issue of young children again about 2 years ago, we looked at what had happened 
since our last report on this subject and were struck by several things. One is the fact that the 
majority of 3- and 4-year-old children are now in center-based care for some part of every week. 
That is obviously related to the fact that the majority of mothers of young children are now in 
the workforce. 

For all of the ideological arguments about whether or not it is a good thing for young 
children to be taken care of outside the home, the fact of the matter is that almost all children 
are for some part of the week. Many of the settings in which these children spend time are not 
particularly of high quality or necessarily the settings where we would want our own children 

The second thing that struck us is the fact that increasingly over the last decade, research has 
shown that children have learning capacities that are not being developed. Children are spend- 
ing a lot of time in out-of-home settings but are not spending that time in ways that help them 
develop and enter school on a level playing field. The third thing we saw is that much progress 
had been made since our earlier reports in terms of programs and opportunities for young 
children, but that progress is still slow. We were not anywhere as far along as we had hoped to 
be, and the key reason seemed to be that public investment in young children is still inadequate. 




554 



560 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



Unlike elementary, secondary, and higher education, in this country we still treat young 
children as primarily a family responsibility and do not make public investments in young 
children comparable to investments we make in older children. When one looks at a whole 
range of issues and concerns related to young children, many of them seemed at some level to 
stem from the fact that there are not sufficient resources available to remedy identified prob- 
lems. We decided that in our new report, we wanted to focus particularly on the 3- and 4-year- 
olds who are already, for the most part, enrolled in center-based care and on the importance of 
prodding access to preschool learning opportunities that prepare all children for school. When I 
say "preschool learning opportunities," let me be clear that we understand and believe that we 
are not just talking about cognitive skills. We are talking about a whole range of developmental 
skills, abilities, and capacities that children need for school readiness. 

Since we are a business-related group and one of our comparative advantages is our ability to 
mobilize business leaders behind public policy issues, we also wanted to focus our attention in 
this report. There are a tremendous number of issues that we could have addressed, but our 
ability to mobilize business leaders behind public policy changes is in part tied to having a 
limited set of objectives to ask people to support. In this report, we recommended that the 
United States acknowledge society's stake in and responsibility for early education, as it long has 
for older children, by making publicly-funded prekindergarten offered by a variety of providers; 
furthermore, it should be available to all children 3 years old and over whose parents want to 
participate. Everything in this long report is connected to that major recommendation. 

We wish to extend that recommendation. We think that universal preschool can be accom- 
plished in the most timely and equitable way through a strong federal-state partnership. Part of 
the reason we explicitly make this point is that it is not the way we do K-12 education in this 
country. K-12 education is still primarily a state responsibility; the federal government provides 
7% of the money. Part of the result of that state dependence is enormous inequities across the 
country in the educational opportunities available to children in elementary and secondary 
education. 

In early education and care, we actually start from a different vantage point. The fact that to 
the extent there are public subsidies, and of course there are extensive subsidies in this area, they 
are more heavily federal than state. We are not bound by the history and the tradition that has 
affected K-12 education and kept us from having a national perspective. We were concerned as 
we looked at how unsystematic early childhood education and care is. There should be a strong 
role for the states in taking the lead to design preschool systems and having the freedom to 
choose their own approaches as long as all children have access to preschool education that is 
consistent with recognized standards and is obtainable from a variety of providers. We thought 
the federal government's role should be to provide incentives for and assistance to states in 
constructing high-quality early learning systems. 

We debated the issue of what kind of approach states might, or ought to, take. I want to say 
this explicitly given that the session's focus is about choice. At this point, there is no strong 
evidence for one particular approach that ought to be taken for early education; there is still 
much to be learned about how to do early education. The states are already pursuing a variety of 
different and interesting models. For example, we thought about whether to build on this vision 
of universal preschool using a Head Start model, which some states are doing, such as Ohio. We 
decided that was not the recommendation we wanted to make. Instead of just using what we 
thought was important, the states should have the flexibility to develop a variety of models that 
we can learn from over time, to see if in fact there are one, two, or three best ways to learn this. 
Maybe it will always be the case that one can get to one's goals through a variety of means. Since 
states already have quite different structures in place for early care and education, it seemed 
sensible to us to build on that diversity and the advantages provided by that diversity. 

We thought it was important to stress that parents ought to have the opportunity to choose 
among a variety of providers. We did not see this as just extending the public school system 




561 



555 



SYMPOSIA/ROU NDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



downward into early education and having universal preschool administered through the public 
school systems. It is well known that most of our children are already in some type of center- 
based care through a variety of providers, only some of which are public schools. For both 
philosophical and practical reasons, we thought it was important to build on the diversity of 
providers. 

Although our report is primarily talking about preschool, we repeatedly s^ess the fact that 
from a family perspective as well as from a philosophical perspective, education and care are 
inextricably intertwined. This is especially true for working families; they are not going to have 
options for access to preschool unless those preschool opportunities are connected to child care 
opportunities that extend through the working day and the working year. That is not the way 
public schools are structured. It is important that parents have the opportunity to select provid- 
ers who are willing to participate in state preschool programs but who also provide the broader 
child care opportunities needed by so many working families. 

Let me finish by stressing that we see our report as a call to action more than a detailed 
blueprint. There is still much to learn as these opportunities are expanded. In conclusion, 1 
would like to emphasize the importance of creating universal preschool programs that take 
much fuller advantage than do current arrangements of young children s capacity to learn. That 
approach involves states in building coherent early education systems that are financially 
supported by both the state and federal governments. 

Sroufe: In the Spring 2002 issue of the American Educational Research Journal, there was a 
provocative article on child care from the recent National Institute for Child Health and Human 
Development (NICHD) study. The authors cite the statistic that in 1999, 81% of children going 
to kindergarten had already had a preschool experience of some type. Hansen makes a good 
point that it is almost a universal nonsystem at the moment. 

Rachel Schumacher is a Policy Analyst at the Center for Law and Social Policy (CLASP), 
substituting for Mark Greenberg. She has coauthored a number of works with him, including 
Child Care After Leaving Welfare, The Impact of TANF Funding on State Child Care Subsidy Programs, 
State Initiatives to Promote Early Learning, and State Initiatives to Promote Early Learning: Next Steps 
in Coordinating Subsidized Child Care, Head Start and State Prekindergarten. These topics are all 
related to our concerns in this session. 

Rachel Schumacher: The Center for Law and Social Policy is a nonprofit advocacy and research 
organization that has been around for 30 years. It started out in public interest law but is now 
primarily policy focused. We work on economic security issues for families with low incomes. 
Our niche is to understand, explain, and translate how federal rules and reflations about 
funding streams affect what can and cannot be done under state and local initiatives to promote 
parent choice and other types of activities in early childhood education. My specialties are child 
care and early education issues. 

Our interest in parental choice is fundamental, because parental choice is a key piece of the 
Child Care and Development Fund (CCDF) law. This law is one of the pieces of federal legisla- 
tion that we work on. In particular, our work focuses on trying to bring into the discussion of 
parental choice both the need to think about the impact on child development and the impact 
on being able to provide real work support for families with low incomes. We try to bring both 
those tenets into all the work we do, which is often challenging given that the missions of the 
major federal funding streams for early childhood education can be different, whether one is 
looking at the rules for Head Start or the rules for the CCDF. These have different missions, with 
Head Start being child-development focused but not thinking so much about full-day and full- 
year work schedules; the CCDF is focused on supporting work but does not have in its mission 
the same focus on child development and comprehensive services as Head Start. 

The CCDF law has a parental choice provision that is important for state implementation of 




556 



562 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



this legislation. The parental choice provisions are supposed to allow all parents who need 
assistance finding and paying for child care to have a choice of options and to have equal access 
to child care choices as a family, regardless of economic or financial qualification for that 
service. That is in the law although what that means is up for debate. How states try to meet 
these provisions is also up for some debate. I will go into some issues that affect policy areas 
which states are trying to address and that would also affect parental choice. We have many 
items on our website that explain the law and these types of provisions if anyone is interested in 
finding out more about them. 

Next, I would like to discuss some key issues to consider when talking about what it means to 
make parental choice meaningful. First, there has to be a supply of choices available for families. 
Parents can have abundant resources with which to purchase child care, and there can be a 
universal prekindergarten program in the state. However, if there is not a supply of options in 
the community in which the family lives, with provisions to ensure quality care meets the 
necessary standards and is available during the times parents need it, then parental choice 
provisions cannot be fully met. 

A second aspect of parental choice that is important to keep in mind is consumer education. 

If parents do not have access to information and assistance in finding options, then it is difficult 
for them to exercise informed parental choice. What do I mean by that? One of the ways that 
states try to promote parental choice options is by funding resource and referral networks for 
parents to visit and get information about the options in their areas, what quality looks like, and 
what questions they should ask the providers. 

Another piece involves ways to understand whether the provider is actually meeting any type 
of standard. Some people say that it is easier to figure out whether a vacuum cleaner or a hotel 
meets a certain standard than child care. Some states have tried to address this issue by develop- 
ing "star systems," which are rating systems built into state licensing programs. When a parent 
goes into that program, a sign on the door says how many stars the program has out of the total 
possible. That is one of the ways that I have seen policies try to promote consumer education 
and informed choice. 

One of the more important pieces and one of the toughest nuts to crack is fiscal resources, 
both for the parents to be able to pay for care if there is a cost associated with it and to make 
sure that high-quality care is available and accessible. There are resources that can go directly to 
parents to help pay for care in the form of vouchers or other types of subsidies. Currently, under 
CCDF, we serve about one in seven of the children who would be federally eligible. The second 
piece of the problem is that once a parent has funds, that does not necessarily guarantee 
accessible child care. For example, in the child care system, if one has a child care subsidy and 
cannot find a provider who will take the subsidy, then one is out of luck. One of the things that 
determines this is whether a state has a child care subsidy system where they cannot pay an 
adequate provider rate to encourage high-quality providers to come into the system. Thus even if 
a parent has a subsidy, he or she cannot always make use of their choice. 

Very often, the parental choice argument is made in such a way whereby people think that as 
long as a parent is offered a voucher, they have parental choice. I would argue that many other 
features go into parental choice, especially this last one. If one cannot encourage high-quality 
providers to participate in the system and serve low-income families with subsidies because one 
is not paying them well enough, then there is not a full parental choice system. It is important to 
consider the fact that parental choice is not just choice of a voucher but a real inforrried choice 
of an array of providers. 

I want to talk briefly about Head Start's role in the choice discussion and some ways that 
federal mles and the way the program is mn fits into this whole choice issue. Head Start is an 
excellent prograrh that offers high-quality services in many low-income communities around the 
country. There are a couple of ways that parents sometimes find their choices constrained. One 
way is the income limit on the program; parents who are above 100% of the federal poverty line 



563 



557 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



might not be able to get into the program. We have seen that in the last few years, especially as 
many people have entered the workforce, suddenly it is getting hard for many Head Start 
programs to fill their enrollment. Parents are working and are just over that poverty line. 

Another issue is that although many programs want to be full-day and full-year, many are still 
part-day and part-year. That can constrain the ability of a working family to be able to choose a 
Head Start program. Many Head Start programs are expanding to full-day, full-year programs or 
working on collaboration with child care programs to adjust to this need. 

Lastly, I want to offer a brief update on the current debate about the Welfare Block Grant, the 
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) Block Grant, and the CCDF block grants. 
Gongress is currently reauthorizing these pieces of legislation, determining how much money 
should be spent on these programs over the next five years, and whether there should be any 
major policy changes to those programs during the next 5 years. 

One of the things that has happened in the debate since the administration put forward their 
proposal has been this incredible focus on work and encouraging parents to work longer hours. 

It is an interesting piece of the discussion that will impact parental choice. It will also have an 
impact on child care resources for other families. What may or may not happen is a proposal to 
require families who have low incomes and need cash assistance from the welfare program to 
work or be involved in work activities at least 40 hours a week. That would include families with 
children under the age of 6. 

One of the things that has happened in the debate that will have ramifications for other 
programs serving families with low incomes is that very often, these are the same families with 
whom Head Start programs are working. These families are going to face different constraints in 
terms of what they need to do to continue being eligible for the program. They are going to have 
different child care needs, and it may affect their ability to access Head Start because now they 
will need something full-day, full-year. It could mean that states with limited resources can 
target their funds only toward those families that are receiving TANF and will no longer be able 
to serve other working families with low incomes. 

If they do make changes to the welfare program and work, will there be adequate funding for 
the child-care program so that the states will be able to keep up with that need without chang- 
ing the access to child-care systems for other working families with low incomes? Will there be a 
loss of focus on the importance of quality, because the child-care program will be so stretched to 
focus on getting enough time covered and enough child-care assistance that there will not be the 
time to invest in the quality of the programs? This year, a major part of the discussion has been 
about improving the quality of the child-care system and helping to make child-care comparable 
in quality to the Head Start program and other early education programs. 



Sroufe: Our final presenter is Barbara Bergmann. She has been President of the Society for the 
Advancement of Social Economics, the American Association of University Professors, and the 
International Association of Feminist Economists. She served as a senior staff member of 
President Kennedy's Council of Economic Advisors, and on the advisory committee to the 
Congressional Budget Office. She writes on economic and social policy, particularly about 
welfare, child care, women in the economy, the labor market, problems of women, and African 
Americans. Her most recent book is America's Child Care Problem: The Way Out. 

Barbara Bergmann: Here in Washington, DC, especially now, there is great attention to what 
Congress will do regarding child care. Realistically, one cannot expect Congress to make a great 
leap in child-care funding or quality regulation. The people who advocate for more government 
money for child care are concerned about how many millions more we can add on to the 
current appropriations. When my coauthor Suzanne Helbum and I decided to write this book, 
we took another tack. 



558 



564 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 




Instead of asking what we need to do this year, or what would be a realistic goal for this year 
or next, we said, "Let's sit back and try to see what an ideal system would be. How should it be 
structured? Who should pay for it? That is, what proportion should the government pay, what 
proportion should the parents pay, and possibly, what proportion should business pay? How 
much would each piece cost? What can be done about quality?" This cannot be any surprise, but 
we concluded that huge amounts of money are needed. 

We suggest a system where anybody below or at the poverty line would essentially get free, 
high-quality child care. Parents above the poverty line would pay no more for the care of their 
children than 20% of their income above the poverty line, which we thought was a reasonable* 
formula. There are many others. Hansen's group is suggesting that for the 3- and 4-year-olds, the 
parents pay nothing. She kept saying "universal, " but she meant "free. " We estimated the costs of 
a free system, but we did want to keep the amount in bounds. The system that we came up with 
would cost about $50 billion per year. Including Head Start and the state funds that are going to 
child care, the current system costs about $20 billion per year. 

It seems clear that if one gets a system in which parents do not have to break their budget for 
child care, one can rapidly approach large numbers. We estimated that a totally free system of 
child care would cost something like $120 billion a year. Both of those numbers are high. 
However, because what we are in is called a war rather than a police action, the defense budget 
magically went up $100 billion a year. That would more than pay for an adequate child-care 
system in this country. The question is not whether the money is there, but whether we spend it 
in this way. Obviously, there are enough people who want to add $100 billion to the defense 
budget, but there are not enough people who are energized to add $50 billion to the budget for 
other crucial needs of this country. 

We were delighted to see Hansen's group come in, because they also estimate that much 
money is needed. That gives some countenance to our estimate. I have to say that when the local 
so-called feminist groups in Washington hear our estimates of what is needed, they say that we 
are asking for too much, that they could never back that, and that our numbers are ridiculous. 
They feel that it is so unrealistic that they would not be able to hold their heads up on Capitol 
Hill. It is necessary to be honest and to say what the real needs are. We are not going to get there 
next year or the year after, but unless we advocate for that, it will never happen. I want to remind 
you all that in the few golden years where we had surpluses as far as the eye could see, nobody 
in the public or the child-care community, among liberals generally, mentioned child care as 
something we ought to do. It has not even been on the back burner; it has been nowhere. 

Our book is intended to start the dialogue and ask what is needed and where we should be 
going. We view some of the ideas that the money comes from charity or from business as 
ridiculous. They do not give very much now; they have all the incentives not to give much more. 
The conclusion we come to can be characterized as this: the regular child care programs need to 
become more like Head Start. They need to give more attention to medical problems, psycho- 
logical problems, involvement of parents, and so forth. Head Start needs to become more like 
the regular programs in some respects, namely full-day and full-year, but there also needs to be 
enrollment from a broader part of the community. 

The latter part is important. The worst thing we could see is that all the poor children go to 
Head Start and all the others go to government-subsidized programs. I remember seeing a report 
put out by the founders of Child Development on the Georgia preschools. The person who did the 
report interviewed the heads of these preschools. They said that they were very careful not to 
steal clients from Head Start. Georgia has a universal preschool for 4-year-olds. Presumably, 
there is a Head Start constituency, and there are people of influence who were involved with 
Head Start who understandably do not want their clients hijacked by the system. 

There is a great danger that unless this issue is faced, we are going to get much more race and 
class segregation than we otherwise would. Head Start people need to look at this issue honestly. 
They ought to do what we did. They may come to other conclusions as to the way that the 
system ought to be structured, but they need to look at this issue of segregation. 

565 



559 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Sroufe: That is a good start from our panel. We would now like to start a conversation on this 
topic with the participation of audience members. 

Ivelisse Martinez-Beck: I am with the Child Care Bureau. Could you give us a definition of 
preschool as opposed to early childhood education in general? 

Hansen: In our report, we did not try to come up with a single definition of preschool or 
prekindergarten, because there is not a single definition. At the same time, it is important that 
the big, new public subsidies that ought to be involved come with some quality standards. We 
suggested, as Bergmann indicated, that this was going to be expensive. We indicated that it 
ought to be a federal-state partnership, and funding ought to be about half-federal, half-state. 

We have a rationale for that, since it would be costly in terms of federal money if our recom- 
mendation were actually to happen. 

We thought that federal money ought to operate as an incentive to the states in building their 
systems, to build high-quality preschool or prekindergarten programs. We suggested that the 
federal money should flow to the states as an effective block grant that the states would apply 
for and be eligible to receive if they had strategic plans for how they would move toward 
implementing universal prekindergarten for 3- and 4-year-olds, and if they had developed 
standards for such programs. 

There would be a new federal entity that would not certify a single set of standards, but 
would look at the state plans and the state quality standards for prekindergarten to determine 
whether they were acceptable. In effect, we left it to this new body, which we said should be 
composed of early child care and education experts as well as public policy makers and public 
citizens. They would look at the state of what we know about early education and develop a set 
of criteria for accepting or endorsing acceptable standards. Presumably, those would change over 
time as we learn more about what kinds of teaching credentials are necessary for effectively 
helping prepare children for school. 

For example, many of you are probably aware that the National Research Council issued a 
report a couple of years ago called Eager to Learn. They call for all teachers in preschool programs 
to have bachelor's degrees. We are far away from that reality now. Frankly, we do not know at 
this point how essential it is that all teachers in prekindergarten have bachelor's de^ees as 
opposed to other criteria one might set for a prekindergarten program. Maybe it is important 
that the people who are in charge of developing curricula and programs in preschool centers 
have bachelor's degrees; maybe it is not so important that all other people in the classrooms 
have bachelor's degrees. 

These are things we can learn about over the years from research, as we implement programs 
around the country. We see this body that we described not only deciding initially on a set of 
criteria for acceptable standards but also reviewing those, changing them, and perhaps 
ratcheting them up over time. This would happen in a practical sense as it becomes more 
possible to do that. However, it could also happen in an empirical sense as we learn more about 
which aspects of prekindergarten are the most effective, which types of criteria matter the most 
in terms of curricular standards, teacher credentials, class size, and all the types of things that 
one considers when thinking about program standards. We did not think we were in a position 
to define what those standards ought to be, but there ought to be a body that has such a role. 

Quickly, let me say that this is not an out-in-left-field idea. There are many federal programs 
that have some kind of similar mechanism for setting quality standards. Let me just use one that 
I happen to know, which is higher education. Much federal money flows to colleges and 
universities in federal college student-aid programs. That money is tied to colleges and universi- 
ties meeting some standard that says they are eligible institutions. In higher education, the 
federal government uses accreditation as its mechanism. There is a federal body that actually 
accredits the accreditors and determines which accrediting agencies have sufficient standards for 
program review such that if a college is accredited by that body, they are eligible for federal funds. 



560 




QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



We did not want to talk about accreditation alone, because accreditation might be one way 
that standards are set. It might be that this federal body would say that if a preschool program 
had National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC) accreditation, they 
could be eligible for federal funds. We did not think that ought to be the only criteria. For 
example, look at Georgia's universal pre-K program. The standards that Georgia defines as 
meaning pre-K might well be ratified by this federal body as making the program eligible, 
similarly with pre-K programs in other states. 

Sroufe: Were you asking more about curricular differences that would be based on different 
definitions of preschool? For example, is there a difference between 3-year-olds and 4-year-olds 
or even younger children? 

Martinez-Beck: Why are providers able to give different types of care considering market 
mechanisms? 

Bergmann: As an economist, perhaps I have too optimistic a view of what the market can do. 
The usual assumption by economists is that if the demand is there, the supply will appear. I 
recently had a little comeuppance on that. I got a call from a reporter from the National Public 
Radio program Market Place. He said that he had a newborn. He lived in Washington, DC and 
had been calling around to find care for his infant. I suggested that he ask— especially since he is 
the reporter for Market Place — for-profit providers why they are not providing more care for 
infants and toddlers. This is a subject for serious research. Certainly if we received large appro- 
priations, there would be expansions of supply. My view tends to be that the main shortage is 
money. 

Sroufe: When you say that more research is needed in this area, specifically what aspect are you 
pointing to that requires research? 

Bergmann: We ought to get funding to talk with the executives of these 4arge corporations to 
find out what is happening. It is nothing we want to theorize about; we want to ask about it and 
find out their decision making process in terms of opening up centers. Who are the clientele 
they are opening up for? 

Schumacher: Most consumers cannot afford to pay the cost of a high-quality program. There 
are some incredibly amazing centers in some urban settings where there is demand as well as a 
concentration of people who can pay. Those are fantastic, but the great majority of consumers 
cannot afford to pay $12,000-15,000 a year for infant care. 

Bergmann: In our book, we give an example of a couple earning $30,000 a year. If the poverty 
line for them is $17,500, then their disposable income leaves them about $10,000 for child care. 
That is about what it would cost to get two children into care. What we are saying is that this 
family, which is in the lower middle class, would have to reduce it's standard of living to the 
poverty level in order to pay for child care for those children, and they will not do it. That is why 
there is so much off-the-books care and why, to some degree, parents choose family day care. 

Schumacher: I find the power of the universal argument interesting. I was happy to see in the 
Preschool For All report that right now, many of the programs that are aimed at providing early 
childhood education are focused on the families with the very lowest incomes. Even for poor 
children and Head Start, CCDF states can go up to 85% of the state median income, but only a 
few do. They do not have the resources to do it, so most families are just above the poverty level 
if they are getting any type of child care assistance. We know from research, and instinctively 
from anyone who is looking for child care right now, that it is difficult to afford. 



er|c 



567 



561 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



It is interesting to try to remove the universal argument from the idea of it having to be 
means-tested, focused, and therefore politically unpopular. We should start thinking about it 
more as a universal program that is appealing to the average person, and see it as more of a 
public good in a way that then seems important for government to make gains. That has 
happened in Georgia. Although it is funded by a state lottery, the Georgia pre-K program for 
4-year-olds is fantastically popular. It is free to everyone; it serves about 70% of the 4-year-olds 
in the state. 

Hansen: It is critical to pick up on the fact that it is prekindergarten. It is seen as education. For 
good or ill, we may not like it, but people are much closer to accepting universal preschool 
education than they are to universal child-care subsidies. It is where we are politically. I need to 
be sure that I am clear that our proposal is about part-day and part-year universal pre-kindergar- 
ten. If we could get that enacted in this country, the public subsidies that would flow with that 
would in part start to take care of one big piece of the child-care problem. The money flowing to 
that could displace public subsidies that are now being spent on those children in child care; 
that money could flow to other children for other kinds of care. It is not perhaps as we would all 
wish it. It occurred to me earlier that by emphasizing the early education aspects of this, there is 
potential to build support that is not worth sneezing at. There are whole new constituencies 
who are not yet ready to talk about the types of universal child-care subsidies that we envision. 

Schumacher: I would agree with that and add one point. One would want to make sure the 
preschool can be delivered in a variety of settings and that there are ways for them to qualify and 
get up to speed so that they can provide that service. That is the power to lift all boats putting 
money out there that is attached to higher quality standards, but giving the money to actually 
help programs get there. That is when the system can truly be transformed. 

Colleen Gallagher: My concern is about the funding. We would need to ensure that if we set up 
a universal pre-K program, we are not taking away from programs for children birth to 3 years of 
age. All of our research shows that birth to 3 is when early education starts and that concerns me 
greatly. I have seen things shift to take care of one problem and leave the other out in the cold. 
Regarding parental choice, can state and local groups give parental choice to a particular type of 
provider? Under current legislation, can states restrict funding to licensed care systems? 

Bergmann: Our book suggests that no public money go to unlicensed care, including relatives. 

Schumacher: Under the current CCDF law, states may use the money with unlicensed provid- 
ers. The state has to certify that a health and safety standard system is followed. I have seen states 
work on moving more of their children from subsidized families with low incomes into higher 
quality programs. For example, in Oklahoma, where they have a tiered reimbursement star 
system, they pay more for higher quality care. They are trying to move more of their children 
into higher quality care. Oklahoma is moving toward saying that the care has to be a certain star 
level to use the subsidy. 

GaUagher: Is that okay? 

Schumacher: There are some concerns. Our advice has been to go toward that gradually. There 
have to be enough providers available to meet needs or the state cannot be served. It must be a 
gradual process. 

Bergmann: Since the term waiting list was broached, that has been an important political 
weapon. We ought to have systematic information on waiting lists nationwide, and people 



5RS 



562 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



should be encouraged to get on the waiting list so that pressure mounts for more money. 
Advocates have been delinquent in inventing strategies for raising the amount of public money. 

I would guess that the waiting list publicity could be one of them. 

Sroufe: Gallagher had two questions, the second of which we dealt with well. We did not 
address the first question. If the state mandates a funding level for preschool education, like 
birth to 5 years of age, that would work against putting resources at the 0 to 3 level and also go 
against kindergartners who might be older and thus ineligible.. 

In Florida, almost 44% of our subsidized care is for school-aged children. That is actually 
where it falls in my area of town as well. It is not that we cannot serve those children — we can. 
However, if the priority in the law is from birth to 5 years of age, then that is where the funding 
will go. Once those children are served, attention will go to the others. In some areas, we will 
never get to the others, because there is not enough money. 

Janet Hansen: Unfortunately, there is not an entitlement to child-care services. Many states — at 
least 17 that we know of— run out of fiscal resources and have to put children on waiting lists. I 
share those concerns. When we interviewed people in Georgia about how universal pre-K was 
working and what the implications were, there was a great deal of money going to 4-year-olds. It 
is a separate funding stream, but people definitely said they were trying to shift some of their 
resources down to the children aged 0 to 3 years and to the older children, because they know 
that age group was being left out. This preschool movement focuses many of the resources on a 
certain age group. 

Gallagher: That is my concern — serving families versus serving an age group. 

Bergmann: That is part of the problem in giving in to what Hansen has characterized as the 
political reality. The political reality is that legislators will go for something that is called 
education but will not go for something that is called child care. One can give in to that or one 
can say, "That is not right— we need both kinds." 

Hansen: That is important. One does not have to give in to it; we need to look at our child-care 
system and think of it as education and care. I would say that we have not sufficiently thought 
about the education part of most care provided for 3- and 4-year-olds. We can win more support 
for those types of things by acknowledging that we are providing higher quality care, which 
includes more intentional attention to things we are learning about how to educate young 
children. That is effective politically. 

Bergmann: It is a little harder to pretend that the money put into the 0 to 2-year-old programs 
is educational. 

Hansen: I agree. 

Bergmann: Yet those children need high-quality, developmental care. When one emphasizes 
education to the exclusion of everything else, one gets part-day and part-year programs that do 
not help working parents or their children. 

Schumacher: Not only would one want the funds to be delivered in a variety of settings, but 
also one would want to make it easy to blend so that they can put a full-day, full-year program 
together. That is the beauty of universal or major early education pre-K initiatives in a variety of 
settings. The program gets extra resources to boost their quality and meet pre-K standards, but it 
is in a child-care program that is already operating full-day and full-year. They can put those 



569 



563 



SYMPOSIA/ roundtables/conversation HOURS 



funds together with those that they get for child care and do a full-day, full-year program. The 
problem is where there are barriers and difficulties of learning the multiple funding streams. 
Programs are doing this. The onus is often on individual programs to figure out all these 
different rules. There are resources available, but more could be done to increase the flexibility 
of funds. 



Hansen: 1 agree with everything said. It is also important to remember that most of the public 
subsidies for child care go to families of children in poverty. This is only part of the group that 
we are concerned about. 1 would say that it is when we take this education focus, especially for 
the older children, that we have a hope of getting broader public subsidies for worldng families 
and other families above the poverty line. We are not going to get big public subsidies any time 
soon for those children for something that is called child care. 

Bergmann: Not unless we ask for it. Boeing has 200 lobbyists on Capitol Hill. Maybe the way 
to start asking for it is to convince Boeing to contribute a share of its lobbyists for this cause. 

Marilyn Arons: 1 am with the Melody Arons Center for Preschool Research and Education. The 
layer 1 have not heard addressed is disabled children, particularly those aged 0 to 2 years and 
their families. In terms of parental choice, for any mentally handicapped infants or toddlers, 
especially if one is poor or just above the line, there is literally no way to meet those children s 
needs. Isn't the real issue, the political issue, how to get the energy to leave here, go to Capitol 
Hill, and turn it into action? 



Bergmann: One is not going to get there by asking for $20 million more this year. Obviously, 
$20 million more is better than not $20 million more, but we must articulate a vision of where 
we want to go. 1 have another book comparing France and the United States. The United States 
government uses about 30% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), which is money that passes 
through the government's pockets through taxes and so forth. In France, that figure is 45%, and 
in Sweden it is 60%. Neither of those countries has as ridiculously swollen a defense establish- 
ment as the United States. We need to start thinking of unmet national needs, including child 
care, education, and universal health care, and where we want to go with them. Are we willing to 
pay for it? What kind of taxes would we want to raise? There ought to be a party in this country 
that wants to spend more and realizes that what we need is expensive. 

Arons: It is not just the money. The General Accounting Office (GAO) saw that we had 90 
programs across 11 federal agencies, and none of the programs were coordinated. The issue is 
how to get that money to become more efficient if we cannot get more. 

Sroufe: The first question helped out with the fact that we have been ignoring the issue of 
disabled children in our thinldng about parental choice. The second comment was about the 
fragmentation of federal policies, making it difficult to have an efficient and coherent system, so 
there are fewer choices than there might be otherwise. 

Charles Hare: I am with the Oklahoma Association of Gommunity Action Agencies. I was 
worried about TANF being reauthorized. There is going to be a real effect on early childhood 
divisions at the state level. We talk about all the money that we are losing. It impacts the state 
legislature as well. 

Bergmann: States are suffering from lower tax collection and budget deficits. Gonstitutionally, 
many of them are not allowed to have budget deficits. Again, we ought to have revenue sharing 



ERIC 



564 



570 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



from the federal government to the state government. That is particularly important because 
with all the corporate scandals occurring, the economy may not recover. This economic climate 
may be around for a while. 

Schumacher: A good point has been raised, something we have worried about for a while. The 
great majority of states have budget deficits right now, along with balanced budget amendments, 
so they have been in the process of slashing their budgets for the last couple of months. We have 
been trying to track the changes. For example, many states are considering lowering their 
eligibility for child care and they have begun to implement waiting lists and not increase 
provider payment rates. Some states are also scaling back on early childhood initiatives. 

Another troubling issue is that in the last few years, caseloads fell by half and states used their 
free TANF funds — almost $4 billion in 2000 — for child-care initiatives. The total budget was 
about $9 billion. They used that money for child care, after-school initiatives, or early childhood 
initiatives. That is positive, and we encouraged them to do that. It is important for people to 
realize, however, that the TANF block grant will probably not be cut but will not be increased 
either. Due to the factors of inflation alone, it will go down in value by 22% if compared from 
1996 to the end of the next 5-year reauthorization. There will definitely be an impact on child 
care and early education after-school initiatives in states that use those funds. 

On the other hand, we are also looking for more funding for the Child Care Block Grant. So 
far, the House put in $1 billion over 5 years as new mandatory funds. The Senate Finance 
Committee is meeting today, and my understanding is that they are going to look for about $5.5 
billion over the next 5 years. Advocates were asking for $20 billion. Most of those funds had 
been assumed to require a state match. 

My understanding is that the Senate Finance Comniittee has decided in the first couple of 
years to put the bulk of the funds in without requiring a state match because of the concern that 
state budgets may be unable to come up with it. This could be good for states. It could also be 
bad because as an advocate at the state level, one wants to use that match to encourage the state 
to keep the money in child care. It will be interesting to see what happens in the end and 
whether states pull back their investments because of that. It is hard to make decisions right now 
with such a dire economic backdrop. 

Sroufe: Senator Jeffords had a hearing on early childhood education and the needs of the 
country. Among the featured witnesses was someone talking about the French system men- 
tioned by Bergmann. Senator Jeffords was then the chairman of the committee because it was a 
Republican-controlled Senate. He had the hearing on early childhood education. The only 
fellow members of the committee that showed up were Democrats. Literally 2 weeks later. 
Senator Jeffords had moved to the other side. 

Rubina Azhar: I am from South Texas Community College. We always think that these are 
parents who are going to go to work, but is it possible to have the choice to get aid and stay 
home, or receive lower pay and stay home for the year? The billions of dollars we spend on 
providing child care could be used to get the parents to stay home and leave their job. It would 
lead to a better outcome for the children. 

Bergmann: In our book, we come out against that. To show how fanatical we are, we also come 
out against long, paid parental leaves. The rationale goes something like this: If one is pleased at 
the advances that women have made in the last 40 years, those advances essentially stem from 
their being in the labor market even after having children. If we set up a system in this country 
where essentially a mother is encouraged and subsidized to stay home, we will go right back in 
terms of women s position in the labor market. Employers will discriminate against women 
more because they will not view them any longer as permanent employees. If one is concerned 



571 



565 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



about equality for women, that is not such a good idea. My coauthor tells me that 1 am the only 
person in the whole country that thinks that way. 1 hope that is not the case. 

Secondly, if one looks at the needs, the people who stay home are relatively privileged, with a 
husband or partner who has a decent job. It is a crime to give them money that could go to 
hard-pressed single mothers. In terms of sending money where it is needed, that is not the way 
to go either. Minnesota put in a policy of paying mothers to stay home. They do not allow single 
mothers or people who might be eligible for welfare to take part. Why? Because they do not 
want to re-establish welfare, and for single mothers, that would be the equivalent of welfare. 

The country agreed that single mothers should work, and I do not think that is such a bad 
idea provided they have good child care and health care. Although Minnesota is telling people 
to look at this wonderful program, only 23 people are supported by it. Yet Minnesota has a huge 
waiting list for working parents, poor working parents, or close-to-poor working parents, so it 
does not make sense to put money into that kind of program. 

Nancy Johnson: I used to be the director of the Resource and Referral Network in Minnesota. 
Politically, the legislature was looking at the flexibility under TANF to allow women who were 
receiving assistance to be able to stay home with their infants and continue getting assistance up 
through the infant's first year. The legislature in Minnesota was looking at that and the cost of 
infant care and realizing that even under Minnesota's generous and fair leave benefits, they were 
still in many cases spending more for infant care than if they allowed mothers to stay on 
assistance. The mothers would not be penalized for choosing to work under this program.The 
legislature was making that decision at the same time they were looking at who also wanted that 
option and did not want to have to go on welfare to get that kind of option. 

The way that this program works is that it allows either parent — the father or the mother — to 
choose to stay home, but they have to have been in the workplace. That is different than just any 
kind of means-tested program and particularly different from welfare. The concept is that if one 
is in the workforce, one has attached oneself to the workforce. Some studies of paid parental 
leave have found an effective loyalty among parents who are getting paid parental leave. It is a 
reality that it is mostly people who have upper incomes, but what they find is that it is not at all 
a disincentive to attach to Ae workforce. If anything, it is a bigger incentive to stay with that 
employer if one takes some time off. 

The program in Minnesota was fought for by the department, a government agency who was 
looking at the long waiting list for the child-care program. They did not advertise the mles of the 
program for the first year. Now that they have been directed to advertise the program, we are 
beginning to see more families take an interest in the program. It is not just for single families, it 
is available to all family configurations. It also is not enough to live on, but many families tell us 
that when they put it together with some alimony or child support, they are able to stay home 
for another month or two, and they value that. 

On the other hand, the way the clause is written right now, the state agencies actually seem to 
be saving from this program. When the mother or father stays home with the infant, the other 
children are also at home, so they are not paying for the child care of the 2- to 5-year-olds either. 
The mother is home with all the children. Another state might choose to design the program 
differently, making the other children stay in child care and paying those subsidies as well. 
Characterizing staying at home in opposition to an important goal for women is missing a point 
here. Many mothers and women that I have talked with believe that they want both options, and 
they should not be forced to have to make that choice. 

Bergmann: From the economic perspective, if the staffing ratio in a good child-care center is 
3:1, then if a woman has fewer than three children and is paid minimum wage or more for 
staying home, it is much more expensive to keep her at home. That is just plain arithmetic. 
Obviously, if this will be available, people will want it. It will not be available to the typical 




566 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



single mother who does not have any other money, or if it is made available only to the single 
mother, it will be a new form of welfare. 

In general, rules are going to be established, and Minnesota established such rules as you 
mentioned that precludes those people. It is single mothers that we have to be most concerned 
about. They have the hardest situation, make the lowest pay, and have nobody else to contribute 
to household income and family services. Is it about one third of mothers? This is not a small 
group. If your point of view is that we have to make sure that single mothers are not left out or 
are given priority, then this type of a program is not dead. 

Schumacher: Whether you like this idea or not, there is some chance that it might become an 
option for all states to try officially through the re-authorization process, because the Senate is 
considering legislation to give the states the option of doing an at-home infant care program. 



Bergmann: Prompted by Jerry Fallwell's fans? 

Schumacher: No, actually not. It gets bipartisan support and the interest of people whom one 
would not normally think would be interested. The people who are interested in seeing moth- 
ers roles supported are interested in this, and they are interested in aligning with people who 
would normally be on the left-hand side of the column. I am on the fence about what it is going 
to mean and how useful it will be for families. We might have more information in 5 years, if 
states actually get a chance to experiment with it. 

Hansen: Just listening to the discussion, I have to say that I have a problem with the arithmetic. 
On the one hand, I assume we are talking about infants, children under 1 year of age. 

Bergmann: Right. 

Hansen: Everybody says that infant care is the most expensive care, costing $10,000-15,000 a 
year. We know that many women in the workforce are not earning $10,000-15,000 a year, so I 
am not sure that I follow the argument about how the arithmetic does not work. Maybe it does 
in some way I do not get, but many people— and not just the Jerry Fallwells — hear the argu- 
ments about how expensive infant care is and question whether forcing single mothers with low 
incomes into low-paying jobs is a better use of public funds than enabling them to stay home 
with infants. 

Bergmann: The reality is that welfare allowed them to stay home but allowed them to stay 
home in utter and complete poverty. 

Hansen: That could be indefinitely, not just with infants. 

Bergmann: Right. Nevertheless, the stipends were below the poverty level, whereas if mothers 
work and receive child care from the government, those children will be brought up above the 
poverty line. For children to have a standard of living above the poverty line, one needs mothers 
to get jobs. 

Hansen: Maybe we are talking about the difference between what exists now and the ideal 
system we would like to see. I am hearing arguments for a system in which the pieces all work 
well. I am not an expert on infants, but I have heard that care for infants is the worst and the 
hardest to find. You are talking about the vision of an ideal system that would work, and maybe 
that is where the disjuncture enters the conversation. 




567 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



Barbara Rudin: I am from Caliber Associates and I'm doing work in the early childhood area. 
One topic that we mentioned in the beginning that we have not talked about at all is the idea of 
partnerships, particularly in the business environment. I love the idea of the government paying 
for all of this, but I am not sure that is entirely realistic in our political environment today or at 
any time. One can exempt businesses from certain expenses by using the government. In 
Virginia, where I live, businesses can get up to $35,000 right now to institute telework policies, 
which can be attractive. We work with many private companies who put in child-care programs 
for their employees; they do it for all sorts of reasons. It could be done at a broader level if the 
right pieces are in place. 

Hansen: I do not want to take exception to that. That is right, although there is a report about 
to come out of the National Women's Law Center about the use of tax credits to persuade 
business to provide child care. My understanding is that this will be relatively negative regarding 
their effectiveness. I do not want to say anything against giving incentives and encouraging 
businesses to provide these kinds of services directly. However, as a business-led group, when we 
talked about this, one of our own tmstees pointed out that it is largely the biggest businesses 
that are in a position to do that. Most people are not employed by big businesses in this 
country. The most effective thing that business could do to increase resources toward this issue is 
to be willing to pay taxes for public programs. Do not forget that businesses are also taxpayers. 

It is great when businesses want to do this themselves, but most of the small- and medium- 
sized employers, where most people work, are not going to get into the business of providing 
these services directly, for multiple reasons ranging from economics to legal liability questions 
to mobile workforces. All business, in our view, ought to be willing to pay taxes to support 
public programs. That is another important way in which business does in fact support this and 
ought to support it more. 



568 



574 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



The Chicago Child-Parent Centers: Prevention 
and Cost-Effectiveness in Early Adulthood 
From the Chicago Longitudinal Study 

CHAIR: Arthur J. Reynolds 
DISCUSSANT: Pamela Stevens 

PRESENTERS: Arthur J. Reynolds, Judy A. Temple, Suh-Ruu Ou, Michael D. Niles 

Evaluations of early childhood programs have advanced beyond a sole reliance on average 
program effects to increased attention on the heterogeneity of effects and the mechanisms ' 
through which participation leads to long-term benefits. Evidence concerning the key mecha- 
nisms of program effectiveness are crucial to program improvement, replication, and expansion 
to other settings. To enhance the relevance of evaluation findings for policy decisions, benefit- 
cost analysis (BCA) is also recommended. BCA is increasingly used to help prioritize the use of 
scarce prevention resources. Unfortunately, prevention and intervention research on established, 
large-scale programs has rarely provided evidence concerning these emergent issues (Karoly 
etal., 1998). 

In this symposium, we investigate the long-term benefits of participation in the Chicago 
Child-Parent Center (CPC) Program, the second oldest (after Head Start) federal preschool 
program in the U.S. Data from the Chicago Longitudinal Study (CLS, 1999), an ongoing 
investigation of 1,539 low-income children that includes an entire cohort of 989 CPC kindergar- 
ten participants in 1985-86 and a matched comparison group of 550 children who participated 
in an alternative intervention in kindergarten are used. At age 21 (March 2001), the project has 
determined through surveys and administrative records the educational status of 1,314 youth 
and the juvenile arrest status of 1,404 youth. Rates of sample recovery exceed 80% for program 
and comparison groups, and no evidence of selection bias or selective attrition has been found 
(Reynolds, 2000). 

We found that CPC participation beginning in preschool was associated with significantly 
higher levels of cognitive skills at school entry, higher school achievement through the school- 
age years, with significantly lower rates of grade retention and special education placement by 
age 18, and with significantly lower rates of juvenile arrest by age 18 (Reynolds et al., 2001). We 
also found that participation in extended intervention (4 to 6 years) is associated with higher 
school achievement and lower rates of grade retention and special education. Two of the most 
recent findings are that preschool participation is associated with significantly higher rates of 
high school completion by age 21 (Reynolds et al., 2002) and that preschool participation and 
extended program participation are associated with significantly lower rates of child maltreat- 
ment by age 17 (Reynolds & Robertson, 2003). 

In the first presentation following the overview, we investigate the pathways through which 
the long-term effects of preschool participation on high school completion and juvenile 
delinquency are achieved. The second presentation addresses the instmctional and family- 
involvement mediators of the early cognitive and scholastic effects of preschool participation. In 
the final presentation, we describe findings of the first BCA of the CPC program. Overall, our 
findings strongly support the benefits of program participation in preventing learning and social 
difficulties and achieving substantial cost-effectiveness. 

References 

Chicago Longitudinal Study. (1999). Chicago Longitudinal Study: A study of children in the Chicago 

Public Schools. User's guide (Version 6). Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin, Waisman Center. 
Karoly, L. A., Greenwood, P. W, Everingham, S. S., Hoube, I., Kilbum, M. R., Rydell, C. P, Sanders, M., 




575 



569 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



& Chiesa, J. (1998). Investing in our children: What we know and don't know about the costs and 
benefits of early childhood interventions. Santa Monica, CA: RAND. 

Reynolds, A. J. (2000). Success in early intervention: The Chicago Child-Parent Centers. Lincoln, NE: 
University of Nebraska Press. 

Reynolds, A. J., & Robertson, D. L. (2003). School-based early intervention and later child maltreat- 
ment: Findings from the Chicago Longitudinal Study. Child Development, 74(1), 3-26. 

Reynolds, A. J., Temple, J. A., Robertson, D. L. & Mann, E. A. (2001). Long-term effects of an early 
childhood intervention on educational achievement and juvenile arrest: A 15-year follow-up of 
low-income children in public schools. Journal of American Medical Association, 285(18), 2339- 
2346. 

Reynolds, A. ]., Temple, J. A., Robertson, D. L, & Mann, E. A. (2002). Age 21 cost-benefit analysis of the 
Title I Chicago Child-Parent Centers [Discussion Paper: 1245-02). Available from the Institute for 
Research on Poverty Web site: www.ssc.wisc.edu/irp/ 



■ Pathways of Effects of Early Childhood Intervention 
on Educational Attainment and Delinquency 

Suh-Ruu Ou, Arthur J. Reynolds, James W. Topitiz 



Five hypotheses were investigated that link participation in preschool to educational attainment 
by age 20 and to juvenile arrests by age 1 8 for children in the Chicago Longitudinal Study (CLS; 
Reynolds, 2000). These include the cognitive advantage, family support, social adjustment, 
motivation, and school support hypotheses. Two questions are addressed: (a) Examined 
together, which hypotheses contribute most to the mediation of the effect of preschool on 
educational attainment? and (b) Do the hypotheses that explain the mediation of educational 
attainment best explain the relationship between preschool participation and lower rates of 



delinquency? 

Of the 1,539 original participants, this study was able to document up to 1,404 youth from 
the CLS Program. Program and comparison groups were well matched at program initiation. 
Previous research in the study indicated that preschool participation was significantly and 
independently associated with higher educational attainment and lower rates of juvenile arrest. 

The primary measure of educational attainment is high school completion by age 20 
(September 2000). Delinquency is measured as the incidence of court reported arrest by age 18. 
Cognitive advantage was measured by scores in the Iowa Test of Basic Skills (ITBS; Riverside 
Publishing Company, 1986) word analysis at age 6. Family support was measured by teachers 
and parents’ rating in school participation through age 12. Social adjustment was measured by 
teacher ratings of classroom adjustment at age 9. Motivation was measured by students report 
of whether they expect to go to college at age 10 and 15. School support was measured by 
attendance in magnet elementary schools and by number of school moves from age 10 to 14. 

Latent-variable stmctural modeling indicated that when the five hypotheses were entered 
simultaneously, the cognitive advantage, family support, and school support hypotheses 
significandy mediated the effect of preschool participation on high school completion. Among 
the three significant mediators, the cognitive advantage mediated the effect indirecdy through 
other factors. School support alone accounted for 31.1% of total indirect effects of preschool 
participation on high sAool completion, and family support accounted for 16.8%. 

The school support hypothesis (attendance in magnet school) contributed most to the 
explanation of the link between preschool participation and delinquency reduction (48.1%). 
The family support hypothesis (parent involvement in school) also contributed to the media- 
tion. The cognitive advantage hypothesis contributed to long-term effects by direcdy affecting 
family support and school support b^i^^ as well as motivation (educational expectations). 




570 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



The model accounted for 67% of the main effect of preschool on high school completion and 
73% of the main effect on juvenile arrest. 

These results support the cognitive advantage, school support, and family support hypotheses 
of intervention effects on educational attainment and delinquency. Findings indicated that 
cognitive advantages in early childhood could launch better motivation, social adjustment, and 
higher parent involvement, and then have long-term effects on educational attainment and 
juvenile arrest. This suggests that the cognitive advantage hypothesis does not lead to long-term 
effects directly; instead its impact was mediated by other intervening factors, such as school 
support, motivation, and grade retention. These findings direct attention to improved school 
practices and learning environments in the elementary grades to help promote long-term effects 
of early childhood intervention. 

References 

Riverside Publishing Company (1986). Iowa Test of Basic Skills, Forms G and H, Basic Battery. Louisville, 
KY: American Printing House for the Blind. 

Reynolds, A. J. (2000). Success in early intervention: The Chicago Child-Parent Centers. Lincoln, NE: 
University of Nebraska Press. 



■ Origins of the Cognitive and Scholastic Effects of Early Childhood 
Intervention: Findings From the Chicago Longitudinal Study 

Michael D. Niles, Arthur J. Reynolds, Melissa Clements, Dylan L. Robertson 

There is a longstanding curriculum debate whether early childhood education should follow the 
academic model or the child-developmental model. In this study, we investigate the contribu- 
tion of instmctional approach and parental involvement to the initial cognitive advantage and 
the longer-term effects of participation in the Chicago Child-Parent Center (CPC) preschool 
program. 

Three questions are addressed: (a) Does participation in preschools emphasizing direct 
instmction in phonics and child-developmental activities impact language and cognitive skills at 
the beginning and end of kindergarten? (b) Does parental involvement independently contrib- 
ute to language and cognitive skills? and (c) Do instructional approach and parental involve- 
ment contribute to longer-term effects on school remedial services and juvenile arrest by age 1 8, 
reading achievement at age 14, and high school completion by age 21? 

The study sample included 989 low-income minority children attending the CPCs at ages 3 
or 4 in the Chicago Longitudinal Study (CLS, 1999). Instructional approach was assessed by 
retrospective reports of CPC head teachers and independently verified by school district staff. 

The phonics-based approach included centers reporting use of direct instruction materials (e.g., 
Houghton-Mifflin, Open Court, DISTAR). The child-developmental approach was based on 
extensive participation in field trips, learning centers, and child-initiated activities. 

Parental involvement was measured by first-grade teacher ratings of school participation 
(range from 1 to 5) in which children were assigned the mean for their CPC site. Regression 
analysis was conducted controlling for gender, risk status, ethnicity, full-day kindergarten, and 
participation in the CPC school-age program. 

We report three sets of major findings. First, children enrolled in centers emphasizing 
phonics and child-initiated activities (P -i- C group; n = 387) had the highest average scores on 
the Iowa Test of Basic Skills (ITBS; Riverside Publishing Company, 1986) cognitive composite at 
kindergarten entry, surpassing the No-P -i- No-C group (n = 177) by .49 SD. The No-P -i- C group 
(n = 362) had the second highest average cognitive scores. In math, the groups emphasizing 




571 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



only phonics and only child-initiated activities had significantly higher scores than the other 
two groups. 

Second, parental involvement was associated with significantly higher cognitive scores at 
kindergarten entry and higher word-analysis scores at the end of kindergarten. 

Third, children enrolled in centers rated relatively low on phonics and child-initiated activi- 
ties had the highest rate of grade retention, while the P + No-C group (n = 63) had significantly 
lower rates of special education. Instructional approach was unassociated with juvenile delin- 
quency and reading achievement in eighth grade. The No-P + C group had the highest rate of 
high school completion, which was significantly higher than the No-P + No-C group. 

Parental involvement in school was associated with higher reading achievement, lower rates 
of grade retention, and marginally lower rates of delinquency. 

Instructional approach and parental involvement significantly contributed to short- and 
long-term child outcomes. A blended instructional approach that emphasized phonics and 
child-initiated activities appeared to provide children with the greatest cognitive advantage in 
preschool. These findings indicate that the use of direct instruction methods should not come at 
the expense of other enrichment activities. Each instructional approach was associated with 
long-term benefits either for reducing special education placement or increasing high school 
completion. Parent involvement contributed significantly to early cognitive and literacy skills as 
well as long-term school competence. This contribution was above and beyond that of instruc- 
tional approach and family demographic attributes. 

Reference 

Chicago Longitudinal Study. (1999). Chicago Longitudinal Study: A study of children in the Chicago 

Public Schools. User's guide (Version 6). Madison, Wl; University of Wisconsin, Waisman Center. 



■ Age 21 Benefit-Cost Analysis of the Chicago Child-Parent Centers 

Judy A. Temple, Arthur J. Reynolds, Dylan L. Robertson, Emily A. Mann 

In this study, we investigate the long-term cost-effectiveness of participation in the Chicago 
Child-Parent Center (CPC) Program. Two major questions are addressed: (a) By the end of 
adolescence, is participation in the CPC program for different lengths of time independently 
associated with several indicators of child well-being including educational attainment, delin- 
quency, and school remedial services? and (2) Do the estimated program benefits exceed costs? 

The main study sample includes 1,286 youth of the original sample of 1,539 in the Chicago 
Longitudinal Study (CLS, 1999). Data in this prospective study were collected from educational 
and juvenile court records up to age 21 (September 2000). An alternative-program, quasi- 
experimental design was used in which the behavioral adjustment of the entire cohort of 989 
children in the 20 CPCs in 1985-86 was compared to a random sample of 550 eligible children 
who participated in another government-funded early intervention. The program provides 
comprehensive services to children and parents from ages 3 to 9. 

We estimated the present value of program benefits and costs in 1998 dollars for five main 
categories of benefits: (a) reductions in expenditures for the school remedial services of grade 
retention and special education, (b) reductions in criminal justice system expenditures for both 
juvenile and adult arrest and treatment, (c) reductions in child welfare system expenditures 
associated with child abuse and neglect, (d) averted tangible costs to crime victims, and 
(e) increases in adult earnings and tax revenues projected for increases in educational attain- 
ment. We used a 3% annual discount rate evaluated at the beginning of preschool participation. 
The distribution of benefits was calculated for society at large (participants and the general 
public). 




575 



572 



QUALITY EARLY EDUCATION AND CHILD CARE 



Relative to the comparison group and controlling for family economic disadvantage, sex and 
race of child, and program sites, participation in the CPC preschool program was associated 
with a significantly higher rate of school completion by age 21 and with significantly lower rates 
of juvenile arrests, special education placement, grade repetition, and lower rates of child abuse 
and neglect. Participation in the school-age component and in the extended program (preschool 
+ school-age) was associated with lower rates of special education and grade retention by age 18. 

The benefit-cost analysis yielded the following results. The preschool program generated a 
total return to society of $47,759 per participant by age 21. Total benefits to the general public 
were $25,771 per participant. With an average cost of $6,692 per participant (1.5 years of 
participation), the ratio of benefits to costs was $7.14 per dollar invested for society at large and 
$3.85 per dollar invested for the general public (tax payers and crime victims). The main sources 
of public benefits were increased tax revenues projected over adulthood, reduced expenditures 
in the criminal justice system due to lower rates of crime, and reduced remedial education 
expenditures. 

The school-age component provided a total return to society of $4,944 per participant and a 
total benefit to the public of $4,219 per participant. With an average cost of $2,941 per partici- 
pant (1 to 3 years of participation), the ratio of benefits to costs for society at large was $1.66 
per dollar invested, and for the general public it was $1.42 per dollar invested. 

Participation in the extended intervention (4 to 6 years of participation) provided an eco- 
nomic return of $24,772 per participant above and beyond that of less extensive intervention 
(1 to 4 years). Total benefits to the general public were $14,594 per participant. With an average 
program cost above and beyond less extensive intervention of $4,057, the ratio of benefits to 
costs was $6.11 per dollar invested for society at large and $3.60 per dollar invested for the 
general public. 

As the first cost-benefit analysis of a federally-financed, early childhood intervention, findings 
indicate that participation in each component of the program was associated with economic 
benefits that exceeded costs. This was accomplished by increasing economic well-being and 
reducing educational and social expenditures for remediation and treatment. The preschool 
program, the most intensive and comprehensive component, yielded the greatest benefits by age 
21. Findings for school-age and extended intervention demonstrate the benefits of reduced class 
sizes and enriched school environments in the early grades. Contemporary child development 
programs can provide substantial long-term benefits to society. 

Reference 

Chicago Longitudinal Study. (1999). Chicago Longitudinal Study: A study of children in the Chicago 

Public Schools. User's guide (Version 6). Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin, Waisman Center. 



DISCUSSANT: Pamela Stevens 



Since its beginning in 1967, the Title I Child-Parent Centers (CPC) have strived to meet the 
needs of young children by offering a continuum of education and family services from pre- 
school to second or third grade. The CPC program is the country's oldest federally-funded 
preschool after Head Start. As reported in this symposium, the CPCs have consistently demon- 
strated their effectiveness in promoting children's school success and long-term well-being. In 
1998, it was given exemplary status by the U.S. Department of Education, an honor originally 
bestowed on the program in 1976. Over the years, more than 100,000 preschool children and 
families have been served and many more school-age children. Beginning in the fall of 2000, 
fiill-day preschool services have been offered in selected sites. 




573 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



In September 2001, the Child-Parent Center Program and the Chicago Department of 
Human Services (CDHS) Head Start Program entered into a new collaborative relationship. 
Through a blending of resources, a new opportunity was created for Chicago's preschool 
families. Twenty CPC sites already offering a full-day preschool program (9:00 a.m.-2:30 p.m.) 
are for the first time in the history of the school system providing before- and after-school care. 
With additional resources from CDHS, each of the specified sites offers care for one class of 20 
eligible children from as early as 7:00 a.m. until class time and from dismissal until as late as 
6:00 p.m. Through the use of Head Start funds, eligible families are provided this service for 49 
weeks. Priority is given to those families who are able to document need. 

This new collaboration is meant to stabilize the day for preschool children already at risk due 
to societal, economic, and environmental factors. In addition to the CPC sites, 10 State Pre- 
Kindergarten classrooms are also providing this innovative service. 

Today, the Chicago schools serve over 59,000 preschool children in 423 sites in 521 schools. 
In addition to the CPCs, the schools administer the following pro^ams: Head Start, the State 
Pre-Kindergarten Program, Parents as Teacher First, Even Start Family Literacy, Tuition-Based 
Preschool, and Extended-Day Kindergarten. 



580 



574 



Quality Health Care 



Providing High-Quality Health Care for Children: 
Patient Service and Policy Issues 

CHAIR: John Pascoe 
DISCUSSANT: Martina Rogan 
PRESENTERS: Carole Lannon, Judy Shaw 



John Pascoe: My name is Jack Pascoe, and I am a general pediatrician from Dayton, Ohio I 
am on Ae Program Committee, and I will moderate this session, "Providing High-Quality 
Health Care for Children: Patient Service and Policy Issues." 

I Lajinon will begin our session today. She is Associate Professor of Pediatrics and 

Internal Medicine at University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and also the Senior Vice 
resident of Ae National Initiative for Children's Health Care Quality (NICHQ). She is also 
irector of the Student Committee on Quality Improvement for the American Academy of 
ediatncs. Judy Shaw is at the University of Vermont and directs the Vermont Child Health 
mprovement Prograni (VCHIP). I am also pleased to welcome our discussant, Martina Rogan 
She IS the General Health Manager for the Child Development Council of Franklin County, Ohio. 

Carole Lannon: We appreciate the opportunity to be here. One of the things I want to ask 
before I begin is about who is m the audience today. Pascoe said we might have policy makers, 
researchers, front-line Head Start managers and staff, so we planned a fairly general talk as well 
as a generous amount of open time to answer questions. I was asked to focus on patient safetv 
issues because that is one area I work on with the American Academy of Pediatrics. We will 
provi e an overview, and then we will be glad to answer specific questions 
tK about making health care safer for children. Judy Shaw and I both work with 

• ^ ^ ^ nonprofit organization that works closely with the American Academy of Pediat- 

rics and the i^encan Academy of Family Physicians to improve health care for children. We 
with practitioners, as well as with policy makers in state agencies, the Academy, 
and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). We work in our respective states on 
various issues, so we will be glad to go into some of those things in greater depth. 

Some of the areas m which we have worked are preventative services, asthma. Attention 
Deficit Hyperacu^ty Disorder (ADHD), foster care, and we are beginning some work with the 
Commonwealth Foundation on developmental services. I am also involved in work with 

children with special health care needs, including children with fetal alcohol syndrome and 
associated exposures. riiuiumc emu 

NICHQ is an education and research organization dedicated exclusively to improving the 
quality of children's health care. We have offices in Boston, Vermont, Washington and No^ 
Carolina. I also work closely with the American Academy of Pediatrics. About half of my time is 
spent working with them on different educational and policies initiatives. The Academy is a 



581 



575 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



55,000-member organization dedicated to the health of all children. The missions of NICHQ 
and the Academy are in significant alignment. 

Pascoe asked me to talk about the Institute of Medicine (lOM) report that came out almost 
3 years ago, entitled To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System. It received a lot of press in 
December of 1999, when it said that medical errors are the eighth leading cause of death in the 
United States. Although the number is disputed, the number of deaths due to medical errors is 
thought to be somewhere between 44,000 and 98,000 deaths per year. As you can see, that is 
equal to or greater than the number of deaths per year from breast cancer or motor vehicle 
accidents in the United States, and it dwarfs the number dying from AIDS. 

I saw someone grimace in the back, and that was the national reaction when this book was 
published. Luckily, there has since been a lot of work on this issue; the Clinton Administration 
had put together groups to work on it. The Federal Agency for Health Care Research and Quality 
is making this a major initiative. 

All the facts that I showed you dealt with adult injuries, but we do not know much about the 
risks of errors in children's health care. Two years ago, a study was published showing that 
serious in-hospital medication errors occurred with pediatric patients three times more fre- 
quently than with adults. It was thought that one of the key reasons for this is that multiple 
calculations are needed when prescribing medications for children. For example, if anyone in 
the audience came to see me with a strep throat, I would prescribe 500 milligrams of penicillin, 
even though you all are different sizes, shapes, and weights. For children, particularly for an 8- 
month-old, a 2-year-old, or a 4-year-old, we are not so broad or generic, and we need to know 
their weight in order to figure out the proper dose of medicine. 

Many over-the-counter medicines have instmctions suggesting a certain dose to children 2 to 
3 years of age, or another dose to children 4 to 5 years of age. For those of you who work with 
children, you know that they can vary in weight and size in any age group, particularly the 
younger the child; therefore, there is variation in dosing. In the literature about dmg errors for 
children, there is something called the Tenfold Error. During my internship, two instances 
occurred to my colleagues who were calculating milligrams per kilogram. Dividing it three to 
four doses a day, they mistakenly moved a decimal point, so that an intravenous penicilliri dose 
was given tenfold to a small infant, causing some problems. 

This study was from the hospital. We know very little about what happens in the outpatient 
setting. Part of that, one hopes, is that fewer serious dmgs are given in the outpatient setting, 
particularly very few intravenous drugs. On the other hand, in the outpatient setting, there are 
fewer restrictions, guidelines, or regulations than in hospitals. Two studies are now looking at 
pediatric health-care settings. Last month, the Academy sponsored a conference on this topic. 
One of the concerns that I suspect you can relate to is the connection between what happens in 
the doctor's office, or in the hospital for children with significant illnesses, and what happens in 
the day-care setting, school, or family home. 

Again, most of the safety evidence we have is based primarily in adult, inpatient, or hospital 
settings. But, we know that 70% of child health care occurs in ambulatory or outpatient settings, 
and as I have mentioned, children pose unique safety challenges. Aside from weight-based 
dosing, there are communication and caretaker issues. 

As a pediatrician, I often see a grandmother, other relative, or caretaker bring in a child for an 
appointment while the parent is working. These individuals sometimes speak a language other 
than English, so to communicate with them is similar to playing the game "telephone." I may 
tell one person something, but by the time it gets to the parent, who may then relay it in the 
Head Start setting, there could be a different discussion going on. One of the concerns is also 
that children may have less capacity to buffer errors arid may be less resilient because they are 
smaller than adults. Another communication point is that children, particularly younger 
children, are not able to communicate very well about side effects they may be experiencing, 
unlike adults who can typically let us know. We may not know about some of the things that 
occur because they are thought to be part of the illness. 



O 

ERIC 



576 



582 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



Many wise people in the airline industry and other industrial areas, as well as in medicine, 
are beginning to think about causes of error. You may remember that the title of the lOM report 
was To Err is Human. The idea they tried to get across is that it is too easy to blame the last 
person who signed off on a medication or health-care order. There may be a tendency to say, 
"That person should have known, and if we get rid of that person, we will take care of things." 

As someone said, "If one got rid of every pileup when an error occurred, we would not often 
travel by airplane." The airline industry began to think about safety issues over the last 20 to 30 
years, and we are learning from them. 

One of the challenges in health care is the complexity of what happens. There are multiple 
steps in medication order and delivery, and statistically, the more steps there are, the more likely 
it is for an error to occur. Human factors are another issue. The airline industry has mandated 
limits for how much work pilots and support staff can perform and for what period of time. The 
medical health-care field is trying to do that as well. In fact, for those of yoii who work at 
universities, a new statement has been released stipulating that residents in training must work 
only 80 hours a week, because the more one is up, the more tired one gets. 

One of the main findings from the lOM report was also that the system itself is often de- 
signed to produce unsafe results, and we need to think through the process of health care in 
order to simplify it. There is a lot of work going on about how to do that. I will mention one key 
point. When I first gave this talk, it was during the Winter Olympics, and I tried to give the sense 
of handoffs, which increase the potential for error. That is what I meant about complexity in the 
system design. The more steps in a process, with care transitions from one setting to another, the 
greater the increase in opportunity for error. 

When a child with special health-care needs or a chronic illness such as asthma leaves the 
hospital, there is a handoff to the primary care physician, sometimes to the parent. The informa- 
tion does not get welled back to the primary care doctor. When the parent takes the child to the 
Head Start setting, that is another handoff, and if the child with asthma begins to wheeze, do 
the people in the health-care setting or the Head Start setting know what to do? Every time there 
is a handoff, the chance of miscommunication or error increases. 

For example, there is a sick child who comes in to visit the doctor. The caregiver may not 
know all of the child's history and may not speak English well, so the doctor may not hear the 
full picture. The clinic may be busy, and the doctor may suggest giving the child Tylenol for the 
earache, along with a prescribed antibiotic. 

As some of you may or may not know, there is an array of Tylenol products available. There 
are infant drops. There is a liquid medication that is actually a different concentration and 
strength than the drops. There are chewable tablets that come in different strengths. Something 
that would be good for a 3-year-old might be different from what would be appropriate for an 
older child. There is also a junior size, which my daughters have just graduated to. 

With antibiotics, one must calculate the correct dose by the child's weight. Most people in 
pediatrics do this as a matter of course. Sometimes that can be a little inaccurate, particularly 
with unusual drugs or drugs that are not commonly used. A caregiver may not be aware of a 
child's allergy history, and sometimes that is not appropriately communicated to the clinician. 
Also, the family has received a prescription for antibiotics and been told to take Tylenol. One of 
the current challenges is the handwriting of physicians. The medication has to be filled, and that 
assumes that pharmacists can read and correctly interpret the handwriting. The medication then 
needs to be given to the child. 

One question is, does the child take the medicine? Do they take it in the various multiple 
locations they may be in? If the directions say one teaspoon, three times a day, can one use a 
teaspoon or a cereal spoon at home? One should actually use a device from the pharmacy that 
accurately measures a teaspoon. This may be less important for certain medications, but for 
certain seizure or asthma medications, measurements are particularly important. When the 
instructions say three times a day, does that mean every 8 hours or does it mean they just need 




583 



577 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



to get it in at some point, and it could be skipped during the hours that the child might be in 
day care? 

As I have mentioned, the child might be in multiple locations during the day, tended by 
multiple caregivers at home, day care, or grandma's house. I am trying to give you a common 
scenario. Handoffs increase the potential for error, especially for children with an unusual 
disease or for those needing complicated medications. 

What can help with handoffs, and how can we make health care safer for children? Using 
written instructions in the office can be helpful. This is an example of an asthma management 
plan, and a written note about medications and making sure that the family understands the 
directions. Because of the law now, pharmacies are giving out some instructions, and often 
talking with the person picking up the medication to make sure the instructions are clear. 

One of the things that has been encouraged lately is an asthma management plan. The 
Academy is also developing an ADHD management plan in collaboration with NICHQ. These 
are often made in triplicate, so that one copy can stay in the chart and one can go home with the 
family. The NICHQ website has an array of tools that can be downloaded. 

In the last month, the Academy has also come out with a new online program where tools, 
including management plans, can be downloaded. For those of you in Head Start settings, it 
would be helpful to have something like this at the setting. There is also a card that one of the 
asthma groups has developed. Again, you can link to that from the Academy work. A wise 
person came up with the idea to provide color, so when this is printed, there are shades of green, 
yellow, and red. These colors tell the child and the caregiver if the child is doing well. For 
example, green means to continue with their basic medicines. What is nice is that those continu- 
ing medications are written down with instructions. I suggest that people put this on the 
refrigerator and give a copy to the school. 

In the yellow zone, there are some symptoms that the child is experiencing. It is like a yellow 
warning light or a caution light. It says that when one is at this point, one may want to intervene 
in order to avoid having to go to the emergency room or get hospitalized. Red should make one 
worry about the child, check him or her with the physician, and follow a management plan. 
Often when we give these to practices, they adapt it for their own setting. These are also avail- 
able in Spanish and other less common languages. 

In summarizing this information, I thought of how those of you who work in Head Start 
settings and interact with families can help children with the health-care system. Discussing this 
issue in the group can be helpful for children. 

What happens when a child visits the doctor? Goes to the hospital? Has an x-ray or blood 
test? There are many children's books about visiting the doctor or being in the hospital. I think 
there is an Arthur book and one Curious George, even though he swings from things in the 
hospital and ends up much worse than when he started. Then there are some Sesame Street 
books, with Big Bird or Elmo going in. It can also be helpful to talk in the group and suggest 
that when the child goes to the doctor or the hospital, bring something familiar like a teddy 
bear or blanket. 

The day-care provider often serves as a real ally for parents, and as a source of trusted infor- 
mation. I often encourage parents to write down any questions in order to remember them. If, 
as a teacher, you have a real concern about a child, share that with the parent and write it down, 
so that they can share it with a physician. If one is comfortable, offer to have the physician call 
you. I often call teachers, since they see the child everyday. They often have helpful information, 
particularly with my ADHD patients. It is also important for teachers and parents to review the 
child's care plan and to request written instructions. 

To summarize, medical errors are unfortunately quite common. We believe that they occur at 
an equal or greater rate for children than adults. This may be because of weight-based dosing in 
children. Causes for errors include the complexity of health care, human factors, and even 
system design. Being an aware consumer can help. The federal agency is developing a handout 



578 



584 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



suggesting parents know their child's weight, know about allergies, give medications at the 
right time with the correct dose, ask questions of the caregiver, and request readable written 
instructions. 

The Academy provided me with some handouts for this presentation. 1 also have some 
handouts from one of the federal agencies, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
(AHRQ). It offers 20 tips to the layperson to prevent medical errors. It is written for adults, and 
there is one that the Academy is currently reviewing that will focus on parents and children. It 
should be available within a few months. I would like to turn the podium over to my colleague, 
Judy Shaw. 

Judy Shaw: I will talk about the work that NICHQ has been doing with the primary care 
providers, and I will begin to explore how primary care providers could be a venue for 
partnering with the health-care or child-care community. What do we mean by preventive 
services — making children healthy and innovations to improve child health? What is happening 
in the country? Lannon talked about focusing on medical errors. Some other groups are looking 
at improving child's health and at the opportunities between Head Start child-care providers, 
primary care practices, and communities in general to improve health care for children. 

I like to think about the phrase "it takes a village" to frame the context of health. To improve 
health care for children, every child should have the opportunity to be healthy and to stay 
healthy. Those of us in the pediatric community, as well as in the child-care setting, tend to agree 
with that. Every child should have access to quality health care including prevention, dental, 
medical, mental health, and developmental services. Children should also have access to 
community supports and services. 

What do we mean by all that? I will start by talking about preventive services in primary care. 
When we talk about prevention, we are talking about intervening in some way, or helping a 
family and a child to stay healthy, reflecting back on the fact that every child has the right to be 
healthy and to stay healthy. We want to ensure that they continue throughout their life as 
healthy as possible. Part of the work we do in the primary care setting, as well as what you do in 
the Head Start setting, is to try to prevent children from getting ill and to keep children healthy. 
One of the things that we do is give immunizations. As you are all aware, that is something we 
administer to the child. 

In addition, there is screening, risk assessment, and counseling. Although I worked in the 
primary care setting for many years, I never thought about the difference between the three and 
how I might, as a health-care provider or as a child-care provider, think in that context. I can 
begin to think about the opportunities I might have as an individual or in the context of my 
environment to intervene and support efforts of making children healthy. 

Some of the things that I will describe in more detail include screening for anemia, tubercu- 
losis (TB), lead, smoking, sleep position, blood pressure, vision, and dental problems. Those are 
some of the areas where we discuss screening, risk assessment, and counseling. There are many 
more, but I will offer some basics and put that into context of how we all can work together to 
make children healthy, to prevent illness. 

When we talk about screening, we talk about identification of an unrecognized disease or risk 
factor by a standardized history, physician exam, lab test, or procedure. That is what we do in 
the primary care setting. It is not intended to be diagnostic; it does not make a diagnosis, but it 
gives us information about the child. It does not necessarily have to be invasive, like sticking a 
needle into a child and inflicting pain, or doing something to the child. 

One example of screening is vision screening. We are not diagnosing what the problem is, 
but we are vision screening to note if there is a problem. Think about this in the context of how 
you work with children and how you might partner with the primary care provider. What if you 
notice a child is squinting or having trouble seeing at a long distance? Begin to think about 
some of the things that you do on a day-to-day basis. Blood pressure is another example of 



58f5 



579 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



screening. We are not making a diagnosis, but we are looking to measure the child's blood 
pressure. 

We also have developmental screening tools to show us where that child may have problems, 
not to diagnose. For lead exposure and anemia, getting the lead test and blood test for anemia is 
actually screening. The second part is risk assessment. We do not always have to screen. Some- 
times, we want to do a risk assessment. A risk assessment is any technique used to identify 
patients at high risk for health problems. We all do that in different ways when we approach a 
family or a situation. It involves specific questions to determine the patient's risk for certain 
conditions. 

It can be implemented in many ways. In the primary care setting, we sometimes have parents 
complete structured forms, or sometimes providers complete prompting forms asking those 
questions. In health care, we gather information to understand as much as we can about the 
child, the family, and the context of their community, so we can help guide them to have as 
healthy a life as possible. 

TB is an example of risk assessment. Not every child needs to have the test done. In some 
situations, we do what is called a risk assessment, which involves asking questions. If the child is 
at risk, then we do the screening. Knowing some of the requirements and what primary care 
providers do can help one to parmer in the risk assessment, in one's own setting. Smoking is 
another example. We want to do risk assessment for parental smoking or exposure to second- 
hand smoke in that child's environment. We ask some structured questions about the risk, 
identify the risk, then think about the intervention to put in place. 

We may want to assess a child's risk due to sleep position. We do not just counsel the parents 
to put a baby on the back and move on. We want to assess the child's risk. Does a grandparent 
who does not believe in putting the baby on its back to sleep care for the child? With in-depth 
assessment of the need, one can more appropriately intervene. 

The last piece is imparting information or advice regarding behaviors that could reduce the 
risk of subsequent illness or injury. How does it fit into the framework of screening, risk assess- 
ment, and counseling? Some examples of that are injury prevention and counseling parents 
about how to make their environment and their home safer for the child. 

Head Start has done a wonderful job in the child-care community about being aware and 
partnering with parents to think about how to make their environment safe. When we assess 
risk, we also counsel and support the parents. For example, if we identify a parent who has a 
child at risk for smoking, or for being exposed to secondhand smoke, we may want to counsel 
the parent about how to stop smoking or exposing the child to smoke. 

Then there are issues of adaptation. In child development, we all participate in helping 
parents and children to better develop. Toilet training and discipline are some examples of 
counseling that we provide. In the pediatric community, we do not do this based only on our 
best judgment. There are guidelines for how to deliver this care. The American Academy of 
Pediatrics, the US Preventive Services Task Force, and Bright Futures all have guidelines for when 
we should do these things, at what stages, and what might happen if we identify a child at risk. 
However, those guidelines are not always followed. 

I have provided data from North Carolina where a number of pediatric practices are repre- 
sented. The researchers went in and looked at the charts to see how many kids in each practice 
had an anemia, TB, or lead screening in the chart. The mean is low if all children at 12 months 
of age should be screened forTB. Ideally, one hopes for 100% compliance. This shows us is that 
not only is the mean low, but there is tremendous variability. The point is that pediatric provid- 
ers cannot do this alone. They cannot do this in isolation. There is tremendous variability in 
how we deliver preventive services and how we impart that information to parents. 

For the data from the project that we are working on in Vermont we see the exact same 
pattern happening. We can improve the quality of preventive services in the primary care setting, 
but I contend that it is not just up to the primary care provider to work toward making children 



580 



586 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



healthy. It is the responsibility of all of us in this room. Part of the discussion we want to have 
this morning is where the opportunities exist for partnering, to help provide good preventive 
services for children, to reduce errors, and to improve the quality of health care. 

Historically, this responsibility has focused on the provider. As Lannon said earlier, if there is 
a problem, we point at the individual and say the doctor is bad or the practice is bad. We are 
moving away from that approach now and looking at the system of care and the community 
level of support. I want to talk about what is happening to improve children's health-care 
quality. Lannon talked about NICHQ, which really focuses on improving the quality of health 
care that we deliver to children. Healthy Steps, which I am sure many of you have heard about, 
is a primary care practice redesign to deliver better child developmental services in the primary 
care setting. 

The other group that some of you may have heard about is Foundation for Accountability. 
They have this survey called Promoting Healthy Development, the PHD Survey. They are seeking 
parents' input and are making the consumer accountable for health care. In other words, they 
conduct a statewide survey that gets parent input into the actions of primary care providers. Did 
the provider discuss child development with the parent? We are broadening our horizons and 
looking beyond the providers to get information back from the parents about what we can do 
better, where the gaps exist, and what they want to hear in the primary care setting. 

One area targeted within NICHQ's quality improvement efforts is child development. We are 
working in collaboration with The Commonwealth Fund in New York. We developed some 
modules that practices can implement, to think about how they might improve their system to 
provide better child development information, screening, referral, and partnership with the 
community. Some of these "change concepts" that practices can put in place do not agree on the 
guidelines. Believe it or not, in some practices, one doctor does it one way, and one doctor does 
it another. Some of the things introduced to practices regarding guidelines is meant to encour- 
age agreement on what to do. 

Another area we focus on is seeking family and parent input. Some of the most successful 
practices focused on improvement have parent support groups or parent inputs. For some of the 
practices in Vermont, quality improvement is comprised of people in the practice as well as 
parents. I can tell you that parents have the best ideas about how to fix the problems in the 
practice, and how to fix the system. One of the things NICHQ encourages the practices to do is 
to engage a parent partner to help solve system problems and improve health care. 

We also advocate using structured assessment tools, like a risk assessment check-off list. We 
no longer expect providers to keep absolutely everything in their heads. We recognize the fact 
that there is so much information in the medical field these days that it is okay to use a check- 
off list to remind one of questions to ask. Distributing the work and training the staff are also 
key components. We also help the practice to think about the provider not having to do 
everything. There are many people in the practice and in the community who can partner, 
which is critical. 

In one of the practices in Vermont we found that the school does vision screening on all the 
children. They trained the school to do the vision screening and send the forms back to the 
practice. The practice knows that the schools have been trained to use the standards that the 
practice adheres to. We are not trying to add more work to the practice; rather, we are encourag- 
ing them to look to the community, to think about partnering together to improve the health of 
children, to simplify the referral process, and to link with community resources. 

We have discussed opportunities to improve the quality of health care for children. We want 
to deliver the same message from setting to setting. We began working with primary care 
providers, the pediatricians in Vermont, around improving health care and the delivery of health 
care. The hospitalis came to us and said, "We want to deliver the same message as the pediatri- 
cians about baby sleep position, smoking, smoking cessation programs, and so forth. We want 
to have the same message. " 




581 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



One of the issues is working together so that we are all delivering the same message to 
parents, forging partnerships with pediatric providers and practices. Again, as we said about 
screening and risk assessment, how might one identify a child in need of screening or a risk 
assessment, or help the parent to facilitate the follow-up, if a child has an elevated lead level or 
is anemic? How might one enable that parent to get into the appropriate services? 

In terms of injury prevention and child development, how might one partner to support the 
parent and to educate the parent about injury prevention? How might one identify quality 
improvement efforts in the pediatric providers' offices? What are the practices in your particular 
area currently doing and how might you intercept with them and learn about the gaps in 
services? 

I have done a lot of work in injury prevention. It is not one group s responsibility to educate 
parents about how to make the environment safer for their children. That is something we all 
want to do. There is a cartoon that says, "I got sick and tired of putting her in and out of the car 
seat, so I finally just said the heck with it." This is not our goal, to strap children in car seats and 
keep them there. We all want to help parents to think about the concept of making the world 
healthier for their children. 

The last piece is child advocacy, parental education programs in the community, and commu- 
nity education programs. March is Poison Prevention Week, so how might Head Start and the 
child-care community work with the hospital community to provide better education around 
injury prevention? Another example is May's "Buckle Up, America" week. Then how do we 
identify community resources? 

I have trained physicians, nurses, and many others in health care and have always said that 
they do not need the answers; knowledge about who to go to for the answer is more important. 
If a parent comes into one's setting and says, "I have this concern," one may be able to answer 
his or her question. But more importantly, if one cannot answer that question, who can? The 
next step is partnering with the community to distribute the information. 

With the Web and the wealth of information available for parents, how do we disseminate 
that information to parents in the best way? In summary, I want to talk about preventive 
services, screening risk assessment, counseling, and partnering with primary care providers. We 
talked about innovations to improve children's health, a little bit about NICHQ, and what is 
going on in the community to do that. There are organizations and groups working on improv- 
ing children health. How might one partner with those groups? What opportunities exist to 
improve the quality of child health care? That really involves forging partnerships with health- 
care providers and community organizations. Thank you. 

Pascoe: Any questions or clarifications for Shaw? 

Question: On the chart from North Carolina with all the dots, what does the line mean? 



Lannon: This was a study by a colleague, which should be published soon. We do not believe it 
is realistic to set one's goal at 100% because there are reasons why it may not get there; so 90% 
is the goal we ask all practices to aim for. The goal that many set becomes somewhat the 
national standard on many issues, so this shows the gap between them. 

Rogan: First of all, I wish I could invite you to Columbus, Ohio, to speak with the pediatricians. 
They need to be innovative and on the same boat. When the nurses come to me, their biggest 
frustration is their communication with the pediatricians, which is also felt by our Head Start 
parents. I feel similarly to Lannon and Shaw that parents have to be the primary caregivers for 
their children. As Head Start professionals, we feel it is our goal to empower the parents to do 
that. Sometimes it is not an easy task, because the parents whom we serve have difficulty relating 
to pediatricians. 



O 

ERIC 



582 



588 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



They feel intimidated when they go to a doctor's office and the doctors tell them things about 
their child that they do not understand, or in a language that is not understandable to them. We 
work with parents of many different cultures, and they often have distrust toward doctors, for 
whatever reasons, including religious and cultural reasons. We still have families who see the 
medical providers as "the system." This is still happening in the year 2002. These parents do not 
want to visit the doctor unless their child is sick. Tftey feel like it is part of "the system," which 
has not always offered them a positive experience. 

One of the things that I wanted to do briefly is provide a summary of three things. We talked 
about medication errors, and in Head Start, the potential for that is great. We have 10 nurses to 
service our 58 centers. When children need medication in our centers, it gets delegated to the 
center's staff, which is a teacher, teacher's assistant, or a site manager. 

Even though the nurse is responsible for initiating the administration procedure protocol and 
for the training and instruction, the teacher ultimately gives the medication; thus the potential 
for error is great. I do not know how to fix that issue in the Head Start structure. Perhaps 
feedback during the discussion can provide some answers. 

We do know three things. First of all, we know that communication among health-care 
workers. Head Start workers, and family is most important in preventing medical errors. We also 
know that we, as the health care workers in the Head Start program, play an important role to 
ensure that parents know the health care system. Finally, we should be advocates for the chil- 
dren as well as the families. 

Our health-care system for the Medicaid families in Columbus, Ohio can be complicated, 
with all this red tape. If they need referrals to specialists, sometimes they have to go through the 
primary care provider, who does not always understand the need for the referral. We know 
children with special needs and health concerns in the Head Start program demand our atten- 
tion. About 40% of our children have asthma problems in a program of about 2,300 children. 
We have other real concerns for children with life-threatening allergies. For some reason, in the 
Head Start agenda, education and social service gets a lot of the attention, but we sometimes 
forget about the importance of health issues. 

Lannon: I have an Academy video, entided Child Care and Children with Special Health Care 
Needs, and a handout on all the different Academy publicadons. There are several helpful 
resources for out-of-home caregivers of children. The Academy also puts out resources on 
asthma, for example, the updated 2002 version called Caring for Our Children, which has 
national health and safety performance standards and guidelines. And as I mentioned, I have 
brought the list on medical eiTors put out by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
(AHRQ). 

The Academy supplied me with brochures for the purpose of this conference, including 
Choosing Child Care, What's Best for Your Family. These may be helpful for parents of younger 
children who want additional information. There is also something here on child passenger 
safety, called Protecting Children in Child Care. This brochure is about a national conference held 
by NICHQ in November, on providing care for children with ADHD. One of the Academy 
guidelines on the diagnosis of children with ADHD is set up for children ages 6 to 12, which I 
know is older than the children whom you all care for, but it may be of interest to other people 
that you know. 

Comment; Very often, when I have a monthly meeting with parents, they talk about the 
emotional problems of their children. They do not understand the anger, severe depression, or 
uncontrollability in their children. It may be that immigrant families do not know exactly how 
to set boundaries for their children. From what I hear from your presentation, there has to be a 
wide array of resources in order to educate parents. Many parents also have physical and 
emotional problems. 




5S9 



583 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Lannon: You are speaking to a universal concern that many of us have noted. NICHQ is actually 
working on some developmental modules, which are more like anticipatory guidance. Some key 
pieces are on discipline for families. Some of these are still in their pilot stages. To help bring 
these issues to the surface, clinicians are using the Parents' Evaluations of Developmental Status 
(PEDS) questionnaire and the Ages and Stages questionnaire. 

I do not want to call them screening tools, but they are ways to help elicit parent concerns 
when a child may be out of sync with what the parent thinks is appropriate. These are to be used 
in clinic settings. There is also something called the Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist, used 
by some clinicians to help focus on the issues. Some of the Academy handouts talk about 
different issues around discipline. I realize that literacy can be an issue, and it is important to 
have things that are easy to read. NICHQ is developing simple handouts. 

Shaw: When we recognize children have emotional illness, or if parents have many questions, 
no one group is able to address that. How can we work together to address that issue? One of 
the grants that we just applied for in Vermont was similar. It tries to bring the pediatric commu- 
nity together with the child-care community to identify those issues and put in place a program 
for going forward. It seeks partnering in order to identify children that need services early and 
to provide support for these families, rather than waiting for them to declare themselves later on 
in life. 

We are all talking about how to work together to address these issues. Historically, the 
primary care provider has used those tools, identified the problem, and referred the child to 
services in the community. Rogan also described the communication between those who are 
providing the day-to-day care, the parents, and the primary care setting. How can we build 
bridges and collectively work together to meet those needs of children in the community? 

Pascoe: The question addressed how to help families identify and work with children who have 
social and emotional problems at home. Barton Schmidt's book. Your Child's Health, depending 
on the reading level of the parent, is one resource. 

Question: I worked at a local Head Start program, and I currently work with the region for 
Training and Technical Services. One of the beneficial things about working with programs in 
the region is that we have a wonderful resource that helps our advisory committee. It is great, 
but underutilized. There are many issues with trying to communicate these topics or communi- 
cate these issues with parents, and then trying to give the caregivers a broader perspective on 
issues of early childhood development. It is also important to have people in the early child- 
hood development field understand that an effective health service advisory committee can 
affect health concerns. 

I would like some feedback on that, because I agree with Rogan's comments about some of 
the challenges. I can definitely identify with that from my experiences. But one of the things that 
I found in programs that are less frustrated with it, but frustrated nonetheless, is how the health 
service advisory committee is used. Are the educational efforts just providing, unfortunately, 
information about the program's operation but not really educating the committee members? 

Rogan: Can you define what health advisory committees are? I assume that is a committee 
specific to Head Start. 

Comment: Each Head Start is mandated to have a health advisory board. Until about 2 years 
ago, our health advisory board was useless, so to speak. We now have an excellent health 
advisory board, and I have begun to utilize them. We have nurse practitioners, mental health 
professionals, and disability experts from the community on the board, and they have made my 
life easier. But there has to be a strong board. The board must have people on it who are 




590 



584 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



interested in the children and the families served. And, they should have some connection to the 
health care providers in the community. 

Comment: I am a health-care provider. The Bureau has just produced a video on effective use of 
health services. It is a motivational, inspirational video to use with parents, staff members, and 
community members. That should come out fairly soon. 

Comment: I have had the opportunity to observe 33 years of what we call primary care in an 
urban setting. We have a two-class system in this nation. The White children go to private 
doctors, while the Head Start children go to the clinic and sit with their mothers, waiting 
for hours. 

When we talk about one village, there is not one village; there are two villages in most places 
in the United States. I see the fear in the faces of the patients as mothers carry in their children, 
fearful that they may lose them, or that their children will not get out of that hospital alive. We 
are addressing such immense issues that go way beyond the screening issues. We are addressing 
how to change the whole system. 

Lannon: Unfortunately, the parents that we serve go to what is referred to as the high-volume 
clinical providers. They see children en masse, and the practitioners, pediatricians, and nurses do 
not have time to sit with the parents and explain what services they are providing. The children 
are mn through the system as though on a conveyor belt. But, the high-volume places will take 
the Medicaid insurance or whatever type of insurance the family has. The nice practices where 
the pediatrician has a big plush office and our families can sit down at the desk and learn the 
procedures and services — most of them have a limit. Or, for whatever reason, especially in the 
dental world, they just cannot service all of the Medicaid-eligible families. 

We would love to improve access and remove two-level systems. The Academy does have 
many members who are, as you describe them. White and suburban practitioners. On the other 
hand, the Academy has been one of the strongest advocates for universal access for children. 

They have worked hard to push the State Children's Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) 
through. Many of the Academy members work in settings where the majority of children are on 
Medicaid. In our hospital, we try to be responsive to those needs. 

I hesitate to tar the Academy, when it has done so much to advocate for children. Shaw and I 
are both from states where we have worked closely with the Departments of Medical Assistance. 
On a positive note, the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), which is now the Centers 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), is actually driving quality improvement in this 
country. The federal and public agencies will drive quality improvement, because many health 
maintenance organizations (HMOs) and managed care organizations will not pay for it. 

There has been progress because of the advocacy of CMS and the CDC. In North Carolina, it 
has been a model. The majority of clinicians care for both private and Medicaid patients. All this 
improvement in primary care settings is actually funded by Medicaid. In North Carolina, 
Medicaid has funded 15 practices in mral areas that all care for children on Medicaid to be part 
of the ADHD work. 

I want to sound hopeful because there are many people working to improve access. NICHQ 
is also doing a lot with innovative scheduling in something called Open Access that one calls up 
to get in to see the doctor. They were actually doing that in a county in North Carolina that is as 
large as the state of Rhode Island. We have been doing that for about 6 months, and we have 
seen that preventive service rates have increased because children can get in when they need to. I 
want to sound hopeful, and I also want to say that the American Academy of Pediatrics is a 
wonderful advocate for all children and has a good track record. 



591 



585 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/ CONVERSATION HOURS 



Shaw: I could not agree more. I moved to Vermont from Massachusetts, where there definitely 
was a two-class, two-tiered system. We had the house center, and we had the wonderful private 
providers. In Vermont, I am proud to say that every provider sees Medicaid patients. I do not see 
a two-class or two-tiered system. Everybody takes care of everybody, and it is wonderful. 

Granted, Vermont is small, and I know we are different from everybody else. NICHQ spreads 
that learning to others and gets other practices and communities to see how supportive and 
wonderful the system has been. They are all working and bringing parents in to think about how 
to improve the quality of health care, regardless of how services are paid for. 

We need to start small. We need to start developing and spreading those networks. We will 
not address it from above, I believe it must bubble up from below. We will need federal support, 
but it will take the groundswell from practices and pediatricians to cut across those boundaries. 

Pascoe: I would like to add that 55,000 sounds like a lot of people, but my understanding from 
the Department of Federal Affairs and from the Academy is that it is a relatively small, national 
organization. We need to band together with advocacy, collaboration with public health 
organizations, and any organization with perspectives of child health. Everyone in the room 
would likely agree that we have a lot of work to do; but we need to be hopeful and keep working 
together. 

Peter Leonard: It seems to me that there are two broad themes that sometimes enter into the 
conference, and which enter into the relationship between Head Start nationally and profes- 
sional experts, including both researchers and medical providers. One theme is that for Head 
Start to be effective in the long run, it is essential that professional specialists demonstrate 
respect for the parents and families in the way they practice. Secondly, they must take seriously 
the idea that the parent is inevitably the child's primary teacher and primary health-care pro- 
vider. For health-care providers to practice in ways that naturally honor those two ideas, they 
must have a fire in their belly and an inner conviction that each and every parent is also an 
expert — as much an expert in certain things as the medical provider or the researcher. 

For example, the parent may have information, without which, the health-care provider 
cannot be effective, no matter how much they know. My question is, given the job of pediatri- 
cians, how likely is it that they can allocate time to these concerns and do something about 
them with all the other things they have to do? Secondly, what does the population of pediatri- 
cians look like nationally? How likely is it that many of them will actually honor those two 
principles? 

Lannon: My middle name is Pollyanna, so I actually feel hopeful for the work that we do. I am 
board certified as both an internist and a pediatrician. It is special working with pediatricians 
because I think they want to do the best job they can. And, on the totem pole of financial 
reimbursement for physicians, they are on the low realm. I think a lot of the work they do is out 
of genuine care for children. 

There are a few evidence-based tools. Some of the things I suggested before, the PEDS and 
Ages and Stages questionnaires, can help clinicians to elicit parental concerns without spending 
much time going through a checklist. It can even be done in the waiting room. The PEDS has 
been shown to work with many different literacy levels and socioeconomic groups. There are 
some tools and combinations we can use. 

One of the things that we are doing in NICHQ is to say this responsibility should not fall 
entirely on the clinician. Because they have so many other things to do, how can we spread this 
out? The practice I spoke of earlier is the only pediatric practice in a place the size of Rhode 
Island, and 65% of its patients are on Medicaid. They have been able to have the receptionist 
work with families. In certain cases, people become concerned, "Isn't that patient going to 
scream at you?" But the practice has worked out their procedures and is actually a star group in 
sharing how to do this throughout the state. 



586 



592 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



There are ways to work on it, and NICHQ and the Academy are partnering to spread a lot of 
this. Shaw talked about the idea of spread, and it takes building awareness and sharing strategies 
that work to give people hope. There are many ways we are working in the Academy to do that, 
through continuing education sessions, monthly publications, and by speaking at different 
sessions and working within each state and region to help build this sense. 

Barbara Calabrese: We are working with Head Start in Baltimore on an asthma study. In our 
asthma program, we have included the training of family service coordinators as the asthma 
experts in the schools, because there are no school nurses. In some cases, no one on the board 
has any medical background at all. We are looking at the issue from the bottom up as well as 
from the wide range. Let's start talking to family service coordinators about how to train parents 
to look at barriers to asthma management. What are some of those barriers to getting access to 
the physician, and how can we help them to make this connection with their local physician? 

It may help to get the health council into some of the issues in their local area. As a school 
nurse, I know that some physician offices require that one bring just the child who is being seen. 
For a family with many children, that is impossible to do. We are helping the family service 
coordinators identify barriers and different ways of helping parents to address those barriers. We 
are teaching the parent to be an informed consumer. Asthma is not just a health issue, it 
involves looking at appearance review issues and other issues in the system. We are trying to 
work that issue from the bottom up. 

Shaw: You are describing a systems approach and the bubbling of ideas from the bottom up. 
Another good example is when I showed those dot plots for immunization rates, TB, and 
anemia. NICHQ has brought together different entities, including the practice and supporting 
community groups, to learn from each other. The example about bringing only one child into 
the practice is interesting. There is a practice with 100% immunization rates, where not one 
child is not up-to-date for immunization. Their trick is to immunize every child who walks 
through the door, including every sibling, neighbor's child, everybody. When that one child 
comes in for a visit, they check everybody out regardless. When they stood up and talked about 
this accomplishment in front of 30 other practices in Vermont, it made the practices think 
differently about immunization. 

We did not go into detail today about what NICHQ does, but it brings together different 
groups to generate ideas and begin learning from each other. It is intended to broaden horizons 
about how to work together to improve whatever it is that we are trying to improve. We are 
trying to find models that work while also sharing and learning from each other, instead of in 
our own little isolated practice, where we deliver care in isolation. 

I worked in the primary care setting in Boston for 20 years. I never talked to another practice. 

I never learned from anybody else; we really were functioning independently. The opportunity 
to think about and learn from each other, have others generate ideas, and then learn about those 
ideas is a wonderful opportunity. 

Comment: On the asthma issue, if we teach the parents what the National Asthma Education 
and Prevention Program (NAEPP) guidelines are, they can then go in and prompt the doctor to 
look at them. 

Comment: I want to share with you another approach, because in Australia we have a different 
health-care system and a different child-care education system. Our approach to prevention has 
been based in the early child centers or the schools. We have a health-promoting movement that 
works together with the children, parents, health providers, and other service providers in the 
community. 

It works from a point of strength in acknowledging that, as people have mentioned many 
times before, the families and the children themselves actually know an awful lot about their 



593 



587 



symposia/roundtables/conversation hours 



strengths and their situation. Moving forward from that, those people identify the issues that 
they think prevention should move forward from, and we give those people the skills they need. 
We talked about empowering those people to actually move forward and take responsibility for 
their own health issues. Our role as researchers is to document and facilitate that process and to 
provide evidence for the future that that model works. 

Comment: I want to do some advertising for my own program, because we involved Head Start, 
health coordinators, and possibly members of the health advisory committees. I am the director 
of the National Training Institute for Child Care Health Consultants, based in North Carolina. 
We cooperate with the Child Care Bureau and the Healthy Child Care America Campaign at the 
Academy. We also train state-based trainers for child health consultancy. We have trained people 
from 47 states in the United States, providing child care health consultation coordination, 
training, and assistance to child-care centers, but not necessarily to Head Start. We have not 
figured out how to provide these services to Head Start programs, but we have just invited Dr. 
George Askew, the new medical director of Head Start and Early Head Start, to be on the 
advisory board, and he has accepted. 

We have had a couple of Head Start trainers, from Denver and Boston. We would like to 
reach out more to Head Start programs. We offer an intensive face-to-face and online training 
program. The curriculum is based on Caring for Our Children, the book that Lannon showed us. 

It is coordinated with the National Health and Safety Performance Standards. 

Terry Frankovich: Our organization sees education as separate within the health-care systems. 
For the last 2 years, we have served about 1,200 children. One nurse and I provide the health- 
care resources. I found that it has been a great experience in terms of opening access to the 
health-care system. It is hard to change a physician's practice. For nonphysicians to try to change 
a practice it is impossible. We have been able to make some progress by getting private founda- 
tion support. Without this support and innovative approaches, I think it would be difficult to 
create that interface with the medical establishment as well. These agencies should think about 
these collaborations. 

Comment: One of the reasons that I am here at this conference is to see where oral health fits in 
to the Head Start agenda. Unfortunately, the neighborhood of Washington Heights, in New York 
City, is not as wonderful and supportive as Vermont. Part of the reason is because there are no 
pediatric dentists serving this area. Only about 30% of the dentists in the area accept Medicaid. 
We have tried to get pediatricians to screen for dental care and to start screening for behaviors 
that promote dental health. But, there is a separation between mental and dental well-being and 
general health that permeates our medical community. Given that, how feasible is it for pediatri- 
cians and Head Start to allocate time and support for dental care and screening? How feasible 
would it be to allocate time to incorporate screening and risk assessment for oral health? 

Comment: I can speak for our Head Start agency, and I concur with you that oral healA is one 
of the areas that receives the least attention. We have the most difficulty in our area trying to 
solicit dental screenings for our children, even from dental hygienists. One of the problems is 
that in Columbus, Ohio, many dentists have received grants to work with Head Start and low- 
income, eligible families. There are several Head Start programs in our area, and we stmggle with 
particular dentists to provide us with sufficient services. There is not enough of them to go around. 

But the feasibility is great. If we had a dentist who was willing to work with the Head Start 
program in our area, we would probably bend over backwards to do whatever we needed to 
have that dental service. We would even have him monitor dental students or dental hygienists 
who could come in and provide at least the initial screenings for our children. 



588 



594 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



Shaw: In Vermont, all the pediatricians see children on Medicaid, but it is not the same with the 
dentists. Access to dental care is a problem. Another challenge is that if one asks a pediatrician 
to screen and identify, there needs to be services for them to refer to. The federal government 
could help by getting more dentists trained to provide the services and to be available for those 
children. When we did those chart abstractions and looked at practices, we also gathered dental 
data. The practices were doing a good job of risk assessing early. Then we also looked at 4-year- 
old charts. Many of them had verified that a child had seen the dentist, but it still does not get 
us beyond the access problem of getting those children in need of services to the dentist. We 
have a strong effort in the state to address dental care, so that may have helped as well. 

Lannon: One of the things that happened in North Carolina was a collaboration between the 
Pediatric Society, the Academy of Family Physicians, and Medicaid. It started with child health- 
care providers being reimbursed for oral health services including painting on fluoride. The local 
NICHQ group worked with providers to train people to do follow-ups. We tried to blanket the 
state in terms of clinicians both being much more aware of oral health issues and in being 
empowered and enabled to do preventive treatment. This issue is gaining increasing attention, 
and I know that the Academy has been trying to help elevate this issue. 

I will also mention that a friend of mine works with the National Health Law Program, 
which protects the rights of children, and there are several lawsuits on this subject. One in North 
Carolina pushes the envelope on Medicaid coverage for children in terms of dental health. There 
are many barriers to get over before this is accomplished, but people are beginning to work on 
it. I would be glad to put you in contact with the people in North Carolina because they have 
done a great statewide effort. 

Pascoe: Another possible resource is the Children's Health Alliance of Wisconsin. I used to be a 
member of this group and oral health was a major initiative underway at the time. 

Comment: We started with a Head Start program and a Medicaid program. If one follows the 
money historically, from the day President Johnson signed Title 19 and Title 18, Medicare and 
Medicaid, they always underfunded providers. If we had usual and customary fees for the 
Medicaid child, we would not be having this discussion today. The bottom line is that we need 
universal health-care programs. We currently spend $180,000 per child in the nursery and then 
in the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU). But, we will not pay the doctor who is caring for 
that child more than $20 per day for the care. There is a rationing system that was done either 
intentionally or unintentionally. We continue to face this problem. It is 40 years old, yet to be 
solved, and the debates go on. 

Pascoe: We have a call for advocacy on working together for universal access. 

Lannon: One of the reasons North Carolina has been able to lead in this area is that the 
reirribursement rates are equal to private reimbursement rates, in many of the cases. That 
enables people, and it is why most clinicians in the state care for Medicaid children. I want to 
point out that the Academy has been behind universal access for children and universal health 
insurance for many years. 



O 

ERIC 



595 



589 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Child Health Advice: Past and Present 

CHAIR: John Pascoe 

DISCUSSANTS: Howard Market, Steven Shelov 

John Pascoe: I have been dreaming about this session for 4 years now. I thought it would be 
fun to get Howard Markel and Steven Shelov together to talk about child care, past and present. 
This is an informal conversation hour, so the ground rules are that both of our speakers will take 
a few minutes to make some general comments about their particular area of interest and 
expertise, and then we will open it up to a conversation with the audience. 

The first discussant is Dr. Howard Markel. 1 have a copy of his book, The H.L Mencken Baby 
Book. He says that his mother bought one too. He is a practicing pediatrician, medical educator, 
and historian in medicine at the University of Michigan, where he is the director of the Histori- 
cal Center for the Health Sciences. The second discussant is Dr. Steven Shelov. He is the Chair of 
the Department of Pediatrics at Maimonides Medical Center and Vice President of the Babies 
and Children s Hospital in Brooklyn, New York. Shelov was also the pediatrician on the Today 
Show in the early 1980s. 

Howard Markel: It is always a pleasure to come to the Head Start National Research Confer- 
ence. My charge is to talk about the history of baby-care advice. Doctors have been giving advice 
since there have been doctors, at least since the time of Hippocrates, and probably before that. 
We know that since the Middle Ages, there have been specific books for general consumption. 
Most of these books use different concepts of medicine and disease than those we would 
understand today. In fact, in America, there was a popular book by a physician named William 
Buchan called Domestic Medicine that went through 12 editions in the 1800s, and the book did 
not separate children from adults. 1 bring that up because baby and child care advice books are 
actually part of a bigger phenomenon. That bigger phenomenon is pediatrics, children s health 
as a specialty, which is a late 19th and early 20th century phenomenon. 

Before that point in time, most doctors on this side of the Atlantic Ocean, or elsewhere, 
would simply think that the problems of children were just smaller problems. They did not 
separate issues of physiology or pathology, which reminds me of a joke. Once, when 1 was a 
resident, the transplant surgeons came in to do a transplant. These doctors could put a heart 
into somebody but could not start an IV line on a 3-year-old. I was requested to do that. The 
transplant surgeon asked me how I could take care of such teeny- tiny patients. I said that it was 
easy, and that I pretend that I am a teeny- tiny doctor. This notion that children are different 
psychologically, developmentally, and physically, and the diseases they get are different, has not 
gone away completely. It is a 19^ and 20th century phenomenon, as is the public health 
movement that we benefit from today. Those are two joined enterprises. 

This is not surprising, when one thinks about it. In the late 1800s, in this country alone, one 
out of every five infants died before their first birthday. Another one out of five would die before 
their fifth birthday. Death was a common visitor to the homes of most Americans. As a means of 
prevention or decreasing infant and child mortality, doctors, public health workers, and social 
workers instituted a concept called scientific motherhood. This is an early 20th century term; 
now we would probably call it "scientific parenthood." Let us recall that the lion's share of 
parenting at that time rested on mothers. It was important not only for Americans but also for 
immigrants. From 1880-1925, 25 million immigrants came to the United States, during an era 
when the Immigration Restriction Act was enacted. This Act was one way of inculcating hygiene 
and issues of better living, and is the time when these child books came about. 

Dr. Luther Emmett Holt, who in many ways was the father of all the baby-care books, wrote 
The Care and Feeding of Children, first published in the 1 890s, and it was actually written as a 
catechism. It included about 90 questions that he wrote first as a manual for nurses. It then 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



became so popular that he had it published, and it went through edition after edition. In 1946, 
it was the most widely selling baby-care book in the world. 

At that time, one could find baby-care advice in magazines such as The Delineator, a women's 
mag^ine. It is published by the Butterick Company, which also sold dress patterns. The editor 
at this time was a man named Theodore Dreiser, the famous novelist. He was in between gigs as 
a novelist and was editing a women's magazine. Baby care was the most popular topic requested 
by readers of magazines like The Delineator, Ladies' Home Journal, and Good Housekeeping. 
Parenthetically, he hired some people to write baby-care articles including Leonard K. Hirshberg, 
a physician that graduated from Johns Hopkins in 1904, and a man named H. L. Mencken. You 
may recall him now as a famed Baltimore journalist; he was 27 years old at the time. Mencken 
ghostwrote all the baby-care articles under Hirshberg's byline. That link is also how Mencken 
and Theodore Dreiser met, and they developed an important relationship in American literature. 

Mencken was a bachelor until he was 50 years old, and he never had children. In fact, the 
only real experience he had to write a baby-care book was that he was once a child himself. He 
used many of the leading textbooks of the day, including Luther Emmett Holt's Care and Feeding 
of Children. Holt also wrote the standard textbook of pediatrics at that time. The book was then 
sold by Butterick. It appeared in 15 different issues of The Delineator but was then sold for a 
quarter as A Textbook for Mothers on the Care and Feeding of Babies with Questions and Answers 
Especially Prepared by the Editor. An original copy of this book is worth about $25,000, which 
would have made it quite a good investment. 

Well-baby contests were held throughout the progressive era. These were ways of getting 
mothers to learn how to feed their children, how to recognize symptoms, and so forth. One 
particular contest was directed at immigrants from Chinatown in San Francisco. There were 
wonderful cross-cultural attempts at this time of people going into immigrant neighborhoods or 
neighborhoods of different socioeconomic classes, and doing the best they could. They did not 
always do a perfect job. They brought their own cultural biases to the scene, but they were 
dedicated people who tried to benefit children's health in America. This goes to the other point I 
raised about the partnership of public health and pediatrics. 

Then came Dr. Spock in 1946, when his book was published. Spock's book sold more than 
40 million copies, which is more than any other book with the exception of the Bible. 

Question: Do you know how many editions there have been? 

Markel: The book is now in its 10th edition. Spock was a fascinating man, because he repre- 
sents, more than any other American pediatrician, this nexus of public health, doctoring, public 
education, and the doctor as teacher" concept by dispensing reasonable and sound advice. 
Remember that the first sentence in Spock's book is "You know more than you think." 

Spock also became quite an activist. He was opposed to the Vietnam War and to the prolif- 
eration of nuclear warheads. He explained late in his life why he got involved in protesting the 
Vietnam War. He said, "These are my patients who are going. To me, that is a real issue that I 
need to be involved in as a doctor. It seemed outlandish at the time, and some people in the 
medical profession thought that was not the proper role of a doctor. Still, JAMA put handguns as 
the main public health issue in their journal 1 or 2 years ago. It is interesting to see the change 
over time in that we see a broader role for all of us who care for children in the realm of what 
we need to think about and do in order to protect their health. I will leave my comments for 
later, because I know Shelov is probably going to proceed from Spock, and then we can all 
interact. 

Steven Shelov: Spock and Lwere friends, and I once spent a wonderful weekend with him and 
his wife, Mary, at their home in Camden, Maine. He was quite old at that time, and somewhat 
enfeebled physically, but not mentally. He was considering having me take on the editing of, or 



ERIC 



597 



591 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



the next step of, an edition of his book. He and the late Michael Rothenberg made a decision to 
part ways, and he was not sure what the next step would be. We spoke at length since we had 
many political similarities and commitments to the health and welfare of children in the 
broadest context. He was a visionary person, even at 89 years of age, and one who could see 
what the needs of parents were in 1946 and throughout the multiple editions of his book. He 
was incredibly energized at that age despite his worry and had in his heart the direction of where 
parents and children needed to go. 

Despite that conversation with Spock, the publisher decided that I had a conflict of interest at 
that point, because we had moved through the first edition of the Academy s child-care book for 
parents and had already achieved a level of identity. The publisher thought it would look 
strange, and perhaps be a breach of competitive need, for me to take over the Spock book. Spock 
was the only play in town for dozens of years, and it was an incredible testimony to him and his 
vision that parents looked to his advice in such a meaningful way. I certainly remember doing 
that with my first child. He gave a sense of reassurance, knowledge, and comfort at times when 
you needed it. He could speak through his book, with so much experience that one could get a 
sense of direction in the midst of a 2:00 a.m. crying jag from a 7-month-old infant. 

During the 1970s and 1980s, the whole field of parent education exploded, and publishers 
tried to build on the incredible thirst for knowledge and degree of subspecialty movement 
sought by parents in a more sophisticated world. What were parents looking for that partly 
spawned this incredible burst of targeted information? The first thing they were looking for was 
expertise, not just opinion. The beauty of Spock, and to some degree his shortcoming, is that 
while he was an experienced, talented. New York-based pediatrician of many dimensions, he 
offered only himself, as smart as he was. Parents began to say that they did not want only one 
person's opinions, and they asked if there were other ways to gather enough opinions so that 
they could make some of their own decisions. I took into my heart Spock s basic theme that 
parents know more than they think about their children. This theme is important when decid- 
ing what should be the best of parent educational materials. 

The second thing parents wanted was good, "cutting-edge" information. They wanted to hear 
predictions of where things were about to go, so books began to move in that direction. They 
did not want things out of date. There was often a 10-year hiatus between Dr. Spock's editions. 
Many things happen now, and there is a telescoping of new information. It is not all necessarily 
good, and it has to be sifted and cared for. When one analyzes the advice given now, much of it 
is the same as what was offered back then, only it is more complicated because the world is 
more complicated. 

The other thing to note is that Spock was a general pediatrician. He attended medical school 
at Yale University. During his residency program, he actually did a little bit of child psychiatry, 
like T. Berry Brazelton. Brazelton is the other major individual with an area of specific expertise, 
but he translated much of his child development expertise to the lay public in his books, mainly 
focusing on infants, infants and mothers, and temperament. He translated temperament for 
parents in such a way that people could identify with the very active infant, the not-so-active 
infant, or the quiet infant. Brazelton took the baton from Spock and made "cutting-edge" 
developmental science available to parents. 

However, they were basically still generalists, and there was a move toward the subspecialty 
desires. One of the things that has happened in child health is that our children are physically 
healthier than they were at the turn of the century or pre-World War II. Much of that has to do 
with public health dimensions, immunizations, and other preventive dimensions, so that in 
1968, when Bob Haggerty coined the term "the new morbidity," much of the physical stuff was 
either different or had come under control. There was a movement toward a greater understand- 
ing of behavior, as it was related to child development and growth. What could experts say that 
we could then translate into parents' understanding? That is where the evolution came to the 
current flurry of what you see now in bookstores. 



O 

ERIC 



592 



598 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



The purpose of the books was to impart seven principles. The first principle is obviously to 
educate. They were meant to enable parents, and enabling is what Spock did the best. They were 
to empower the parents, to give them a sense that they could take some control and, through 
understanding, more effectively manage a situation with a child. The books were meant to 
encourage and support. Encouragement was a critical part for parents undergoing difficult times. 
It is hard work to be a parent every minute of the day, though it is certainly rewarding most of 
the time. I remember when I was a 1st year resident at Montefiore Medical Center in New York. I 
had literally been there for 3 weeks when our son Joshua was bom. I remember going to the 
nursery, seeing him, and being excited, and then looking around for someone to sign him out 
to. That is a medical term— when you change shifts, you sign out and then go on to the next 
thing, and somebody else takes over. There was no one to sign out to. I looked around, and I 
was the sign-out person, and this was our child for every minute to follow. Encouragement 
through those times was an essential part of what those books provided. 

The books provided expertise. The parent is, in fact, the given expert in terms of knowing an 
infant best. However, one can also benefit from learning things that other people have to offer, 
which is an important part of these kinds of books. The books offered empathy for the situa- 
tions confronted by parents. More important than anything else, they embraced the parent as 
the most important partner in the care of children. The books at that time covered a variety of 
topics, and one began to see many new books on the 2-year-old who is whining or who is shy. 
This is all important and has added to the domain of the books. It is an accomplishment for an 
organization to bring expertise and specialty in "cutting-edge" and updated information, 
focusing on developmental stages. Developmental stages and behavior are the cornerstones of a 
quality book that parents are looking for. Prevention of illness, either prevention of physical 
illness or "anticipatory guidance" as it is called in child-care settings is critically important and 
should be addressed in a book like this. Information for parents on nutrition, behavior, and 
expectations should also be rolled up and gained from that book. 

These books have evolved to offer techniques for bathing an infant, putting an infant in a 
blanket properly, carrying a child in a car seat, feeding an infant at different times of their lives, 
making formula from scratch, putting an infant to sleep, or handling a fever. The book should 
offer suggestions for how to handle situations and how to recognize illnesses that are apparent 
yet confusing. A quality book should also assist parents to use the resources available to them 
and how to recognize their child's own uniqueness and sameness at the same time. There is a 
sense of pride in believing one's child is unique, but there is also a sense of comfort to know 
that others have also experienced some of the things one is going through. This can help a 
parent adapt to their own experience. 

The tone approach is critically important in making a book feel good to read or to see. That is 
clearly expanded now, in a generation that has some worry about parenting advice. The maga- 
zines, as one could see in that magazine from 1910, show some things that never change; they 
just become portrayed by glossy, color pictures. 

We have some tremendous challenges as parents, pediatricians, and care providers for 
children. One of those challenges is the abundance of information that is of questionable value. 
This information is available through Internet connections and other ways that can be frighten- 
ing because they are unsifted, unfiltered, and unvalued in terms of what is truly a good piece of 
advice and what is not. They often come not with literal censorship but with a sense of fear. 

For instance, I now have a grandchild. That boy whom I did not sign out continues to not be 
signed out, and he is 31 years old now. He has a wonderful wife and a 5-month-old child. We 
were recently talking on the phone about the infant having a fever. We talked about what to 
look for and examine, and they found some suboccipital nodes. I said that the child probably 
had roseola. My daughter-in-law looked up roseola on the Internet, and learned that it is caused 
by the Herpes vims type six. She entered a panic mode over what that now means for the child; 
including sexually transmitted diseases, syphilis, you name it. How terrible! Fortunately, I was 



Er|c 



599 



593 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



at the other end of the phone and could calm her down, but that does not always happen. That 
is an example of how information from certain venues, accessed in certain ways, does not help 
families. Instead, the information made her afraid that the infant had some terrible, fatal disease. 

We are at an interesting threshold. Over the past several years, I have been pleased and proud 
to carry part of the mantle of educating parents. The book originally came out in 1989, so we are 
actually almost 13 years into it; and it will be revised this summer. Yet at the same time, we are 
cautious about having so much information out there for parents, child-care providers, and 
others. We need to be more vigilant about what we recognize as quality. We should allow access 
to people such as Markel, myself, or others to develop methodologies in which the best infor- 
mation is provided to families and child-care providers in ways that are both good to educate, 
good to update, and safe. A fearsome situation should not be created such that parents will feel 
afraid of the wonderful opportunity to care for their child. 

Pascoe: I would like to ask Shelov to elaborate on how this book was put together. From the 
comments of Shelov and Markel, it sounds like in the late 19th century and the first half of the 
20th century advice books were primarily a one-person show or written by a small group. Could 
you say a few words about how this book was put together? 

Shelov: By the way, I get no interest out of this book, so do not worry, this is not self-promotion 
and is not helping my child go to college. I brought this proposal to Bob Haggerty, who was the 
president of the Academy, in 1985 or 1986, responding to what we felt were the needs of 
families, the need for expertise and updates, and providing more than one person s opinions. 

We felt that it was important to tap into the expertise of some of the smartest people in child 
care all around the United States. Many of them are on committees or are representatives of the 
Academy. We used them as the centerpieces for the knowledge, and someone wrote up the 
information and translated it appropriately from "medicalese'' to language more appropriate for 
the lay audience. 

We assembled about 75 pediatricians, experts in their area, and allowed them to develop 
materials that were appropriate to what needed to be known at different ages about different 
subjects. We then wove it together, first in a ^^medicalese fabric, and then in one voice that 
would be understandable and appealing to mothers and fathers — many fathers have read this as 
well — while incorporating the proper information. That process took about 4 years. My base- 
ment was literally covered with various versions and revisions. That was the origin and the 
mechanism by which this book was done, and it has continued in that way. Now I have an 
editorial board with a new, young set of people who are experts in the field, and we are going to 
reassemble some new information. 

The other thing we have done is to update the information every time it is printed, such as 
including new immunization schedules. If one bought a book today, it would have the right 
immunization schedule. That is something that publishing and printing allows one to do when 
the book goes back to press. Fortunately, this book has had such a frequent print run because 
many pediatricians have embraced it. 

The book is also online now through the Academy, so if one wants to download a page or 
two for something, it can be done. That is the way in which we have blended availability to 
parents, expertise that one need not question because the authors are highly established in their 
field, and information is presented in a format that is easy to understand. We have received 
criticism that reading levels may still be too high in this book, and one must look at who 
comprises the audience. Some books are sophisticated and may be okay for some readers, while 
other readers may have more difficulty. One adapts their own view of what is valuable, based to 
some degree on how comfortable it is in terms of ones reading level. At this point, authors with 
credible backgrounds should write materials for parents. However, anyone can get on the 
Internet and call himself or herself an expert. The Academy of Child Psychiatry provides infer- 





QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



mation about who the experts are. Those people are recognized and highly regarded. That is the 
same principle to which we should adhere. 

Pascoe; I have one question for Markel, then we will open up to the audience. Were there any 
recommendations from the late 19th century or early 20th century that most of us would find 
anywhere from quaint to outright dangerous, based on the information that we have now? 

Markel: One thing that is interesting is how much has stayed the same. That is also true of 
textbooks. Frank Oski used to say that we could study any edition of Nelson's Textbook of 
Pediatrics from the past 40 or 50 years in preparation for the American Board of Pediatrics exam 
and probably do fairly well. There are many ^ings one would recognize and many things that 
one would not enjoy or not recommend to a patient. 

For example, pediatricians in the early 20th century had a fetish about when to toilet-train. 
Holt said to begin children as early as 3 to 6 months of age. That is quite remarkable. The 
feeding schedule was also quite a fetish in that it was like a train schedule at Grand Central 
Station rather than based on when the infant wanted to eat. There were also different points of 
view. When Mencken was writing his baby book for Hirshberg, he wrote boldly that any woman 
who does not breastfeed is not worthy of the name "woman." That is not something we would 
ever say. In my generation of pediatricians we recommend breast-feeding, but we do not make 
mothers feel guilty about botde-feeding, or at least we try not to. Thankfully, we live in an era 
where botde-feeding is quite safe. 

Formula use is also a 20th century phenomenon that is a remarkable advance in baby care. 
The cutdng-edge pediatricians of 1900 were all developing artificial formulas. It is called 
formula because it contained milk and a certain amount of added carbohydrates, fats, and 
protein. Each infant would have his or her own formula. There were actually no collaborators, 
like the Walker Gordon Laboratory in Boston, owned in part by T. Morgan Roach, the famous 
Harvard professor of pediatrics. There was technology transfer even at that time. They would 
make these formulas for wealthy parents, by the way, not for poor people. Everyone had a 
method— Holt used the percentage method and David Murray Cowie at the University of 
Michigan had his own method. Formula was the human genome of the day for pediatricians, 
and it helped build many careers. By 1920 or 1925, it was shown that one size fit most, but not 
all. We know today that certain infants need a soy-based formula or children with particular 
nutritional deficits or problems need a specific formula. For the most part, the differences 
between Similac and Enfamil are like those between Goca-Gola and Pepsi. Those are issues that 
have changed quite a bit. 

Another thing that has changed quite a bit is the use of sterilization. We live in a disposable 
age right now. One can now buy formula in a can, already premixed in powder form. Many 
people now have dishwashers, and do not sterilize in the old-fashioned sterilizer. In fact, the 
microwave is a new tool for sterilization. We warn people not to microwave the formula for their 
infants because it heats unevenly and the child can burn his or her mouth or lips. 

Obviously, things have changed. Another thing that has changed quite a bit involves infec- 
tious disease. Gontagious disease was the other "cutting-edge" issue of pediatrics. I do not think 
I emphasized the power of immunizations in terms of bettering children's health. One out of 
five children died of diphtheria, measles, and polio, which was not as big a killer as the others. 
The diphtheria vaccine was developed in 1936. Diphtheria antitoxin existed in 1895 as a 
treatment, not a preventive. Until the 1930s, we did not have many vaccines; they started 
coming in the following decades. From the late 1930s to the 1970s, most of the vaccines we give 
today were already in use. What you give and when you give it changes, but the menu is rela- 
tively similar. 

Issues of hand washing were huge, as were warnings to not kiss infants, due to tuberculosis. 
Until 1960, people thought the disease was primarily transmitted by spitting rather than 




595 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



coughing, even though it was known that tuberculosis was in the sputum in the lungs. People in 
the late 19th century were not terribly shy about spitting or where they spat. Some subway 
stations in New York City still have signs that say, "No spitting by order of the Board of Health." 

It was not an aesthetic sensibility, although that is a good enough reason, but it was believed 
that if one had tuberculosis, the sputum would dry, mingle with the dust, and then the tubercle 
bacilli would float around. Therefore, spitting and kissing were two main issues in the early 
baby-care books. 

As Shelov was talking about his son, 1 was thinking about my daughter, who just turned 2 
years old last week. 1 have written a baby-care book, a baby textbook, a pediatric textbook, and 
others, but 1 did not know what 1 was doing during her first few weeks of life. 1 wrote about it in 
the New York Times, saying, "What the hell was 1 thinking when 1 wrote this stuff?" 1 bring that 
point up because nobody truly knows how to parent until one does it. One learns on the job, so 
1 think that all of us can act as coaches for parents, since parenting is not instinctual. 1 did not 
know how to burp my child; now 1 do, but 1 did not then. 

Pascoe: Did the hordes of infants that were dying in the ghettos of diarrheal disease at the turn 
of the 20th century, primarily in the summer, contribute to the focus on nutrition? 

Markel: Absolutely. We do not know exactly what the cholera infantum, or summer diarrhea, 
was. It is not likely to be rotavirus, because that tends to occur in the winter, but it could have 
been from tainted milk. There were not refrigerators back then; milk came from the milkman 
and was put on a cake of ice. Particularly before the 1920s, milk was dispensed in a giant milk 
pail. Farmers would bring milk from the farms to the city, and customers would fill a smaller 
metal milk jug. If one lived in a tenement apartment building in New York City or Philadelphia, 
one might just put it out on the stoop or on the fire escape, because that was the coolest spot in 
the house. There was no refngeration, let alone air conditioning, in these houses. 1 do not know 
what caused these waves of summer diarrhea. 1 wish 1 did, but 1 do not have any data. It had to 
be caused by a microbial agent. The presumed culprit is tainted milk. 

Clean milk supplies at the milk depots were a wonderful thing for the poor children of 
America. Henry Koplik of Koplik Spots is the one who actually invented it, but he does not get 
the credit for it. There was a man named Nathan Strauss, who was from the distinguished Macy's 
department store family. Oscar Strauss was the U.S. Secretary of Commerce and Labor at the 
time when they were joined as one department. Nathan Strauss ran Macy's, and his brother and 
business partner, Isidor Strauss, died when the Titanic sank in 1912. They gave out free milk to 
poor children, and they linked that with a pediatrician conducting a well-baby exam. The well- 
baby conference that we do today, on various schedules, emerged out of that. It was a preventive 
strike then for children at high risk to be checked out, but it has now become mainstream for 
our standard of care for children. 

Pascoe: Let us open up to the audience now for questions. 

Casey Emmer: Despite the plethora of child advice, or maybe because of it, parents still have 
misconceptions. I am curious what you think some misconceptions are, now in 2002, in terms 
of behaviors that are still happening. What is the role of pediatricians, the public health sector, 
and even books, in counteracting those misconceptions and poor health behaviors? 

Shelov: That is an easy answer— do we have another hour and a half? The first comment is that 
there are often no answers. There are often ideas while a behavior is occurring as to what it 
might mean or a menu of approaches or advice for something; but there is not a perfect answer 
for most things. This reality still makes parents uncomfortable, since they would prefer to have a 
magic bullet. Many questions asked by parents involve behavioral situations, such as tantmms. 



O 

ERIC 



596 



602 



QUALITY health CARE 



sleeping issues, behavior with siblings, behavior in school or preschool, biting episodes, and 
bedwetting. Any magazine survey listing parent concerns would have these items. . 

Obesity is starting to come onto the scene; it should have a long time ago. There are no 
perfect answers for those things. They need to be done in conjunction with what is happening 
within the family, and each situation is different. In my mind, that is the role of the pediatrician 
or allied health professional in the pediatrician's office. Sometimes, pediatricians are too busy 
to deal effectively with these issues as much as they should. The one-on-one stuff is important 
for developing individual family strategies for dealing with a host of these things. It may take 

some attempts at different things to reach where one wants to go, knowing that there is no one 
perfect answer. 

Magazines and articles tend to make things fit onto one page, with six bullet points, which is 
somewhat unhelpful. The oversimplification of some of these issues is also problematic. This is 
why, when I did the Today Show, I had to be careful about not doing too much in a 4V2-minute 
segment. If Willard went too long or if the prompter blew up, I only had S'A minutes. The 
danger of any of those presentations is that they tend to be simplistic in their advice. The sound 
bite mentality exists, and oversimplifying child health advice is a trap. People need to be careful 
about falling into that, by either expecting it or relying on it too much. 

The issue of public health and pediatrician involvement is linked. We are probably one of the 
most public-health-oriented professions because we think preventatively. We think on a cross- 
population basis and not just about the individual. We think long-term rather than just immedi- 
ate. We think of other entities besides the physical, including mental and public-oriented stuff, 
when it comes to herd immunity and immunizations. We think of long-term diabetes preven- 

tiori by offering nutrition counseling. Without the pediatrician thinking in those terms 

environmental, safety, exposures— we are missing the boat. Most of us have been trained in that 
approach in medical school or other training programs. Many of us have gotten into public 
health advocacy issues because it is a natural role for us to be in. Different pediatricians do it at 
different levels; it depends on their own orientation. In their hearts, people in these professions 
embrace public health efforts. 



Markel. Your question and your answer are reflective of American society and medicine over the 
last 50 or 60 years. I always ask my students when they think a visit to the doctor would actually 
result in improving one's health, offering a bonafide cure for something. People say, "Well, he 
was not Theodoric of York or any of these bloodletters," or things like that from the lOOOs'or 
1920s. Penicillin was widely available around 1946, after World War II. One might be able to 
shrink it back a little to 1922 with insulin, but that is a smaller segment of the population. It 
was a mid-20th century phenomenon for people to expect answers and cures for what ailed 
them. We loved it as doctors, because it increased our prestige, our revenue, the complexes we 
work in, the research we do, and so on. Hopefully we are coming up with the goods, and the 

health of Americans and people around the world, particularly in developed countries, is better 
than it was 100 years ago. 

However, with that progress comes a double-edged sword whereby people expect quick pat 
answers to some questions under the rubric that lack quick pat solutions. Behavior is a perfect 
example of one of these issues. If a child has a strep throat, the culture is positive and one knows 
what antibiotic to prescribe. It is a binary situation with a yes or no answer. However, with a 
child having a tantmm, it is hit or miss, and parents are uncomfortable with that. I ktiow my 
residents are annoyed when I say, "On the one hand . . . , but on the other hand ..." They roll 
their eyes and just walk away. However, most of medicine, particularly most of pediatrics, is a 
muddy gray space, as are these low-morbidity diseases that we address. In a way, we are victims 
of our own success. We are not dealing with the yes or no questions any more, but with compli- 
cated questions. Parents are uncomfortable with these complicated issues, and so are pediatri- 
cians, because we would much rather say to "Do x, y, and z and come back in a week." It is 
reflective of the time in which we live. 



603 



597 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Barbara Calabrese: As a nurse who has worked in public health, I think we have taken out the 
personal interaction by relying more and more on printed material. We have taken out the 
opportunities for dialogue between parents and professionals. We have lost the well-baby clinics 
that we used to have. Many HMOs decide the amount of time that one is allowed to have during 
a visit with a physician. Parents do not have the personal resources; even extended families are 
disappearing in many cases. How can we retrieve that personal touch in educating parents? 

Books are wonderful, but if a parent cannot read, understand, or have access to the book, it does 
not help. 

Shelov: You are absolutely right. Books were never meant to replace personal contact, but were 
meant to allow for an expansion of knowledge at the convenience of the parent. I do not think 
that books should replace personal contact. This is a serious problem having to do with the 
pressure of what it is like to be in a practice that has turned into a volume-dictated source of 
fiscal sustenance, combined with a host of other restrictions on practice requiring more paper, 
more documentation. Some of these requirements are good, but some of them are redundant. 

All physicians are affected by a difficult series of converging forces, with adults coming with 
six or seven problems as they get older, not just one or two. That is an even greater issue, because 
they do not have any additional time, and we now have four times the number of things to 
discuss. 1 do not know the answer to this problem; one possibility is to use other personnel 
colleagues, nurses, nurse practitioners— in creative ways, to allow better communication from a 
variety of different vantage points. 

Doing some things as groups may be an interesting approach, even though they take more 
time from the professional. From an educational standpoint, that can actually serve as support 
for families, but not in terms of one-to-one visits. Pediatricians and other physicians will find 
themselves tapping a number of those different venues to have interaction, communication, and 
dialogue with their parents and patients. 

One hears from the people in the practice how Saturday office hours have become an 
absolute requirement. They are practicing 6 days a week on a regular basis, taking time from 
their own personal lives. This creates a sense of drain on their part and a sense of not having the 
time to recharge their own batteries. The professional nurse and doctor are not in an easy 
position, whether as a floor nurse, a Pediatric or Neonatal Intensive Care Unit nurse, or in a 
primary care setting; they are under great pressure from a variety of different vantagepoints. 

The way around that is to increase numbers of professional personnel, including both physi- 
cians and nurses. People may not realize that the last medical school built was in 1981. We are 
not turning out any more doctors than we did 20 years ago. Every year, we graduate about 
16,000 new doctors, entering every different career. On the other hand, the general population 
has increased and is getting older. Nursing schools are closing. Therefore, our problems are 

more significant. • • u 

Children are experiencing a variety of different exposures. One of the talks I give is about 
counseling children and families after September 11th. I gave a talk last week in Florida; it was 
packed, and nobody said a word for an hour. Then people got up and talked about what the 
children in their practice were like 9 months after the event. Those are complex issues that 
require a lot of time from the provider. We need to train a significantly larger number of health- 
care personnel, including nurses, allied professionals, and physicians, to meet volume needs and 
health care-related needs. Will that be more expensive? Yes, it will. Will that allow more time to 
be taken between a provider and a patient? I believe so. That is probably the only answer, and 
we must figure out how to do that. 

Markel: I agree. The average doctor, at my age of 42 years old, has had four to five jobs since 
finishing residency and/or fellowship. They work at HMOs and bounce around from job to job 
because they are unhappy with the setup or the care or the time allotment or what have you. 



O 

ERIC 



598 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



This action causes an incredible financial drain, because it costs about a quarter of a million 
dollars to recruit, train, hire, and move a primary care physician. One would think the HMO 
companies and insurance companies would want to retain as many doctors as they could, 
purely from a business point of view. 

The point you raise is something that deeply worries me. Whether one is a nurse, nurse 
practitioner, or physician — the title is less important than what one actually does — one needs to 
talk to and be with the patients. Anyone in this room knows that pediatrics mostly involves 
talking. I am not a psychiatrist, but often I play one in my clinic. I see teenagers mostly, and 
these visits involve a lot of talking. I talk about drug abuse or depression issues, and I need 
to spend time explaining things to my patients. I do not like when the bean counter has a 
stopwatch. 

Everyone here is deeply concerned about children, and we are all purchasers. I will bet that 
everyone here has a health plan, or I hope everyone here has a health plan. One is a purchaser, 
or a consumer of, a health plan. One thing that businesses listen to most of the time is their 
consumers. It is not just doctors and nurses who need to complain about this, but patients also 
need to complain that they are not getting the time they need. 

There is a real value to that in the pediatric line. Whenever one sees an ad for an HMO, it is 
always of a young child hugging the doctor or holding balloons, and everything is nice and 
hunky-dory. There are reasons for that: (a) one wants young families in a managed care or 
insurance program because they tend to get sick less often than older people, and (b) it is great 
for public relations. 

As a pediatrician, I am deeply offended at how children are exploited for products. Now we 
are doing it; the enemy is us because corporate medicine is doing it. It is always children, and we 
need to complain and take a page out of Dr. Spock. What is particularly not right is that I do not 
know many patients who feel great about seeing their doctors all the time. They like their 
doctors, but do not always feel that they get the time. I do not know many doctors who feel 
good about that either. I do not mean to demonize HMOs, but we have a real need here, and it 
will inevitably cost more. So what? We are the richest country — well, until yesterday with the 
WorldCom situation — but we are still a wealthy country. I suggest that in this conversation we 
need to revolt a little bit. 

Question: I am a nurse with the Head Start program in Morris County in northern New Jersey. 

In my other life, as I call it, my husband and I own an antiques shop, where we have books. 
About 2 years ago, I came across a domestic science book that had a chapter on child care and 
illnesses. It came right after the chapter on how to kill a chicken. This is just a humorous 
anecdote to share on the priorities in life at that time. 

The second thing that came to mind in the discussion today, and a concern that we have in 
working with our parents who have great access to the Internet, is that they believe everything 
that is there. The community is out there with a narrow aspect of what they are talking about, 
and they do not always see the broader picture. They also have web sites that are linked to 
products and services that are even scarier. Quite often, information is written in a language they 
can understand. They become concerned, wrongly sometimes, and buy into things they need 
not buy into. Do you see this as a concern, and will there be any public education from pediatri- 
cians about this new phenomenon? 

Shelov: We have seen it before, but it has gotten bigger. We have been dealing with it for a long 
time, however, they are much better at it and are taking advantage of forums and opportunities 
that did not exist before, some of which have been of their own making, for the sole purpose of 
promoting something. That is an insidious, ever-present situation. 

The problem is that physicians are all over the map on this issue. Some physicians feel 
morally, consciously, and ethically that there is no way they will take anything from any phar- 



ERIC 



605 



599 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



maceutical company, which is another way of doing it. Others feel that they can separate 
practice from that aspect, and others do not care or look forward to a free dinner on the backs of 
the pharmaceutical company representatives. In this forum, we are not going to be able to 
depend on individual behavior to dictate an outcome. As much as 1 hate to say this, there needs 
to be more control over it. 

Finally, they are waking up to what pharmaceutical companies are doing with respect to 
physicians. 1 have been watching it escalate. In practice it is outrageous, and it is incredible what 
is being spent. In fact, there may be some regulation or means of controlling it so it is not 
permitted. That all adds to the expense of what ultimately becomes the product cost to all of us. 
Anybody who does not understand that does not understand Health Economics 101. 1 cannot 
say that the sensitivity of physicians uniformly takes umbrage at that. How is that for a politi- 
cally correct answer? It will have to come from a higher authority, which 1 am not sure is there 
right now either. 

Markel: The Internet is the world's greatest library, but it has been indexed by Beavis and 
Butthead. One must be careful. One thing our clinic does is to create a list of recommended web 
sites, like the American Academy of Pediatrics or the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) sites. There is also KidsHealth by the NeMours Foundation. There are many good web 
sites, and it is incumbent on the pediatrician to take a look and offer recommendations to his or 
her patients. 

The other issue that was brought up is the nexus of products, free donuts, or whatever. At 
lohns Hopkins, we used to get a crab feast on lune 30th of every year, hosted by Ross Labs. They 
always got us crabs, but 1 rarely prescribe Similac. The issue of free dinners needs to be changed, 
but it is chump change compared to a much bigger issue. If one looks at the New York Times or 
any major newspaper today, one sees full-page advertisements, or television commercials, for 
Prilosec or Zyrtec or whatever, guaranteed to make life better. lerry Seinfeld has a whole routine 
about that. The character in the ad is always some guy on a bike, and the weather is nice. Who 
are these people? That is even scarier. 1 do not mean to sound paternalistic, but when products 
are advertised directly to the doctors, there is at least an editor or a filter. 

1 bring this up because the Internet does not always have an editor. There is a good reason 
why newspapers, magazines, and books have editors to act as a gatekeeper. A good editor is a 
smart person who reads a lot and knows which information is nonsense or useful. It has been 
said that what separates man from the animals is the desire to take medicine. Madison Avenue, 
for lack of a better term, markets things, and they are much better at user-friendly explanations 
than we will ever be. 

Pamela Raya-Carlton: One interest of mine involves working with adolescent parents, both 
historically and currently, and with the frequent challenges of convincing them to see a doctor 
about their new infant. 1 am talking about 13- and 14-year-old mothers. First of all, 1 was 
curious if adolescent parents were, historically, a whole lot easier to work with than other 
parents. 1 do not know if they were ever easy as parents, or easier to care for their children s 
health, and to take care of them in a mature way. 

Markel: It was much easier historically, because there were orphanages. That has died out, 
thankfully, but until World War 11 or shortly after, unwed teenage mothers would give their 
children up for adoption. There were 19th century sensibilities to institutionalize, separate, and 
quarantine others, whether they had a contagious disease or were socially not acceptable. 
Socially undesirable was the term they used in the late 1800s. They were easier in that way 
because it was a means of control. There is a wonderful book called Search for Order by Robert 
Wiebe about the history of America between 1877 and 1920. It describes various institutions of 
control— insane asylums, penitentiaries, orphanages, and wayward women's homes— all that 
stuff that has fallen by the wayside. 



606 



600 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



In terms of the history of adolescent medicine, a wonderful book came out a couple of years 
ago by a colleague named Heather Munro Prescott called A Doctor of Their Own. It provides a 
history of adolescent medicine as a subspecialty which is a new phenomenon. It goes along 
with this low-morbidity issue from about 1960. It was going on in the 1940s with college 
clinics, but the idea of adolescent medicine and teen pregnancy as a medical entity came about 
in the last 40 years. That might give you some insights. 

My clinic serves many teen mothers, and I used to have more of them in Baltimore. I have 
learned that one cannot make assumptions about someone's ability to parent based only on 
their age. Some of the best and some of the worst mothers and fathers I have seen have been 
teenagers. It is an individual situation. It is amazing how there are high profile issues in Ameri- 
can health, like cloning, which is a dot on the wall compared to teen pregnancy sexually 
transmitted diseases, or tuberculosis, but those are not sexy topics. 

The acute sudden scary thing or the science fiction that always gets our attention fascinates 
me. This is way out of proportion to the chronic killers or the chronic health problems that go 
on all the time. That dichotomy is very troubling and probably an element of human nature. 
Something that comes suddenly and kills a few people in a spectacular fashion will grasp our 
attention out of proportion to the teen pregnancy issue. 

Shelov: The other piece that has changed, in addition to the change in orphanages, is the 
breakup of the extended family. What may have helped a young girl decide not to have a child 
was that her mother was there for her in some way, shape, or form. Where that has been broken 
or severed, a greater negative potential is added for what may happen to a young teenage 
mother. 

Data show that school attendance and school graduation by teenage mothers probably has 
the greatest likelihood of resulting in a better outcome for the mother-child dyad, and ulti- 
mately for the young teenage mother — more than almost any other intervention. Any opportu- 
nity to foster and nurture that is important. There is a program at a high school in Bronx, New 
York, that specializes in having teenage mothers and their infants come to school together. The 
school provides child care for the infants so the young mothers can attend school. It is not an 
easy place, but there are better outcomes. Those are the kinds of things one has to throw at the 
600,000 teenage pregnancies per year. The number has decreased from a peak of 1 million in 
the 1980s, but it still remains a huge issue. 

Market: I can make a specific comment about that issue. We conducted a prospective study in 
Milwaukee in the early 1990s. We followed mothers from when they were pregnant in the 
second or third trimester until a little beyond birth. We asked about binge drinking and looked 
at how the infants did. Some of the first-time teenage mothers had relatively good infant birth 
weights and also had higher scores on social support; the idea is that they were still with their 
families. The mothers who had difficulties, who were binge drinking and delivering small 
infants that ended up in the Special Care Nursery, were women in their middle 20s. This was 
typically their third child, and they were no longer in a nuclear family; instead they were 
depressed and socially isolated. Ten percent of them were binge drinking on a regular basis 
while they were pregnant. 

Diane Langkamp: I am from Children's Hospital Medical Center of Akron. I have two ques- 
tions about the role of child-care advice from specialists. First, it was mentioned that people 
want the bullet, the magic moment, or the quick answer. What is the role of child-care advice in 
addressing more complex problems? You alluded to the problem of obesity, which certainly is 
exploding in epidemic proportions in this country. Parents want quick solutions to their 
problems. 

The other question is the role of child-care advice in things that might be unpopular. For 
example, one of the things that comes to mind are cold and cough medicines, and their use for 



607 



601 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



young infants. There are millions^ if not billions, of dollars made in that industry and yet they 
probably do more harm than good. 

Shelov: For issues with such long lead times, like obesity prevention and the poor ability to 
recognize a definitive outcome, one knows if a child is overweight by school age. What does that 
mean, and how is that measured? We must continue to ram home the messages about the 
consequences of poor health, from the standpoint of weight control or obesity, and encourage 
the lay press to continue covering these topics. The lay press is an influential arm of public 
health education, and the message must be loud and consistent. It is almost too late for a host 
of children of this generation. Type II diabetes for our community in Brooklyn is astounding. 
They are seeing the same thing in Dallas. It is an American phenomenon, although it is also 
surfacing in Europe and China. Continuing to be consistent about the message, using every 
vehicle we can to converge on the same message, and repeating that message in a variety of 
venues is the way to impact these issues and produce outcomes. 

Interestingly, television health education has now been pushed to the cable networks, for the 
most part. However, viewing per minute on the network stations is much higher than on the 
cable networks. The regular networks may carry one-time messages, but there is little continuity 
around health education. A hot issue may make a splash, but it is usually not accompanied by a 
"sexy" or entertaining message. There needs to be some convincing about those vehicles of 
communication for health education messages because people watch a lot of television. These 
messages must be backed more on the screen. There were more messages during the 1970s and 
1980s, but they have slipped away, thinking that cable would pick up there. Cable will not pick 
up the load; they just do not get the popular viewing that they need. That is not satisfying to the 
families because they want a quick fix. The same need for immediate solutions affect antibiotic 
and cough medicine use in the office; people want something immediately. 

Taking the high road on that is challenging in practice. Many books are clear about the lack 
of efficacy of those things, and they do not promote them. A constant message has to be 
repeated, time after time. Parents see the old cause-and-effect pattern whereby the child takes the 
medicine and feels better. Most of us know that medicine often has nothing to do with getting 
better; fortunately, the course of most illnesses is self-limited. But the parent looks at the 
situation as a cause and effect, so we must somehow convince people. One has to use every 
venue possible while keeping the message consistent. The bugger in this whole thing is the 
profit people want to extract from the products that they make. With that continuing to be a 
major force, there is no easy way. 



Market: I once wrote that the only people who benefit from the sales of over-the-counter cough 
medicines are the people who make them, or their children, who go to better schools. That is an 
easier high road to take. By the way, baby-care books in the early 20th century warned against 
soothing syrups and the like. The syrups often contained morphine, opiates, or heavy-duty 
ingredients like paregoric for colic, well into the 1950s and 1960s. This is not a new problem. It 
has become a billion-dollar industry. The antibiotic thing is a little different. 

It is easy for me to take the high road because I work at a university and am not there in 
practice. When I was moonlighting in a practice years ago, it was a hard thing to do. There is a 
huge cost because antibiotics are societal drugs; if one develops resistance, it will also harm 
others. That is something we need to pay closer attention to. 

There is a great book called The Spirit Catches and You Fall Down by Anne Fadiman. The one 
thing the Hmong would actually relate to in Western medicine was antibiotics. They would take 
antibiotics; they felt that that actually was the one thing Western medicine had to offer that was 
any good. 



608 



602 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



Shelov: It is a miraculous entity. Stuart B. Levy has written a book called The Antibiotic Paradox. 
The subtide is something about how the miracle is being destroyed. I am paraphrasing it, but 
the idea is that we are developing resistant strains, and most of iiem are caused by 
overprescription of issues. I just filed a story on immigrants buying antibiotics over the counter 
at bodegas throughout New York City. I write for the Science Times and New York Times. My 
editor called and suggested that I go to the neighborhood of Washington Heights and try to buy 
some ampicillin. I bought 30 capsules without even walking that far. This contributes to a small 
percentage of the phenomenon; however, the major contributor is that middle-class people 
demand antibiotics from their doctors, 

I want to discuss obesity, though, because it is a tough issue. Other than smoking, it is the 
second greatest public health threat that we face. We know that children who are obese tend to 
remain that way, and we also know that people's eating habits are laid down early in life. It is a 
complicated issue. People are inundated by Big Macs and Burger Kings and super size meals. It is 
not just a regular Coke; one has to get a super size Coke. I do not mean to point only to the fast 
food industry, because they provide a product that people like. It tastes good if you like that, and 
it is also fast. For a working family, it is hard to cook at the end of the day. There are reasons for 
all of that. 

I had a call the other day about an obese child. One out of 10 children in the country is 
overweight, and 1 out of 10 children is clinically obese. Therefore, 20% of the children in 
America are overweight or worse. The children eat french fries, candy, and soda. It is tough to 
change these eating patterns, and one has to start early on to establish good eating patterns. One 
by one, it is incumbent upon pediatricians and any children's health care professional to not ask 
if a child is eating well, getting his vegetables, and all that stuff, by rote. I have done it, but I do 
not do that anymore because we are seeing so many heavy people. 

The New England Journal of Medicine published a great study a few months ago on the rise of 
Type II diabetes among younger people. The abstract reported in the American College of 
Cardiology meeting showed that young, clinically obese women in their late teens and early 20s 
had signs of risk factors for heart disease, like cardiomegaly. On one level, by not doing any- 
thing, we are reassuring that we will have business in the years to come; I do not think that is an 
acceptable approach. We need to work hard on this, whether by books, Internet, doctor, or 
patient sit-downs. I do not think we are doing enough on that issue. 

Question: I want to bring the conversation around to child care if possible, which is the 
umbrella under which we are gathered. We have heard about the need for increasing numbers of 
health professionals and the need for looking for as many venues as possible to get health 
messages to people. I wonder if the panelists or audience might reflect on their experiences or 
their expeaations for engaging the out-of-home child caregivers, teachers, and providers who 
take care of 60% of the preschool-age children in the United States in the delivery of helpful and 
accurate health information to parents. 

Comment: We are currendy doing an asthma study with Baltimore City Head Start. We are 
going in and providing education on asthma management to family service coordinators, with 
the caveat that we would like them to report the same information to not only the Head Start 
staff, but to the parents in group sessions and at teachable moments. We have not finished the 
study, so we do not have any data on it, but some of the family service coordinators are very 
^rig^g^d and others are not. We do not know quite what the difference is or why we can so 
thoroughly engage some people but not others. We do know that the ones who are engaged are 
actually out there teaching and have felt that it has made a difference. We do not have all the 
data yet. 




609 



603 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Bob Bradley: That is an important point because the literature out there sadly suggests that, on 
average, there is not much communication between child-care providers and parents. It is an 
actuarial thing. One of the general challenges is to figure out ways to get more communication 
back and forth. I am involved with a group in Atlanta called the Center for Child Well-Being. We 
have a parenting network, and we are trying to figure out ways to coordinate with Head Start, to 
try and get more exchange, and to find out how we can best help that group work with parents 
toward those kinds of objectives. 

Jane Goldman: There is a project going on in Connecticut. I am not directly involved in it, but 
Angela Crowley, a pediatric nurse practitioner at Yale University, is coordinating a whole 
program of coordinating the health-care consultants. Each day-care center must have a health- 
care consultant, and there are attempts to get him or her much more involved as part of the 
staff, above and beyond administering tuberculosis tests. Together, they are working with the 
families and with the medical practitioners in the New Haven community. Hopefully, people 
will learn more about this model. 

Patricia Home McGee: I am from Ann Arbor, Michigan. One of the requirements of the Head 
Start Performance Standards is that there be a health service advisory committee that includes 
professionals, pediatricians, nurses, and so forth. Part of their involvement is not only in terms 
of advice for the Head Start program, but also in terms of parenting education, parent involve- 
ment, and disseminating correct information about health needs in that specific community. 

In our area, we are seeing a resurgence of tuberculosis, mainly because of our new immigrant 
population. We also have a high incidence of asthma, so a great deal of what the pediatricians 
and nursing community and health community brings to Head Start families is correct informa- 
tion about those areas, because there is a resistance of parents to want their children to have the 
tuberculosis skin test. Why and how that can be helpful, especially in this time, is essential 
information. As you all are going into the profession in your various cities, that may be a way of 
being involved with the child-care communities. Head Start Performance Standards clearly speak 
to all that need to be involved and the use of the community professionals in sharing information. 

Shelov: The beauty and importance of the venue of child-care centers or out-of-home child care 
programs is that the age of the children is perfect for having an incredible impact on lifestyle 
behaviors and nutrition. These actions can set the template for the rest of their growing years 
and for later on in life. It could and should be a major point of intervention and a point of 
addressing these issues, including the parents but not necessarily relying on them. The parents 
need resources to use, which can come through the child-care center. 

The child care chapter in this book was done with Susan Aronson and a host of other people. 
She is a gum in the field, and she is wonderful. She is not the easiest person to work with 
because she is insistent that the quality of the information is perfect. More power to her. I got a 
lot of heat making sure that things she said were in the chapter. I said. Who else would you 
listen to in terms of that kind of information?" A reader can cut them, pull them out, use them, 
and then give them to families. The more projects that we can focus on that age in those centers, 
the more likely we are to see some change. 

Comment: I would like to make one other comment about Head Start staff and their asthma 
knowledge. Interestingly enough, even though most of them do claim that they themselves or 
someone in their family has asthma, they are not comfortable with asthma management 
themselves. If we can teach the Head Start staff about asthma management, we are then not only 
helping the children, but also helping in community education and making an impact on the 
entire community. 




604 



61-0 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



Emmer: I am from Columbia Dental School. I have limited knowledge about standard Head 
Start curricula and to what extent health behavior promotion is included and standardized. 

Does that exist at all? 

Comment: That is the keystone of it. That is an important part of Head Start. 

Emmer: I have been charged to come here and see where dental health behaviors are on the 
map in Head Start. In terms of activities, maybe we could chat afterward. 

Markel: By the way, another place to make a difference beyond Head Start is as a consultant to a 
day care center on medical issues. One of my residents had this idea several years ago when his 
children were in day care. Now we require that all of our residents, and I do it for my child's day 
care center. It is a kind of a volunteerism, a grassroots, pro bono kind of thing that we ought to 
do when sending a child to school. When I started my medical career, I wanted to change the 
world. I am not that much older, but I believe in incremental differences more than I ever did 
before. Anyone here that has been with Head Start all these years knows that these incremental 
differences make enormous difference. This is just one other thing we can all do. 

Pascoe: This has been a wonderful session. I am sure you have all noticed that when profession- 
als who care about children and families get together, invariably themes of communication, 
collaboration, and advocacy arise. 




605 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Providing Quality Health Care for Indigent Children; 
A Comparison of the U.K. and U.S. 

CHAIR; John Pascoe 

PRESENTERS: David Hall, Thomas Tonniges, Leslie L. Davidson 

lack Pascoe: I am a general pediatrician from Dayton, Ohio. I thought it would be wonderful to 
talk together about the similarities for child health care in the U.K. and U.S. 

David Hall is a Professor of Community Pediatrics at the University of Sheffield and the 
President of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health. He is also editor of an important 
book in the U.K. called Health for All Children, in its fourth edition. Tom Tonniges has been 
Director of Community Pediatrics at the American Academy of Pediatrics for the past 7 years. 

For 1 8 years, he was in private practice in Hastings, Nebraska. 

Leslie Davidson, also a pediatrician, has been Director of the National Perinatal Epidemiol- 
ogy Unit in the U.K. for 5 years. She was also a Reader in Public Health and Notice, in Oxford, 
England. She is returning to the United States in September 2002 to become Chair of the 
Department of Population and Family Health at the Mailman School of Public Health at 
Columbia University in New York. 

David Hall: 1 am originally a general pediatrician, a jack-of-all-trades, and master of nothing. I 
spent several years working in southern Africa and became interested in a whole range of public 
health issues. 1 also worked for a time with neurodisability issues and neurology, and became 
increasingly interested in prevention, early detection, and health promotion. 1 have gone the full 
circle from being a front line, general pediatrician to a public health-oriented person. Now 1 am 
involved with policy and training issues, which is one of the roles of the Medical Rural Colleges 

in the U.K., similar to the American Academy. 

I am going to provide a flavor of the interesting and hot topics of the moment in the U.K. 

We have a wonderful National Health Service, which was set up after World War 11, to offer free 
health care for everybody through taxation. People were supposed to get free medicines, teeth, 
spectacles, everything. We now have some problems with the system, not fundamentally due to 
a wrong model of care, but because of serious underinvestments over the last 25 years. That is 
why we are all struggling at the moment. 

What does every child get from the National Health Service? They get free access to health 
care at every level, from preventive health care to gene therapy and organ transplants, all free at 
the point of use for everybody within the U.K. In theory, they get access to a health visitor for 
the first 5 years of life. A health visitor is a trained nurse specializing in that particular branch of 
practice. On average, she will have a caseload of 320 children under 5 years of age, although it 
does vary enormously. There is a serious shortage of health visitors in some parts of the country. 

We also have a school nursing service, and one school nurse covers quite a number of 
children at school. Again, there are serious shortages of staff. Although this is the plan on paper, 
it does not actually work out in practice in every case. Every child will be on the list of a General 
Practitioner (GP) or family practitioner. A GP in England has a list size ranging from 1,400 
people to 3,500 people, but is on average just over 2,000. One fourth or one fifth of the popula- 
tion is children, so the average GP looks after somewhere between 300 and 600 children. 

With that wonderful health service, with everyone receiving equal access to free health care, 
we should not have any health inequalities. Unfortunately, that also is not quite the case. We 
have data from my own city of Sheffield. For each home visitor caseload, we have calculated 
their poverty or deprivation score using city council data. Then we have taken the birth weights 
of the babies born in each of those caseloads over the years. 




612 



606 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



In many parts of the U.K., there is about a 200mg birth weight difference between the best off 
and the least well off parts of Sheffield. Then we have a number of examples of the inequalities 
in health. The gradient across social class, in many respects, is getting worse over time. The social 
class gradient from dying in a house fire is 15 times higher in the poorest than the wealthiest 
families. The gradient for the number of days missed of school across the social classes is also 
steep, ranging from about 2 days to about 7 or 8 days. If one compares the qualifications of 
children leaving school and divides them into those who get free school meals, which is a 
convenient poverty index in the U.K., and those who do not get free school meals; there are 
enormous differences in the gradient of the qualifications the school leavers receive. 

In regard to dental data from the city of Sheffield, the decayed, missing, and filled teeth 
(DMFT) index shows the differences across the city. In the more prosperous parts of the city, it is 
between half and 1 DMF. In the worst parts of the city, it is somewhere around 4. There is a 
general recognition that poverty is bad for health, as The Guardian stated the other day. An 
estimated one sixth of our children live below the poverty line. The statistics are fairly scary. 
Picking one at random, 8 million people do not have a refrigerator. Two million children lack 
two or more basic essentials. Poverty is still a big issue in the U.K. Our Prime Minister said he 
would rid the country of poverty by 2019. Two of those years have gone and so far, we do not 
see much change in the gap. 

Social inclusion is high on the government agenda at the present time. In some parts of the 
country, one could buy a whole street for the price of a car. Housing is virtually abandoned. 
There is much emphasis on bottom up approaches in the government initiatives to tackle these 
problems. 

Sure Start is one of our flagship programs. It is a cross government program. Seven different 
ministers are part of the management team at the government level, so we have representation 
from Health, Education, Youth Offending, Home Office, and the Treasury. The aim of the 
program is to "ensure that a child is ready to benefit from education when he starts school." 

Many of these families cannot afford a car and have long distances to go for school; it is a 
scattered population. In some respects, these people are actually more deprived, and have worse 
poverty than the people in the cities, even if their actual income is not necessarily low. 

Rural Sure Start is now getting underway. Interestingly, Sure Start builds on the American 
Head Start research about early intervention. However, it has another dimension that is rather 
different from the U.S., and that is emphasis on bottom up approaches, community develop- 
ment, and local ownership. As a result, there is huge variability in what actually goes into these 
Sure Start programs. The typical Sure Start project will serve 400-800 children, probably reach- 
ing a population of up to 20,000. 

For a local community, the original concept was what they called pram-pushing distance, 
except nobody has prams anymore; but that was the term they used to capture the idea that this 
should encompass a walkable neighborhood. That is largely the way it was developed. The 
importance of bottom up approaches emerges when one looks at some of the imaginative local 
projects. 

One thing that I feel strongly about, and clearly the ministers do as well, is the notion that 
one can make a big investment in the early years. But, if one does not capitalize on it once the 
children are in school, much of that investment can be lost, notwithstanding all the research 
pointing to the sleeper effects. Any of us who have had children of our own know that a parent's 
job is not done when the children go to school. In fact, the amount of support one puts in as 
they go through school probably grows rather tlian diminishes. 

On Track is a second program driven by the Department of Education in the Home Office as 
part of crime prevention. It focuses on the 4- to 12-year-old age group. It tries to stop these 
children from getting into trouble, because one can identify early on the children who are 
heading for trouble in school. There are a number of components. This program is at an earlier 
stage than Sure Start, and its full impact is not yet clear. 



O 

ERIC 



613 



607 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Another program is called Connexions, which is about providing a personal mentor for the 
13- to 19-year-old age group, with a particular focus on the at-risk youngsters, who are the 
inner-city children from extremely deprived or disturbed backgrounds. This program is getting 
underway, and it looks interesting; but again, it is probably too early to make any real evaluation. 

Excellence in Cities is about raising the standards of inner-city schools. When I reviewed the 
collection of government initiatives since 1996, I counted 67. 1 probably missed a few. The 
people who have to bid for this money are complaining that they cannot keep up with all these 
new initiatives. It is virtually one initiative per week, and it is certainly difficult to keep track of 
them. 

The government is now looking at various ways of forming partnerships for children leaving 
public care, in a program called Quality Protects. We have 53,000 children in public care at any 
particular point in time, and a survey of these youngsters showed the appalling outcomes when 
they grow up and leave school. A small snapshot survey of 48 random children leaving care 
showed that one third were using drugs, one third committed self-harm at least once, nearly two 
thirds have thought seriously about suicide, and 40% have actually tried to kill themselves at 
least once. 

The General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) is our school-leaving certificate for 
16-year-olds. Based on data from 5 years ago, 70% have no qualification at all when they leave 
school. These children have the most awful outcomes. Quality Protects is a huge investment, 
and it puts enormous pressure on local social services to do something about these children and 
to improve their outcomes. Another area that has become clear are Domestic Violence Refuges, 
or shelters. At any one time, 34,000 children in England and Wales live in these refuges. Two 
thirds of them have no background health data chart at all; two thirds of them have no access to 
incoming mail. Then we complain when they do not keep hospital appointments. Furthermore, 
20% have developmental problems, and 50% have behavioral problems. Accurate immuniza- 
tion rates are difficult to get, but they are certainly low. This is another group of children who 
are just outside the system and not captured by any of the routine services. 

As the Evening Standard newspaper said the other day, it pays to have rich parents. That is still 
the case, even with universal access to a free health care system. In a meeting a couple of years 
ago between the U.K. and the American Academy, there was great interest in the fact that we 
have achieved free universal access to health care, which I know many of you in the U.S. would 
like to achieve. The fact is, we still have big health inequality gradients. It is fairly obvious to all 
of us that this is about the poverty gradient, the poverty gap, and the extent of inequalities. 

The questions that seemed worthy of discussion for this group are; How much does health 
care in general, and pediatrics in particular, have to contribute to this whole picture? I ask myself 
that question in more depressed moments. What type of social engineering works best? Does it 
have to do with income? Does it relate to benefits? Is the answer a curriculum-oriented program 
working with parents, similar to Head Start? Is it the more community-driven, bottom up 
approach that we have in Sure Start, which is less specific on the inputs than Head Start? What 
about the importance of maintaining investment in school-aged children? I do not know what 
other programs are running here that are comparable to our On Track and Gonnedons. The 
lesson seems clear that notwithstanding all the early optimism about Head Start, it is important 
to maintain the investment in children going through school. It is no good investing all the eggs 
into one basket in the preschool years. 

We have a huge evaluation of Sure Start underway. The total budget in Sure Start is in excess 
of a billion pounds, like one and a half billion dollars, which in U.K. economics and population 
is roughly one quarter of the U.S. It is a lot of money. There are about 20 to 24 million dollars 
invested in a long-term evaluation program. It is the biggest grant ever won by a university, and 
it is not mine, I am jolly glad to say, because it is the most nightmarish evaluation project 
imaginable. Edward Melhuish and Jay Belsky at Birkbeck College, University of London, are 
coordinating it. There is also a consortium. I am on the steering group with a number of other 




614 



608 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



people. It is fascinating to see how it is being developed. In terms of the data set, it makes NASA 
look like a laptop. 

Question: It was mentioned that children have access to transplant funds from the Bureau. 

Does that include bone marrow? 

Hall: Absolutely everything. In general, we have a good record where children's oncology is 
concerned. We compare fairly well with the rest of mainland Europe, except that the uncommon 
childhood solid tumors tend to get referred a bit later, which we suspect may be due to primary 
care and training issues. But in other respects, the care of children with cancer in the U.K. is 
good. We can hold our heads up on that. In fact, the more complicated the problem, the better 
we do. It is the front door kind of thing that we are not as good with, like child psychiatry, 
where waits of 18 months are not uncommon. The waiting time is not bad for children, but it is 
appalling for adults. ' 

Tom Tonniges: I am a general pediatrician. I have practiced in rural Nebraska for 18 years and 
have been at the American Academy of Pediatrics for the last 7 years. At the Academy, I have an 
opportunity to work with pediatricians around Head Start and child-care issues. We actually 
administer the Healthy Child Care America Campaign, with which many Head Start people are 
familiar. We recently got a Bright Futures Implementation Grant as well as an Oral Health and 
Mental Health Initiatives. 

I would like to give a sketch of the U.S. health-care system. I want to talk about its strengths 
and weaknesses, the social determinants, and follow up on some of the things that Hall men- 
tioned. Then I will describe some of the things we are doing at the Academy that I think are 
useful. I will conclude with some comments about the Healthy People 2010 Initiative, which is 
important to the health-care system for children in this country. As one looks at the U.S. health- 
care system, it is no secret that health care is considered an entitlement rather than a right. And 
yet, even though we have a right to pay taxes, and we have a right to the education system, for 
some reason we still have not been able to identify that health care is a right for our citizens. 

There are literally hundreds to thousands of payment plans, including indemnity insurance, 
fee for service, HMOs, PPOs, and managed care organizations. Many people are trying to 
identify what services are appropriate in our health-care system. As an example, our government 
has Bright Futures guidelines, but Medicaid does not pay for the program's implementation. 
Frequently, the services in our health care system are determined by the employer. If one talks to 
the employer, which we frequently do in pediatrics to improve payment for services, they will 
say that they pay for what their employees want. 

We frequently get caught in a "catch-22," because families do not know what they need until 
they need it, and then it is too late. Rarely do individuals pay for their own health insurance. As 
an example, in my practice, it was not infrequent that farmers with seasonal or variable income 
would frequently choose not to have health insurance or get extremely high deductible insur- 
ance that would throw their family into economic distress if a catastrophic health problem 
occurred. Drugs, procedures, and hospitals drive our health-care system. Most of the health-care 
dollars go to those three areas of our sj^tem. 

We have minimal but increasing support for primary care. In terms of preventive health-care 
services, only 1 to 2 % of our health-care expenditures actually go to preventive health-care 
services, even though people would all agree that preventive health care is a good use of health- 
care dollars. 

Our public health system is variable. I was practicing in a state with essentially no public 
health-care system; yet in other states and communities, it is well-established. September 11th 
and the anthrax issue in this country highlighted how varied our health-care system is, and how 
we have difficulty responding to national and local emergencies. Our health-care system is 





609 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/ CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



basically still a cottage industry. From a physician perspective, it is mainly made up of solo and 
small group practices. Over 50% of physicians function in a practice of four people or less. Yet, if 
one looks at child health, it really is a low cost, low tech health-care system with a small 
percentage of patients who are high utilizers, or at high cost. Still, we have not figured out how 
to ensure health access for all children. 

Our health-care system in the past has been based on anecdotal experience. We have not 
invested the dollars in health-care services research to show that what we do makes a difference, 
which is more interesting as we move forward over the next decade. Certainly, our strength as a 
health-care system is the research base. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) budget is $25 
billion, yet our service side of it, our Maternal and Child Health Bureau budget, is less than 
$800 million. 

The challenge for all of us from the clinical and practice sides is to make sure that research is 
clinically relevant. Our diversity is a strength as well as a problem. For example, through our 
newborn screening system, some states actually test for up to 25 newborn metabolic diseases at 
birth. Meanwhile, other states only test for two or three diseases. Consequently, there are 50 
different newborn screening programs. 

Another strength is that, in general, people and children in America are cared for. We have 
occasional experiences similar to the U.K. of people not having access. People do get health care, 
and most people would agree that we are probably the most technologically advanced health- 
care system in the world. The abilities and resources in our health-care system, and the way it is 
set up, drive technology research and new drug development. It provides an opportunity for 
creativity, particularly in the areas of access to care, health-care delivery, and treatments. 

Currendy in America, 11 million children are without health insurance, and over 5 to 6 
million of those children are either Medicaid- or State Child Health Insurance Program 
(S-CHIP)-eligible. Yet we have difficulty getdng those children into regular, ongoing system of 
care. Each day, over 1,400 children are born without insurance. Over the late 1980s and 1990s, 
we saw an increase in the number of children without insurance. More children are growing up 
in poverty, and there is an increase in the number of families who lack prenatal care. 

From the standpoint of disparities, looking at the relationship between household income 
and health, as income increases, health improves. Perhaps one of the issues for discussion 
centers on education and income. As a person's education level goes up, their income goes up. 
The ability to have a higher income later in life is one of the ways we can get out of this issue of 
poverty for many of our families. Certainly, the American family has changed. It is like the 
family in the U.K., in that families were extended families in the 1950s. Malnutrition was not 
uncommon. A trip to Grandma's house was a big deal. Three vaccines were all one could expect. 
Certainly, for the child of the 2000s, these things are not new. 

Certainly, obesity is a major problem. In my community in the Chicago area, it is not 
uncommon for children to go to Europe alone, but they do not go into Chicago and see some of 
the situations where families have to raise their children today. One of the significant diseases of 
the 21st century is Type II Diabetes. An article was published in JAMA last week about the 
significant complications that young adults were having, including strokes and heart attacks. 
People in their 20s and early 30s have developed Type II Diabetes. It is an epidemic among the 
Native American population and is significantly increasing among our ethnic minorities. 

Certainly, there are changes in our health-care delivery system. We are going on at this point 
and will be accelerating over the next 10 years, changing to an interdisciplinary, 
multidisciplinary team approach. Research will show that prevention works and that we need to 
focus more resources in that area. We will also continue to see changes in health-care financing. 
Many people say that if you have seen one managed care plan, you have seen one. The only 
consistent thing about managed care plans is that they should be called shifting managed care, 
because they continually change. We will also see an extended role for the nonphysician among 
our child health-care providers in the future. 



ERIC 



610 



616 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



We developed a definition of community pediatrics at the Academy. It applies to social 
service, social welfare, education, health, or any profession. We have defined community 
pediatrics as a perspective that enlarges the pediatrician's focus from one child to all children in 
the community. That is something each of our professions can do. We work with individual 
children, but we have a responsibility to think about all the children in our community. We are 
hopefully moving pediatricians to think in terms of a strength-based model rather than a 
deficient model of care. 

Communities are places of strength where child health can actually be improved. The 
community pediatrics perspective recognizes that family, educational, social, cultural, spiritual, 
economic, environmental, and political forces act significantly upon child health, favorably or 
unfavorably. It is a synthesis of clinical practice and public health principles directed to provid- 
ing health care to a given child and promoting children within their community. Pediatricians of 
the next decade will have much more public health experience as they go but into communities, 
due to different things happening in postgraduate education and residency training. Commu- 
nity pediatrics involves a commitment to use community resources and to collaborate with 
other professionals, agencies, and the parents, to advocate for and achieve access and quality of 
services for all children. 

The operative word here is collaboration with the parent. As we move into the next decade, 
hopefully pediatricians will be better trained to listen to the needs and concerns of families. It is 
integral to the role of all health professionals, social service workers> and educators who care for 
children. How can this definition be helpful to all of us, no matter what our profession? It can 
help us as practitioners in our specialty. It can help us advocate for community services. It can 
help us develop tools for educational and community-level activities. It can help us provide 
questions to be researched and can provide a framework for advancing each of our careers. We are 
doing this at the Academy through the medical home concept and comprehensive primary care. 

We define this as accessible, family-centered, continuous, comprehensive, coordinated, 
compassionate, and culturally competent. Many activities are going on at a local, state, and 
national level. A great amount of information about local programs is available at 
www.medicalhomeinfo.org, where one can click on any state or community and find out about 
what is going on in that area. 

I want to close by talking about Healthy People 2010, which is a comprehensive, nationwide 
health promotion, and disease prevention agenda. It is grounded in science, public consensus, 
and is designed to measure progress. It follows up on our Healthy People 2000 activities. The 
two main goals are to increase quality and years of healthy life and to eliminate health dispari- 
ties. It offers active, practical steps to put into practice services for families at the community 
level. It is framed in a 100% access, 0% disparity program. 

Those of us working on these initiatives feel that they are truly achievable over the next 10 
years. There are 470 areas in child health that are part of the Healthy People 2010 Initiative, 
including 100% access, disparities, immunizations, breastfeeding, oral health, vision and 
hearing screening, and children with special health care needs. In regard to children with special 
health care needs, it will hopefully help us move to full implementation of a system of care for 
these children, will measure the success, and will build on years of partnership while also 
engaging new partners. 

It has 10 outcomes, including access to a medical home, adequate insurance or coverage, 
early screening and identification, a family-friendly service system, and family partnerships and 
satisfaction. Another outcome, where pediatrics has woefully failed as a profession, is in working 
with our adult colleagues around appropriate transition into adult life. 

What can one do? As anyone dealing with children within the community, use community 
data. Become involved in the community. Work with public entities. Use local resources to solve 
local problems. One of the things we are trying to do is break this down into chunks that 
individual pediatricians can handle. If every pediatrician in America figured out how to improve 




611 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



access to care for 200 children, which I think is totally doable and manageable, 100% of 
children in America would have access to care. The process would also foster leadership. 

Very quickly, there are nine characteristics of big thinkers. One of the challenges here around 
health issues for children is to get on fire and never lose imagination. You bet the farm. You 
marinate in thought. You think better together. You do not take no for an answer. You turn 
reality into fantasy. You live your lives with a purpose, and you think with your hearts. 

It is important for all of us to start small. The message is that access to care for children in 
America is really one child at a time. A huge federal program will not suddenly solve this 
problem. We know that that it is not the answer from the U.K. experience, where Hall just said 
that they have 100% financial access but huge disparities. We know from our own experience 
in that we have 5 million children who are eligible for S-CHIP and Medicaid but who still do 
not have access to care. We will never get there unless we think big and think that we can solve 
the problem. 

Margaret Mead said that the solution of adult problems tomorrow depends in large measure 
upon the way our children grow up today. There is no greater insight into the future 
recognizing that when we save our children, we save ourselves. 1 like this ancient quote: "Inferior 
doctors treat the patient's disease. Mediocre doctors treat the patient as a person. Superior 
doctors treat the community as a whole." 

Comment: Tonniges talked about the crowd of 1950. 1 was 9 years old at the time, and the 
doctor in my poor neighborhood in Washington Heights, New York, charged $2.00 for a home 
visit. He gave us as much as he could give us technologically. We had a major medical center 3 
miles away that had a big sign out in front saying that it would provide health care to all, 
regardless of race, color, or creed. The 1950s were not so bad in some areas in terms of altmism 
and caring. 

Tonniges: 1 would not disagree with that at all. The flip side of it is that 18 years ago in practice, 
I saw children die or have significant morbidity from totally preventable diseases and condi- 
tions, and that has dramatically improved. We now have the highest immunization rate of all 
time here in America. 1 would agree with you around the altruism, and in my job at the Acad- 
emy, I try to get pediatricians out of their offices, out of the exam room, and into communities 
to solve some of these bigger issues. 

Leslie Davidson: 1 work in England now. 1 was trained as a pediatrician in the U.S., and 1 did 
my epidemiology training in England. 1 have had babies and young children in both countries, 
so 1 have maternal experience in both, and experience working both in the inner-city of London 
and the inner-city of New York. My direct comparative experiences somewhat fuel the way 1 feel 
about these issues. 1 want to think about the two systems as a starting place for the conversation 
that we can have afterwards. 

Hall had said that mortality in children is actually lower in the U.K. than in the U.S., but it is 
high for Western Europe. England is always lagging behind the rest of Western Europe, with the 
worst figures. It is a huge embarrassment to the U.K. government and population. Increasing 
numbers live in poverty. The government has committed itself to eliminating poverty for 
children in the next 18 years, which is a hugely powerful promise, and they are doing some 
things to address it. Whether or not they can get there in 18 years is a debatable issue. Whether 
or not their approach will get us there is another interesting issue. 

Over the last decades, there have also been massive changes in family stmcture, in the 
percentage of children born outside of marriage, and the number of lone mothers bringing up 
children. These are huge changes that affect child welfare and child life. Again, as has already 
been demonstrated at this conference, increasing understanding at the government and profes- 
sional level on the impact of early experiences on children has led to the Sure Start program. 



er|c 



612 



618 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



which Hall mentioned. They are receiving over a billion dollars from the government to affect 
change and community development for children. That program actually came up as a result of 
a spending review at the Treasury Department. The Treasury Department reviewed all of their 
spending on children and on later childhood, and concluded that they had to do something 
significant, because the spending was enormous, disparate, and uncoordinated; thus they 
developed the idea of Sure Start. Sure Start actually came from the Treasury, not from the 
professionals. That was fascinating because it actually committed the government behind the 
scenes to the program, which had its good and bad sides. 

The other thing that is important about the U.K. compared to the U.S. is the Children Act. 
The legal framework around child well-being is stronger in the U.K. than it is in the U.S. Even 
though the U.S. has a Bill of Rights, a Constitution, and a stronger legal framework in some 
ways than the U.K. for children, the U.S. still has not signed the United Nations (UN) Conven- 
tion on the Rights of the Child. The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child led to the 
Children Act in 1989, and that act puts in place the legal framework upon which education, 
social services, and health is based. Section 17, in particular, is about children in need. It 
basically says that no child should be unable to achieve or maintain a reasonable standard of 
health, and that the government has a responsibility to put in place services for any child where 
their health or development is likely to be significantly impaired or further impaired without 
the provision of services. That is powerful and underpins much of what goes on in the U.K. 

Going back to what Hall said, what does exist, in spite of our inequalities and outcomes, is a 
universal patchwork of services that is geographically based. We have shortages of pediatricians 
and health visitors. But, there is a community pediatrician in every district, responsible for areas 
of child health including child disability, child protection issues, and public health interests 
of children. 

There is also a Consultant in Communicable Disease Control (CCDC) in every district with 
responsibility for infectious disease control. In every local authority, an environmental health 
officer has the responsibility for dealing with the outside health aspects and preventive health 
aspects. Every district also has an immunization coordinator, who might be a pediatrician, 
microbiologist, or public health doctor. They are responsible for planning and implementing 
the immunization programs. There are people with responsibilities for adoption and fostering. 
There is a designated doctor for child protection. Every hospital or community grouping has a 
designated nurse. Every institution has a named doctor and a named nurse who theoretically 
have overall responsibility in that hospital or community grouping for child protection advice 
and support. There is a child protection committee in every area. Every school has a school 
health service. So, there is a rich fabric of care in place across the country with no holes. That is a 
tremendous strength. 

Hall also mentioned that every child from 0 to 5 years of age has a named health visitor. At 
5 years of age, it is transitioned to a named school nurse. At the same time, every child is 
enrolled in a general practice. Children have a person-to-person relationship, and districts have 
a set of accountable responsibilities. 

The child and family are embedded in this whole circle of care and services. Some areas, like 
mental health, fall down. In my old district, one could wait an entire year for a psychological 
consultation and assessment for a child with a disability. It was pitiful and inappropriate. 
However, New York City is worse, especially for a child with complex needs or disabilities. What 
does exist is the potential for this fabric to actually work in a coordinated way to serve the needs 
of the child. The question marks exist because it does not always work that way. The interface 
between different sectors and different services is where it often falls down, between the school 
and the community pediatrician, between the mental health services and the primary care team, 
between the social services and the school. That provides a snapshot of the structure and the 
pattern of health services. 

Now for a different look at the poverty issues. Ninety percent of married families earn over 



613 



619 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



£300 a week. The figures for those who are cohabitating with a partner are not much worse. 

Forty percent of lone fathers make over £300 a week; however^ a tiny proportion of lone mothers 
make over £300 a week. In fact, most of them make very little money. Therefore, the changing 
health status in terms of the increasing proportion of children living with lone parents, and a 
decreasing proportion living with married parents, has a huge implications for the economic 
status of the children. 

One of the lovely things about working in England is that national statistics are wonderful. 

The U.K. has linked birth and death certificates showing the social class gradient for mortality 
for the first and the second year of life. The gradient is sharpest at the end of skilled and un- 
skilled labor. Birth weight, has the same gradient. Dental decay also correlates to social class. 
Decay is increasingly high, affecting up to 70% of the population in the fourth and fifth lowest 
social classes. 

Breastfeeding is the central goal of the National Health Service (NHS), and it has recently 
become a central goal of the government. The initiation of breastfeeding, and then breastfeeding 
after 6 weeks, also demonstrates a social class gradient. England had been unable to shift this for 
decades. In 2000, a bit of encouraging news showed that the gap is narrowing slightly between 
social classes in terms of the initiating of breastfeeding. Every 5 years they do a feeding survey, 
which now shows that the gap is narrowing, from 65% to 50%. 

Smoking during pregnancy is also an issue we have tracked. In the entire U.K., about 22% of 
women smoke during pregnancy, even though effective programs exist to knock that down at 
least 10%. We have increasing levels of smoking among younger age groups, among girls in 
particular. The ^^never smoked in 1998 among school children declined and the increase of 
"regular" smokers rose to about 18% at 15 years of age in England. The number of teenage 
pregnancies are the highest in Europe and is a major government priority; however, it is much 
lower than here in the U.S. 

In terms of mental disorders, a national survey showed these were primarily behavioral 
disorders of children, conduct disorder, anxiety, and depression. The survey again showed huge 
social cross-gradient. Many of these are linked to early intervention. Evidence shows that some 
mental disorders can be prevented if marital disharmony and things like that are addressed, yet 
we have not been able to do it. 

What kinds of things get in our way, given the wonderful fabric of care in place? Children do 
not have to wait for acute care, older people often wait a long time to get their hip replaced or 
the cataract done, but children do not wait. Where do we lose? Where do we fall down? Part of it 
is explained in that they require people to change, and that requires health education and 
effective intervention. It is about adequate housing. It is about health interventions that are 
outside of health, addressing risks to health. 

Injury rates are one example where a 1996 study showed that the overall mortality from 
injury for children has declined massively in the last 15 years. Actually, the decline was seen all 
in the upper social classes, while the gap between the poorer children and the upper-class 
children was widening. We need health services to be better funded, but we also need to 
understand better and implement the preventive approaches that are outside of routine health 
care. That is a huge challenge for both countries. We also need to better coordinate our work. 

What are the similarities between countries? Both countries have inequalities in income, 
health behaviors, breastfeeding, smoking, health outcomes in mortality, low birth weight, dental 
health, injury rates, and disability rates. It is probably true that the levels are different and are 
generally higher in the U.S. than in the U.K., but the barriers are probably similar. The U.S. does 
not have universal health care for children free at the point of access, and it needs it. The U.K. 
has it and thankfully has not lost it yet. However, the similarities struck me the most in working 
between the two systems both as a mother and as a pediatrician. When I moved to Brixton from 
Harlem, 3 per 100 babies were born HIV-positive in Harlem at that point during the early 1980s. 
In Brixton, it was per 1,000. The difference was ten-fold, but it was the same problem. 



614 



620 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



Pascoe: What is the rate of low birth weight in England? 

Davidson: Seven percent low birth weight, about 1.5% very low birth weight. We are at the 
lowest rate we have seen in the U.K. 

Pascoe: Is the difference among racial groups in the U.K. like the U.S.? 

Davidson: I am sure it is, but the U.K. does not collect that data by race. One could say there is 
three times the risk of low birth weight in the U.S. African American population compared to 
Whites. The U.K. cannot do that, since they do not collect that type of information on the birth 
certificates, and the birth certificates are determined by national law. In regard to the differences, 
the U.K. has universal health care while the U.S. has variable Medicaid provisions and other 
ways of doing it. In the U.K., every woman has a named midwife when she has a baby. The 
woman herself has a health professional assigned to her, whether or not she has an obstetrician. 

In terms of universal health visiting, the U.S. has various home visiting programs in certain 
funded demonstration projects or with special funding. Universal school nursing varies. In some 
ways, the U.S. has an interesting model, because the U.K. does not have the reproductive 
secondary school model that the U.S. has. Every child in the U.K. has the right to be examined, 
evaluated, and screened by a GP. Additionally, about 60% of children have a pediatrician. 

Both countries actually have the use of emergency facilities for care instead of their named 
doctor. The U.K. has Sure Start, but they do not have anything like Head Start. The U.K. govern- 
ment came to the U.S. to learn about Head Start, but it decided not to incorporate it and instead 
chose Sure Start. On the other hand, it does have the stated goal to reach universal access to 
preschool, for 4-year-olds and then 3-year-olds. In the U.S. there is a similar goal, but no real 
mechanism yet. 

What works and what does not work? One of the great advantages of England is that the 
country has 50 million people, and the government sets priorities and tells people what is 
important. There is a close tie between government and the health service, with the ability to 
implement what has been decided. That is sometimes good and often not so good. If children 
drop off the agenda for a few years, the people who mn the health service provision drop the 
children off the agenda. Right now, children are way up on the agenda. But for much of this 
decade, children were off the agenda. 

Only in the last few years have children moved up into the top 14 priorities for the govern- 
ment. Because it is so closely knit, the government priorities determine the spending down the 
line. They often do not listen to the professionals or the parent groups. The U.S. is a federation, 
with different funding streams, so one can sometimes weather government changes more easily 
than in the U.K. When I went to the U.K., I thought it would be fabulous to have a national 
health service. However, working and commissioning health care for children and for mothers 
was challenging, because they were not on the agenda. It required total persuasion to get a little 
bit of money for this or that. Because of the differences and the similarities, there is a huge scope 
for collaboration in problem solving and in sharing what we know and what we do not Imow. 
That is one reason why this dialogue is important. 

Pascoe: Is there any parallel to the White House conferences on children, early childhood, or 
mental health? Does the Prime Minister, or some credible body closely related to the govern- 
ment, bring together experts at certain intervals to talk about issues that are critical to children? 

Hall: Within Parliament, there are many cross-party committees and commissions that will hear 
evidence. They are more influential than most people realize outside politics. Obviously, there 
are professional conferences, and some of the professional bodies are skilled at getting into the 
media. The British Medical Association is by far the most expert at getting issues into the media. 





615 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



I suspect it is not as high profile as the U.S. equivalent, and we certainly are not as effective at 
catching public attention. The media will run the stories they think are interesting, but they 
usually have little relevance to what is really important. I do not know whether it is different in 
the U.S. 

Question: Dental care is a problem in the U.S. because insurance companies are supposed to 
cover it, but dentists often do not take the insurance as their total reimbursement. 

Hall: From our perspective, the most important thing related to dental health is prevention. The 
physician network is heavily involved in providing dental advice. Data shows that only about 
20% of children actually get registered with a dentist within the first 2 years of life, which is one 
of the targets we were aiming at. Most of those are middle-class children, even though dental 
care is available for children free of charge. In theory, even sophisticated treatments like orth- 
odontics are available. In reality, however, finding enough people to provide these things is 
difficult; but it is not a huge problem in terms of access. It is much more of a problem in terms 
of using what is available. That is the biggest issue for us. 

Davidson: The issue of fluoridation is a nonhealth intervention that affects health. London 
does not fluoridate its water supply. It has been a battle for years. Similarly, for orthodontic 
treatment, one has to wait 2 or 3 years, at which time the child is already too old. 

Hall: Teeth are falling out by then. 

Davidson: However, there are criteria around orthodontics, which are fair enough, looking at 
potential damage to the tooth as opposed to cosmetic. 

Tonniges: There is no question that oral and dental health is the biggest health problem of 
children today. Early in my time at the Academy, it did not seem to be a problem in my practice; 
but when I started to go on site visits across the country, everywhere I went, people said they 
could get health care. They could get shots for children or physician appointments; but they ' 
could not get a dentist to see them. That flies in the face of the fact that in the last 6 years, two 
dental schools in Chicago have closed. The number of people coming into the system is going 
down. One of the programs that we have around oral health is to educate pediatricians on oral 
health issues and train them on how to do fluoride varnishes and washes and how to provide 
primary preventive dental services in their medical home. We will get a real uptake of that 
concept among people who work in community health centers and areas where many poor 
children live because they will recognize the need for it. It will be interesting to see if people in 
our suburban practices, and more middle-class and upper-middle-class practices, embrace that. 
Currently, less than half of children in American have a dentist and or even see a dentist before 
they start school. It is a major problem. 

Davidson: The other issue is diet, which is a problem in both countries. Fizzy drinks and sugary 
stuff contribute to a huge problem around rising obesity in England, and will certainly have a 
social class distribution. It is not yet at the level in England that it is here in the U.S., but it 
following along. My anecdotal experience is that about 10 years after the problem is big in the 
U.S., it becomes big in England. 

Pascoe: Right. I have an example that may be part of the future, especially if the American 
Dental Association or dental organizations cannot take care of this community problem. A 
pediatrician outside Dayton, Ohio runs a clinic for all children, indigent or not, with a sliding 
scale for children without insurance. He has recently been funded by Ohio's Health Department 
to begin fluoride washes and sealants in children. Of course, there is an evaluation component. 



O 

ERIC 



616 



622 



QUALITY health CARE 



We will see what happens, but I wonder if this is going to be the future, with a one-stop shop for 
preventive oral health as well as preventive physical health. 

Tonniges: We are now developing an oral health initiative. We just got funded about 4 months 
ago and are hiring staff. One of the problems is that pediatric dentists are encouraging earlier 
and earlier exams for children, when there also is less and less access. A policy statement will 
come out of the Academy in regard to this issue. Pediatricians, and most of us in health cafe, will 
be surprised by the direct relation of the oral health of the mother and the health of the child, 
and the colonization of the mother s mouth and oral cavity with bacteria, compared to her 
infant. It will be interesting to get pediatricians to open mothers' mouths, see how many cavities 
they have, define them as high risk, and make sure their children get appropriate oral health care. 

Mike SUverstein: The dental equivalent of NIH just funded pediatricians at the University of 
Washington to conduct a fairly large oral health study among communities in Alaska, where 
dental health is a big issue. 

Pascoe: While the pediatrician is looking in the mother s mouth, I also hope he or she is asking 
about depressive symptoms, which are epidemic in this country. 

Beverly Morgan-Sandoff: I am from the Los Angeles County Office of Education. We are 
requiring our Early Head Start and Head Start programs to make sure that their children have 
access to a full range of health services, including dental. They are coming back to us saying that 
they cannot find any dentists to care for their children. There is nothing that we can do about it. 
Is there any kind of collaboration being developed with the Head Start bill and The American 
Dental Association or American Medical Association. 

Casey Emmer: Many of you touched on the issues that my division at Columbia University is 
working on. The Medicaid reimbursement rates are so low, so dentists do not want to see 
children after the age of 3 years. There are no pediatric dentists in Washington Heights, New 
York. It is a horror. There are only 3,000 pediatric dentists in the country. So much can be done 
in terms of preventative care. It puts the burden of responsibility on the pediatricians to talk to 
the mother and to also screen the children. Head Start has so many opportunities to promote 
good oral health behavior, even drinking the fluoridated tap water as opposed to bottled water. 
They can promote toothbmshing and watch out for how long these children use baby bottles. 
There are many opportunities for intervention. It just requires an iterative process between Head 
Start, day care centers, pediatricians, and dental professionals. 

Morgan-Sandoff: We are doing an intervention in Los Angeles with low-income women serving 
as trainers to low-income families, in the area of health. We could really do something in terms 
of dental care. 

Emmer: There are effective ways in a community to educate people, but we also know that 
education does not always change behavior. 

Raymond Arons: I want to address mental health issues. As a result of my 31 years at A medical 
facility, I receive many calls about finding a bed, particularly for children. For example, autistic 
twins who are 9 years of age, who are in crisis and are looking for a bed, are actually a danger to 
themselves and then a danger to their family. In New York City, surrounded by 15 million 
people, we have about 20 psychiatric, pediatric, in-patient beds available at best, and they are 
full. There is no place for these children to go. If there are 50 million people in the U.K., how 
many beds are available for pediatric psychiatric patients? 




623 



617 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/ CONVERSATION HOURS 



\ 



Hall: I cannot offer an exact figure. I can certainly tell you that it is a long-running problem. We 
are somewhat better off than the figure quoted for New York, but there is chronic pressure for 
beds. The examples given would certainly not figure on our particular list of priorities, because 
those sorts of situations would largely be avoided through fairly good respite care service in 
most places. It is unusual for families to reach such a point of catastrophic crisis for something 
like autism. We do have some specialist residential schools. When the educational, medical, 
psychiatric, and social problems all converge on one family, we sometimes manage to get a 
tripartite-funded placement in one of those schools. 

Where 1 used to work in South London, we had an enlightened administration, and we had 
several such cases. It can be done. We have a much bigger problem with what we call the 
psychosocial crisis — the youngster who is increasingly out of control, with several suicide 
attempts, sexually abused, getting into prostitution and drugs. They come into the hospital on 
Saturday night and turn the ward upside down. The pediatricians say it is not their problem, 
send them to the psychiatrists. The psychiatrists say ihey will not come into the hospital on a 
weekend. We phone the Director of Social Services, who says to wait until Monday. The whole 
thing is a nightmare. At the moment, this is one of the top issues on our agenda that we are 
trying to tackle more effectively. 

Davidson: I came from a less enlightened part of London than Hall. But, Southeast Thames, 
when 1 was a pediatric epidemiologist there, did not have beds for adolescent psychotic chil- 
dren. We had to buy them from the private sector. We had to go down to Kent. We did not have 
any provisions for those children, and it was appalling. We also do not have enough child 
psychiatrists. For the children that Hall was talking about, who have moderate to severe disabili- 
ties, behavioral disorders, epilepsy, etc., a residential school would be better for them. But often, 
in my district, there was wrangling and disagreement about who had what share of the bill 
between education, social services, and health. The rules said that one could not budget share. 
They are changing that, and it is a great advance that the three sectors can now share budgets to 
provide for these children, to prevent such wrangles. 

Arons: Back in the 1950s, we had 100 beds for pediatric cases. As a result of the institutionaliza- 
tion in New York State, we had 100 beds for children in the Bronx or Manhattan who needed 
care. They are not there anymore. ^ 

Davidson: Both countries also have a role to take on regarding incarcerated youth. They are not 
humanely or appropriately provided for in either country, and it is a massive problem that we 
have discussed marginally, but never have done much about. 

Question: One of our major program goals is to facilitate service access, particularly among our 
immigrant population. We notice particular barriers to accessing services for the immigrant 
community. What type of barriers exist in the U.K.? 

Hall: First of all, there are different disease patterns, but 1 think U.K. and U.S. pediatricians are 
well tuned to those. Language, of course, is another barrier. In one little corner of London, they 
speak at least 27 different languages. It is a challenge to set up interpreters and written material 
for 27 different language groups. However, the cultural barriers are probably more difficult, and 
there are many difficulties in how people perceive health care. Even something as simple as an 
appointment system can be a barrier. One of the goals of the National Health Service is to 
maintain a proper, reliable appointment system so people know when they will be seen. Some 
immigrant communities are not used to operating under an appointment system. They expect 
the clinic to be open at all hours. A friend of mine who practices in India runs his office exactly 



618 



624 



QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



like that. It is open until the last patient leaves. A patient gets seen that day even if there is a long 
line. People think it will be the same in the U.K. 

Other barriers include understanding things like long-term medication, the idea of not taking 
it for months to get better, but for years. All of those issues create enormous gaps to cross in 
order to ameliorate the difficulties. On the other hand, there are also great strengths. Many 
immigrants show incredible commitment to their children and determination to do what is best 
for them. The family structure is also much stronger. I do not have any data on this topic, but I 
am sure that the number of severe conduct disorders among our Asian community children, for 
instance, is much lower. 

Tonniges: This issue is really interesting, where public policy that was developed with the 
intention of improving access to care has probably actually made it more difficult. Translation 
services are an example. Federal law requires that translation be provided. How in the world 
could somebody in private practice in America provide translation in 27 different languages and 
then not get paid for it? That is a real barrier. It is easier for practitioners to say that they do not 
accept Medicaid patients or low-income patients. Another example is the whole issue of pre- 
sumptive eligibility, which we do not allow. If one sees a patient who does not have access to 
care, there should be some way for the care provider to get paid while the patient's eligibility for 
public programs is determined. Fortunately, in obstetrics, that is not a problem; but for undocu- 
mented U.S. immigrants, it is variable, so public policies were written to improve access and 
improve care, while it may actually be a detriment. That is why we need to keep having these 
discussions. 

Davidson: A universal health care system in the U.K. makes people assume that it is accessible 
to everybody. Very little of the research looks at the division between offer and uptake for 
antenatal or postnatal screenings, for example. We know little about whether the barrier is the 
level of care offered, the language, or the level of choosing to take it up; In not understanding 
that issue, we cannot do much about it. It is a big challenge for us to begin looking into those 
topics as research questions and also potentially as audit questions for evaluating one's own 
performance and work. 

Hall: Another angle is screening for postnatal depression, which is highly topical. It turns out 
that the standard screening instruments used for depression work poorly within many Asian 
communities, where depression tends to be presented in terms of physical symptoms. That is 
one of the difficulties people are struggling with at the moment, trying to understand what 
depression actually means in those communities. Even translating the word depression can be 
problematic. The mental health area is quite difficult, particularly regarding the diagnosis of 
psychosis and psychotic illness. There is a whole range of challenging, but interesting, cultural 
issues. 

Pascoe: What is the NHS policy on patients who are not U.K. citizens? 

Hall: Being a citizen is one thing, but the real question is whether one is in the country legally. 
Depending on which country one comes from and whether one is a European Union citizen, 
distinctions are made between emergency and elective care. There is not a quick, simple answer. 
Certainly, when the hospital admissions officer is checking people's details, they look to see if 
they are eligible for NHS treatment. It is rare to have any problem over that in pediatrics, but in 
adult practice it might happen more often. I have never had to turn a child away from treatment. 

Davidson: Certainly there is an obligation for GPs and hospitals to treat anybody for emergency 
care. 





619 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Pascoe: Treat them and charge them for the service? 

Davidson: Yes, but they do not ever do it. It is much more complicated to get the charges. There 
are no bills. The paperwork is killing. In England, there is no paperwork, one just goes, so it is 
easy for people who are not eligible to slip through the net. It is rare for routine services for 
anybody to check at the child level. In London, and where I work, with a huge number of 
immigrants, there was an explicit policy that we would not turn away anybody. Everybody, every 
child, whether or not they were legal, would receive care. 

In the U.K., data shows that failure to provide health care leads to worse outcomes. There 
certainly is data for dental. There is public health data in England for dental about the provision 
of care and increasing dental health, which has been increasingly good over the last decades. 

For elderly people, it is much more direct, so there are data on failure to repair hips with 
increasing disability, cataract failure, failure to screen for retinal disease from diabetes, failure to 
treat blood pressure and renal failure. There are much better long-term data, mostly morbidity 
rather than mortality, linked to failure to either provide or take up, because for blood pressure, 
often it is the failure to take up. Many people dislike taking their blood pressure medication, for 
a variety of reasons. Some studies are looking into why or how, and there are ethnic differences. 

Pascoe: Two years ago, we held a meeting in Newcastle, with 25 pediatricians from the U.S. and 
25 from the U.K. This fall, there should be a supplement in Pediatrics about the conference 
proceedings. Even though we shared a common language, one of the most marked differences 
was an extreme passion by U.K. pediatricians about the UN convention, compared to a neutral 
or negative response from U.S. pediatricians. It boiled down to the U.K. system honoring the 
rights of the child, and the U.S. health care system honoring the rights of families and parents. I 
am interested in comments on that assumption, because we never had a vigorous discussion to 
resolve the issue. It was a fundamental difference. 

Davidson: I was passionate on the rights of the child. The U.S. pediatricians were seeing it as a 
diminution of the rights of the parents. It is true that in the U.K. law embodying it, rights were 
somewhat shifted around. Parental rights were parental responsibilities. Overall, the U.S. is 
derided around the world for being the only country to not sign the convention. That does not 
mean that one cannot look at the subtle issues. It is fascinating to go to a UNICEF conference 
and hear people speaking of the U.S. with contempt because of that treaty issue. What is wrong 
with empowering children's rights? It does not diminish the family because actually it puts the 
child in the context of the family. 

Pascoe: We have not discussed the basic difference in the provision of primary care, which is 
that pediatricians provide a great deal of primary care in this country. They do not in the U.K. 
Does that contribute to the difference in opinion? 

Hall: It is a fascinating topic, because it is not compulsory for our general practitioners to have 
training in pediatrics. It is possible to become a GP without having completed a pediatric post in 
a hospital. The argument would be to learn pediatrics on the job while doing general practice 
work. We are not impressed with that argument and with the changes in the way the health 
service is structured and the current unpopularity of family practice, the whole thing up for 
review. When we have discussions with our colleagues in mainland Europe, where many 
countries have primary care pediatricians, they always ask how on earth we can provide a 
decent service. 

GPs are not trained in pediatrics. The fact is that it would be difficult to show that it made a 
big difference, because the GPs overuse the specialist pediatricians. I suspect that for health 
promotion, child mental health, and dental health promotion, we would probably find that 
care is not as good. However, I am not aware of any data that actually shows that. 



620 




QUALITY HEALTH CARE 



Davidson: What goes on the birth certificate is decided by law, so to change one's birthday, one 
must go to Parliament. It is difficult to change. Gestation is not on the birth certificate. It has 
been under review as part of a civil registration review, but all the national statistics come from 
the birth certificates. The midwife delivers the baby and writes a notification. The notification 
goes to the community health services. It goes to the registrar locally. The parents are required to 
go to the registrar and register the birth within 2 weeks. The two are put together and sent to the 
Office for National Statistics. It is not illegal to ask about race, but that information is not put 
on a birth certificate. It does not get into the national statistics. 

Hall: However, there is local data. Quite a few places would be able to tell about someone at the 
local level. Because everyone does it differendy, and it is not specified nationally, there is no 
nationally aggregated data. That is the problem. We have also seen about 25 different ways of 
cataloguing race. 

Davidson: The politics of the NHS was that for 20 years, under the Conservative government, 
they took out 3% out a year. They took out money. They did not just level-fund; they starved it. 
The Labor government has not begun to put money in. It is still way below the proportion of 
gross national product of any western European country. And, it is only targeted to come up 
close to some of the lower mean over the next few years, for training, infrastructure, buildings, 
everything. It is trying to rebuild itself It is not level funding; it is actually sharply increasing 
funding. Hall might want to speak about the national service framework for children. Would 
that help make children a priority? 

Hall: There are several different kinds of prioritization. The biggest one for us at the moment is 
simply what slice of the cake goes to children, so that is prioritization against heart disease, 
cancer treatment, mental health, the elderly, and so forth. We are running a number of cam- 
paigns and lobbying efforts to raise the proportion of money allocated to children. But on the 
whole, the distribution of money is from the government to health districts. It does not usually 
come labeled specifically for children or cancer. It is decided in detail at a local level. 

Once the government offsets certain spending priorities, the local health authorities or the 
local trusts are obliged to take those priorities into account. There is a complicated political 
process of deciding the order of the priorities, whether it is the elderly, children, or whomever. 
Within children's spending, there is another round of politics. What tended to happen in the 
past was that whomever shouted loudest got the most. 

The big, powerful academic units with high-tech research will get vastly more than child 
mental health, for instance, but that is shifting gradually. We now have what is called a National 
Service Framework, which is trying to more effectively define priorities and service levels. I will 
say in 2 years time whether that has made a difference, but it is an interesting process. However, 
the most important thing is probably parent power, which is sometimes effective for getting 
important things onto the agenda. And sometimes, it gets rather unimportant things onto the 
agenda and gives them more priority than they deserve. At the moment, the autistic pressure 
group is highly effective, as is the chronic fatigue syndrome group. So, a disproportionate 
amount of energy goes into those conditions. For instance, Aildren's traumatic head injury does 
not have an effective pressure group and thus little money goes into that; but that can change 
overnight if a politician's son gets hit by a car. There can be illogical distortions. 




627 



621 



Student Programming 



Challenges and Commitments: The Role 
of the Mentoring Reiationship in 
Deveioping Junior Schoiars 

COCHAIRS: Rebecca Bulotsky, Eileen Rodriguez 

PRESENTERS: Christine McWayne/John W. Fantuzzo, Tonia Natalie Cristofaro/ 

Catherine S. Tamis-LeMonda, Abbie Raikes/Ross Thompson, Jason Downer/Julia Mendez 



Rebecca Bulotsky: We would like this roundtable to be an interactive discussion. Our panel of 
student-mentor dyads will talk about challenges related to mentoring. Then we are going to poll 
the audience to get your ideas about which challenges you would like the panelists to speak to 
and address problem solving strategies to meet these challenges. Since there are many students 
in the audience, there is a great deal of wisdom. You are all experts on this experience. We would 
like you to share that wisdom with us as part of a larger group discussion. 

The topic of mentoring has been receiving a good amount of press over the past couple of 
years especially with the Head Start Scholars Grants. We want to especially thank Michael Lopez, 
Catherine Tamis-LeMonda, John Fantuzzo, and Faith Lamb-Parker for valuing mentoring and 
encouraging us to do this roundtable. We would also like to say a special thank you to our 
mentors who told us "just to go do it." 

Each of the dyads will give a presentation on one specific challenge that they have encoun- 
tered in the mentoring relationship. Students will present 5 minutes on their perspective and 
then the faculty mentor will present 5 minutes on their perspective. After this we are going to 
poll the audience and choose one or two of the challenges to discuss among the panel members 
who will discuss strategies they have used to meet these challenges. Then we will turn it over to 
our special guest, Anthony Salandy, who will facilitate the larger group discussion with students 
in the audience. We encourage you to share your perspectives on any strategies that you have 
used and share your wisdom with all of us so we can all talk about these issues. 

Eileen Rodriguez: I will briefly introduce each of the four dyads to give you a flavor of the 
variety of people we have on the panel. Each dyad will offer a unique perspective on what they 
perceive as challenging within the context of the mentor— mentee relationship. The first presen- 
tation will be by Jason Downer and Julia Mendez from the University of South Carolina (USC). 
Downer is in his 6th year, heading towards his clinical internship. He has been working with 
Mendez for the past 2 years. They will speak to the issue of how students develop their au- 
tonomy within the context of the mentor-mentee relationship. 

The second presenters will be Tonia Cristofaro and Catherine Tamis-LeMonda from New York 
University (NYU). Cristofaro is a doctoral candidate in the psychology development and she has 
just completed her 3rd year in the program. She has been working with Tamis-LeMonda for the 
past 3 years. They will address the challenge of balance and fostering a healthy relationship. 



622 



628 



STUDENT PROGRAMMING 



Following their brief presentation we have Abbie Raikes and Ross Thompson from the 
University of Nebraska at Lincoln. Raikes will start her 3rd year this fall and has been working 
with Thompson for the past 2 years. They will discuss the role of mentoring in effectively 
bridging basic and applied research. 

The fourth dyad is Christine McWayne and John Fantuzzo from the University of Pennsylva- 
nia. McWayne will be going into her 5th year as a doctoral student in the School, Community, 
Clinical, and Child Psychology Program, and has been working with Fantuzzo for the past 5 
years. They will give a brief discussion on perspective taking. 

Jason Downer: Julia Mendez and I have talked about different types of challenges we have had 
over the years. Being in my 6th year, I have had quite a few. It was difficult to choose just one 
but we decided to talk briefly about how a young scholar can develop his or her own indepen- 
dence, own thoughts, and own autonomy within larger projects that his of her mentor has and 
throughout the time in graduate school and beyond. There are three questions to think about 
before we open up the floor. Think about how mentors can promote autonomy in young 
scholars and what the students can do to facilitate this process for themselves as well as for the 
mentor. Specifically, we will talk in terms of how to do this in the context of participating in 
community/university partnerships — how one does it out there in the community and not just 
in a department of psychology or sociology. 

When 1 think about autonomy, I think about it as a process. I know that as a young graduate 
student, one comes in, has big ideas, and is confident. It is a difficult process to get into graduate 
school and so one is looking already to individuate and get one's ideas out there. However, one 
quickly learns that autonomy is a process in which one is going to be in the entire time in 
graduate school and that it does not happen over night. One needs to be patient and work 
towards it in a number of different ways with one's mentor. 

There are several steps to head towards being more independent as a young scholar. The first 
thing that I learned with Julia was that one must develop a knowledge base particularly in doing 
partnerships with the community before one can become independent and do things by oneself 
because one needs to know the community. One needs to shadow his or her mentor, listen/ 
observe all the skills of a psychologist that we can learn, and ask questions. One must be able to 
do that in order to be autonomous. 

One must also be a competent autonomous scholar. That is something one can do through- 
out one's time as a student in working towards being more autonomous. That then provides a 
good base towards taking on more responsibilities in the research program in which one is 
working. Julia has done a terrific job of gradually giving more and more responsibilities. One 
has to learn that process and then do it on one's own. Then one can add more in the commu- 
nity by talking to community leaders and Head Start directors and teachers. That role can slowly 
be handed over to the student so he or she is doing it on his or her own and not just watching 
and observing the mentor. 

As a student, one gets more responsibilities. It is the student's responsibility to start taking 
more risks in that supportive mentor-mentee relationship. For me personally, that involved 
staying at USC for another year and applying for the Head Start Scholar Grant and giving it a 
shot, which is something I never would have done on my own. Julia was supportive, but I also 
had to take the personal risk to do that. It is a two-way street; she had to trust me to go ahead 
and do it, and I had to take the risk. That is one way to develop one's autonomy: to use a 
mentor as a stepping board and a support to take risks and develop who one is going to be as a 
young scholar and in the years to come. Gradually, I have felt more comfortable expressing my 
opinions about my project as well as the greater projects on our team. I feel more confident that 
my contributions need to be heard and am slowly able to talk more about that in the team 
meetings and other forums. 




629 



623 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



Julia Mendez: It is a treat for me to be here today. Jason Downer and I have had a great time 
reflecting on how we have gotten to this point. I might need a mentor self-help group after the 
session because he is leaving us to go to Philadelphia. He has been a valuable student and I am 
going to miss his contributions at South Carolina. It is also a privilege because my own mentor, 
John Fantuzzo, is sitting at the end of the table. 

I graduated from the University of Pennsylvania's program in 1999. 1 was a Head Start 
Scholar in 1997. 1 was proud that Jason took the risk to attempt to become a scholar because it 
was such an influential experience in my own growth. When he talked about taking risks it is 
true that mentors can create opportunities but ultimately it is up to the student to choose which 
opportunities will help them to find themselves and at what time. The choice that this indi- 
vidual made to join the Head Start community and make father involvement research a part of 
his identity meant delaying another important milestone in his own trajectory, which was 
leaving for an internship. 

In any decision that mentors and mentees make together there are tradeoffs, and one must 
figure out how to work to develop one^s own sense of identity and autonomy. We do not use 
autonomy to mean independent. One of the things that you will hear as the theme today is that 
mentors and mentees stay connected and also help autonomous, young scholars, of which I 
include myself in that category, make new connections. What one winds up doing is adding to 
one's reservoir of mentors in one's professional life while also maintaining the original mentors 
that taught us that together we are more than we are as individuals. 

Let me give you five things to think about that emerge in the context of a diverse training 
experience that involves working in Head Start communities, not only with faculty mentors but 
also with practitioners and Head Start teachers. Head Start parents have been very influential in 
my own training and now also in Jason's training as he is listening to the thoughts of the fathers 
with whom we work. 

First, Jason characterized a knowledge base, which I refer to as relevant research skills. It is 
one thing to understand statistics, data analysis, and research design. However, one also has to 
understand how to explain that to someone who has not had that training. One's ability to 
translate research into useful information that will benefit Head Start is one aspect of allowing 
one to be autonomous in one's work in the community. 

The second aspect of autonomy that we talk about is interpersonal competence, which is not 
easy to define. One of the difficult things that students face is developing one's^own interper- 
sonal competence and not just mimicking the style of one's mentor. One's mentor will have a 
style that works in connecting with the community, but not everybody can carry that off. John 
Fantuzzo is one of the best people to make up titles of things. He is always naming things. I am 
horrible at titles and still, to this day, pick the title last. I took that influence and tried to come 
up with a title called The Companion Curriculum for my own project. It may or may not work but 
I had to find my own style in terms of how I wanted to be connecting with the community, 
whether it is through humor or whether it is through respect. We have someone on our team 
who is consistently described as a lady and that is her special connection with the community. 

So one has to find one's own way of relating. 

Other aspects are planning and decision making, where the best mentors allow mentees to 
see individuals thinking, reasoning, and planning, not just making decisions. One needs to be 
focused on the process of getting to the outcome, not just on what the outcome is. That is 
actually more important than just knowing what data we are collecting or whether we are going 
to that center next year. As a student, that is hard because one wants to know the answer. One 
wants to know what is going to happen. One wants that comfort, and it is just not always going 
to be there in the context of community-based research. 

One's confidence will grow as one's experiences diversify so, therefore, the corollary is to have 
different experiences. The last thing I would like to mention is a piece of advice that I received 
from Esther Kresh in 1997. She made it very clear that mentees have to be willing to learn not 



O 

ERIC 



624 



630 



STUDENT PROGRAMMING 



only from success, but also from failure. Remembering that our lessons from failure are often 
more important than our successes will be helpful because when one is learning, one fails often 
and that can be a good thing. 

Tonia Cristofaro: Thank you for your interest in this very important topic of the mentor- 
mentee relationship. If we reflect on Ainsworth's definition of a secure attachment between a 
mother and her young child, we will most likely consider the qualities of autonomy, indepen- 
dence, freedom to explore, availability, accessibility, and consistency. Ainsworth describes the 
secure bond as a safe base from which to explore. In my opinion, these features of a secure 
relationship are also characteristic of a strong, healthy, and nurturing relationship between a 
mentor and a mentee. 

The mentoring relationship is a vital foundation for students' future partnerships with 
research families, community agencies, other universities, future mentees, and so forth. This 
partnership that we experience becomes one important model for how we extend this one 
fundamental relationship to other relationships. In this regard, we may also refer to Bowlby's 
notion of an internal working model. The specific challenge is maintaining balance in managing 
the multitude of tasks and responsibilities as a graduate student. We may define balance in a 
two-tiered fashion. 

First is the interplay between student autonomy and dependence on the mentor. Second is 
having well-rounded graduate training. To successfully juggle many tasks is an expected chal- 
lenge in graduate school and definitely an important experience. That teaches me about my own 
strengths, weaknesses, and how I contemplate various issues. Cathie Tamis-LeMonda systemati- 
cally and constantly encourages her mentees to maximize opportunities to enrich their aca- 
demic, scholarly, and professional development. For example, academic development involves 
course work while scholarly development includes engagement in the many aspects of research, 
such as the coding of data. Professional growth consists of attending such conferences as these 
and the dissemination of findings. Cathie's ability to engage in multitasking and to succeed is 
wonderful motivation for me. Participation in various activities clearly requires dedication, 
devotion, and carefulness. As a graduate student, I embrace all these opportunities and I learn 
from them and try to succeed although I am realizing the very real constraints of time. 

Linking to the notion of good mentoring, Cathie is my coach, my support system, and my 
guide who motivates and inspires me, and who is actively helping me to develop my own 
unique style. Her values are rigorous, dignified research and her strong personal and career goals 
are my models. I deeply appreciate her care for her students' growth as developmental research- 
ers with integrity. There is a challenge in prioritizing responsibilities and duties because, for 
me, all dimensions of graduate school contribute toward development in different and benefi- 
cial ways. 

I welcome opportunities to actively engage in research, to pursue various projects, and to 
embark on new ventures to challenge myself. For instance, she asks students to reflect on serious 
issues in children's development and asks thoughtful questions about them. She asked me to 
present her with a research topic of interest to me and to work with closely with her in an 
interactive manner to pursue the study. She and I have been working closely together on parent/ 
child language. 

I firmly believe that I have Cathie's consistent guidance. Her faith in her students' abilities is 
very much appreciated and this faith becomes a spark for me that creates the desire and will to 
assume further responsibilities. The challenge unfolds with meeting all the demands of research 
and professional activities in combination with course work responsibilities at this point in our 
lives. The mentor-mentee relationship serves as a building block and stepping stone from which 
Cathie and I join efforts to meet this particular challenge of balance. 




63 . 1 . 



625 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Catherine Tamis>LeMonda: That was so beautifiil. I am absolutely thrilled to be here. Eileen 
Rodriguez and Tonia Cristofaro are my students, but I have also come to know many students in 
other universities, including John Fantuzzo's students at the University of Pennsylvania. I feel as 
though they are my mentees as well. 

When we were told we had to come up a theme, Tonia came to me with the idea of balance. 
Balance captures actually everything everyone has spoken about today. I am going to talk about 
balance in two ways. One is the balance within the university or department setting a student is 
in. The balancing of the research that goes on in ones lab with one's mentor concerns the 
opportunities afforded by course work and other faculty. 1 have a true story about a student of 
mine from several years ago who has now graduated and has a fabulous career. She was phe- 
nomenal. When we were doing visits, coding, and everything else that goes on in research, she 
was getting more visits done than anyone else. She was coding more than anyone else. She was 
thinking about every last conference presentation that one could ever have thought about — she 
was my star. 

She was my star until one of my faculty colleagues came up to me and said, Allison (I am 
using a pseudonym here) is failing my course in emotional development." I said, "How could 
she be failing your course?" She said, "She comes in late every single class. In fact, she missed 
the last two classes and felt it was okay to miss them because she had home visits for you." I was 
suddenly struck with the realization that I had said to make sure visits are the priority. In our lab 
that is our motto: Visits are the priority. If a family is going to see us, we go on that visit. If it is a 
father who is going to see us, we do not sleep at night — one does anything to see a father. 

I suddenly realized that I was failing in a sense as a mentor. I had not instilled in my student 
the idea that there is a balance between the research in which one engages and the learning that 
happens within the lab and in the larger environment of the university. We need to keep that in 
mind because I constantly expect my students to do everything under the sun within the lab. I 
realize that they also have to do well in other aspects of the university life. They have exams to 
pass as well as classes and seminars to attend. It is easy for me to get them wrapped up in the 
research and forget. 

Additionally, I gave a talk earlier this week on multidisciplinary collaboration and the 
importance of learning from other fields. Without balance, if I am the only mentor, if I am the 
only teacher, then I failed because the balance is that one learns from everyone. One learns from 
the qualitative researcher who knows so much more about ethnographic methods than I can 
ever teach my students. That balance is so important. 

The second aspect of balance is the within university/outside the university balance. In the 
protective environs of my lab, students learn research and make mistakes. Research is a pro- 
cess — we change coding because that variable does not work, and so forth. I want to nurture 
that. I want this process to be a beautiful unfolding of an experience. On the other hand, I sit on 
faculty searches at NYU. I make sure I am on every faculty search, because I want to make sure I 
know whom we hire. I see the CYs coming by my desk from recent graduates who have 10 
publications. I could never get a position in my university today because we are raising the bar 
for faculty positions and professionals. I get the sense that as I want to nurture a gradual 
unfolding there is a tension out there, there is balancing. The reality is that we need to present at 
conferences. We need to publish. My students need to have end products. So while we want the 
end product ideally to take years as one thinks about it and ruminates and reflects, one has to 
turn some of those out quickly. 

We need to make sure we get our pieces written, which means I line edit and make students 
do 10 drafts of a piece so that it is meticulous and can be published. My students know that I 
keep saying publish, publish, publish. I sound like a broken record. Although I believe our sole 
goal is not publishing, there is a reality out there that we do need to produce. There is that 
outside world that will not know how wonderful people like Tonia and Eileen are, but will only 
know their names as printed at the top of a journal article. We need to balance this self-develop- 
ment and growth with the reality of objective demands in our field, which are rather steep. 



O 626 




ERIC 



STUDENT PROGRAMMING 



Abbie Raikes: Ross Thompson and I chose the tension between applied and basic research as 
our topic, which draws upon many of the elements we have discussed up until now and also 
raises a few new elements. 1 would like to start by saying that 1 came to the University of 
Nebraska from a public policy and public health background and had worked on Capitol Hill, I 
have a masters degree in public health and have done some research in Central America. I came 
with a relatively well formulated, 1 thought, idea of what 1 was interested in studying. One of the 
greatest pleasures for me in graduate school has been to explore new aspects of developmental 
psychology that I was previously not aware of. That has occurred primarily through my 
mentoring relationship with Ross, and 1 am grateful for the opportunity to do that. In the 
process of doing that, although I am still interested in some of the applied questions, there have 
been times when I have been impressed by research and the questions that basic research can 
answer that are harder to do from an applied research perspective. 

Over time, I have become more interested in integrating the two approaches and attempting 
to find common ground between applied and basic research. In light of the Head Start confer- 
ence, I have noticed that there are many people who seem to be juggling that tension in attempt- 
ing to come up with ways of designing studies that can contribute both to applied and basic 
research. Ross and I have spent time discussing that and struggling to define the ideal for my 
development as a graduate student in light of my appreciation of both basic and applied 
research questions. 

In terms of my own research, I feel strongly that I conduct research that leads to an increased 
understanding of how to help the most at-risk populations. That stems from my public health 
and public policy background. That is a core in myself that I like to remain true to as I do my 
research. I am presently conducting a study on attachment and risk in Early Head Start. For 
those of you who do not know Ross's work, he is an attachment expert. In the process of doing 
this study, I have been impressed by the careful research that he has done in the past. 

I highly recommend that if given an opportunity, talk with Ross at length about early rela- 
tionships and attachment relationships, because his approaches to these issues are inspiring. 
They have influenced the way I approach my own attachment research and have also made me 
much more aware of the limitations that I encounter in dealing with an Early Head Start 
population. 

Some of the things that I will address specifically are the manifestations of this tension. In 
terms of what happens to me as a graduate student and in terms of our mentoring relationship, 

I feel as though I spent a lot of time figuring out how to recruit my sample because I picked a 
difficult and diverse population to study. I definitely abide by the earlier statement about never 
missing home visits. Everything is scheduled around home visits. That is definitely my life these 
days, as well as addressing issues that arise from working with the Early Head Start program. As 
a result, I feel as though I spend less time writing up results and preparing articles for publica- 
tions than I would like. However, since it is the population that I am interested in, it is time that 
is well invested, and I feel as though I am making good choices. On the other hand, sometimes I 
am very admiring, perhaps a little jealous, of the clean and well-defined populations and the 
nicely designed studies that I have seen come out of my university. That is one way that the 
tension manifests itself 

Additionally, I feel a responsibility to design studies that benefit the Early Head Start program 
that I am working with, because they have provided me access to their population. I feel as 
though my research questions need to be designed to give them information that they would 
not have had otherwise. Then, as a result, sometimes the focus of my studies takes more of an 
applied angle. I spend time trying to figure out how I can answer basic research questions while 
still providing them with this information and helping them integrate and understand what I 
am telling them. That is probably something that is not so true of basic researchers. 

As I prepared my comments today, I realized how mentors have such a large influence on the 
type of research questions that students ask, how we envision making a contribution to the 




633 



627 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUND TABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



field, what we define as success in the field, how important it is to feel as though we are living 
up to the expectations of our mentors, and the desire to draw upon and utilize the expertise of 
our mentors and to use that expertise as a catalyst for our own development. It is a great 
inspiration, but it also can create challenges as one realizes how one is both similar to and 
different from one's mentor. I had no idea when I started graduate school how influential this 
mentoring relationship would be. 

Ross Thompson: Something like this ought to happen all the time because it is amazing what 
one learns from other people on a panel and firom one's own student by listening to their 
comments. I am reminded of a conversation I had with another of my students about a year and 
a half ago when she just finished her orals. We were ruminating about our time together and I 
found myself asking her a question that I thought about a lot, which many of us in the field ask 
ourselves. I said that sometimes I wonder if whatever legacy I happen to leave for my career is 
going to matter more in terms of the research I contribute or the students whom I have 
mentored. Quick as a shot she said, "It is your students." She responded so fast that I immedi- 
ately said, "What is wrong with my research?" However, when I had a chance to reflect more on 
her comment, I took it as high praise, as she was obviously reflecting her experience. The legacy 
we leave, and certainly comments about the softball team-sized mentoring relationships left by 
John Fantuzzo and by Cathie Tamis-LeMonda, reflect the fact that we do leave an important 
legacy in human capital. 

I wanted to put some of Abbie's comments in context, because the program in which she and 
I both work is fairly unconventional. It is a program in developmental science and developmen- 
tal psychology. It is oriented toward training basic scientists with a concern about development 
and context. As a consequence, whatever orientation students come to the program with, they 
will be well trained in the basic science of developmental psychology, but always with an 
awareness toward its applications, the role of culture, and the influence of social policy as it 
relates to the applications of our research. Part of this comes from the fact that our department 
also has a strong law psychology program. Many of Abbie's colleagues in graduate school are 
getting their law degrees along with a Ph.D. in psychology. There is also a Center on Children, 
Families, and the Law that works hard toward applying the insights of developmental science to 
train child protection case workers in the State of Nebraska, doing mission-driven applied 
research related to children and families, and doing contract-driven research as it relates to the 
needs of children and families throughout the country. 

This provides a unique context for both opportunities and challenges of graduate study. 

Many of them focused on the issues that Abbie raised concerning how one puts together an 
identity as a basic scientist with the driven needs that cause many of us to do applied research. 
We have had four students come out of the program just this year. Where they have gone is not 
unusual for us. Two are becoming assistant professors as development psychologists in depart- 
ments of psychology. One is taking up a position at the Centers for Disease Control and Preven- 
tion in Atlanta, and another is a post-doctorate with Cathy Spatts, on child abuse. That reflects 
the breadth of interest many of these students have, and they were not expecting they would go 
in that direction when they started the program. How do we work with these kinds of chal- 
lenges? How do we think about forming bridges between basic science and its important 
applications that have caused many of us to come into this field? How do we think of that in the 
context of the mentoring relationship? As a bottom line, the best that we do as mentors is to 
provide a wealth of opportunities for our students, knowing that the period of graduate study is 
a period of unique development. 

Therefore, oftentimes, Ae best that one can offer the students under one's guidance is as 
many opportunities to discover for themselves what types of professional roles and opportuni- 
ties they want to take advantage of. Abbie's involvement, for example, in some of her research 
arises from the fact that she has been involved in the Early Head Start Evaluation Project 



628 



634 



STUDENT PROGRAMMING 



through internships at our Center for Children, Families, and the Law. In many respects, those 
have provided provocative opportunities for the development of her thinking as a researcher. 

Her involvement in the Early Head Start program has also enabled her to enlist some of the 
personnel there as advisors in the development of her own research opportunities. 

In addition, she and I coauthored a number of writing projects. One is a chapter on the 
impact of welfare reform on children. It is a new topic for both of us, and in working together, 
we both discovered things that we had not known about the interaction of basic research and 
applied challenges. Another is a chapter in a book that we just wrapped up, on the development 
of psychopathology and the challenges to attachment theory and research. 

The other broad thing I have learned about mentoring in this context is the importance of 
recognizing that as a mentor, one is going to learn from the opportunities that students take 
advantage of. I have experienced a wealth of growth in the context of working with Abbie, little 
of which she is aware, that comes from my discoveries of having to respond to her work. As a 
result, when we meet together, my head always hurts because I have to think very hard about the 
questions she is asking and the integration she is making. I cannot always answer the questions 
she poses, so we have to work together to figure out the answers. As a result, I am also growing, 
and that is the best thing about being a mentor. 

Christine McWaync: I am going to play off that last image. When I leave meetings with lohn 
Fantuzzo, I am sure his head also hurts, but I think it is for different reasons, lohn and I have 
a wonderful relationship. Every person on this panel is an exemplary mentor or mentee. 
However, frankly, there are probably some students out there that would agree that the mentor- 
men tee relationship can be relatively difficult sometimes. John and I will talk more about the 
conflicts and tensions that exist in the mentor-mentee relationship and the importance of 
perspective taking. 

We were thinking about the mentor-mentee relationship in relation to a theory outside of 
psychology — to Einstein's theory of relativity. There are three basic elements: space, time, and 
motion. We were reflecting on these three elements, because we think they are important issues 
for both mentors and mentees to consider. We tend to have different perspectives on time, space, 
and motion. I will talk about my student's perspective. 

In terms of time, I know, as a student just starting out, that I felt overwhelmed with how 
many things I had to get done. I had a whole laundry list of what I had to accomplish; finish all 
my course work, complete a master's thesis, pass my preliminary exams, and (oh yeah) that 
dissertation, and internships, writing independently, and everything else. For students, it is easy 
to see all of these tasks in a linear fashion. For example, I am going to do one thing and, then, I 
am going to the next thing— not experiencing them as part of a whole process of learning and 
growing. One reason may be that much of the time tasks are competitive. Tasks are often not 
related, or they do not seem to be related at the time, so as a student, one feels disjointed and 
compartmentalized about the work one is doing and how it relates to the big picture and to the 
future. That is the issue of time. 

The issue of space is interrelated. As students get through all these checklists of things that we 
have to get done, oftentimes we do not have the space, particularly the psychological space, to 
reflect upon our process and what we are doing. We may feel dissonance between what our 
mentors value and are accomplishing, and what we value and want to accomplish. Having time 
to step back and think about owning our own values and forming our own questions about the 
field, and about ourselves as professionals, is critical to becoming a scholar. "Space" is often 
limited for students because of the limited amount of time we think we have. We might place 
stock in how long it takes us to do things. We set up arbitrary deadlines for ourselves, comparing 
ourselves to our colleagues, and think, "Given how long it takes me to do things, I must not be 
as smart as the person who could get out in 4 years." It is important to be able to reflect with a 
mentor about this time pressure and what time means to a student. Everyone has different 






635 



629 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



family circumstances and different issues. Being able to work within a realistic time frame that 
one has developed for oneself making it individual, is what is important. 

The last element that Einstein talks about is motion. In terms of motion, we came up with 
two metaphors. The first one is an express train, which is very much related to the time issue. "1 
have a lot of things to do. 1 do not have very much time to do them. 1 am going to get on this 
express train and make as few stops as possible. The problem with that frame of mind is that 
most of the time the "stops" are the most meaningful experiences as a graduate student. The 
next metaphor is the Tasmanian Devil, one of my favorite cartoon characters. 1 can relate to this 
image right now, as 1 am preparing to do my dissertation and all the other things 1 am involved 
in. It feels like a big whirlwind. 1 sometimes feel as though 1 am whirling around and 1 cannot 
see where 1 am going, because 1 am whirling around so fast. As students, we have to remember 
to give ourselves psychological space so that we can move in a more thoughtful direction and 
feel peace about being in the middle of the whirlwind. 

To sum up, these three elements — time, space, and motion — are all relative, because we each 
(mentors and mentees) have different perspectives as individuals but also in the different roles 
we embody. Graduate students are developing. Our mentors are developing, too, but at a 
different level and pace, and they have already been through what we are going through. There is 
much room for conflict and tension within these differing perspectives. We hope the audience 
members will share with us their experiences and how they have reconciled these different 
perspectives within their mentoring relationships. 

John Fantuzzo: It is important to note, as Christine McWayne was saying, that mentoring is 
rocket science. 1 am a neurotic mentor. This is a true confession. 1 wanted to let you know and 
Julia Mendez will provide social validity for that concept. My conflict relates to the fact that 1 am 
obsessed with this process as a neurotic mentor. 1 take my lead from famous Italian philoso- 
phers, Ernst and Julio Gallo: We present no scholar before her time. 

In relation to this obsession with time, 1 am concerned. 1 get upset with the multiplicity of 
things that my students must do. They should be singularly devoted and singularly committed 
to becoming a scholar, which means they have two things on which they must concentrate. All 
the rest is trash. That is, 1 am obsessed with them being steeped in the "what" and the "how of 
research — steeped in theory, steeped in the empirical literature. 1 want them to fully experience 
the multiple levels of scientist-practitioner partnerships. 1 want them to partner with their 
colleagues. 1 want them to partner with parents. 1 want them to partner with administrators. 1 
want them to partner with teachers. They have to, do that. That is important. Everything else is 
not that important. 

There is a treatment 1 could get from Gathie Tamis-LeMonda about balance, but right now 1 
am obsessed with the substance. 1 am also obsessed with space. That is, they are not taking 
enough space and time to be grounded as a person. They should be reflecting more about their 
inquiry. They should be attending to the "what is" going on inside of themselves. They should 
be talldng about what they resonate with. 1 want to know what they resonate with, and how that 
relates to their careers. 1 am obsessed about the need for them to spend more time reflecting 
when they come into my office. 

Last, there is motion. Do you know what 1 spend most of my time doing as a neurotic 
mentor? Saying: "Slow down. Another draft, please. More analyses. Gheck that additional 
reference. Gather more data. Go back and talk to that parent. Slow down. No, no, you are 
moving. This is a pregnant moment. This is not chronicles time. This is not tick-tock time. This 
is kairos time. You are never going to be here again. Get everything you can get out of it." My 
obsession drives them to think about that. 

1 want them to understand the realities of my suffering as a faculty member. They do not 
understand me. It is a demand-supply thing. It is hard work doing this time, space, and motion 
obsessional stuff 1 want them to think about the fact that 1 have to deal with trying to set up the 



ERIC 



630 



636 



STUDENT PROGRAMMING 



auspices of their research. I have to deal with the funding of their research. I have to deal with 
the crazy psychotic politics of my department, and I have to deal with creating networks for their 
future jobs. It is driving me crazy. 

My perspective is that these obsessive things will get them to where they need to be. Their 
perspective is, as Christine advocated, a different one on time, space, and motion. We also feel 
there is a correction to Einstein's famous equation: E = MC^. We believe in mentoring ph 5 ^ics 
that it is EM = C^: Effective mentoring is a relationship of two-way communication. 

Bulotsky: You can pick two of the four topics: autonomy, balance, tension between applied 
research and basic science, and perspective-taking. I am going to turn it back to the panel to talk 
about strategies they have found as students and as mentors, to meet the challenges of balance 
and perspective-taking. 

Thomspon: I would offer one comment, picking up on something that John said. I say this 
repeatedly to students at all levels, and they never believe me, so I will try again. One resource 
that you do not know that you have is time. Think about it this way. How much difference will it 
make whether you have taken 4 years, 5 years, or 6 years to do a Ph.D.? From the perspective of 
career development, it makes absolutely no difference. You can afford to extend your degree 
program if it advances your professional development, and if you do not waste time, but 
develop a research program to pursue an interest much in the way that Jason has done. 

By contrast, when you are our age, to take 1-2 years off to do something is a major consider- 
ation for career development. I find that students do not believe this because they are in a hurry 
to get their degree for many reasons. One is that so much of their education has been timed 
already. You have to get through 12 grades in 12 years. You have to get through your under- 
graduate degree in 4 years. You go to graduate school and expect it is going to be done in 4 
years. I find myself telling them more and more often that being on time in graduate school is 
less important than being well-prepared. 

That comes from keeping an eye on the prize: what it is that you want to become as a 
professional and devoting the time that is necessary to make it happen. I wish more students felt 
that way because if they did, more of the reflection would occur. One could look at graduate 
education as an opportunity rather than as a-credential to get in order to get the life one truly 
aspires to. As John may have begun to convince you of, it ain't all that great once you get there. 

So take the time to do what you ought to be doing. 

Fantuzzo: One thing we could see for part of the strategy is that it is a process and it is a 
valuable experience. This is a formative time. So what can mentors and mentees do? That is 
where we are basically providing the equation. The issue is how one creates the two-way 
conversation in the midst of the Tasmanian Devil activity. There are a couple of different 
strategies that Ross is underscoring, such as the issue of having a big picture. 

A student has to have a working model of what they want to be, and there should be an 
ongoing dialogue. That student should be held accountable to basically determine relevant and 
irrelevant activities based on that working model; it is not just doing what one chooses to do. 
That is where the evolving autonomy comes. The mentor has a responsibility to that big picture 
goal and to help the student figure that out. Ultimately, it should be the student's choice in 
terms of the student's valuing of whether or not they should take that year and to what degree 
the mentor could provide resources. The mentor can provide a good focus for them to think 
about what the big picture is. Are we providing time along the way to actually have students 
reflect on that? 

I have had students, quite frankly, who as part of my informed consent to work with me, 
agree that these are the things they must do. Not many students will want to do that. Needless 
to say, I am riot a generic mentor. However, when one gets students committed, and students 




637 



631 



SYMPOSIA/ roundtables/conversation HOURS 



basically reflect on themselves and where they want to be, that can be distracting. 1 have got to 
get my work done or those students do not stay as my mentees. The issue is that we have an 
ethic, and we cannot afford to produce people who go out there with neurotic models of what it 
means to be an academic, because we suffer through every faculty meeting from many of those 
dysfunctions. 

The question is, how do we do this, and what support can we find for that? I want to ask my 
colleagues how they struggled with creating the space to help their students think about their 
working program of study, and how it relates to what they want to be. How do you have that 
dialogue? 

Raikes: As I listened to the lecture this morning, I was thinking that being a graduate student 
might be the ultimate adult challenge of self-regulation. I do not worry so much about time, and 
I appreciate the importance of investing and all of that. The other side of it is the emotional day- 
to-day experience of being in graduate school. One of the things that I struggle with is that I am 
impatient by nature. It makes me crazy how long it takes me to do everything. It makes me crazy 
how long it takes me to finish. That is my issue and that is not anyone else's problem. 

At the same time, that influences my sense of the time I want to take in graduate school. 
Money is part of it; there are also personal concerns. Then there is the other part of it, where we 
realize that academic time is different from the time that takes place in the rest of the world. 

One has to become more comfortable with this idea that one will develop over the course of 20 
or 30 years and that where one ends up at the end of that time is different from where one starts 
out. Approaching it from that angle always helps me maintain perspective. 

As a student, I am not rushing to get through anything. It has more to do with an adjustment 
of what one's sense of oneself is. It is great if one knows what that self will be in 20 years, but I 
do not know that one always does. 

Question: How did you figure out how to manage all of the balance, time, where you want to 
be, and how you are going to get there? Was that something that you had gotten from different 
mentors in your life? Was that something you just needed to come to on your own? 

Raikes: It was through conversations with people, but probably more on my own. When I 
started graduate school, I was a little older, which was helpful because it helped me maintain a 
sense of the long-term trajectory of being in graduate school and of career development. 
However, it is not a challenge that I have mastered. There are days when I wonder how many 
home visits are going to be canceled before I can just get 50 families. How long does it take? For 
me, it is also helpful in terms of developing relationships with other students in the program. It 
helps that everybody has a sense of support about what they are doing. 

Question: When it comes to finding a job after graduate school, what are your expectations, 
and how do you navigate through this process with your mentor? 

Mendez: I can talk about that, because I secured a great job 3 years ago, and it is still fresh in my 
mind. It is an important point and it relates to the question that John brought up earlier about 
how one finds time to have a discussion. As an illustration, here is a quick story. During my last 
year in the program, I was complaining to my father about all this reflecting because when you 
reflect, you look back. It is hard to get going again. I recall complaining to him, and saying, 
"How do I know where I am going to wind up? Where am I going to be in terms of employ- 
ment? I do not know." I went on and on, and my father, in his infinite wisdom, listened for 
about 25 minutes. Then he said, "Are you getting a Ph.D.?" I said, "Yes, I think so." That is the 
agreement that we got to after this reflecting. Then, he said, "I think that getting a Ph.D. is 
supposed to be hard," and he left the room. John would never have done that. We would 




632 



638 



STUDENT PROGRAMMING 



have talked for another couple of hours about why getting a Ph.D. is hard. That was a good 
balance there. 

As a student, one is constantly talking about being in graduate school, getting things done, 
and all the things one has to accomplish. However, one has to remember that it is not about 
being in graduate school; it is about getting a doctorate and using one's doctorate to advocate 
for people who do not have that position in society. So what I found when I started looking for 
jobs was not what classes I could teach or what I had to offer in terms of faculty senate or 
committee work or search committees. It was what I wanted to accomplish and how the 
department could provide me with resources to help me accomplish my goals. I was lucky to 
find that in South Carolina. 

For the job that you eventually seek, whether it is in academics, a community agency. Head 
Start, a research firm, or public policy, the goals of your job have to match your training experi- 
ences. What your mentor does is network you with people that share your goals and values so 
that you can go out and get the resources to do your work. John connected me with people that 
had similar perspectives so that when I get to my job, I can do the work that I went to graduate 
school to learn how to do in the first place. That has been much more important to me than 
being on the tenure track, trying to publish, or coming to conferences. It has been being around 
people that have similar interests and values. It matters where you wind up. 

Fantuzzo: I would echo that in terms of thinking about locus of control with one's statement of 
a job. If the student is talking to me about a job and it is an external locus of control, the 
student is not ready for a job. If the student is talking to me about their passion and their 
connection and what they want to do, that person is going to get a job, given the training we 
give them. Here is what I want to do and here is how my Ph.D. prepared me for that, and I have 
a passion about a job. Those people get hired. People who say they have to get a job do not get 
hired because they do not have depth and do not reflect the Idnd of scholarship that is needed 
to sustain and get tenured. 

We serve people by helping them come to the intrinsic or internal locust of control when 
they articulate what a job means to them. If you do not have a passion, then you are not going 
to get too far and you are never going to make tenure with all the things one has to do in 
academic institutions. You have to have something that will sustain you, and it is important for 
us to make sure there are burning coals in that furnace. 

Thompson: The one thing I would add to this is that there are many pathways to the destina- 
tion one is looking for. There are many ways of getting to where the professional place will be 
that will cause one to thrive and contribute. It blows me away to look at the people that I went 
to graduate school with and to see where they are now, and to plot the different ways in which 
they got tliere, ways I would never have anticipated when we all got our degrees. Some have 
done the postdoctorate route while others have been in one position their entire careers. Some 
have moved from one position to another and some have gotten midcareer retraining. When I 
was in graduate school, I was so linear about the process because my education had been linear 
up to that point. Get your Ph.D., get your job, get tenure, get promoted. There you are. You are 
happy at 35. One of the lessons I have learned from watching the career pathways of people 
who were part of my generational cohort was how nonlinear the process can be. This can be 
tremendously reassuring to students in recognizing that all the variance of one's future is not 
determined the first year after one gets a Ph.D. Isn't that wonderful? 

McWayne: I would like to give another student perspective. In talking about values, we were 
reflecting on the issue of giving yourself space to think about your values. If one is working with 
a mentor who does not necessarily share one's values or reflect the importance of process, then 
it is important to have a conversation with him or her. One might need to find someone else to 



633 




SYMPOSl A/ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



work with, because this issue of congruent, or at least not completely dissonant; values are 
important. Students often feel disempowered in the process of education. A genuine mentor will 
help one find their voice in the process: to say, "this is what 1 care about," "this is what I am 
passionate about," and "you can help me get there." It is critical to give yourself time and space 
to reflect on why you chose this path and whether you are here because someone told you that 
you needed to go here or whether you are here because there is something inside of you compel- 
ling you to accomplish these things. 

Downer: I want to piggyback on that because I want to put out a challenge to all of the students 
here no matter where you are in your program. We also have a responsibility, as we negotiate 
this process and begin to appreciate not just looking at the hoops we are jumping through but 
what we are learning as we do it, to mentor younger students. I have been at USC for a long 
time, because I wanted to learn more before I left. When I first got there, I would tell new 
students to just get it done. There is this, this, and this to do. You can do it. Make sure you know 
what you want to research early on, find that mentor, and finish. However, the longer I have 
been there, the more often I sit down with a new student and ask, "What is your passion? What 
are you excited about? What are you interested in?" I do it in friendship. I say. That is what is 
important. If you can do that quickly, that is wonderful, but if not, it is okay. ' One thing a 
mentor might do with older students is to promote that kind of social responsibility toward 
younger graduate students so it is not all on faculty mentors. Older students can take part 
in that. 

Question: Can you speak to the role of the university in either enabling or hindering your 
ability to be a great mentor? 

Tamis-LeMonda: All faculty members have constant tension, of course, with administration. 
That is the way it is. At NYU, if I agree to teach 40 courses per semester and write 3,000 articles, 
they would be thrilled, but the reality is, what you can do? It is our responsibility to educate 
administrators and be bold about that on behalf of students. I recall my 3rd year at NYU. I sat in 
the deafrs office and the dean looked at me and said, "Catherine. You have a lot of publications 
but you do not have many sole-author publications." I looked at the dean and said, "If that is 
going to be the only way for me to receive tenure, I am never going to be tenured. Do I knock 
off all the students here? Do I knock off my collaborators? I was doing cross-cultural work. Do I 
take out the faculty affiliate at University of Tokyo? Whom do I knock off to appease you? I 
fought this, and so there is now no law or rule at NYU about having to be a sole author in 
psychology. There is an understanding. I fought for understanding about what collaboration was 
and the importance of having students collaborate on pieces. I am using that as one example. 

We need to educate administrators because, in essence, there could be issues about work, 
teaching load, and so forth. 

We have this thing called scholarship where one is rated on one's research and then on one s 
teaching. I said to them, "How come we have these two as separate? Why isn't my research a 
piece of the teaching?" It is the most important part of it when I am mentoring students and 
they are engaged in research. That work outside the classroom is more valuable than any work in 
the classroom. I went to war on what I considered to be an artificial dichotomy. I happen to 
have a responsive administration, so the deans always listen to what I say. That is important 
because it could be a hindrance to the development of students. We need to go to battle about 
these issues. 

Fantuzzo: We handle the issue of sole author by spelling it differently: s-o-u-1 author. Ethically, 
if there are soul authors, which is the ethical sharing of all of the people who contributed, that 
accomplishes that. The battle with administration is crucial. It helps to reframe things, and in 



634 



640 



STUDENT PROGRAMMING 



some ways, the students are actually the best fighters. An example is this cross-university 
experience that Cathie and I have been involved in. The students have been going to the Dean 
with proposals, operating like Colombo. Students go to the dean and say, "Gee, would you be 
interested in supporting our scholarship? Would you be interested in increasing high quality 
experiences across major universities?" The dean says, "Of course. Wonderful." If we proposed it, 
we would hear, "There is not enough in the budget." However, the dean would have to sit in 
front of these incredibly bright, capable students who put together this well-formulated plan 
and say, "I do not care about your education. I am not going to spend $3,000 for your education." 

You basically know what you need to be productive. You are not going to wait until the 
seventh inning stretch. You are going to present the things you need to be productive as you 
negotiate your position. Julia is a strong advocate for saying mentoring does not stop. Do not 
take a job if they are all losers in the department or if you cannot find someone whom you 
could have as a mentor in the department: someone who cares about you, who has talked with 
you, had eye contact, and actually had some tone of empathy when you interviewed. If there is 
no one there like that, stay away. 

The notion is to use your skills to basically determine where you want to plant yourself Julia 
was thoughtful and picked a wonderful place with wonderful colleagues who encouraged her to 
do the things she was trained to do; but you have to take responsibility for that. A job is not just 
a job. A job is an adult decision that one is making. An onus is on us. Everyone who is tenured 
has a responsibility to mentor the assistant professors who are not tenured. It is difficult. The 
autonomy thing is scary there. It is hard to be seen as paternalistic and telling people what they 
need. That is even more difficult than mentoring students. I do not have any ideas on that one. 

Question: My question is different because I am a full-time graduate student and a full-time 
employee. One of the things that I find interesting about faculty is that because they have not 
done it a particular way, everyone assumes it cannot be done. Try to follow your own path, but 
at least listen to what others have to say. 

I just finished up my Master of Public Health, and I started my doctoral studies in the fall. 
When I started, every faculty member said, "You can't take four classes. You're going to flunk. 

You can't finish in 2 years because you're a full-time employee. You're going to die." Then, when 
I did finish, everyone said, "Okay. You did it,-but now you're going to be a doctoral student. You 
can't do this because you're going to fall apart." I want faculty members — because I do not have 
a mentor — to open their minds. See that there are many different ways to do things, and follow 
the student. If, as a student, I come to a faculty member or mentor and say, "Do you know 
what? I have been doing this and it has been working for me up to now, but I think I need to 
make a change," I want the faculty member to be willing to listen. 

Oftentimes, faculty members are so stuck in their ways and in what they have done that they 
do not always give students the opportunity to create their own place. To me, that is important, 
especially because as part of my studies now, I am joining a field that is relatively new — spatial 
analysis along with youth violence. When I went to faculty members and said I was doing 
spatial analysis, everyone said, "That is so great. We will work with you." I said, "Good. Are you 
going to teach me something?" They would respond with "No, we want you to teach us because 
we do not know how to do this." So, try to get faculty members to be more willing to support 
you and to connect you with others. Sometimes, some faculty members are not willing to do 
that because it is something they have not tried. As a graduate student and as an employee, I am 
looking for people and looking for an experience with faculty members who are more willing to 
open their minds. 

Salandy: First of all, I appreciate your comments. I have listened to many comments that I am 
dying to get at. One is that prior to students coming into the department or right when they 
come into the department, it is important to meet with a mentor and talk about expectations. 



ERIC 




635 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



That is extremely important. I have been privy to two mentors: one horrible mentor as my major 
professor when I was doing my undergraduate degree, and one great one. I started doing a Ph.D. 
in molecular genetics and had a terrible mentor who said, "Stick with me and I will make you a 
star." That was one of his first things, and we never laid out what he expected of me and what I 
expected from the program. 

I left there after 1 year and ended up doing a Ph.D. in human development and family 
studies. Right when I got in there, I spoke to another mentor who said that one has to talk about 
one's expectations wi^ a mentor, whomever one is going to be working with. I did and that was 
extremely important. It framed our relationship and the journey that we were going to be 
embarking on for the next 2 years. That was extremely important, although that is not to say that 
things will not change. They change, but they change within the framework of the relationship 
that you build based on the expectations that you laid on the table initially. 

Another point that I wanted to bring up is about the university valuing mentoring. It is 
coupled with the point of promoting mentoring in institutions and departments. Given the 
types of people who come to these meetings, we are preaching to the choir. There are faculty 
members in the audience who are interested in mentoring, and they know what is going on. 
There are people on the panel who are interested in mentoring, and they know what is going 
on. We need to reach the other 99.9% of the people in universities who know nothing about 
mentoring. They do not have a clue. One of the things I am appreciative of is that every year I go 
to a national institute of teaching and mentoring for ethnic minority doctoral students and 
faculty members. The ethnic minority doctoral students — Latino, Native American, Asian 
American, African American — bring their major professors to this institute every year. They have 
to go through a rigorous, intense, 3-day mentoring workshop with the student. 

I took my major professor there the first year of my doctoral program. He came back and was 
a totally changed person. He said, "Everyone needs to know about this thing. They need to learn 
about this." When you go back to your department, it is important to try to get a mentoring 
mechanism established within the department and the institution, so faculty members know 
how to mentor. It is extremely important for ethnic minority students. There may be some 
unique issues involved in the mentoring relationship when one is mentoring a minority 
doctoral student. Faculty members need to understand the unique issues involved and get 
specific training. 

How does one approach this issue of space? How does one navigate this to.figure out 
whether or not to do it in 4 years or 6 years or rush through the program? A mentor taught me 
that graduate school is like a game of Dungeons and Dragons. One goes through this game 
slaying people and then capturing assets. One can capture magic potions and other things that 
help get through the game. He said, "Approach graduate training like that. Picture the bad 
people as toxic agents in your graduate life. Throw that away along with these other things that 
are not good in your life." 

However, there are other things that are assets one can acquire, such as internships or 
fellowships like the "Putting Children First" program at Columbia University. There are many 
different assets that one can pick up along the way. They may extend your graduate program, 
and you may see people leaving. However, one has the map, and one can choose to map the 
layout the way one likes. One chooses one's map and goes through the game and slays the toxic 
things and collects assets. Then guess what? When one finishes, one can use those assets to get a 
job, be marketable, or decide to do more fellowships and gain more assets until one figures out 
exactly where one wants to be. I have my assets now, and I am going use them. I am going to use 
my potion and my wand. That is one good way to look at it. It may not work for everyone, but it 
worked for me. 

Bulostky: I want to say something from the student's perspective. One of the things that I found 
as the best strategy to meeting some of these challenges is to recognize, as a student, that you are 



O 

ERIC 



636 



642 



STUDENT PROGRAMMING 



your best asset. You should be real with your advisor to explore those avenues that will encour- 
age you to move on your trajectory, to take advantage of all the opportunities that are out there, 
and to recognize those things inside yourself that you can foster and those interests that you 
want to build upon in the future. Many students do not feel empowered to recognize that they 
have a wealth of assets, and that they should be real with their advisor about where they are and 
what they want. Oftentimes in the beginning, at least when meeting with an advisor, you do not 
want to say, "I do not understand what you are talking about," or "that is not what I am inter- 
ested in at all," because you do not want to look stupid. It is important that you come to a place 
where you can say, "Do you know what? This is what I want. This is who I am. This is what I 
believe in. This is where I want to go." 

It is a two-way street. It is not just the mentor telling you what to do. It is you being able to 
tell the mentor what you want and who you are, and being real about your capacities as a 
person and where you want to go. That is critical. Students should feel as though they can be 
honest about who they are and be real with their advisor. 

Question; I would like to throw something else in the mix. I would like to ask this panel about 
a mentor-mentee relationship with a practitioner in your research. Have you had that experi- 
ence? How valuable has it been? What kind of lessons can you tell other students? 

Downer: I can speak to that. There is one person in particular whom Julia talks about all the 
time, because she has been a mentor to our whole team. Her name is Ogie White, and she was a 
director of one of the Head Start centers with whom we worked. When I first started working 
with Julia, I did not know much about Head Start. It was very new to me. White was one of the 
first people in the center to show me what Head Start was all about. I told her that she did not 
have any idea how much I learned about the process of a Head Start center, and what the 
teachers do with children. I learned so much from shadowing her at the center and hearing how 
she enjoys promoting parent involvement, as well as her energy and excitement about what she 
was doing. I thought it was important for her to know that, too, because I am not sure that we 
always express to people in the community that they are important in the learning process of 
building partnerships and helping families and children. 

Mendez; When I met White, she was a center director. The center was short on teachers, so she 
was also the lead teacher in the classroom, directing five classroom centers. I mention that to 
offer a sense of her commitment. I arrived and said, "Let me tell you about peer play and why it 
is so important for social competence and children." We talked and she listened and nodded for 
about 20 minutes and then said, "That is great. Do you know anything about parents?" I quickly 
realized that we were going to have a conversation, and our work grew over time. She helped us 
develop the parent intervention program that we are doing now. It speaks to the idea that 
research is continually evolving, and practitioner input is needed. One needs people to be real 
and have those conversations. That was very much her style. 

Stephanie Childs' style is much more reflective and safe. When you talk with Childs, she 
makes you feel as though any idea that you have about a Head Start child is the most wonderful 
thing anyone has ever thought of. It is very motivating. Some of the practitioners whom we 
continue to work with make the work meaningful. They remind you why. 

Raikes; Julia, something you said about autonomy not equaling independence resonated with 
me. A trap that many graduate students run into is that their advisors are phenomenally busy, so 
they feel as though they need to do everything on their own. Otherwise, they fear being seen as 
incompetent. What do you say to your peers when you see them struggling and you realize that 
if they were just meeting with someone on a regular basis, they could do so much more and 
better work? How do you tell your peers that this is so important? 



643 



637 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Mendez: The great thing about having mentors is that you can quickly give others advice and 
have time for more questions. I will let you know what Margaret Spencer says about that. When 
you have a mentor or when you are a student, mentors give students permission to bug them. 
That is what it is about. Mentors are extremely busy because they are mentoring and aeating 
opportunities. As the student, you have to say, "You agreed to mentor me, too." I always keep 
that in mind. I always say it is permission to bug me. 

Even now, I know that I have permission to e-mail John even though he is incredibly busy 
with new students. That is why the expectation idea is so important. A student needs to be able 
to go to a faculty person and say, "Do I have permission to talk to you about these issues?" If 
they say yes, then you have that permission. If they say no, you have to keep looking. 

Fantuzzo: I have my mentees talk to my family, because they are part of my family. I look at 
how I spend my time during the week and say, empirically speaking, that I spend almost as 
much with you as I spend with my family. What does that say to you? The notion is that we are 
talking about something important. The students need to realize what percentage they are of the 
faculty person's world — it is rather significant. 

Downer: Julia and I have been creative about how to meet and how to talk. I will suggest having 
a quick lunch or grabbing coffee in the morning. It is not necessarily meeting in the department, 
the office, or the lab, but trying to squeeze in one or two questions here and there. That has been 
enjoyable as well as helpful. 

Cristofaro: It is absolutely important to be in contact with one's mentor. As tremendously busy 
as she is, I know Cathie's office door is always open for me. There have been numerous times 
when I have walked into her office with a question about a home visit — something sensitive or 
challenging that I do not know how to address — and she always makes time for me. We set dates 
way in advance or have impromptu meetings in the elevator. It has already been mentioned for 
the student to take that initiative, because mentors are so busy. It shows your interest, values, 
curiosity, and passion for what you are doing. Without that initiative, one cannot achieve 
success. 

Thompson: You also want to form the concept of a team because, first of all, a team is economi- 
cal. The team is a nice place for junior people to hide until the senior people launder their 
biggest concerns and worries and create a dialogue, so they do not have to be the first person on 
the block to bring up a problem. It is important to have your peer colleagues actually surface 
tensions and conflicts. Then you know that you can build off of that. You can get some momen- 
tum from their raising the issue. It is important to utilize a good, effective team. 

Downer: As a student, you should never have to make excuses for being curious and having 
questions. In a positive mentor-mentee relationship, even though both sides are busy, questions 
are always good. 

Question: My first question regards institutional policy for becoming mentors. Obviously, 
mentors should somehow be qualified persons. I am from the Mayo Clinic, and I was an intern 
at Yale. The Mayo Clinic has an informal policy about becoming mentors, specifically, taking 
graduate students under their wings. Usually at the assistant professor level, there is no rule 
about taking someone under his or her wing unless someone is a M.D. or Ph.D. I would like 
you to share the policies from your experience in your institutions. 

The second question is for the graduate students. There are many factors to consider when 
choosing a mentor. It involves many of these issues as well as the qualifications of your mentors. 
What are the most important factors to make you think, "This is the one I would like to labor 
with during my training?" 



ERIC 



638 



644 



STUDENT PROGRAMMING 



Fantuzzo: Vivian Gadsden is the chair of our graduate group at the Graduate School of Educa- 
tion. She has actually created a task force on mentoring. We have a doctoral Spencer Grant on 
urban educational research. Gadsden has collected an incredible collection of articles on 
doctoral research mentoring. If you sent her an e-mail, she might send you a bibliography of 
wonderful articles she has collected on mentoring. There is a literature out there, and there have 
been task forces at the American Psychological Association and at the American Educational 
Research Association (AERA) about these issues. What are standards for mentoring between 
doctoral students and faculty? People could use those standards for formulating policy. 

Tamis-LeMonda: I would strongly encourage all universities to have these standards. We are 
doing that as well. The variation within any given institution or department is immense. I think 
of it as the meeting of the hearts and the meetings of the minds. Two things that are important 
when talking with your mentor is that you feel a connection and you feel that the person is there 
for you. I am flabbergasted when 1 hear colleagues of mine who have 3-week or 1-month 
waiting lists when their students sign up for half an hour. That seems absurd to me. If you are 
not passionate about the areas of the research in which I am involved, or if you want to explore 
other areas of psychology, you would not be working with me. It is important for you to get 
passionately involved. 

An earlier question desaibed faculty looking to their students for expertise. It does not sound 
like the initial format that I would encourage students to enter as their graduate experience. I 
always say to my undergraduate students who are applying to graduate school that they are not 
applying to a university — they are applying to a person. Do not say you are going to apply there 
because it is Yale. Who is the person at Yale with whom you are going to work? I applied to NYU 
because I wanted to work with Mark Bornstein. He was wonderful. I was excited about his work, 
and I applied because of him. I did not apply for any other reason. It is important in graduate 
school to apply to a place where you know you will be mentored appropriately both at the point 
of the heart and the mind. 

Cristofaro: From a student perspective, when I was applying to graduate school, I was abso- 
lutely captivated with Cathie's work with parents and young children. I had tons and tons of 
questions. I sent her e-mails with 12 or 13 questions, and she replied to every single one of 
them. At one point, she gave me her home phone number to call her at anytime, and I did. That 
showed her commitment to her students, and that has been played out ever since. One gets this 
feeling right away from a potential mentor. 

Salandy: I wanted to comment on something that Jason said about reaching back to students in 
your department to mentor them. It connects with perspective taking, because while I was going 
through, I mentored younger students. We created an association called the Doctor Scholars 
Association, which is made up of about 140 doctoral completers from the Southern Regional 
Educational Board Doctoral Fellowship program. Right now they are faculty members. We 
mentor approximately 440 doctoral students from ethnic minority backgrounds. We do that 
through a listserv and annual meeting, but the listserv has proven to be effective because we get 
doctoral students asking questions about all kinds of things from "Can we collaborate on a 
paper?" to "Can I room with someone at a conference coming up?" It is something that is real 
and ongoing. Once one starts mentoring younger students, one starts understanding the 
perspective of one's own mentor. When someone sends you e-mail, reply quickly. When 
something is due, make sure to have it on time and things like that. Once one becomes a 
mentor, one becomes a good mentee in one's relationship with his or her own mentor. 

Fantuzzo: I appreciate you all coming and letting us share with you. Clearly, I want you to 
realize that mentoring is rocket science. Think about Einstein's equation — about changing it 



645 



639 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



around and establishing two-way communications. You have heard wonderful examples of 
people who are struggling with the process. No one has this process cracked, but the fun thing is 
that there are colleagues who are contemplative about the struggle. That is what we have to do to 
make the invisible visible and get people talking. 

I am excited that this topic is on the conference agenda. We have to write and talk about this 
issue. This is a vital relationship for the future of our field. Perspective-taking and finding people 
who give each other space to talk about these important issues is essential. Lobby with adminis- 
trators and policymakers who say at the federal level, "This is important." We have to say it is 
important to talk about the next generation of scholars and the quality of work they are going to 
be doing, and how well we want to care for them, heart and mind. 

Bulotsky: On behalf of all the students, we want to thank everyone for coming and for having 
such a great conversation. Thanks to all the mentors who support us and made this happen. 



WORKSHOP 

Statistics and Common Sense: A Quantitative 
"Head Start" for Researchers and Practitioners 

PRESENTER: Howard Andrews 

This workshop provided an introduction to basic issues in research design, measurement, and 
statistical hypoAesis testing. The focus was on design and analytic issues that frequently arise in 
conjunction with Head Start research and evaluation projects. The following topics were 
discussed: statistical power, reliability, validity. Type I and Type II Error, chi-square, t-tests, 
correlation, multiple regression, multilevel analysis, "significance" versus "importance," 
choosing statistical and data management software, and furthering Head Start research through 
a central registry of Head Start enrollees. 



640 



646 



Miscellaneous 



Creating Integrated Early Childhood 
Learning Programs 

CHAIR: Ruby Takanishi 

PRESENTERS: Rachel Schumacher, Sally Coleman Selden, Jessica Sowa 

Ruby Takanishi: There are many early childhood education and care programs in this country 
and many funding streams — federal, state, and local. The best image that 1 can think of is that 
when one looks at all the funding streams that come down to programs or families, it looks like 
a rabbit's warren or spider's web. It is tangled and byzantine. It takes discipline and detailed 
orientation to figure out how one can have terrific programs that serve the needs of children and 
families at both the family and child level. 

In this particular session, we will present policy-oriented research. This is research on early 
education and care and the policies that drive program delivery and impact children, versus 
many of the other sessions that focus on children's development, intervention, families, and so 
forth. Focus will be on studies in the states of Georgia, Ohio, and Massachusetts, and some 
locally-based studies in New York and Virginia funded by the Charles Stewart Mott Foundation 
that particularly look at Head Start and child-care collaborations. 

Rachel Schumacher is a policy analyst at the Center for Law and Social Policy (CLASP) in 
Washington, DC, a national public policy and law organization that works on the economic 
security of low-income families. Her work focuses on early care and education policies that both 
support children's development and the needs of low-income working families. 

Sally Coleman Selden is an associate professor in the School of Business and Economics at 
Lynchburg College in Virginia. She will report on her work supported by the Charles Stewart 
Mott Foundation on assessing early childhood collaborations, including Head Start, in two 
states. Jessica Sowa is a research associate working on investigating partnerships in early child- 
hood education. She works with Selden and is a doctoral candidate in public administration at 
the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs, at Syracuse University. In planning this 
session, we saw it as a conversation between individuals who have been studying the challenges 
in integrating all these funding streams and early childhood programs. 

Rachel Schumacher: I will start by presenting the federal overview of the programs. People here 
might be familiar with different parts of different programs, and I am sure a lot of you here 
know about Head Start. I want to show you the three major sources of funding and major places 
where children are being served in early childhood education. These factors determine how 
these programs are being delivered, the ability of programs to work across systems, and the 
content of what is delivered to children. 

The first program is Head Start. Almost 900,000 children are served by Head Start, based on 
statistics from the most recent year available. Head Start received $6.5 billion in federal funds in 
the last appropriation. One can compare that to the Child Care and Development Fund 



O 

ERIC 



647 



641 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



(CCDF). The CCDF is a block grant used by states for state child-care subsidy systems. CCDF 
serves 2.2 million children in an average month and receives around the same amount total in 
funding in terms of appropriations. In fiscal years 2001 and 2000, there was a trend of using the 
welfare block grant for child-care funding. The reauthorization under discussion has major 
implications, not just in terms of the child-care block grant, but also the welfare funding that is 
being used for child care. This is an important point that many people do not know about. 

Lastly there are state pre-kindergarten programs. 

Question: Do the numbers include matching funds? 

Schumacher: The Head Start number is just the federal appropriation. The CCDF number is 
$4.8 billion in federal funds, and the $2 billion is what the states have to match. Often, when 
numbers are thrown around at the federal level, they do or do not include matching funds. One 
has to ask the question of whether it also includes state contribution. 

On the state pre-kindergarten question, the $1.7 billion is based on the Childrens Defense 
Fund (CDF) research, which is described in the Seeds of Success book that they published a 
couple years ago. We do not have good national figures on the state pre-kindergarten program, 
on how much money is spent, or for how many children. CDF tried to pull that information 
together a couple years ago. Based on those figures, about 724,000 children are served, with the 
program receiving about $1.7 billion in that school year. We do not know how many of these 
children are being served in multiple programs and how much overlap exists. 

The basic parameters of the Head Start program are that it is a federal to local grant program; 
the mission is school readiness competencies for poor children, not just cognitive, but social 
and emotional development, and family support. It serves children 3 to 5 years of age, but there 
is also an Early Head Start program. The program is free and is not tied to parental work status. 
There are many factors that go into the flavor of the program and its mission. The program is 
scheduled for reauthorization next year, which means Congress is going to take a look at 
whether it was adequately funded, how much they want to fund it for the next few years, and 
what they want to change about the parameters of the program. 

The Child Care and Development Fund is a block grant to states. It has a different flavor than 
Head Start, which is an actual program that goes down to the local level and that has parameters 
for how it serves children and families. On the other hand, states get to make many decisions 
about how CCDF is implemented. Most of it goes out in the form of vouchers received by 
parents, which then go into the child-care market. 

States set eligibility levels. They can set them up to 85% of the state median income, but most 
states set limits much lower than that. They do not have enough resources to provide the full 
extent of possibilities of such a program. Our research shows that we still only serve one out of 
seven children who would be federally eligible for the program. Most parents have to pay a 
copayment; it is not free. Only 4% of the funds are set aside for quality, compared to almost 
25% for the Head Start program. CCDF is being reauthorized now. 

Regarding state pre-kindergarten programs, we know that 41 states and Washington, DC have 
some type of pre-kindergarten program. Many of these programs are extensions of Head Start, 
where state dollars are used to expand the Head Start program. These programs are primarily 
funded with state dollars, although there is some use of federal dollars. There is a new phenom- 
enon of using Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) dollars, which are welfare block 
grant funds. As state funds have been freed up in the last few years, they have used that money 
for early childhood initiatives. 

Most state programs are limited to certain categories of children and are not universal. There 
is a trend to thinldng about offering universal pre-kindergarten, but Georgia is the only state 
that has done that for 4-year-olds and is one of the states we profiled in our research. Other 
states, including New York and Oklahoma, are working toward that goal. 




642 



648 



MISCELLANEOUS 



The programs are usually part-day part-year. They often allow delivery in settings that are not 
the school/ which is something people often do not know. There is great variety in how high a 
level of quality they look for, like whether there is a curriculum standard or any type of compre- 
hensive services in addition to the educational component. There is a wide variety of quality in 
these programs. 

I want to focus on some of the key areas of difference that we should have in our minds and 
some of the challenges for people coordinating across programs at the state and local levels. First 
of all/ there are the missions of these programs. Work support is the focus of the Child Care 
Development Fund/ and child-care subsidy programs tend to focus on that. Children need a 
place to go so that their mothers can work. Other programs focus on child development and 
education/ which makes a big difference on how policies are formed. 

Eligibility requirements and the processes that parents go through to get into the program 
and to keep their child in the program also differ between programs. Factors include the age of 
the child/ family income/ parental work statuS/ and changes in family circumstances. If the 
family income changes/ does that mean the family has to pay a different amount or suddenly 
cannot be in the program/ even though the program blends funds from CCDF and Head Start? 

It was also interesting how important distribution of funds waS/ in how the funds come down 
to programs/ what impact that can have on the program/ what they can offer/ and how much 
they can plan ahead. Head Start money comes down as a grant and one knows how much one 
has for a year. Child-care subsidies come down as vouchers; parents can come and go from the 
program as they please/ so there is a different flavor to that type of situation. 

Lastly and most importantly are the standards for programs/ with the strength of require- 
ments that must be met in order to serve children/ what programs must be offered/ and what the 
staff must look like. Those standards are different among the states and federal programs and are 
important issues to consider when thinking about how to integrate across programs. 

The CLASP study that we did in partnership with the Foundation for Child Development 
posed the research questions: To what extent the federal rules hinder collaboration when states 
seek to promote early learning/ and what examples e?dst of where they promote collaboration? 
What lessons can be learned from looking at states that have made efforts to promote early 
learning through major early childhood initiatives? 

We looked at three states: Georgia/ MassaHiusettS/ and Ohio. Georgia has a universal pre- 
kindergarten system that is free of charge to all 4-year-olds in the state. Their pre-kindergarten 
program and Head Start programs now serve approximately 70% of 4-year-olds in the state. 

Their Office of School Readiness administers the program. It is separate and not imbedded in 
any other particular agency. The money comes from a state lottery. As a note of comparison, the 
funding for this program in Georgia is bigger than the entire CCDF child-care subsidy program 
for children ages 0-13 years of age. It is clearly a well-funded program, and it provides early 
learning opportunities for children 6.5 hours a day, 5 days a week. It does not have to be 
delivered in schools; it is delivered across programs. 

Different approaches work for different states. States have different expectations and cultures 
of what they want to see done in terms of integration. Georgia wanted something focused on 
pre-kindergarten and early learning and wanted to talk about it in that way. In Massachusetts, we 
attempted to choose different approaches, because states can integrate efforts in many different 
ways. 

Massachusetts has Community Partnerships for Children Program for 3- to 5-year-olds where 
funds from the Department of Education go to local communities. These communities organize 
councils with representation from Head Start, child care, and the schools. They sit down 
together to discuss their needs and then develop plans for how to best serve their community. 
Those funds serve children and families with incomes that are up to 125% of the state median 
income, so it is a relatively high income level. They charge a copayment. They have some similar 
policies to their child-care subsidy system; however, all the programs that participate have to 
become accredited within a 3-year period. 



649 



643 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



It is not exactly like the Georgia program, but it tries to improve quality. The number of 
accredited programs in Massachusetts over the last few years has skyrocketed. They have the 
most accredited programs of any state, and they are not a big state. 

Ohio has a Head Start child-care partnership model. They were out in front and have been 
doing this for a long time. What they do is put state funds into Head Start programs to expand 
their services to provide full-day services. They pay particular attention to working with child- 
care partners in their communities, including family child care, to provide an array of services to 
the Head Start-eligible population in the state. Their original goal was to reach as much of the 
Head Start population as possible. Our overall finding was that collaboration is difficult, in that 
the federal rules present challenges to the states. 

We identified five key areas of collaboration challenges, which we will talk more about. They 
had to develop comprehensive vision, expand fiscal resources and address the regulatory 
differences across these programs, and figure out ways to get the structures in the states to 
cooperate. It is challenging to build constituencies across states where people have not talked to 
each other before this point and have thought of themselves as serving difeent children. 

Lastly, they had to track their progress and measure their results, because if they do not, they 
may lose their political support. That is a big issue. In summary, collaboration is difficult but not 
impossible. 

Sally Coleman Selden: I want to take a few minutes to talk about the purpose of our presenta- 
tion, which is essentially threefold. First, I will describe our research design, then Sowa will talk 
about our research question, and then lasdy we will go over some of our findings. 

As we approached this project, we were residing in Syracuse, New York. New York State had a 
universal pre-kindergarten program in policy but not in practice, so this study was built upon 
good ground. I will talk about why we chose New York State and Virginia, and then what we 
have done and found thus far within each of the two states. 

First of all, we used a structured, comparative case study design. That involves the use of an 
intensive data collection protocol in each of the selected cases. On average, we visited sites at 
least four times throughout the duration of the study, and we have just finished our 2nd year of 
fieldwork. New York State was particularly interesting because in policy, it has a universal pre- 
kindergarten program. It does not have that in practice, but the state requires at least 10% of the 
p re- kindergarten programs be provided in community-based sites. That is important because we 
were essentially interested in programs that are partnering or collaborating using at least two 
public funding sources to provide full-day, full-year care. In order to be incorporated into our 
study, they had to use at least two public funding sources, which usually means subsidy money, 
preschool dollars, or Head Start dollars. Full day is not the school day; fiill day is typically before 
school and after school care. In other words, we were looking for programs to support working 
parents. That is essentially why we started with New York State. 

We chose Virginia because it also has an interesting policy context. The way they have 
implemented their preschool program is essentially mutually exclusive from Head Start. If a 
child receives Head Start funding, the child is not eligible for the Virginia Preschool Initiative. 
That is not true in New York State, where community-based programs are encouraged, but 
Virginia does not have that written into their policies. 

We thought these two states were at different points in terms of their early care and education 
policy. In each of the two states, we have chosen 10 sites that are collaborating or partnering 
across at least two of those funding sources. We were careful to choose both urban and 
nonurban sites because we were interested in what is going on in rural areas. Our site selection 
in New York State was not based on an understanding of the universe of programs; it was too 
complicated to get that information. In Virginia, before we selected our sites, we did go into the 
field and identify all of the programs in the state that were collaborating or partnering to 
provide full-day, full-year care. From that point, we tried to draw from urban and nonurban 



er|c 



644 



650 



MISCELLANEOUS 



areas. Then we had two control sites that provide full-day, full-year care to children from 
families with low incomes, but who do not receive preschool dollars or Head Start dollars. 

Lastly, I talked a moment ago about the fact that we are using a structured comparative case 
study design with multiple data-collection tools. We are conducting a series of interviews with 
different stakeholders, administering a series of surveys within the organizations, doing struc- 
tured classroom observations, and doing extensive document analysis. Our research study has 
both the policy orientation and, more importantly, an organizational approach. 

Jessica Sowa: In designing the study, we realized that we wanted to share our findings with 
multiple audiences. Generally, we were concerned about the challenges that collaborations and 
interorganizational partnerships might pose for the management and implementation of these 
programs. In addition, we wanted to know about the how and the why of collaborations. 

First of all, why are people getting into this? What are the benefits for different organizations 
to come together to provide services? How do they do it? How do they institute these partner- 
ships and bring together the multiple sources of funding? We have found that there is not a set 
model; there are many different ways to put these funds together. We also wanted to know the 
impact of policy-level variation on what is occurring at the organizational level. 

From our preliminary field work and pretesting, we saw that Head Start and federal funding 
has a big impact on nonprofit child-care centers that may not have been exposed to any broad 
federal regulations before. We wanted to measure the impact of different levels of federal 
funding on organizational conditions, human resource management, financial management, 
implementation decisions, and classroom quality. 

Finally, we wanted to evaluate the impact of variations in setting and services on the organi- 
zational conditions. The collaborations have various levels of intensity and various degrees of 
comprehensiveness of services. Finally, we wanted to know how they impact the parents them- 
selves and whether the collaborations affect their assessments of how well their children are 
learning and how flexible the program is in serving their needs as working parents, and whether 
the collaborations affect the quality of the relationship between the teacher and the child and 
between the teacher and the parents. 

We have completed our 2nd year of data collection, so we have finished our primary data 
collection and are moving into analysis and writing. We have done some initial policy white 
papers looking at why organizations collaborate and how they reconcile the policy contradic- 
tions that arise in putting together these collaborations. Those are all available on our web site. 

Takanishi: Two study teams have reported on several states and also at the local level about 
some challenges and issues in creating these kinds of integrated learning programs. 

Question: I have not heard about children with disabilities. We are trying to find inclusive sites 
for these children, so I am curious if you looked at that issue. 

Selden: Several of our sites focus heavily on that issue, and one of our New York sites is a 
particularly interesting case. It is a for-profit organization that specializes in providing services 
for children with disabilities, but they also run a child-care center in an urban area. They are 
partnering with a local Head Start grantee, bringing in Head Start funding to that child-care 
center. They have the Head Start teacher and a full-time special education teacher together in the 
classroom and have brought all those services together. The two lead teachers have some chal- 
lenges just figuring out the best way to run this collaboration, but it seems to be working well. 

In Virginia, they are partnering with school districts to create inclusion classrooms. Some are 
inclusion classrooms by design, and some are by default. The ones that are by design have 
infrastructure set up as they enter into that partnership; the others realize they have children 
needing special services so they approach the school district to provide the support services. The 
relationships are developing, depending on the need. 




645 

BEST COPY AVAIMBLE 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Schumacher: We did not look specifically at that issue, and our work is more at the state policy 
level than individual programs. A point of interest is that the Massachusetts Community 
Partnerships program grew historically out of the Department of Education s concern about the 
need for inclusiveness. It was built on a network of community partnership councils that had 
been formed to deal with inclusiveness issues; they found that the schools could not do this 
alone and needed to work with community-based providers to offer inclusive care. 

Takanishi: One of the issues we did not talk about has to do with how the studies were con- 
ducted, and the "leave no child behind" legislation. It also funds preschools, so that is another 
funding stream entity that needs to be taken into account. The other is what you mentioned 
about the children with disabilities. That will be reauthorized next year. 

Our web site, ffcd.org, will soon have a working paper by Don Bailey, head of the Frank 
Porter Graham Institute at the University of North Carolina, which addresses some of these 
issues. It is an interesting twist addressing what people can do to increase access to good early 
childhood programs and the provisions of preschool programs for children with disabilities. He 
wrote the paper because we felt that any effort to be more inclusive in the early childhood 
program area needed, as well as an important funding stream, preschool provisions like those 
found in the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA). 

Question: In Ohio, data are collected electronically through Galileo software, and some full-day 
child-care directors are struggling with not just with how to use it, but with the implications of 
what it means when the state collects that information. I wondered about the other states and 
the response to outcomes. How does one integrate that? Are you looking at how people respond 
to those findings? 

Schumacher: We found that in organizations partnering with Head Start, as either a grantee 
expanding certain classrooms to full-day, full-year care, or a child-care center bringing in Head 
Start funding, the partnerships can present challenges for the teachers in those classrooms. The 
efficacy of the Performance Standards and the outcome measurement has been shown, so we are 
not suggesting that that should be revised. There needs to be thought given as to how that works 
in a full-day, full-year classroom, and the challenges it presents for the teachers. Many of the 
teachers we have seen experience high levels of stress and burnout because they have paperwork, 
home visits, and other responsibilities. Finding time to do all those tasks is a real challenge. 

Tools like information technology can facilitate the teacher s work. Even additional funding 
for substitutes can be helpful. One of our sites had one full-day classroom and a Head Start 
grantee. That teacher felt left out of the overall organizational culture because the part-day 
programs had meetings and even lunches together, but that teacher could not leave class to 
attend. Some thought must be given to what we need to adjust and support now that we have 
moved toward expanding Head Start services. 

Selden: There have been discussions in New York State. Virginia is participating with a dozen 
other states that are collaborating to identify what would be the appropriate school readiness 
measures to collect. Virginia is not yet at a point where there is much formal integration across 
the programs. Sowa mentioned that it is based on site-by-site models. Every single site has a 
different approach. It is a huge stumbling block and a barrier when one is talking about collabo- 
rating with Head Start, because especially with the community-based programs there are 
teachers, for example, who are required to use particular record-keeping procedures, but who are 
not trained to do it. It does create additional red tape and requirements, so that is a barrier to 
collaboration. 





646 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Sowa: We have spoken to teachers about that issue. They all see the paperwork as valuable; they 
do not see it as actual red tape, but are struggling with how to fit that in and manage it. 

Comment: The issue on getting the data for the part-C or part-H IDEA money is in the 21st 
Congressional report. It has been captured for the past 5 years, indicating the number of 
children served since 1995. Part C was called Part H. Head Start has tracked dollars and children 
since 1966, but the IDEA funding is only tracking the last 5 years by age. 

Schumacher: There is such an array of programs, large and small, all filtering down to state and 
local levels. What we do not have is federal leadership or a sense of how to put these data 
together in a comprehensive way so that we can understand where children are being served, 
and if they are being served in multiple programs. That is one piece of the puzzle that we would 
all like to see solved. In our study, we found that state leadership is necessary, along with federal 
guidance and resources. One of the other barriers we saw to building a complete picture of 
where children are is an incredible lack of resources and capacity of data systems at the state and 
local levels. Most of this is driven by what the federal government requires to be reported, so 
there is a large role for the federal government to require good data reporting as well as the 
resources to have that happen in a coordinated manner. 

We saw the states going out on their own and approaching data collection in different ways. 
Back to the first question, Georgia tried to look at s Aool readiness and how children were doing 
by the time they reached kindergarten. Georgias Office of Education Accountability, which 
traditionally focused only on kindergarten to 12th grade, has now made it clear and has the 
governor s go-ahead to start focusing on appropriate ways to measure the school readiness of 
these young children as they enter kindergarten. Over the next 4 years, they will likely struggle 
with the appropriate way to measure this issue. 

Massachusetts has always been clear that they do not want to target individual-child out- 
comes and to get into this in a way that could be used against particular programs. On the other 
hand, they thought it was important to have data showing how resources in programs affect 
how children come out of programs. They have conducted a cost, quality, and outcome study 
that was replicated across the state, and they found interesting information. For example, staff 
serving children from families with low incomes were much less likely to have degrees than staff 
serving children from families with higher incomes. 

Ohio is part of a nationally funded partnership impact study to see how these collaborations 
are working. Hopefully, results of that research will come out soon. Someone brought up the 
outcomes study, which was just in its infancy when we were writing this paper. Computers have 
been placed into pre-kindergarten programs including Head Start and some child-care programs 
to collect data about child outcomes across systems. 

The idea of outcomes measures is taking hold at the national level. We definitely saw it in the 
educational format, and it will probably come down the pike through other early care- and 
education-focused legislation. We will also talk about Senators Kennedy and Greggs' legislation 
on early care and education. Even though the research is not clear on how to move forward with 
outcomes measurement in a productive way, something is definitely coming down the pike. 

Question: I am a Head Start director in Palm Beach County, Florida. I will try to tell the Florida 
story in a nutshell, which involves school readiness legislation. It created a state partnership 
forum whereby the state would have responsibility for all publicly funded preschool programs. 
Local coalitions, which could be multicounty or single-county coalitions, had the same respon- 
sibility at the local level. The membership of the state partnership, as well as the local coalitions, 
was predetermined by the legislation. It included the Head Start agencies with their local 
coalitions. Also, because the Head Start funding was not a part of state block grants, there was 
opposition from the state government for a waiver that would allow the Head Start funding to 



ERIC 



653 



647 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



be integrated. Now, 2 years down the road, my local coalition is interested in functioning 
differently. That has resulted in the traditional providers and services no longer being provided 
by us, but being implemented by other state agencies providing services and the child-care 
resource and response services funds going to us. 

It will be instrumental to look at how your work informs us of what others are doing at the 
ground level, in the early stages. Some of this work is early in the process. There are some who 
tend to look at what some of the other states are doing, such as Georgia. I struggled with trying 
to say to the programs and to the policy makers that collaboration can occur. It is happening 
well in communities all over the state, but it did not have to happen in one single way with all 
the money going into one pot. My question was whether you looked at local programs and 
collaborations. 

Sowa: You are absolutely right. The various models and ways in which people collaborate differ. 
In looking at our local arrangements, in only two places is there local infrastructure where one 
government entity receives all funding sources and then contracts with various entities to 
provide those services. 

It looks different everywhere one goes, so we are interested in knowing the implications of 
these different arrangements, in terms of impact on the organizations, classrooms, and parents. 
We are finding that there does not appear to be a single best model. Funding sources can be 
blended or partnerships can be created in multiple ways. Only one model blended fiscal 
resources; there are other ways in which people are partnering or collaborating. For example, 
sometimes they are housed in the same building, so it is easier to create a partnership where 
there is a sharing of resources and services but not necessarily sharing of dollars. Many ways of 
collaboration exist. We are still in the beginning process of sorting through the implications of 
those models. 

Selden: We have found that the degree to which people believe in collaboration impacts the 
kinds of models that arise. In New York, everything is devolved to the local or county school 
district level. Especially with pre-kindergarten, we found that people's level of commitment in 
working with community contractors significantly impacted how these collaborations were 
arranged. In some places, people get money and never see the school district again; in other 
places, they work together to bring the community together for training, to set up billing 
systems, and so forth. The variation in commitment has a big impact on what occurs, especially 
in New York. 

Question: I am from Orlando, Florida. One of the issues I am talking with the local program 
coalitions about is that there needs to be three separate coalitions. For two of our coalitions, the 
public school districts help them out. The third one is getting other funding. My question is 
about parental choice, which seems to be a huge issue. Have the school districts dealt with the 
issue of parental choice? 

Schumacher: You raise an important question. Whether there is an imperative to have parental 
choice and whether that is in ^e policy intent or not makes a big difference, because that will 
affect the programs. 

Comment: It is in the Florida law. 

Schumacher: The Florida law says that parents should be able to choose from an array of all the 
programs in the community. How that is worded can make a big difference. Essentially, one of 
the issues that have been raised is what one must do to make sure everyone comes to the table 
and stays at the table. In the research that we have reviewed, it seemed that people need incen- 





648 



MISCELLANEOUS 



tives to come and sit at the table. People often come because they know they might receive some 
benefits out of participation, such as binding, increased enrollment, or quality improvements. 

Comment: There is only one outcome that drives the binding eventually, and that is a perfor- 
mance outcome when the children start school. 

Schumacher: However, with the Florida program, there was no new money coming in You 

were given an opportunity to have an influence over the existing funding but not an incentive of 
new funding. 

Comment: The state was asking for us to serve the same number of children with increased 
quality but no increased dollars. 

dTa™TSs raised-that no other partner in public school districts must 

Selden: When talking to people in the field in Virginia, they feel as though there is competition 
between Head Start and the Virginia Preschool Initiative (VPI) because of the way it is set up If 
one IS served by Head Start, they cannot be served by VPI. They are mutually exclusive at the 
child level. That does not mean the organization could not deliver both. We only found a few 
organizauons doing both the Virginia preschool program and Head Start. It is much more 
prevalent m New York State. 

What is interesting about New York State is that a child can be served a half-day by the 
universal pre-kindergarten program (UPK) because its funding source is based on a half-dav 
model, and Head Start can fund the other half-day for children. There are some benefits to that 
system in terms of available resources. 

Virginia is interesting because they require a local match for Virginia preschool- the UPK 
program in New York does not. That makes it more difficult, especially for some school districts 
wheryesources are much more limited. They cannot easily afford that local match. '^Their day is 
considered the school day, as opposed to New York where it is half a day, so the amount of 
money from the subsidy pile is much smaller in Virginia as compared to New York. 

These issues create dynamics for parents. It is an issue of access. Access is centralized in some 
places, as in one local office. In other places, the point of access is where the service is. Some- 

rhil?p district and they decide which preschool program will enroll the 

^ild. Every county differs, and that is the challenge in Virginia and New York State. All these 
decisions are made at the local level, from reimbursement rates to eligibility determinations to 
how services are accessed. There is no centralized process that transcends those counties across 
tn0 two states, so it can be confusing for parents. 

Schumacher: There are some important issues raised here that resonate with our research. One 
issue IS getting back to how one bangs people together in a way that will be productive. Funding 

people will get out of it and where they 

think they will be able to deliver a better service and have more binds available 

People also need enough time to plan and get to know each other. People cannot be thrown 
togeAer and expected to make a plan by next month. They need to interact with each other in a 
facilitated environment with someone who is helping them to understand each other's nro- 

fhrJr.vh T collaboration are available 

^rof Onii?'‘r ^ il^ have created their own 

type of QUILT, Georgia has now funded a Head Start-child care collaboration entity that will 

pro^de mchnical assistance. These infrastructures need to be built in order for collaboration to 
work It IS not a one-shot deal, and resources will need to be available throughout the whole 
collaboration process. ° 




655 



649 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



The second important issue that I heard is the way funds go out plays a big role in how 
collaboration works. It can be done in such a way that makes people feel like they are compet- 
ing, or it can happen in a way that makes people feel like they are making the best out of limited 
resources across programs. It should not be set up with an idea that there will be double- 
dipping or fraud. That type of worry often leads to policies that make it difficult to collaborate. 

For example, Ohio had a policy whereby if child-care subsidy dollars were put together with 
state Head Start funds for part of the day, one could not charge for a whole day of child-care 
subsidy. They backed out the part of the day that was served by Head Start. If that happens, there 
are not enough funds to do a high-quality, full-day, full-year program. It costs more than what is 
currently put into the child-care subsidy system to do high-quality, full-day, full-year care, and 
that is what we want for the children. How the funding goes out can make a big difference to the 
collaboration processes because everyone has a bottom line to work with. 

Comment: In anticipation of the issue of measuring child outcomes in our state, we wanted to 
develop a partnership institute, similar to what Schumacher mentioned, to promote partnership 
between Head Start and child-care programs to yield useful information about outcomes down 
the road. We promoted these partnerships and this institute, and we hired someone to provide 
technical assistance behind the partnership. These partnerships require an ongoing look, rather 
than forming the local communities, walking away, and hoping they do well. The ongoing 
technical assistance is beneficial. 

We have used a framework for categorizing the partnerships, looking at four or five different 
stages of development from introductions to full maturity; those are the developmental stages of 
partnerships. What are the contents of the partnerships? What are they made of? Are they only 
training? Are they sharing transportation? Are they sharing funds? We have a lot of rich informa- 
tion about the collaborations aside from the typical descriptions like, "Well, we are collaboratT 
ing." Collaborations can have a sophisticated framework. 

Then we want to be able to look at how to measure child outcomes in Georgia. I will tell you 
that even though we call ourselves the Office of School Readiness, we do not have a clue what 
that means. 

Question: Haven't you been collecting some data? I thought you had collected data on out- 
comes or classroom quality. 

Comment: We have collected data on classroom quality, not child outcomes. However, we have 
^ a governor who says that he sees an increase in Iowa Test of Basic Skills (ITBS) scores in the third 
grade, and he thinks it is a result of the Georgia pre-kindergarten program. We are nervous about 
that because we do not want that to necessarily be the measure of the effectiveness of our 
program. It is great, but we are not in business solely to raise test scores in the third grade. 

We now have a framework where when we start collecting child outcome data in the Georgia 
pre-kindergarten program and overall in our early care and education system, we will have one 
way of looking at whether or not collaborative partnerships have any effect on child, commu- 
nity, and family outcomes. We are looking at a variety of issues, but at least we will have a 
framework that can evaluate both items in the Georgia pre-kindergarten program and the Head 
Start or child-care programs, as well as whether the mix provided by collaborations improve 
overall quality of programs, child outcomes, and community-based involvement. We are 
moving in the right direction, but this is 6 months old and just a framework. 

Question: In looking at these collaborations, are people thinking about taking advantage of the 
formation of these collaborations to further some other outcomes, like community outcomes? 

In some of these populations, there are so many other issues. 





650 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Selden: There is a locality in Culpeper, Virginia that has done just that at the community level. 

It is one of the only places that have put it in that larger context, in terms of the whole commu- 
nity. What has been striking to us is that no matter what is happening at the state level, people 
in some areas remain uninformed about what is going on at the state level. Everything that is 
occurring at the local level is based on what we consider the entrepreneurial leadership where 
people have a need and a shared desire to meet the needs of working families and children and 
they are seeking ways to do it. 

QUILT just came into Virginia, and they conducted a series of focus groups all over the state. I 
attended one and was struck by the fact that some local partners had absolutely no knowledge 
of any other policies. They did not even know about the Virginia Preschool Initiative (VPI). I 
was starded that they did not even know that the Department of Social Services set the rates. It 
suggested a huge disconnect — a major gap. There is a policy world out there, and there is a 
practice world in the field. I applaud the work that QUILT and other people are doing because 
they are desperately trying to bridge that gap and encourage service providers to get involved. 

Exciting happenings are coming down the pipeline. They are searching, looking for partners 
to serve the children and their families in the way they need to be served. We have one site that 
decided to participate in our study because they were desperate to collaborate with Head Start 
and they did not know how to gain access to Head Start. They felt that participation in this 
project was an avenue. These are exciting prospects. 

Question: Are there state collaboration offices? 

Selden: Yes, in Virginia, for example, they have finally hired a collaboration director, but the 
position was vacant for over 1 year. She is initiating this effort with the people at DSS and Head 
Start, and it is on the governor's agenda. 

Schumacher: Head Start funds a collaboration office in every state. Some of them are excellent, 
influential, and strategically placed in either the governor's office or elsewhere, like the Office of 
School Readiness in Georgia. There is great collaboration across programs, but in some states, 
they are marginalized. It depends on the state. It is an issue of politics and funding. In Ohio, 
they had an active collaboration person, but she moved to the Child Care Bureau and the 
position has not been filled yet, so it is a challenge. 

Question: We are having difficulty as far as the quality of the program. We wanted to make it 
more of a development program. How do you hire, how much you pay, and so forth? We are 
having difficulty collaborating in that manner. Is there anyone who can help us with that, to see 
how we can make it happen? 

Comment: I have collaborated with close to 20 child-care centers. Before I entered into partner- 
ship with them, they had to make a commitment in writing that they shared in the vision, the 
comprehensiveness of the program, and focus on quality. Then we could enter into a partner- 
ship and they could participate in all of the training and technical support that we provided. 

Schumacher: The mission and orientation is incredibly important as a basis. The time and 
learning about each other is important, but much of this comes down to resources, and child- 
care programs traditionally have not had anywhere near the resources of Head Start programs 
and some pre-kindergarten programs. Their services are usually paid for at the barest minimum. 
They do not get that quality component set aside, and they do not get extra money for salaries. 
When we looked at collaborations, we saw that Head Start grantee agencies sometimes invited a 
child-care partner to attend a training, and the child-care people could not take advantage of it 
because the training was on Friday, a day on which they teach. Child-care centers may not have 





651 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



any money for substitute care, so they cannot pull a teacher out and they do not have the funds 
to attract teachers at a higher income level. With a higher training level, salaries must be higher. 
These all factor in, so if Head Start grantees have extra money to collaborate, some of that 
should go to the child-care provider or they will likely not be able to participate. 

Comment: They should develop an agreement. We have to make sure they are getting enough 
so they are not being set up for failure. 

Selden: You are doing exactly what we found in places that have been highly successful. You 
mentioned the issue of teacher salaries and quality. In the collaborations studied in New York 
State, a career ladder emerged. People would enter the ladder through a child-care center, then 
they would go to Head Start, and ultimately, they wanted to get into the school district, because 
the school district in New York State paid the best salaries. This created some weird tensions. To 
address this issue, some people have agreed that they will not hire people who work for another 
agency in the partnership, which helps the partnerships to work a little better. However, this 
does not address the wage differential issue, which has been problematic. For example, some 
places have paid their Head Start teachers more, whether they are VPI teachers or UPK teachers, 
because of the required credentials. In order to get people that have these credentials to meet the 
quality standards, they must pay them. This creates all kinds of organizational problems. 

One of the biggest challenges is with the Head Start Performance Standards. That creates an 
enormous barrier. The grantees that we talked to have essentially said that it is a relationship 
that creates the quality. In some places, they only look for accredited programs, and that works 
well in some areas, but it will not work in many nonurban areas where nationally accredited 
programs do not exist. It starts by setting those expectations before entering into that relation- 
ship, by literally bringing people along. It is a painful process on both sides; it is painful to the 
people who are saying that we have these quality standards that have to be met, and to the 
people who believe in their own minds that they run a quality program. It is all based on how 
one structures and interacts. That is individualized to the particular sites, but setting those 
expectations is one important way to start. 

Sowa: I read something the other day about the idea of a collaborative dating period, like when 
one is getting to know a significant other. If organizations can come together and talk about 
their vision, their orientation toward early care and education, and get to know each other first, 
those sustained relationships will help keep the collaboration going in the future. We definitely 
saw that in one of our sites. They had a difficult time getting together; it took them about 3 years 
and three different models. They had QUILT come to them to mediate and figure out how to get 
it to work. It was that dating period and the relationship between the two directors and their 
shared vision that helped keep it rolling, rather than deciding early on to scrap the partnership. 

Selden: The one message I would send to people is not to give up after 1-2 years even though 
many people throw in the towel. For those programs we have seen that are effectively partnering 
and collaborating, it usually takes a period of 1-3 years before they get to that point. 

Question: Someone mentioned salaries and qualifications for teachers in 2003, and that Head 
Start teachers will have to be college educated. How will that affect these partnerships? 

Schumacher: They will be in trouble. This is a huge concern for people. We are starting to see 
additional resources emerge such as teacher programs. They are trying to figure out ways to 
access programs. At least one Head Start grantee has developed its own relationship with the 
local college, but we hear this issue voiced time and time again. They are extremely concerned 
about that requirement. 



er|c 



652 



658 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Comment: Especially if they are full-day full-year programs. They have to be in class at 5:30 
p.m. in the evening. 

Schumacher: Absolutely. One fairly unique program has a relationship with a college who does 
it during the working day so that gives them release time. It takes many resources to do that. 

Question: I am concerned about the collaboration of Head Start, child care, and day care. I am 
from a Head Start agency in New York City. They come together to collaborate, and I do not 
mind sharing my Head Start dollars, but if I am responsible for performance standards and have 
federal reviewers evaluating my program, my feeling is that anyone who receives Head Start 
dollars should be under the same criteria. New York City ignores the federal performance 
standards. Until we get politics out of people wanting to run the program for day care, we will 
definitely have problems in terms of partnerships. My colleagues in day care need to have 
training and all the other kinds of resources that Head Start has. I do not mind sharing as long 
as we are on an equal basis in terms of quality. What also bothers me about 2003 in terms of 
credentials for teachers is that in New York City my teachers now have to be certified. 

Question: My question is more of a reflection on what I have seen in programs. Collaboration 
is happening in wonderful ways across the country, at the state and local levels. Federal regula- 
tions are not getting in the way. If federal leadership means more money, I am with it. If federal 
leadership means more regulations, either child care would have to look more like Head Start or 
Head Start would have to look more like child care, and we will drive the market in uncomfort- 
able ways. We will get in the way of these partnerships that are happening out there. Could you 
tell me what you mean by federal leadership? 

Schumacher: When I mentioned federal leadership earlier, I was talking in particular about data 
and research, which most people can agree on. Collaboration is certainly happening now, which 
was a major finding of our report. We had expected to come up with a list of specific issues, such 
as a piece of legislation about barriers, that should be changed in reauthorization, but that is not 
what we found. We saw that rnany changes are in progress already. 

However, other changes would be helpful and I lean toward allowing more flexibility. In a 
world of finite resources, and with a mandate, particularly in the child-care programs, to serve 
working families or those in education or training, there is concern. Many state child-care 
subsidy policies get in the way of collaboration because they make it difficult for families to get 
in and stay in the program. The federal leadership has said, "Look, if you are collaborating, you 
can have some more flexibility." I am not sure that the message has gotten out, and it is still 
difficult for states to follow through on that. 

States are worried about being caught serving one parent who is no longer working, when 
they may have a waiting list of 300,000 people. It is definitely one of the constraints, and there 
are ways to allow more flexibility. There are all these barriers: copayment requirements, state-set 
eligibility levels, and frequency of families having to determine child-care availability. These are 
the states' choices. We need some federal leadership to say that it is okay to be more flexible, but 
the mentality of the program is not based on a collaborative approach. There have been many 
efforts in the last few years, with Head Start collaboration directors and QUILT. Head Start has 
done a lot to promote collaboration, but there could be more. Some of it comes down to the 
nitty-gritty rules, and we just need a signal giving states more flexibility with their programs. 

Takanishi: We will use the last part of this session to talk about what we see in the future, and 
what are the next steps. It is obvious that collaboration is difficult, but on the other hand, there 
are ways to do it well. There is experience that we can share and learn from. The National 
Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) has information on their website. They recently com- 



Er|c 



659 



653 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



pleted a 50-state survey looking at legislation state-by-state to find out how programs can better 
work together. That resource has been useful for some people, and I recommend it to you. 

Clearly what NCSL's analysis shows, depending on one's spiritual orientation, is that either the 
devil or God is in the details. 

To keep us from falling into great despair, we thought it would be useful to talk about what is 
on the horizon and about pieces of relevant proposed legislation with a possibility of passage 
either this year or in the immediate coming years. This includes some of the training, collabora- 
tion, compensation, and regulatory issues. TTie handouts here arrayed the proposals as to what 
we know and looked at the different provisions and how the proposals compare. I encourage 
people to make their views and experiences known to the individuals who are making these 
proposals. I would like to underscore the word proposals. These are what people are saying they 
want to do, but they may change their minds with some input. 

Schumacher: The President recently announced an initiative to promote early literacy. What 
was interesting about that in terms of integration is that he has discussed proposals around 
Head Start and child care. There were items mentioned about integration, increased training for 
Head Start people on literacy, and inviting child-care people to be involved in that training. 

There was also emphasis on the Head Start side about putting items in the child-care legislation 
reauthorization to require more measurement of progress and more focus on quality. Unfortu- 
nately, there are no new dollars for any of these initiatives. The handout shows the provisions of 
the Bush administration plan, the final House legislation on child care and welfare, and the 
Senate bills that are currently in play. From where you sit, what would help states with collabo- 
ration in early education? What would be helpful to move people forward? 

We have the provisions of the Kennedy, Gregg, Murray, and Voinovich legislation, the Early 
Gare and Education Act. We expect this piece to go forward at the same time as the Senate 
Health, Education, Labor and Pensions (HELP) Gommittee considers the statutory requirements 
of the Ghild Gare and Development Fund (GGDF). The Finance Gommittee is meeting today; 
they set the mandatory money for GGDF, which is obviously important. The HELP Gommittee 
has not met yet; it will probably meet in July. They provide all the provisions of the actual 
statute, so it is an important committee. Senator Kennedy is the chair of that committee. He has 
filed this legislation, so we expect it to go forward at the same time. 

The Early Gare and Education Act will be administered by the Department of Health and 
Human Services and the Department of Education through a joint agreement. States would need 
to apply to receive funds. In order to do so, they would have to put together a state council or 
appoint an existing council if there is one already. Some states are ahead of the game and have 
developed a coordinated plan of early care and education for the system, including how they 
will get there, how to measure it, and what they will do to improve the school readiness for all 
children. 

There is a menu of allowable activities to promote early learning including professional 
development linked to compensation. This was a big part of the discussion in the drafting. 
People felt strongly that there had to be this link, and it looks like it got into the final language. 
Funds could be used for public awareness campaigns, parent education, and evaluation, but 
they do not have to use the funds for any one of these purposes. They obviously have to do 
some of them. Gonceivably, a state could do public awareness and not professional develop- 
ment, but the reviewers of the grant would have to decide whether that was adequate. 

The other major highlight is that bonus funds are set aside that would be used as an incentive 
for states to demonstrate measurable child outcome improvements. Gongressional representa- 
tives and senators got excited about the Education Reform Act and the idea of being able to 
measure outcomes. As they start to look at preschool education now as the next step, we see that 
issue arising as something they think is essential. 

This particular provision would have the National Academy of Sciences and other major 
federal research organizations develop recommendations for how to best measure child out- 



O 

ERIC 



654 



660 



MISCELLANEOUS 



comes. States could use those recommendations in their design or submit an application for 
something else. Many states have said they wanted this provision for some money that they 
could use as "glue money." They want to be able to do planning, and they want to be able to 
pull their programs together, so they need federal money that is not tied to a particular program. 
We would like to talk about how this would be useful for your states, whether this is something 
that would act as a catalyst for collaborative activities, and whether there are concerns about it. 

Takanishi: I would like to add that a number of people have talked about which child out- 
comes would be measured. There is a provision for the National Academy of Sciences to look at 
which outcomes should be measured and how they should be measured. 

Schumacher: It was part of the drafting, and it was something that people pushed hard for. If 
one looks at the research that is out there now, there is no consensus on how best to do this. It is 
in flux. 

Comment: Having worked with child outcomes in Head Start for some time now. Head Start 
needs to be proactive. We should have by now the 2nd year of our outcomes work, the 1st year 
being a quasi-experimental year. Every program must have measured child outcomes. It is 
important that Head Start federal and local staff with outcomes experience be part of the 
collaborative outcomes discussion, not just the Academy of Sciences, who might come up with 
something that does not resemble anything we have had experience with before. 

Question: We just answered an RFP and chose an outcome measure that was in Creative 
Curriculum. One picks it, and that is it. They will implement it in August and it will be used 
within 45 days of the child starting kindergarten. They will eventually give funding allocations 
on that. This year, they are even including the checklist as part of the coalition's funding alloca- 
tion. As someone has already said, it is an irrelevant checklist because it is done differently in 
every district, but they are using it anyway. 

Comment: One of the items of concern in this provision is that once implemented, it would be 
20% of the total funds. That would obviously be a major incentive for states to go this route. 

One would want to make sure it was a productive measure, and that a situation would not arise 
where someone did a 50-state chart saying that these states are improving and these are not. 
Whether that is a meaningful measure or not would obviously be important. 

Comment: It is already being implemented. A good group was working on it. I appreciate their 
expertise, and it is being implemented right now. They are conducting training across the state 
right now. 

Question: The problem with all of these assessment systems, even the ones that Head Start is 
using, is that they are teacher administered. As soon as states are put on this system, programs 
will not want to take the children who are difficult to serve because their scores will not look 
good, and teachers may feel a need to inflate scores when they rate children. It is a difficult bind 
that we are all put in that is required by the President or the SZ-2566 legislation, in order to 
create an assessment system. If money can be taken away based on the outcomes, it is difficult to 
see how everyone will administer them fairly. 

Schumacher: There are many important issues under the rubric of child assessment. We have 
certain provisions in place already, but how the different fields, including the provider field and 
scientific field, respond to those provisions and attempt to modify them will be key in terms of 
children's outcomes. The Academy will offer one way of doing it, but it is not the only way. It 
clearly is an issue that everybody should pay attention to. 




655 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Comment: I have another point about state councils. Special education calls for developmental 
state councils to set up an early infant and toddler system. Those have been invaluable to states 
because it is mandated membership, and it forced the different departments and entities to 
come together and sit at the table. One issue is that they revised the councils and there are 
different opinions from state to state. There is some incredible value in having requirements set 
by a council. 

Schumacher: Provisions are an interesting issue. The advisory councils right now are involved 
in helping write the plan; what is not clear and what would be interesting to have new ideas on 
is how to keep them involved over time. It is not laid out, and we are trying to come up with 
ideas. 1 would be interested in your councils' ongoing roles in monitoring the progress, perhaps 
in reviewing research reports about how your states are doing on their goals and coming up with 
policy changes. There is also an option to have the plan that the state submits for this be the 
same as their Child Care and Development Fund plan. States have to submit their plans every 
2 years to the Child Care Bureau, so that is a way that has been recognized for states to integrate. 

Takanishi: I would like to thank Schumacher, Selden, and Sowa for their presentations. The 
whole idea is to widen the disciplines and perspectives that are presented at this conference, and 
today we have heard from a number of people trained in public policy analysis and public 
administration. Their training and perspectives are useful to the work that each of us does. 





656 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Successful Transitions to School: Factors That 
Dramatically Increase the Success of Former Head 
Start Children in Kindergarten Through Third Grade 

CHAIR: Robin Gaines Lanzi 

PRESENTERS: Sharon L. Ramey, Craig Thomas Ramey 

Robin Gaines Lanzi: This discussion centers around findings from the National Head Start 
Public School Early Childhood Transition Demonstration Study. This study was a 4-year study 
on the importance of children's transition from Head Start to public school. This project was 
launched to test the value of extending comprehensive Head Start-like supports "upward" 
through the first 4 years of elementary school. Intervention and supports were provided in four 
main components: family support services, parent involvement, activities to facilitate develop- 
mentally appropriate approaches to education, and health services. This project, administered 
by the Head Start Bureau of the Administration of Children, Youth and Families, funded 31 local 
Transition Demonstration Programs in 30 states and the Navajo Nation from the 1991-1992 to 
1997-1998 school years. 

This longitudinal study involved over 7,500 former Head Start children, more than 4,000 
non-Head Start children in the same classrooms, and more than 450 public schools. Data 
included baseline and then annual assessments of children's academic performance (based on 
school record reviews) and standardized test performance, interviews with children's primary 
caregivers, children's own perceptions of their adjustment to school, ratings of the school 
climate, ratings from classroom teachers and school principals, annual observations of partici- 
pating classrooms, and local site visits by an interdisciplinary team. In addition to standardized 
tools, a number of open-ended questions and qualitative data from local site evaluations 
(including participant observation and ethnographic data) were obtained prospectively. Census- 
level data and community data also were collected about local schools, school systems, and 
neighborhoods. The social-political climate also made many major transitions over the course of 
this project, spanning the presidency years of both former Presidents George Bush and Bill 
Clinton. During this time, major welfare reform occurred, Head Start expanded its research base 
and adopted more rigorous Program Performance Standards, and the concept of "transition 
supports" and "developmentally appropriate practices" both became widely endorsed concepts 
by early childhood educators. In addition, a national group was convened to consider the future 
of Head Start research and the most pressing issues to study. 

Based on the national 31 -site randomized trial of extending Head Start-like services and 
supports from kindergarten through third grade, we have identified many former Head Start 
children who had highly successful transition-to-school experiences. In general, these children 
are characterized by good social-emotional skills, performing at national level or above on 
standardized tests of reading and mathematics, reporting that they enjoy school and do well in 
school, and having supportive and involved parents. Many of these children came from homes 
with multiple challenges and/or schools with serious administrative and financial constraints. 

Our discussion today will focus on the different types of challenges faced by former Head 
Start children and their families, and the factors most closely associated with "beating the 
statistical odds." To put this in context, Sharon Ramey will provide a brief overview of the 
project and findings. Craig Ramey will provide a description of how we are operationalizing 
children s successful transitions in terms of social, academic, and familial components. 

Sharon Ramey: This particular study presented some major findings that caused us to pause 
about some of the well-known "facts" about former Head Start children. I want to highlight 





657 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/ CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



these as part of the introduction. One is the fade-out effect. It is not clear that there were ever 
compelling and adequate data that fade-out is a true phenomenon, although what probably is 
true is that children from Head Start-eligible families face a lot of increasing challenges as they 
get older. But this study was motivated by the desire to prevent fade-out ^ to have former Head 
Start children maintain the gains into public school (as described in the Congressional authori- 
zation for this study). 

Indeed, what we have found is that overwhelmingly, the majority of these former Head Start 
children enter school initially below national average and in kindergarten and first grade 
especially. In second and third grade, they continued to show progress and the progress they 
show relative to national norms places them by the end of second or third grade well into the 
average performance on all of our outcome measures, including reading, math, and social 
adjustment. 

These are children who are not necessarily stars and in some of our classrooms they are not 
doing quite as well as nonpoverty peers in the same classroom. But they are not falling way out 
of the range of normality of performance. On average, even when they enter school, they are 
showing continued gains, if you will. Schools are helping these former Head Start children on 
average. 

Now, our sample is limited or perhaps selective for two main reasons. First, the sites com- 
peted nationally and were required to complete the application during a relatively short amount 
of time over the summer. We did look at the kind of communities that applied for grants and on 
average they have more resources as evidenced by census bureau indicators. These are, therefore, 
communities that have somewhat higher resources to be able to develop a competitive applica- 
tion in a short time and enact the intervention. 

Further, the Request for Proposals (RFP) included a detailed description of the intervention, 
including the four main components and specifications of what needed to be included. It 
provided basically the blueprint for what was then and still now is the most articulated 
conceptualization of what children need to do well in the early years. Also, in many cases, when 
schools found out that they were randomly assigned to the control condition, they were able to 
garner the resources to put in place what was virtually identical to the treatment group condi- 
tion. 

What the project showed that was a bit disappointing, although understandable upon 
reflection for the reasons just described, is that children in the intervention group did not 
perform a lot better than those in the randomly assigned control group. When we look at our 
control schools, in at least one third of the sites they enacted interventions equal to or greater 
than the funded one. In fact, it turned out the competition or the quality of supports extended 
to the control schools and children were greatest in the sites that enacted the best intervention. 
Often the people who enact good interventions are the kind of people who are kind and 
generous and they allow some of their staff or teacher training programs to be open to anyone, 
including teachers in the control condition. 

There was no prohibition or denial of services and supports to children in the so-called 
typical "untreated" setting. It then becomes difficult, even when you have a good design, to say 
that the control condition is untreated. What we did was further explore the kinds of supports in 
place in the children s lives that led to success because across the 31 sites there is not a major 
treatment effect. 

What was exciting about this proposal, and especially rewarding for me, was that we did not 
pick one and only one outcome. We did not decide it was going to be something like just IQ or 
just achievement tests or just the teachers' ratings of the children. What we did was develop a 
multi perspective, multidimensional definition of what it means to succeed in school and have a 
successful transition. Craig Ramey is going to describe to you this definition of what it means to 
be a successful child in the first 4 years of elementary school. 



658 




MISCELLANEOUS 



Craig Ramey: I would like to begin by saying that I believe that the world has become more 
complicated than some of our standard research designs are now taking into account. Our task 
as researchers interested in finding out how to be helpful to children and families is not to try to 
force programs into an artificially constrained research design. Our task is to increase our 
sophistication about research design and measurement so that we can figure out how these 
programs work. With that said, there are a number of conceptual issues that we in this consor- 
tium discussed at great length. 

In 1991 when we first met, it was a meeting held in Washington in a hotel not far from here. 
About 500 people showed up who were the leaders, leaders in Head Start programs, schools, 
and universities involved in carrying out this project. There were different understandings of 
what was about to ensue. From that initial conversation, we collectively crafted a thoughtful, 
functional consortium in which we invented some rules for how to make decisions and how to 
explore issues in a timely way to arrive at a rationale for why a given course of action was being 
taken. I want to thank the Administration on Children, Youth and Families for allowing that 
process of developing the consortium, our bootstrapping of ourselves, which was an important 
sometimes hard-hitting way to deal with difficult controversies, to talk about them, and argue 
them to resolution. Though it seems there was little unanimity on any issue. 

What was clear at the beginning was that we needed to come to some general agreement 
about how we were going to decide whether the children who participated in this, those either 
in the treatment group or in the comparison condition, were successful. We were not dealing 
with just children because the intent of the intervention was to bring Head Start-like services, 
including services for parents, health services, social services, as well as state-of-the-art educa- 
tional practices, into the public schools from kindergarten through third grade. Obviously the 
goals of Head Start, which include achievement in school, go beyond doing well in school by 
any simple measure. 

Now some of you who, again, might know a little bit about my past know that I have 
frequently used, along with other measures, measures of standardized assessments of cognitive 
and intellectual development to mark how well children were doing in various intervention 
conditions. But I am not a strong advocate of relying on those measures alone and I think that it 
is extremely difficult to get an adequate evaluation of a complex process by taking a single 
measure in time. 

Therefore, how then were we to conceptualize success so that the default option was not the 
child's score on a standardized test of reading or math by itself at the end of all of this creative 
and extremely difficult work on the part of what turned out to be more than 7,000 children and 
450 public schools? It was a massive effort! 

At a conceptual level, the National Transition Research Consortium endorsed a definition of 
"successful transitions" for children that emphasizes multiple, interactive components: integrat- 
ing good academic and cognitive development with social adjustment, positive feelings about 
school and learning, and mutually supportive relationships among children, families, and 
schools. Following on this conceptualization of transition as a multifaceted construct, a 
multiperspective definition of transition-to-school was developed. Six indicators of successful 
transition were identified and scored in the final year of study participation (which was the 
child's 3rd and 4th years of school). These included the following: (a) that the parent indicated 
the child's academic and overall adjustment to school were good; (b) that the child indicated his 
or her own adjustment to school was good, by saying they liked school and thought they did 
well in school; (c) that the teacher indicated satisfactory school adjustment; (d) that the teacher 
indicated satisfactory academic adjustment, comparing the child to others in the child's class- 
room and to grade-level expectations; (e) that by objective standardized assessments of reading 
skills, the child's achievement in reading was at or above the national average based on national 
norms; and (f) that by objective standardized assessments of math skills, the child's achievement 
in math was at or above the national average. Having five of the six indicators classified the child 
as being in the successful-transition-to-school group. 




665 



659 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Dichotomous indicators (yes = criterion was met; no = criterion was not met) were created 
for each of the six indicators and then summed to obtain an overall transition score (range 0 to 
6). The transition scores were then divided into three categories: (a) highly successful transition 
(score of 5 or 6); (b) moderately successful transition (transition score of 2, 3, or 5); and 
(c) poor transition (transition score of 0 or 1). Thus, to be classified as having achieved a 
"highly successful transition," the child had to be broadly judged as having made a good 
adjustment to school and having exhibited an average to above average achievement in key 
academic areas. We ended up with about 30% of the total sample being classified as highly 
successful. Now if you think about this from a perspective of just a few years earlier where these 
children were expected to have great difficulty in school, 30% of those being highly successful is 
a substantial amount. 

Interestingly, when we look at the overall sample, there were only about 14% of the children 
who were rated by these criteria as making a poor transition to school. Only 14% of the children 
did not meet the criteria of being successful, so I want to reinforce something that Sharon said 
earlier. Interestingly, a high percentage of these children, based on national norms, are doing 
well. Bear in mind that some of these sites are in places like Montgomery County here in 
Maryland where you have sort of the Lake Woebegone phenomena where the average child is 
well above average. We will be talking a little bit more in a moment about some of the contex- 
tual factors that have to be taken into account. 

Question: Could you speculate about a design that would be more likely to identify treatment 
effects? 

S. Ramey: Yes, 1 will speculate about it because we have probably done more thinking about 
this than anything that I have tried to wrestle to the ground conceptually for a while. It may be 
that it is a level-of-analysis problem where I would recommend selecting sites randomly to serve 
as treatment or comparison sites. That would likely attenuate some of the more obvious 
mechanisms for what Susan Gray a long time ago called horizontal diffusion when she was 
referring to program sort of leakage out to other places in the community. That is the best I can 
come up with at this point. 

Now that does not make this area any different from any other area. If you want to test 
whether a particular pediatric regimen works or not or you want to test whether a particular 
pharmacological agent works or not, you have some of those same issues. I just think in this 
case that — and this is a left-handed compliment — the people who wrote the RFP were just 
brilliant. They managed to capture in the RFP such a clear description of the consensus in the 
field of what young children from Head Start backgrounds needed that if you were not one of 
the schools, but you were a resourceful principal or a resourceful teacher, you could go and try 
to broker those services some other way. 

Lanzi: When we conducted analyses based on the successful transition categorization, we found 
that children of caregivers not born in the United States were nearly twice as likely to experience 
a highly successful transition as children of U.S.-born caregivers. This association did not appear 
to be related to the language spoken in the home. Therefore, it may be a reflection of a different 
attitude toward school and learning on the part of the families. We also found that the majority 
of the primary caregivers in the "highly successful families had college degrees. In addition, 
children of families experiencing greater and more chronic poverty were less likely to experience 
highly successful transitions and were more likely to experience poor transitions. Similarly, 
children whose families moved more often during the early school years were less likely to 
experience highly successful transitions and more likely to experience poor transitions. 

We conducted similar analyses to identify "successful families." This involved running a series 
of analyses to develop a typology of former Head Start families as they enter school. The general 




660 



666 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Strategy used to develop the family typology included 15 variables known to describe relevant 
family characteristics: percent receiving AEDC, percent receiving SSI, percent employed full-time, 
mean percent of poverty, percent finished high school, mean caregiver age (when child entered 
school), percent positive depression screen, percent with chronic health problem that interferes 
with parenting duties, percent with father active in child's life, percent with mother absent from 
child's life, mean number of children, percent bom outside the United States, percent reporting 
a language other than English as the primary language spoken in the home, percent of families 
who have moved two or more times in the past year, and percent of families who were homeless 
in the past year. 

The data set was randomly divided into two equal groups. The cluster procedure was then 
applied to each data set, using the same 15 variables to determine if similar solutions were 
obtained. The findings from this analysis indicate that, among the families participating in this 
National Transition Demonstration Study, there are remarkably clear distinctions, with seven 
different family types. Interestingly, the largest group, 42%, is what we refer to as the "resource- 
ful" families. These are families in which they were characterized by having two parents in the 
home, the mother and the father, and the father was active in parenting. Not only did he live at 
the home, but he also was active in his parenting duties. They had primarily a college education 
or some college and were at higher income levels. 

Thirty percent of the families were characterized as being single-parent welfare families. They 
were on AFDC at the time, SSI, and it was mainly the mother who was the single parent. The 
next one was the foreign-language families and that was 11%. They somewhat paralleled our 
high-resource families in terms of the composition of their home. What brought them out of the 
cluster analysis was their place of birth and the language that was spoken in the home, which 
was a foreign language. Then the next highest was 6% with our highly mobile families, and what 
discriminated them was whether or not they moved two or more times in the past year. We 
found that the break off began when they moved at least twice in the past year. Interestingly, the 
next group of families was characterized by the mother not being active in the child's life; that is, 
she did not live in the home and she did not help with parenting activities. These families 
tended to have older caregivers and more primary caregivers with health problems. Finally, the 
last two family types that we found were the chronic health problems and the homeless ones at 
3% each. 

If you take that way of grouping the families and looking at the dynamics of what is going on 
within their home and compare it to the transition-to-school grouping as Craig defined, you 
find that the highly resourceful families and the foreign-language families had proportionally 
more children with successful transitions than families in the other family types. 

One other way in which we have looked at what was successful was solely based on academic 
achievement. Nancy Robinson and Rich Weinberg, along with Sharon and Craig Ramey and 
myself, examined the children's academic achievement. Specifically, we examined which 
children performed in the top 3% in terms of their reading and math skills. We found that these 
children were more likely to have families with somewhat higher resource levels, fewer stressors, 
and parents who endorsed more responsive and nonrestrictive parenting styles than did other 
Head Start families. We believe that these academically talented former Head Start children 
represent an important group who are likely to benefit from increased early learning and 
language opportunities, as well as other academic enrichment activities. 

There is one last set of interesting findings that I would like to present relating to the analyses 
based on the child's perspective. Craig Ramey talked about looking from the child's perspective. 
This is one of the few times that we have asked kindergarten children what they think about 
school. As you can imagine, children love to talk and are open. They will let you know what they 
think and they sure did let us know. 

About 7% of the children indicated that they did not think they were doing well in school 
and did not like school during kindergarten. If you think about what the course of 3 to 4 years 




661 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



can do to a child who does not like school and does not think he or she is doing well — how 
much effort will the child put into school? We found just those two questions alone were able to 
predict which children in third grade were not doing well in school on standardized academic 
and social adjustment measures. Talking with children, finding out about their likes, dislikes, 
and feelings will provide a wealth of information about what is going in the lives of children 
both in the classroom and outside the classroom, even in kindergarten. 

Question: For the children who expressed that they were not doing well in school, did you ask 
them how they knew they were not doing well? Was it something the teachers say or was it 
something their mothers say that makes them feel that they are not doing well? Did you get a 
sense of that? 

Lanzi: It would have been nice if we could, but the short answer is no. It was a questionnaire 
that Sharon Ramey developed with colleagues from the University of Washington. Children are 
asked "how well do you like school." The children respond on a 3-point likert scale from not at 
all to a whole lot. What was so amazing was the children who did not like school and said they 
are not doing well also tended to have a lot of other issues. They were a little less likely to think 
they got along well with peers, a little less likely to like their teacher, a little less likely to say that 
they were trying hard. But their intelligence or their academic ability, their receptive language 
skills, their reading skills, and their math skills were not below the other children when they 
entered kindergarten. Therefore, these were not children who were already different. We could 
not find any ways that the children who had a bad kindergarten experience had qualities at the 
time they entered school that were different from the other children, and it was not that their 
families did not value school. That did not differentiate them. They had bad kindergarten 
experiences and, again, we do not know the full reason for that, but it was highly predictive of 
their progress in school. 

Question: I was wondering if anybody plans to conduct a follow-up of this sample? 

S, Ramey: There is no extended foIIow-up. We thought that would have been a wonderful 
opportunity in the sites that implemented the strongest programs. We would love to go see how 
those children are now doing in seventh and eighth grades. 

C, Ramey: We learned a fair amount from this study and a lot of people put their hearts and 
souls into it and the data and all the supporting documentation have been archived. We hope 
that other people will continue to use these data to ask important questions. 

Lanzi: The public use tape is available through Westat. 

C, Ramey: The good news is that I think these findings are absolutely contradictory to what 
Head Start has lived with since 1968 when the Westinghouse Learning Report said that fade-out 
was the characteristic of the effects of Head Start. I mean that study was not a randomized trial, 
it used a post hoc matching, and so whether the phenomena ever existed is in question. These 
results, I think, have to be understood in light of being contradictory to that central thesis. Then 
they raise a whole host of issues about appropriate research designs for investigating complex 
phenomena, understanding the variation in families and program and the contribution of those 
variations to changes across time. I think that it may have taught us also that we should have 
come to the end of an era of one kind of understanding of what the gold standard is. We also 
need to bootstrap our own competencies and try to be more in tune with the complexities of the 
way the world is working 



662 



668 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Lanzi: I agree. I would like to add that the dedication of project and school personnel was 
commendable, and yielded dynamic and effective programs, even in the presence of significant 
practical, programmatic, and policy obstacles. 

A key issue is whether there are ways to apply the lessons learned from the National Head 
Start-Public School Early Childhood Transition Demonstration Projea so that other children, 
families, and schools will benefit. Examples of pathways to better-than-expected outcomes 
include children who leave special education and perform well in regular classroom settings, 
children who shift from early poor adjustment to positive adjustment by second or third grade, 
children for whom English is a second language who show rapid gains in academic achieve- 
ment, and academically gifted former Head Start children. Children from the most impover- 
ished homes, including those who were homeless, without a regular mother or mother figure, or 
from families where the primary caregiver had serious health impairment (including chronic 
depression) also show variation in how well they adjusted to school. 

If you are interested in accessing the final report for the study, it is available at: http:// 
www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/core/pubs_reports/hs/transition_study/trans_study.html 






ERIC 



669 



663 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



POSTER SYMPOSIUM 

Issues in Partnering With Communities to Improve 
the Lives of Young Children and Their Families 

CHAIR: Hiram E. Fitzgerald 

PRESENTERS: Mary Ann Walker, Elsa N. Brizzi, Jenine Mescher Nolan, Rosemary Flanagan, 
Kimberly Spencer, Ellen Horvath, Celene E. Domitrovich, Anne M. Doerr, Alison Rosen, 

Mary Deluccie, Marcia Manter, Mary Mills 

■ The Golden SLPA Project: A Head Start/Community College/State 
University Collaboratively Developed AA Degree Training Program 
for Speech-Language Pathology Assistants (SLPA) 

Mary Ann Walker, Gabriella Abarca, Elsa N. Brizzi, Ellen Horvath, Judy K. Montgomery, 
Jenine Mescher Nolan 

■ Head Start-University Partnerships: 

Common Goals and Unique Perspectives 

Celene E. Domitrovich, Anne M. Doerr, Alison Rosen 

■ Beyond the Child Development Associate Credential: 

A Collaborative Model of Educating Head Start Teachers 
to Work With Children and Families in the 21st Century 

Mary Deluccie, Marcia Manter 

■ Collaboration Between Occupational Therapy and Head Start 

Mary Mills 



Hiram Fitzgerald: I have been the director of a graduate program that focuses on university and 
community collaborations for the past 10 years at Michigan State University. In December, I 
became Assistant Provost and I am responsible for outreach. Outreach is defined as community/ 
university collaboration across the domains of research, teaching, and service. 

This focus on outreach is not unique to the university. The scholarship of engagement is 
being discussed in academic institutions nationally. Principles of practice are developing and 
emerging. However questions still remain. How do you engage communities effectively? How 
do you deal with multicultural issues while engaging communities, particularly when 
multiculturalism includes race, socioeconomic status, and the mral and urban locations where 
people live and carry out their programs? 

This session features four examples of university/community collaboration from Pennsylva- 
nia, California, Louisiana, and Kansas, across the domains of research, teaching, and service. 
Each person will comment on his or her program. Hopefully, they will make provocative 
statements that will engage us in conversation. 

I have a couple of questions for you to think about during this session. What have we learned 
about community/university partnerships that have made them successful? What do we now 
know about engaging communities that we did not know before? What have we learned about 
barriers to engagement? How should we justify university involvement in community collabora- 
tions and community involvement with universities? 







664 



670 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Ellen Horvath: We were delighted to be approached by Judy Montgomery, past president of the 
American Speech and Hearing Association, with an idea for a partnership. The dean of Cerritos 
College approved the idea and that was the beginning of the Golden SLPA Project: A Head Start/ 
Community College/State University Collaborative Training Program for Speech-Language 
Pathology Assistants. The Golden SLPA Projea is a collaboratively developed AA-degree training 
program for Speech Language Pathology Assistants (SLPA). 

We already had a history of partnership with the Developing a Partnership (DAP)/Parent 
Early Childhood Career and Employment Program, in which students who were referred by a 
Head Start grantee enrolled in classes that would begin them on their college career. Some of the 
students who went into the Golden SLPA Projea had taken 12 units or so in the DAP program. 

Successful community partnerships develop a common vision and mission to create solu- 
tions for identified problems. The Golden SLPA projea targeted a primary and a secondary 
problem. First there is a shortage of speech-language professionals available to provide services 
for Head Start enrollees. A subset of the primary problem is that those speech-language profes- 
sionals who are available have not been trained to provide developmentally, culturally, and/or 
linguistically appropriate services for young children. 

The secondary problem addressed is the support of Head Start families moving from welfare 
to viable work options that support self-sufficiency. The Golden SLPA project created a sup- 
ported training program for Head Start parents interested in becoming an SLPA. In addition, in 
order to qualify the graduate to receive California State registration as an SLPA, the Cerritos 
College AA-degree curriculum works with California State University bachelor degree programs 
in communication disorders. This gives the graduate the opportunity to work as an SLPA and/or 
continue along a career path leading to a speech-language pathologist license. 

The Golden SLPA projea identified two areas of concern — created a common vision and 
mission — and utilized other elements that support community partnerships. Those elements 
include building on preexisting relationships, leadership, ongoing communication with key 
community constituents, scheduled time to meet, understanding the parameters and resources 
of each partner, and a ripe social/political climate. The project utilizes the movement for student 
voice that grew out of the democratic schools' movement for responsible citizenry on social 
issues. Therefore, the three collaborating agencies, Cerritos College, the Region IX QIC-DS, and 
the Los Angeles County Office of Education embraced the parents as the fourth partner. Parents 
sit on the Advisory Committee and guide the prioritization for specific student support. 

The program included eight new classes and the coordination of several others to make it 
happen within the short time of 9 months. The classes were approved with much assistance 
from the curriculum committee, the Dean's Council, and the State Chancellor's Office. We also 
received tremendous support from Head Start; as we were developing the curriculum, they were 
developing the student base. 

It is eagerly anticipated that the Golden SLPA graduates will work in Head Start classroom 
settings. However, their employability and earnings hinge on individual school district's fiscal 
and human resource decisions. Many Head Start programs have been able to use interagency 
agreements to solidify partnerships that address beneficial special education service delivery 
models for Head Start children with disabilities. The employability, earnings, and benefits to 
children are the topics of future research. 

Since the inception of the Golden SLPA Projea, three other community colleges have linked 
with Head Start programs in an effort to reach out to culturally and linguistically diverse 
students. Documenting successful elements of support for these students, as well as tracking and 
measuring their success in school and employment will provide additional information to 
support replication of the Golden SLPA projea. 

Rosemary Flanagan: I have had four children in Head Start. With the first three there were not 
many opportunities for parents. With the youngest child, however, I was introduced to various 



O 

ERIC 



671 



665 



SYMPOSIA/ROUN DTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



programs, and I was given the opportunity to attend Santa Monica College. If 1 had not received 
positive feedback and encouragement from Head Start, 1 would never have gone back to school. 
After a year at Santa Monica College, 1 started the DAP program, which introduces Head Start 
parents to become preschool teachers or teacher assistants, and 1 received my first 12 units in 
early child development. 1 would not be sitting here today without Head Start and the help of 
Cerritos College. 

Celene E. Domitrovich: The Head Start Bureau encourages the collaboration of university 
faculty with Head Start and Early Head Start programs and views collaboration as a necessary 
first step for any research to be conducted successfully in the Head Start setting. Both groups 
need the knowledge and expertise that the other has to offer. Head Start administrators and staff 
know the most about the children and families they serve, the issues they face, and how to work 
with them in a supportive and respectful way. They know the Head Start priorides and stan- 
dards, and the best ways in which outside individuals or organizations should integrate with 
their system to be most effecdve. Researchers have access to empirical findings and knowledge of 
how to evaluate programs and services. Many universities are developing innovadve training 
models and evaluating existing models that have the potential to contribute to the professional 
development of Head Start staff. Research is essendal because it benefits Head Start pardcipants 
directly and it helps justify the program, which ensures long-term sustainability. 

1 will present one example of a University-Head Start collaboration that resulted in the 
successful implementation and evaluation of the Promoting Alternative Thinking Strategies 
(PATHS) program for preschool children and to discuss the essential elements that made this 
partnership and the program a success. PATHS is a teacher-taught social-emotional curriculum 
designed to improve mental health outcomes of Head Start children by teaching them emo- 
tional awareness, self-control, and communication skills. The University-Head Start partnership 
involved in this project adapted the elementary version of the PATHS Curriculum and imple- 
mented it in 20 classrooms within two Head Start programs in Pennsylvania. 

1 work at the Prevention Research Center at Penn State University. Penn State Prevention 
Research Center had a social-emotional curriculum for elementary school children called 
Promoting Alternadve Thinking Strategies (PATHS), created by Mark Greenberg and Carol 
Kusche. They always had a goal to develop a preschool version and we knew that Head Start was 
a good fit to do this. In collaboration with Head Start programs, we would gain insight into how 
best to meet the needs of Head Start families and do this adaptation. 

Creating a strong partnership is a challenging task but successful partnerships share two 
essential characteristics: respect and investment. Each party involved in the partnership needs to 
understand and respect the other. Head Start directors and researchers have different goals and 
needs. It is essential to find common ground and align in this area before moving forward. This 
starts by finding a common language, which is followed by setting mutual goals, sharing 
information, and clarifying expectations. Investment is the second characteristic of a successful 
partnership. New programs or initiatives often require extra time and resources. Therefore the 
partners need to be completely committed to the endeavor on all of these levels. With the 
foundation of respect and investment, University-Head Start partnerships are in a better position 
to be flexible which is also essential at the beginning of a new program or project. 

When a University-Head Start partnership involves the implementation of a service or 
program, the partnership must work together to ensure high-quality implementation and long- 
term sustainability. It is important to maximize the integration of the new service within the 
established Head Start program, including the activities or content of the program, the nature of 
the training and supervision provided, and the monitoring system that ensures the ongoing 
quality of the activities. 




666 



672 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Mary Delucde: My project was initially funded by the U.S. Department of Education, through 
funds for the improvement of postsecondary education. That investment of a little over 
$240,000 was critical in getting us started. I am happy to report that after the 3-year period, this 
was a self-sustaining, self-funded program. 

We redesigned the undergraduate early childhood teacher education program to meet the 
needs and unique strengths of Head Start teachers in the state of Kansas. Primarily through 
video conferencing, we offer more than 71 credit hours of professional coursework in early 
childhood education. Forty-one of those hours are based on the current curriculum. It is the 
same material that is completed by on-campus traditional students, slightly modified in delivery 
to better meet the needs of the Head Start faculty. After 3 years, we recognized a need for 
different types of coursework. Consequently, we developed 30 more credit hours of courses, 
including infant/ toddler curriculum, coping with life crises, family communication, and a death 
and dying class. 

I think our program was successful because it was not an exchange model where the univer- 
sity and Head Start offered services for each other. Instead both entities submitted their profes- 
sional expertise and resources, and created a program that was larger than either one of us could 
have done separately. It demanded a great deal of trust and it presented an opportunity to refine 
strong levels of respect for each other and the expertise we all had. 

Fortunately in Kansas over the past decade we have established a strong foundation for those 
types of relationships. In 1992, we established an early childhood education stakeholders group 
across the state, including around 24 agencies. Any services, institutions, or agencies that were 
involved with children and families came together and developed a document titled Quality 
Standards in Early Childhood Education. Thanks to that foundation, we were able to hit the ground 
running in the design, delivery, and then evaluation of our project. 

In addition, at Kansas State University we recognized.the need to develop a professionally 
sound and academically strong program, which incorporated the Head Start perspective. Head 
Start was interested in improving the oral and written communication skills of their staff. We 
were not aware of this objective in Head Start when we began the program. It was identified 
during the first semester that was spent designing courses and trying to determine what aspects 
of current courses were appropriate and what needed to be dropped, revised, or replaced. 

The federal monies were critical, but we also had the expertise of Head Start staff at the local 
agency and state level, and faculty with expertise in secondary education, elementary education, 
special education, clinical psychology, and speech and language pathology; all working in an 
integrated fashion. There are not many stand-alone experiences in the courses. They are se- 
quenced and many assignments carry across courses, either taken at the same time or in subse- 
quent semesters. 

Another important element that the Head Start agencies provided was on-site mentoring. 
Every agency with staff in the program agreed to provide on-site support. There was faculty 
serving as facilitators of learning. Head Start staff serving as mentors and supporters, and 
students who were engaged as active coconstructors of knowledge. 

Mary Mills: I am the mental health coordinator at a county community-action agency Head 
Start serving approximately 1400 children with an Early Head Start opening up as well. Our 
project was a service project. The Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center Department 
of Occupational Therapy developed a project to support three courses, which needed to include 
research, clinical reasoning, and community involvement. 

In Head Start we frequently receive referrals where the primary concern is not mental health. 
Issues that present as behavioral problems are a developmental concern; although the child does 
not qualify for mental health services, they are struggling to play and learn successfully. We 
thought that occupational therapy could help us since children's occupation is play. The process 
involved preplanning and dialogue to identify the exact needs and assess if the partnership 
could meet the needs of both agencies. 



Er|c 



673 



667 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



We established a mentoring type model where students entered the classroom in teams; this 
way they could support each other. They developed a saeening instrument specific to this age 
population using elements from a number of tools. The teachers learned to use the instrument 
from occupational therapy students. The team building began from the start when the students 
were able to meet the teacher's needs from the start by allowing them to choose the time and the 
most opportune work style. 

Many times Head Start teachers feel that professionals come into the classroom and "call the 
shots." This project was not developed that way. The occupational therapists presented the 
service and requested teachers' input regarding how to make the program work. The teacher was 
a full partner. 

In the next stage, the teachers and the occupational therapy students collaborated to develop 
activity-based interventions in the classroom. The students explained the theory behind occupa- 
tional therapy and why certain strategies worked. They taught task analysis, sequential skill 
building, and discussed children's activities and behavior. As the children developed the capacity 
to learn new skills, the students were available to help the teachers focus on and understand 
what they were observing. 

It was a successful partnership and it helped the students to value community service in their 
profession. They learned to work within a culturally diverse population, with a new age group, 
and they learned as much from the Head Start teachers as they taught them. 

We have continued this partnership in different ways. Through the years we have adapted a 
slightly different focus each time the students start the program, but we have found the students 
in the field of occupation therapy to be a tremendous resource for the mental health content of 
Head Start. 

Walker: A successful partnership involves the information shared with you during my presenta- 
tion but it cannot happen without a vision, commitment, and passion about the problems that 
you service. 

Linda Share: How is the number of speech and language pathologists limited by ASHA require- 
ments? 

Mary Ann Walker: All 4-year institutions with graduate-level programs in speech pathology 
must have a ratio of one full time professor to six graduate students to retain their accreditation. 
We have a labor-intensive department. 

Share: Do you train paraprofessionals to provide their services in an inclusive environment? 

Comment: Yes. This is an extremely important part of their training. 

Share: Are the paraprofessionals working with children who are not diagnosed addressing 
sensory-integration issues? 

Comment: Yes. Sensory integration and fine motor are the two primary areas. They also help 
teachers identify issues outside those areas. 

Comment: We have difficulty obtaining services for children with sensory-integration issues; 
this is a way of providing services without giving a diagnosis. 

Comment: We also address mental health concerns. We can make early intervention plans and 
begin services immediately upon parent signature. Traditionally, children with pervasive 
developmental delay or suspected autism are included in our mental health area; we can now 
address some of their issues as they go through the evaluation. 



ERIC 



668 



674 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Ji Hyun Kim: What is the approval process for the project? 

Domitrovich: A key aspect of any research/community partnership is that each group has its 
own standards and requirements. At Penn State any research, whether in a lab or in a commu- 
nity setting, must have full Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval. We had our own consent 
form approved by Penn State. Then our partners created a mechanism where teachers obtained 
consent during the process of enrolling students. 

The implementation of the curriculum was a choice the directors made, but families gave 
consent to participate in the evaluation. We also paid participants with part of our funding from 
Head Start. 

Kim: How did you receive funding? 

Anne Docrr: A competitive grant that is announced annually by the Department of Health and 
Human Services. 

Comment: I believe there was a peer review process within Head Start, as with most of their 
grants. 

Fitzgerald: As far as I know, the Head Start system does not have an IRB. 

Alison Rosen: Our agency has a research review process to ensure that the rights of our families 
are respected. The teachers also signed consent forms. The project also had to go through our 
process. 

Comment: There is a general Head Start requirement of informed consent for any activities 
involving children and/or families. 

Kim: What is the funding program? 

Comment: The University Head Start Partnership Grant. It is listed yearly in the federal register. 
Somewhere between 7-11 new grantees are accepted each year and funded for 3 years. There is a 
variety of research in Head Start that is funded by many sources. 

Walker: We hold the training and technical assistance cooperative agreement for Head Start and 
Early Head Start programs in Region Nine. As part of that agreement we were required to 
develop a special project with a grantee, which allowed us to develop the partnership with the 
Head Start program and Cerritos College. There are numerous funding avenues in Head Start 
that support partnerships. 

Comment: The reality is that the project cost more money than the funding grant typically will 
cover and there are unexpected costs. It might not have been so successful if our partners had 
not been invested in it personally, and if they had not been able to find some extra funds to 
manage the unexpected bumps in the road. It takes financial investment as well as emotion and 
time. 

Fitzgerald: At Michigan State University, our project on the national evaluation of Early Head 
Start started with four faculty members, each from a different department. We added more 
faculty members along the way to address our community partner s needs. We now have seven 
faculty involved and four separately funded projects with our community partners. 

Our projects are based on scholarship. We require informed consent procedures, IRB approv- 
als, sound methodology and design, and publishable outcomes. These projects involve all the 



675 



669 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



components of good scholarship. From the faculty member's point of view it is a way to publish 
in academic journals, get grants, and connect with the community in ways that the university 

values. u -1 • u 

These projects can work if there is a vision, work plans, and mission statements built in at the 

beginning and then developed in a shared partnership way. It works if the community partner 
recognizes and understands the need faculty have for good scholarship, and if the faculty 
recognize that the community partner needs outcomes and better programs. 

Comment: Many of my colleagues and 1 have a longstanding concern for the low incidence of 
underrepresented groups in speech pathology. On a national level, the rates are 4% or 5%. 

When the Golden SLPA project surfaced 1 felt it was a tremendous conduit through which we 
could move forward. 

I wrote a grant application for the project under which, minimally, we had to show represen- 
tation of at least 15% of the groups. The SLPA program consists of 67%; it is the highest inci- 
dence of underrepresented groups in California. That would not have occurred without the 
support of Head Start and the visibility of the partnership to our college community. 

Fitzgerald: It is heartening that so many of you are interested in funding opportunities. 1 am 
now managing a number of programs involving partnerships with universities and colleges 
serving special populations: Native Americans, Latinos, and African Americans. The understand- 
ing is that the institutions will work with Head Start programs to do one of three tasks: 

(a) develop models for staff development or teacher training, (b) cultural and language preser- 
vations, and (c) technology. 

The Head Start programs' most prevalent problem is nurturing and retaining teachers even 
though there is money for teachers to come to these institutions and to provide substitutes. 
Second, most of the teachers have reservations and many teachers in programs serving a large 
majority of African American children have difficulty with remedial courses. 

Comment: 1 want to emphasize the building of preexisting relationships. The Los Angeles 
County Head Start program already had tremendous experience in supporting parents who had 
been out of school for an extended period of time; they had low self-esteem and poor skills in 
terms of studying, test taking, writing essays, and so forth. The program provides support for 
those parents by having monthly meetings for tutorials, to help with the financial aid packet, to 
practice taking a multiple choice test, and so forth. They meet every month and address an issue 
for which the students have expressed the need for assistance. Students wanted help to feel more 
comfortable on campus and confident in accessing the resources available to the general campus 
population. 

Flanagan: Most of the students in my class are Latino and African American. We had teachers 
who had to revamp their whole syllabus, their whole teaching style, to accommodate this class. 
For example, in our phonetics class, the women did not have a base in English phoiiemes. Many 
of the phonemes do not exist in their native language. He paired up an Asian or Latino student 
with an English-speaking student. We worked together and he utilized both students instead of 
having the class fail the course. 

Comment: We have also found the origination of learning communities to be successful. We 
take two courses, sometimes related, sometimes unrelated, and the teachers develop common 
goals and objectives. We went through an extremely careful process to hire individuals who 
could be successful teaching at the community college level. We rejected applicants who were 
nationally known and who held Ph.D. degrees because we felt that they could not communicate 
adequately to our students. In addition, 1 have enrolled students having difficulty with phonet- 
ics in the speech clinic on campus. 



67fi 



670 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Pauline Turner: In New MexicO/ we recently finished a 3-year project. One of the goals of the 
project was to recruit Native American and Latino students. Another goal was to make our 
programs more accessible, and more culturally and linguistically responsive, to those students. 

Many of the students had been working in ordinary education settings or programs for a 
number of years. Most of them had never had a college or university experience, and many were 
the first person in their extended family to attend college. 

One of the highly effective strategies was a mentoring program. You can pay tuition, buy 
books, pay for child care, and pay for transportation, but you must have continued support from 
an individual who will help you manage the higher education system. There were six institu- 
tions involved in the project. In one site, they managed to bring in early-childhood profession- 
als from the community as mentors for no pay, and it worked out well. At another institution, 
each student enrolled in a career class, and worked with their mentor/ advisor to develop an 
individualized education plan catered to their needs. 

For students who had never received any formal education, it was important for them to have 
that first experience in their own language. We created a 2-year preprogram in Arizona that was 
built on Navajo language and culture and is taught completely in Navajo. They are now serving 
only Head Start teachers. 

It is a real challenge but it is one of the most rewarding experiences. At a recent conference, 
the Navajo woman hired to work with these institutions and implement these programs, 
stopped during her presentation and started to cry. She said, "This is so moving for me because 
these students never ever would have had a chance to get an education if it had not been for this 
project." 

Kimberly Spencer: I would encourage students not to give up. They should not be embarrassed 
to ask for help because that is important to continue their education. I have worked with 
students to find ways to manage their time and fit in the studying while maintaining the family. 

I made myself available to them. 

Question: For those of you at institutions with associate programs, do students matriculate to 
4-year programs? How easy is the matriculation within your state or system? 

Horvath: The Dean at our institution wisely guided me through those steps as part of the 
curriculum development. By the time our curriculum was approved we were also working 
through the matriculation process. Our program has nine units of speech and language pathol- 
ogy courses that will transfer for people continuing on to 4-year degrees. 

Community college programs, at least in California, are attracting people with bachelor s 
degrees to specific training programs. In the fall, I will have approximately 10 young people who 
have received their bachelor s degrees in communication disorders and want to receive SLPA 
training. The matriculation, back and forth, between institutions is an important piece that 
should be addressed. 

Fitzgerald: In professional programs, one of the barriers to transferring is in the interpretation 
of accreditation standards relative to specific courses. A course with the same tide may not be 
transferable, because it does not have the same content. In our system every state institution is 
autonomous. We are currendy trying to set up 2-year associate degree programs for early 
childhood (0-5 years) across the community college system. It is a real challenge because all the 
4-year insdtutions have different ideas about the content of this course. 

Comment: Community colleges in California have recendy started to offer bachelor s degrees in 
certain fields. I made a point to visit key people and talk to them about our concerns. There has 
been a back and forth and it is working. Those people had concerns about students with 





671 



symposia/roundtables/conversation hours 



bachelor's degrees who might not be accepted in graduate-level programs. It is almost required 
to have a 3.8 or higher to be accepted to a master's program in our field. 

Comment: There are multiple concerns developing and solutions are not easy. Another problem 
is that although Head Start standards specify an AA degree or an AAS degree, one is transferable 
to a bachelor's degree and the other is a dead-end degree. 

Turner: In New Mexico, every piece of coursework articulates to the next level. It has taken us 
about 8 years to do this through the legislation we helped to design. If you have an AA degree 
from any 2-year institution in New Mexico, you can transfer it to any 4-year institution without 
losing any credits. 

Comment: To return to an earlier question, I originally approached Penn State for Early Head 
Start research grants the first year it was required. I began my relationship with the university in 
that way. Before the prevention center existed, I spoke to a person who no longer had time to do 
any of the research I was interested in. Later the prevention center was created. Full-time faculty 
members probably do not have the time to invest in the partnership demands our program 
places on them. 

Comment: Referring to the earlier example of a larger initiative, an individual faculty member 
can join a large study. That is different from a situation where a faculty member is trying to 
respond to approaches from the community. You may want to do the work, but it is time 
consuming and difficult. The one-on-one approach from a local Head Start is challenging to fit 
in with a tenure track position. 

Comment: I think relationships are important; when the opportunity arises to fund a project, 
the relationship has already been established. 

Comment: Exactly. That is why trying to meet some needs of the community is important; 
maybe not the full evaluation that the Head Start requires, but some ongoing relationship 
building is beneficial, and then be ready to respond. 



ERIC 



672 



678 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Improving the Quality of the Workforce 
Through Professional Development 



CHAIR: Gerald Sroufe 

PRESENTER; Linda Espinosa 

RESPONDENTS: Marilou Hyson, Carol Brunson-Day 

■ Standards and Early Childhood Professional Development 

Linda Espinosa 

Gerald Sroufe: I work for the American Educational Research Association. Linda Espinosa will 
present the relationship between professional development and quality of early-childhood 
experiences. Marilou Hyson and Carol Brunson-Day are two individuals who run programs 
designed to improve professional development. They will talk about their programs and 
experiences. We are making the argument that professional development is a reasonable 
intervention strategy for improving the quality of children's experiences. At the end, I will put 
this topic into the context of larger policy and research issues and give the perspective of a 
person outside the field. 

Linda Espinosa will be at Rutgers University in Fall 2002, where she will be the codirector of 
the National Institute for Early Education Research. She is currently a member of the Head Start 
Technical Work Group on Child Outcomes and is a consulting editor for Early Childhood 
Research and Practice and Early Childhood Education Research Quarterly. She also served on the 
National Research Council's panel, which produced the report Eager to Learn: Educating our 
Preschoolers, and much of her presentation will be on that topic. 

Marilou Hyson has written a book called The Emotional Development of Young Children: 
Building on an Emotion Centered Curriculum. She was the editor of the Early Childhood Research 
Quarterly. Her research is focused in three areas of interest to us: early emotional development, 
teacher and parent beliefs concerning early development and learning, and classroom practices 
of early childhood programs. She has been with the National Association for the Education of 
Young Children (NAEYC) since January 2000. She is also a member of the Board of Examiners 
of the National Association for the Accreditation of Teacher Education, which is developing 
standards for child-care teachers. 

Carol Brunson-Day is President and CEO of the Council for Professional Recognition. The 
Council serves as the home of the Child Development Associate National Credentialing Pro- 
gram as well as the National Head Start Fellowship Program. She is been involved in the early- 
childhood profession for many years, including her current work with the human development 
faculty at Pacific Oaks College in Pasadena. She will talk about some research demonstrating 
that professional development programs change behavior, salaries, and expectations. 

Linda Espinosa: I want to primarily talk about the findings and recommendations from the 
report Eager to learn. It was a 3-year, intensive investigation into early-childhood or preschool 
pedagogy, including aspects of professional development and teacher preparation. We initially 
convened in 1997, and we issued the report Eager to Learn in January 2001. This report is 
available on the Web through the National Academy Press (NAP) at www.nap.edu. It can be 
downloaded from the website or one can call them to receive free copies. 

The committee itself was comprised of 17 scholars from a variety of disciplines including 
anthropology, sociology, psychology, and education. There was a range of opinions, back- 
grounds, and perspectives, and we had to reach a consensus. It was one of the most stimulating, 
growth-inducing, and provocative opportunities for me to look at our field. What is the research 




673 



ERIC 



symposia/roundtables/conversation hours 



base and what kinds of recommendations can we make around curriculum and professional 
development? 

The committee had four basic charges. The first charge was to review and synthesize the 
research on early childhood pedagogy. The second charge was to come together and discuss the 
issues. We wanted to focus on the teaching and learning of young children between the ages of 
2 V 2-5 years, with consideration for special populations such as children living in poverty, 
children with limited English proficiency, and children with disabilities. 

The third charge to the committee is the one we will talk about this morning, which is the 
report with a coherent distillation of the knowledge base and its implications for pedagogy, 
training of teachers and child-care professionals, and practice in early-childhood programs. 
Eventually, we will get to the policy implications, although I will not discuss those in any depth. 

I also want to reference some additional literature that has been published since this report 
came out. 

The Frank Porter Graham Child Development Institute at the University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill has recently published studies on the characteristics of the early-childhood 
workforce and teacher preparation as well some other studies that offer additional insight on 
this topic. Some of these studies have confirmed our conclusions and some of them add new 
information. All of the available information that we reviewed converged around a central 
finding. The professional development of teachers is related to the quality of early-childhood 
programs, and program quality predicts developmental outcomes for children. It is nothing 
new, but it is scientifically, empirically supportive, which is important right now. I am sure you 
are all aware of the need to have evidence-based policies and recommendations. The programs 
found to be highly effective in the United States, and the exemplary programs abroad, actively 
engage teachers and provide high-quality supervision. This nuance is included in the set of 
recommendations from Eager to Learn. We know that high-quality teacher preparation is 
important for high outcomes for children. 

In reviewing all of the literature on model programs that have led to long-term improve- 
ments in children's functioning, supervision is another key aspect. In the French system, for 
example, the other feature of effective programs is a well-trained, supervisory body. The teachers 
are not left without a mentor to help that teacher reflect on and continuously improve their 
practices. Those systems have a highly qualified teacher trained in early-childhood education, 
usually with a master's degree, who is the supervisor and coordinator. In the Head Start pro- 
gram, the resource teacher would be the equivalent. 

The first issue to think about when thinking about supervisors for classroom teachers is that 
they are involved in upgrading their own skills. For me personally, that person would need to 
have a master's degree in early-childhood education or child development. Or, there are people 
with Ph.D.s, often through a collaborative relationship with a university, where some faculty 
members work with the teachers in a professional development capacity. One should be 
constantly plugged in to sources of current research and information. The mentoring relation- 
ship centers around dialogue, helping the teacher reflect on what they are doing, and for what 
purposes. A reflective practitioner should be an outcome of that mentoring relationship with the 
supervisor. 

Research shows that teachers are among the most important factors in determining how 
much a young child learns. It seems as though we are seriously pursuing the magic curriculum 
that will solve problems for children who have difficulties learning to read or controlling their 
behavior. This report, the follow-through studies from the 1970s, and a huge cumulative body of 
research point to the fact that there is no single curriculum. 

There is no best pedagogical approach. It is mediated by and influenced come the characteris- 
tics of the teacher. The professional qualities of the teacher, including the professional knowl- 
edge, ability to make good professional judgments, and ability to work collaboratively are the 
characteristics that will determine whether or not the teaching practices are effective, and 



O 

ERIC 



674 



6S0 



MISCELLANEOUS 



children learn what they need to know. Another aspect to this involves the system where those 
teachers reside. There are systemic issues in supporting high-quality teachers. This report and 
other research highlights that improving the quality of the teaching force is a higher priority 
than finding that magic curriculum. 

Question: In your study did you find it important that knowledge and skills include being able 
to articulate a curriculum or a set of goals, which is different from saying there is a perfect one? I 
was recendy in a long conversation with someone who was arguing that in many cases, for 
example in research settings the teachers could not articulate a set of goals. That is problematic 
to argue, and different from looking for a single curriculum. Did any of your results speak'to the 
importance of this? 

Espinosa: Yes. There is a coherence to the approach, and the major goals and objectives for the 
children flow consistently from a central set of beliefs. I will talk about that more when I 
describe the specific aspects of professional development, but we all approach active learning in 
different ways. Every single one of us was a student. We have implicit beliefs about what the 
student and teacher roles are, and how that should be carried out. Many times, what we think is 
the natural order of that teaching/learning relationship is, in fact, not what is best for young 
children. 

There is a need to address those beliefs in professional development. What are the implicit 
beliefs, and how can those be made explicit? How can we help those beliefs to be consistent 
with a coherent, theoretical perspective that what we do builds on itself? That was definitely part 
of the literature. 

Some of the main points we found about teacher qualities were related and that is nothing 
new. Teachers form relationships. It is foundational in early childhood, but it is important to get 
underneath those reciprocal, positively supported relationships between adults and the environ- 
ment they are responsive to and contingent upon children's cues. Creating interactive, reciprocal 
relationships takes training, and is not always a natural capacity of people who go into early 
childhood, although 99.9% will say, "I love children." However, there are some specific, well- 
researched aspects of their behavior that can support a positive relationship, which requires 
training and development. 

Know how to select and teach the big ideas that underlie school learning. By big ideas, we are 
not talking about simple facts because the facts will add up to conceptual understandings, which 
is what the teacher would have in her mind about why she is doing a particular activity. For 
instance, teachers need to understand the value of the scientific approach. It is important for 
children to propose ideas, questions, hypotheses, and the scientific method. They should think 
about what they are going to experience and make some predictions. 

Collect information, collect data, and then review or analyze tliose data. Children can think 
deductively about the information they have been supplied. I am not going into the curricular 
recommendations, but one of the other major findings of this report is that young children can 
think conceptually and abstracdy, and they can reason deductively at younger ages than we 
thought if provided the right opportunities. 

Therefore, teachers have to be skilled in how to promote that thinking at higher levels. We 
have heard about school readiness and what will be expected of children. Teachers must have 
that broad base of a liberal arts background around disciplines— math, science, social studies— 
all those subjects that constitute general education courses. They may be required to know how 
to interpret children's behavior and how to interpret children's knowledge from their behavior. 

I want to talk about appreciating similarities and differences in children's home environ- 
ments. When one views a child's behavior, one should accurately interpret how it fits into the 
context of that child's previous learning, which varies by culture, community, and ethnicity. In 
the schools where I work, teachers frequently misinterpret children's behavior as being willfully 



er|c 



681 



675 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



defiant. That is not what that behavior means in the context of how that child is reared in the 
home environment. We need to better understand and respect those differences as they come 
into the educational environment because a 4-year-old or a kindergarten child does not follow a 
three-step direction. It does not mean they are being willfully disobedient. They may truly lack 
the processing ability to listen to, understand, remember, and do one, two, and three. 1 have 
spoken with some kindergarten programs in the country that expect children to be able to 
follow five-step dirertions upon entering into kindergarten. Think about that for a minute. If 1 
were to issue a five-step direction, how many of us could do it? 

The recommendation from the panel based on everything that 1 have said, is that each group 
of children in an early childhood education or child-care program should have at least one 
teacher with a bachelor's degree in early-childhood education or a related field. There should 
also be access to a qualified supervisor and a career ladder with different pay levels. We do 
address the compensation issue in the report, and that is probably one of the major challenges 
in our profession, but other people have talked about that at length. 

For preservice education, some of the issues have to do with foundational knowledge. We 
need to have a broad base of knowledge across disciplines to be able to teach those who work 
with 3- and 4-year-olds to teach at an appropriate level. We need to know about pedago^ and 
the appropriate teaching strategies. The practicum experience should be carefully supervised. 
Field experience must have certain qualities in order to be effective and help teachers learn the 
practices that will lead to the accelerated school outcome expectations we have for children. 

There are five challenges in preservice education, which come from the Frank Porter Graham 
research. The first challenge is the shortage of experts. There are estimates that we need to 
increase the early-childhood teacher faculty at institutions of higher education by at least 55% 
in the next 5 years, to keep up with the rising demand if we phase in the recommendations of 
the report. There is definitely a shortage in the field. 

The second major challenge that we face in teacher preparation is diversity. We do not have a 
diverse higher education and early-childhood teaching faculty. Eighty percent are White and 
women. The chairs of the departments said their single greatest challenge was to recmit and 
retain diverse faculty. We do not have, good teaching conditions either. We teach more students 
with fewer resources and less support. That is absolutely true in my institution. We are undergo- 
ing budget cuts, and over 50% of our faculty are le'aving college education and will not be 
entering in other teaching preparation programs. 

The third challenge in teacher preparation is coursework. In a survey of institutions of higher 
education, 1,250 institutions currently prepare early-childhood teachers. What they tell us, 
which is confirmed by graduate reports and research, is that we do not have enough courses or 
depth of knowledge in three areas. Early childhood special education teachers are not qualified 
to teach in inclusive classrooms, although the vast majority does. Our teachers are woefully 
unprepared to teach children who are English-language learners. A stunning statistic is that only 
10% of our programs offer coursework on how to teach children who are English-language 
learners. In California during fall 2000, 70% of incoming kindergartners were non-White. Forty 
percent of that 70% did not speak English. As for Head Start, statistics from April 2002 show 
that 40% of the enrollees in Head Start currently do not speak English. They enter Head Start 
speaking a home language other than English. Teacher programs currently do not have the 
programmatic resources to adequately address this issue. Our coursework also falls short in 
giving prospective teachers coursework and practica involving infants and toddlers; less than 
30% provide that training. Yet, we are usually certified to teach birth to 8 years of age. 

The fourth challenge is the articulation between 2-year and 4-year degrees. The 2-year programs 
are more diverse, and the candidates have more practical life experience. We need to support 
that candidate pool and provide incentives for them to continue on to 4-year colleges. However, 
those articulations are difficult to work out, primarily from the 4-year institutional side. 







676 



682 



MISCELLANEOUS 



The fifth cTiallenge is the diversity of the candidate pool. Twelve years ago, the survey data 
indicated that around 70% of early childhood teacher candidates enrolled in our programs were 
White and of nonminority status. As of 1999, that figure went up to 78%. Our teaching candi- 
date pool is increasingly White, which is in contrast to our increasingly diverse student popula- 
tion. We need to address recruitment, retention, and preparation, capitalizing on the availability 
of diverse teacher candidates. Hyson will talk about the standards that have helped our teacher 
preparation programs move in that direction. 

Question: Is there information on how to raise the level of workers in all of those areas? 

Espinosa: There is research showing that in-service education can be a powerful force on 
improving the teaching capacity and ability of current teachers. We know that within Head Start, 
as well as within our Title I programs, there has been a push to improve quality through 
professional development and in-service training. We also know that it is not consistently high 
quality. It can have an impact on teaching behaviors, teaching knowledge, and teaching ability 
to apply new knowledge, if it is continuous, coherent, and individualized. However, we also 
know that the vast majority is fragmented, chaotic, incoherent, and is not necessarily the best 
use of available training dollars. I want to give you one example of how I participated in this 
unknowingly. 

Recent statistics show that we spend dose to $ 100 million in Head Start for quality programs. 
In Title I, that amount has been increased tremendously. There is a tremendous amount of 
money for states to engage in professional development, to help teachers learn new approaches 
to early literacy. I was recently asked to do a series of workshops on multiculturalism and second 
language. The organizers asked me to come before a specific date in June. I asked, "Why? It does 
not make sense. Your program is ending. You will have turnover in staff. It makes more sense for 
me to come in September when we can do something continuous that will contribute to the 
program, beyond doing development." They said no, that they had to spend the money before 
the end of June. I went out and conducted a series of four workshops for child-care center 
teachers, preschool teachers, and others. This was the early part of June. The teachers came in 
with no idea about what the topic would be. They came in, sat down, and did not even have 
paper and pencil. They came in because they had a requirement to satisfy a certain number of 
hours of professional development. The administrators did not come. They had no idea what I 
was saying or teaching. They had attempted to zero out their budget by finishing up this 
professional development, not even thinking about follow-through or how this fit into anything 
else going on in their program or in relation to children's learning. 

I would argue that this is probably fairly common. My recommendation is that we develop 
standards for in-service education, just as we have standards for professional preparation of 
teachers. 

I propose that if one submits a plan to spend public money for training, they should have 
results-driven and job-embedded standards that focus on helping early-childhood teachers 
become knowledgeable in both development and pedagogy. They should include coherent, 
integrated content that is cumulative and directly linked to what the teachers do in the class- 
room. There should be participant involvement. Participants should have some say in what 
training is offered. Their needs should be elicited from them, and included in the decision 
making. 

Training should be site-based. I was a principal in an elementary school. I finally decided not 
to send my people off to different trainings, but instead to do our professional development on 
site because we knew our children, community, and families. About 90% of everything we did 
was site-based. Training should also be continuous and supported with follow-up medianisms. 
One of the other issues that I realized is that there is little follow-through application in the 
classroom unless there is some in-dassroom support, mentoring, or coaching. 



O 

ERIC 



683 



677 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



One has to be in the classroom with the teachers in order to help them understand how to 
apply these concepts. One should address knowledge and beliefs so that staff can reflect on 
those theoretical understandings and their practical teaching knowledge. The next standard that 
I would suggest is that results should be evaluated. If one engages in staff development, there 
must be a plan to evaluate the effectiveness that goes beyond what used to be called "post- 
mending reactions." It should go beyond that and link staff development efforts to child 
outcomes. Do children learn more? Are children better off because of staff development? Finally, 
the training should be linked to compensation so that the people who participate in training 
achieve some kind of credit or incentives. That training should help them move up the differen- 
tiating career ladder. I would suggest that when we engage in developing plans for professional 
development, we only get funded when we address standards in these categories. Odierwise, we 
spend money, but we do not know what we are getting for it. To summarize, I described the 
following standards: results-driven and job-embedded, participant involvement, site-based, 
continuous and supportive, addressing knowledge and beliefs, results evaluating, and linking 
training to compensation. 

Carol Brunson-Day: I would like to talk about the Child Development Associate (CDA) 
credentialing program and what we have learned about it from the inside. The CDA program 
was designed in 1975 as a way to organize the informal preparation of personnel who were 
working with young children of 3 and 4 years of age in Head Start programs in community- 
based child-care centers. For the purposes of this discussion, one of the important issues about it 
is that it has a definition of the end point. The CDA is essentially defined as a person with the 
skills to nurture the development of children in group care programs and who has demon- 
strated those skills through a competency-based assessment. 

CDA credentials are issued in several categories based on our understanding of the workplace. 
There is one generic credential, but the person has to do different issues depending upon the 
credential type that he or she applies for. There are three basic types. One is for personnel who 
work in center-based settings. Another type is for the person who works in family child care 
settings. A third type is for home visitors and those individuals who essentially work with 
parents and children in their own homes. Under the center-based setting, there are two age-level 
distinctions. Infants and toddlers are one specific age category and preschool children are a 
second age category. All of the credential types are available to people who work in bilingual 
settings. 

CDA is a professional category or a classification of worker as opposed to a specific job 
description or job title. In order to become a CDA, a person must complete an assessment 
designed to collect evidence about his or her work in relationship to six competency goals. 

These goals have essentially remained unchanged since 1975. All of the material about the CDA 
program is available from our offices in Washington or from our website at www.cdacouncil.org. 
There are six areas of competency standards that were developed by consensus over a 2-year, 
research-based process, with input from all of the various constituencies and professional 
associations with an interest in the welfare of young children. They are general, and can be 
broken down further into 13 functional areas, which are essentially the skill areas that the CDA 
must demonstrate. 

The most important aspect about the assessment is that it is directly related to what teachers 
do in the classroom. The CDA system is directly concerned with a demonstration of practical 
skills. There are approximately 150,000 CDAs, and we issue credentials to about 10,000 or 
12,000 individuals each year in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin 
Islands, and U.S. military bases worldwide. 

One of the important issues about the profile of CDAs is their ethnic makeup. It is a diverse 
population in regard to race and ethnicity. It is more diverse than the U.S. population as a 
whole, but it is consistent with, and reflective of, the population of children in early-childhood 
programs, especially the population in Head Start. People with CDA credentials are 52% White, 



678 



684 



MISCELLANEOUS 



24% African American, 12% Latino, 4% Native American, and 1% Asian American. Those 
figures are shifting, but essentially that is the CDA population. 

What happens to people after they become credentialed? The CDA research shows evidence 
that the system is powerftil from a standpoint of professional development. Every 3-4 years since 
1983, there has been a national survey of CDAs. The latest survey of CDAs was conducted in 
1999. We chose a sample from the entire population of CDAs in our database. Then we sent out 
a survey to 5,000 of the CDAs. We had a response rate of about 20%, which limits the 
generalizability of the findings. However, these findings were consistent with findings from 
previous surveys. 

In 1999, we looked at CDAs who had just received their credentials. We also looked at what 
we call mid-level CDAs, who had been credentialed for 6 years, and we looked at veteran CDAs, 
who had been credentialed for at least 10 years. The results I will describe are most related to the 
power of the professional development system, showing the changes in a couple of areas that 
the population experienced over time, which we believe is a result of the CDA credentialing. 

One area is continued training. Another area is professional position or change in profes- 
sional position. The third area is change in salary, or changes in what we call "tenure in the 
field." In terms of educational background, over 40% of the CDAs in all three groups — the new, 
the mid-level, and the veterans — had already completed some college by the time they received 
their credentials. However, in subsequent years, there were a larger percentage of individuals 
who had attained 2- and 4-year degrees. The trend was strongest among the mid-level group 
who had been credentialed for 6 years. Once individuals receive their CDAs, they tended to 
continue their formal training. The percentage of CDAs completing advanced graduate degrees 
more than doubled for veteran CDAs, and increased slighdy for new CDAs, so that we saw a 
trend over the years of CDAs continuing through the higher education system. 

Professional position was another area of concern. Did CDAs change jobs, or did people 
change jobs once they become a CDA? We asked questions about positions such as early- 
childhood assistant teachers, teachers, and center directors. The percentage of respondents who 
were teachers increased over time from 37% to 40%. The number who were center directors or 
supervisors grew from 9% to 14%. As a result of their credentialed status, people were receiving 
an opportunity to work in positions of higher responsibility. The interesting part about the 
CDA program is that it is not designed for program directors, so this was an anomaly; but as 
people received more formal training in early childhood, they tended to be pushed up to 
higher positions. 

We are always concerned about the salary question. Are salary increases the result of attaining 
higher levels of professional development? All groups reported increases over time. However, the 
increases were minimal in relationship to the entire occupational marketplace. First of all, the 
average salary of people entering the CDA program was about $15,000. In fact, 61% of new 
CDAs earned under $15,000. In comparison to that base, we saw increasing trends. Less than 
one third of the mid-level and veteran CDAs still earned $15,000 after 6 years. However, 60% of 
the veterans reported annual incomes between $15,000 and $29,000. The percentage of veteran 
and mid-level CDAs earning $20,000 or more annually more than doubled, but in terms of 
absolute dollars, it was still not much money. We are seeing an impact on salaries at the higher 
levels of credentials. 

One of the more important findings of the survey was related to the stability in the 
workforce. Traditionally, the early-childhood population was plagued by high turnover, and 
some national surveys report as much as 40% annual turnover at some centers. In light of that, 
when we looked at the CDA respondents across the three groups, 87% reported that they were 
still in early-childhood education after 1 year, after 6 years, and after 10 years. In the veteran 
group, close to 77% were still working in early-childhood education. Eighty-one percent of the 
mid-level group was there, and 90% of the new CDAs were as well. In our report, we caution 
against generalization around this finding, due to small sample sizes. 





679 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



However, in light of the contrast between these figures and what is seen in the general 
population, the CDA program, as an example of a professional development model, contributes 
dramatically to retention in the field and to stability of our workforce and programs. Three 
issues make the CDA program so powerful. First of all, it draws its participants from the commu- 
nity. Forty percent of the CDAs are former Head Start parents. When we look at the workforce, 
we face the future need for an ethnically, culturally, and racially diverse force. The ethnicity 
figures among the CDA population become extremely important for meeting the needs of the 
teaching workforce now and in the future. 

The second feature that makes the CDA credential so powerful is that it is enjoying growing 
acceptance among employers. It now exists in a stable, regulatory climate. At one time, the CDA 
program served the Head Start population. Eighty-five percent of applicants to the program in 
1985 were from Head Start. In the year 2000, Head Start represented about 60%. Now, in 2002, 
60% of the credentials are issued to people outside of the Head Start system. The program s 
impact is now felt in the broader child-care community, and is not just benefiting the Head 
Start population. 

To some extent, this change is related to stability and the regulatory climate. Forty-eight of the 
50 states list CDA as a qualification for teachers in licensed child care. It is not a requirement, 
but it is simply recognized as a potential qualification for teachers. In more states, it is men- 
tioned as a qualification for the director of the program, rather than for the teachers, due to the 
fact that the licensing laws are so poor in terms of staff qualifications. When the advocates went 
to the regulatory bodies to get CDA written in for teachers, they looked at what was written in 
for directors, and all that was needed was a driver's license and a tuberculosis test. It did not 
make sense to require higher qualifications for teachers than for the directors, so they added 
CDA as a qualification for the directors. As a result, they are CDA-credentialed, but that is not 
what the CDA program is about. 

The third powerful force, which we are trying to strengthen, is that more of the CDA training 
is now in the hands of the higher education community. At one time, CDA training was exclu- 
sively an in-service training model, with some demonstration. The federal government funded 
some higher education institutions to design CDA training, but those were primarily 4-year 
colleges. Now 2-year schools are becoming the primary CDA-training institutions. 

It certainly helps to stabilize the quality of the training and make it comprehensive. We 
recently did an informal survey of about 300 applicants over the last 2 months, asking CDAs 
where they received training. We required that they have 120 hours of training delivered by a 
formal training provider, but we had a broad definition of who qualifies as a formal training 
provider. These data are baseline data for us, and we hope to show some upward trends in the 
future in terms of where CDAs receive training. 

We found that 37% received credit for their CDA training, which is not good. We are in favor 
of CDAs going from CDA training in the community to the 2-year institution, and then to the 4- 
year institution as part of an educational path. Receiving some sort of training or college credit 
for the training is important. 

Thirty-one percent of the CDAs received a certificate, but we are not sure whether those 
represented credit-bearing education or whether it is just a certificate. We will find out more 
about that in coming years. We would love for those certificates to be credit-bearing. Twenty-five 
percent are still obtaining training through their agencies, and 9% reported some sort of 
combination. We sometimes waive formal training requirements because, in principle, the CDA 
system is a competency-based assessment system. If one can demonstrate competence, they will 
be awarded a credential regardless of their training background. We still have some applicants 
who request those waivers. 

The CDA program is a bridge between informal and formal training, and it is a bridge for 
people in the community and those who become interested in this work because they love 
children. It gives them a way to access the formal training right in their own communities, and 




680 



686 



MISCELLANEOUS 



receive credit as they move higher in the formal training mechanism, eventually toward those 
Bachelor degrees in early education, which we believe are coming. It will indeed benefit chil- 
dren. We want to make sure that the personnel who receive those credentials truly are part of the 
community where the child care is delivered, and that they have an ethnic and cultural profile 
that is present in the CDA program. 

Rubina Azhar: 1 am from South Texas Community College. Some problems we are having in 
my CDA credential program are in support and funding. Regarding support, while there is the 
education requirement that students complete their 120 hours, they do not have somebody to 
follow through with in the community. They also do not have money to ask somebody to do 
the credentialing. How can 1 help more students get a CDA? 

Brunson-Day: There is a lot of money in Texas for CDA scholarships. A scholarship is available 
through the Child Care Development Block Grant. How that money is used depends on the 
politics or advocacy levels in one's state. Programs in 21 states offer scholarship money for at 
least some of the CDA training and credentialing fees. There is a growing body of dollars to help 
individual candidates get support to pay the fees. 

The advisor issue is something that has continued to come to us over the years. At one time, a 
person who participated in training could not conduct a formal observation, but that has not 
been true now for 10 years. We encourage the training providers to recognize that a candidate 
cannot go out and find an advisor unless the training program helps and participates in con- 
ducting that observation. We encourage training programs to provide that service for the 
candidates. 

Cathleen Armstead: One of the issues faced by CD As is that the local university will not always 
accept their credit. Professional organizations can help make the case that their curriculum is 
more theoretical. 

Brunson-Day: When 1 talk to people in communities where the college does accept their credit, 
the college faculty successfully advocated for it to be accepted, not the CD As at the college. The 
faculty members who became the advocates were able to describe the CDA program in an 
academic manner. We have done our part by writing a curriculum. In fact, my office has several 
documents available that may be helpful in terms of how to structure CDA-training programs in 
ways that make sense to colleges. 

We also have a document that refers people to programs in areas where the negotiation was 
successful. One can talk to somebody from another higher education institution, in another 
community, who has been able to make the case at the college. That work cannot easily be 
accomplished by CDA candidates. It has to be done by the people in higher education. 

Comment: 1 am from the state of Washington, and about 31% of our workers receive certifi- 
cates, which is generally the equivalent of 1 year of technical college. 

Brunson-Day: 1 hope that most of the certificates are those kinds of certificates, but we do not 
know. We did not do that level of analysis, but we will do it for the next survey. 

Marilou Hyson: Today's handouts include a description of some of the work NAEYC is doing in 
the area of teacher education and early childhood. The other handout is a short article that was 
in the March 2002 issue of Young Children about NAEYC's new and improved standards for 
early-childhood professional preparation at the Baccalaureate or initial licensure level. The 
entire standards document can also be downloaded from a website. 

1 want to offer some ideas that are broader than those two handouts. They go back to how we 
will move toward the vision that Espinosa and the Eager to Learn report laid out for us, of having 



O 

ERIC 



687 



681 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



classrooms led by teachers with excellent knowledge, skill, depth, and professional preparation, 
culminating in a Bachelor degree. Our goal is to help young children learn and develop, and to 
support their families in the best possible way, because the quality of our preparation should be 
at least as high for children before they go to kindergarten as for 5-year-old children in kinder- 
garten. In fact, it should be even higher, because of the developmental significance of those early 
years. I want to describe three categories of work that require attention: pipelines, programs, and 
policies. I will focus on preservice higher education. Certainly, it connects with some of the 
other issues we have discussed. We are talking about pipelines into higher education both for 
future teachers and faculty. 

As a person formerly involved with higher education, I know how critical that shortage of 
faculty is. Some of the issues we need to think about include reaching out to high school 
students in the interest of increasing the diversity of those who will eventually teach young 
children. The K-12 teacher recruitment field has had some success with teacher academies that 
identify high school students who may be interested in going into education, providing hands- 
on experience with children, and connecting them to the higher education world, so the 
students can visualize themselves entering this field. We can learn something from the K-12 high 
school teacher academy recruitment strategy. We also have many students in higher education 
who do not know what they want to do. Those of us in higher education need to think more 
about how to lead those undecided students toward the value, rigor, and joy of a career teaching 
young children. 

We also need to nurture those Associate degree students, if we want more of them to go on, 
either immediately or later, to the Bachelor degree. We work hard to create those linkages 
between 2- and 4-year programs so that students do not waste credits. We must think about how 
to reach out to Associate degree students to help them make the transition to 4-year programs. 
We must create consortia of 2- and 4-year institutions. We must create opportunities for students 
at 2- and 4-year programs to share student organizations or take courses at one another's 
institutions. We must make that 4-year transition more visible and accessible to Associate degree 
students. 

We also need to look more closely at who is currently teaching young children. That is where 
the CDA link is so important, because CDAs are significantly more diverse and more grounded 
in the real world of young children and families than many other groups who might potentially 
be part of that pathway. Through personal support and formal mechanisms, we can connect 
CDAs and other paraprofessionals with anyone in Head Start or community child-care training 
programs. What can we do to help them see what pathways might exist? 

We also need to consider the long-term view. It is tempting to do quick- fix solutions, host 
summer crash courses, and put warm bodies with minimal coursework or mentorship into 
classrooms. Only 2,000 of the 8,000 people who were trained through Teach for America are 
still teaching, and although that is not early childhood, this should be cause for pause. Data 
show that to reduce turnover, investment in 4-year and even 5-year higher education programs 
leading to teacher licensure are cheaper in the long run. Those teachers are more likely to stay in 
the profession than those who enter under some sort of an emergency credential. 

There are implications for the way in which we approach our planning for a well-qualified 
early-childhood teaching force. The faculty pipeline is critically important. A national study by 
Diane Early and Pam Winston showed that faculty diversity is a real challenge, as is the knowl- 
edge of faculty in some critical areas. The long-term approach is promising in terms of expand- 
ing the faculty pipeline. 

The Society for Research and Child Development (SRCD) has recently put together a model 
called The Millennium Scholars Program. They are reaching out to undergraduate psychology 
and child-development majors, specifically students of color at historically Afncan American- or 
Latino-serving institutions. They are bringing them to the SRCD conferences with junior 
mentors, who are graduate students in the same fields, and senior mentors, who are leaders in 




688 



682 



MISCELLANEOUS 



the field. They hold a 1- or 2-day preconference intensive orientation to help them get the most 
out of the conference and follow up with continuous mentoring. The idea is that in the long 
run, those students may see themselves on a path that leads to a faculty position in a higher 
education institution. 

Some of those long-range strategies may be helpful to encourage community college adjunct 
or part-time faculty to gain support to continue on the path toward more advanced degrees. It 
may possibly lead to some persons entering a full-time career in higher education. Some people 
have asked, "What is magic about the Bachelor degree? What is magic about an Associate 
degree?" There is no magic, but it does provide people with a depth of conceptual knowledge, 
stronger verbal and written language skills, and pedagogical skills that will translate into good 
outcomes for young children. 

However, the fact is that many higher education programs do not measure up. I am con- 
cerned because there is pressure to expand the number of programs, at both the Associate and 
the Bachelor level. We must pay attention to what is going on in those programs. We will not see 
the translation of getting people into the pipeline and attaining those degrees into better 
outcomes for children unless we pay close attention to the content of those programs. 

Among other issues, NAEYC is concerned about having quality standards in place for those 
programs in regards to what students coming out of those programs should know and be able to 
do. One of the handouts is a summary of the revised NAEYC teacher-education standards. They 
are a vision for high-quality, professional preparation, but they apply specifically to Baccalaure- 
ate or initial teacher certification programs. We also have standards for advanced graduate 
programs and Associate programs. We are in the process of revising standards for both of those. 

There is more information on our website, which is at www.naeyc.org. We are looking for 
feedback, both about the Associate and the advanced programs. We are saying less about specific 
courses, although coursework is certainly important, and more about what the results should be, 
which links to the CDA. There are five critical areas, which well-prepared candidates and future 
teachers should know and be able to do. These areas are (a) promoting child development and 
learning, (b) building family and community relationships, (c) observing, documenting, and 
assessing children's development and learning, (d) building content knowledge through a wide 
array of teaching strategies, and (e) standards on professionalism. 

Through our affiliation with the National Council of Accreditation of Teacher Education 
(NCATE) these standards have teeth in them, because in some states, every higher education 
institution that prepares teachers must be accredited by NCATE. If the institution is going 
through that process and they have an early-childhood program, they must submit documenta- 
tion to NAEYC that says they meet those standards. The bottom line is that we have some real 
opportunities there. We also need to support faculty development, and the Head Start Bureau 
has put some money into a higher education and faculty development initiative. That kind of 
work needs to be expanded with attention to the areas of gap that Espinosa identified. These 
critical content areas include literacy, mathematics, and so forth. 

If we were honest with ourselves, those of us in higher education would say that it is not 
always easy to keep up with the latest research. Many faculty are in isolated teaching situations. 
As early-childhood faculty, they do not have resources for professional development. We need to 
figure out how to give them the knowledge that they need so that their students are not just 
hearing warmed over, outdated information that gives them the illusion that they know some- 
thing, when in fact they are lacking the necessary information. That is a challenge for us. We 
need to see what is promising and effective out there in higher education. 

There is not enough research about the effectiveness of various models of delivering 
preservice teacher education. More research is needed to identify and showcase what is good out 
there. No good ideas will be enacted without policies and structures to support them. I talked 
about compliance with national standards, and we can effectively use those national standards 
and the higher-education accreditation systems. We also need to use teacher licensure and 




689 



683 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



certification as a tool in the states. It is all over the place in early childhood. There is great 
variability from one state to another. NAEYC and others support a vision of birth to 8 years of 
age for teacher licensure. We are not there yet. In many states, there is great inconsistency. 

NAEYC in conjunction with several other groups, has a position statement on teacher licensure, 
and we need to do a better job of using it as a policy tool. Much more is also needed in the way 
of scholarship support. 

TEACH is a model in 21 states, with state and other support, providing scholarships for 
current staff in early childhood programs to take courses. When linked with compensation 
initiatives, that is promising. From a policy perspective, we also need to continue looking at 
differentiated staffing models in early-childhood programs. As we talk about the Bachelor degree 
as a goal, it may not be optimal in programs where, unlike the public schools, we need and want 
a number of adults in each classroom to combine as a team to do the best job that they can. 

Often, that process has been chaotic and fragmented. A policy and general professional goal 
is to think about differentiated staffing as a way of directing our resources in effective ways. 

These pipelines, programs, and policies are some of the tools that we can use as we work 
together more comprehensively, looking at both the challenges and some promising possibili- 
ties and practices to get us where we need to be in professional preparation. 

Susan Hegland: I am from Iowa State University. We used to have an accredited early-child- 
hood teacher education program when we did not have NCATE accreditation. However, like a 
number of other research institutions, we have chosen to move from NCATE to the Teacher 
Education Accreditation Council (TEAC), and NAEYC is not yet affiliated with TEAC. What can 
we do to begin that transfer, because TEAC is results- and outcomes-oriented rather than course 
check-off, input-oriented? I think it is compatible. 

Brunson-Day: TEAC is another accreditation system for higher education, which is much 
smaller than NCATE. It currently does not have any system for specialized professional associa- 
tions to affiliate with it, so I do not know how that would work. I also want to make sure that 
people understand that neither NCATE nor TEAC are course check-offs. Both are performance- 
oriented. We should not set up that type of contrast between TEAC and NCATE simply because 
we know more about NCATE, having been on the Board of Examiners and having been affiliated 
with NAEYC. There are many similarities. We need to look carefully at the development of 
TEAC, and our bottom line needs to be what we can do to help programs. However, I hope 
institutions that are not affiliated with NCATE or TEAC would look to NAEYC s standards as a 
possible tool for faculty professional development, and share them with students to encourage 
alignment with courses and so forth. 

Sroufe: In K-12 education, we now have dueling certification programs, and we also have efforts 
to create status for the professional, like the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards. 
Each of the groups, like CDA, is under some pressure to demonstrate the added value of the 
process that they have people go through. I mention this not because there is anything wrong 
with this, but because it poses some difficult research questions. 

I am not confident in the data that NCATE is putting out to justify the added value of their 
program. I have some questions about the research methodology that has been mentioned 
about the CDA in terms of control group aspects. This is difficult work. It does not mean that it 
cannot be done or that it should not be done, but when we say that we should do more research 
about the added value of professional associations, one has to look at what intervention is there. 
Can we describe it enough? Do we have a theoretical base for it? 

Beverly Hooker: I am with the Head Start program in Missouri. I understand that teachers who 
receive a Bachelor degree in education can apply for certification. The Head Start program is not 
associated with school systems, because maintaining those types of teachers that are required to 



684 



690 



MISCELLANEOUS 



keep their certification is difficult. It is my understanding that they must go into the public 
school system for 1 year to keep their certification. Our mandate to have Bachelor degrees in our 
classrooms is difficult, and I am trying to figure out how to keep my teachers. 

Espinosa: Students need a Bachelor degree with coursework that qualifies them to be recom- 
mended for early-childhood certification through an institution of higher education. The 
university recommends them for certification to the Department of Elementary and Secondary 
Education (DESE). They must then take a test to get their initial certification. 

Brunson-Day: I suppose it would be different in every state. They have early-childhood certifi- 
cation that qualifies them to teach in programs from birth to 3 years of age, from 3-5 years of 
age, and kindergarten through third grade. One could definitely be teaching in a presdiool 
program or a child-care center and keep their early childhood DESE-approved certification. One 
has to fulfill certain additional educational requirements. One does not have to work in a public 
school setting to satisfy that. In Missouri right now, if one has a teaching certificate in any 
subject area, including high school biology, and one wants to get an add-on certificate, like an 
early childhood add-on certificate, one only has to take the early childhood practices. One can 
get early childhood certification without taking coursework. Maintaining ones certificate does 
require one to keep up with the additional hours that DESE specifies, but one does not have to 
teach in a public school or take another test. 

John Bancroft: 1 have a question about the latest findings from the 2000 FACES study. They are 
comparing Head Start programs that were using the High Scope preschool curriculum. Creative 
Curriculum, and a third category of "other." The "other" category includes everything from 
programs using no curriculum to programs that write their own. I am concerned that there 
would be pressure to use or create a packaged curriculum. The other finding is that when they 
compare the Head Start programs by quality, the level of degrees of the teachers was not a 
significant factor. Teacher beliefs were a factor in quality, and those might be a function of 
teacher training. 

Espinosa: Within Head Start, there are several curricula used most frequently, including High 
Scope and Creative Curriculum. A program uses a specified curriculum with certain training 
requirements to implement it as well as some specific guidelines about what is in the curricu- 
lum, and neither one of those is terribly directive. I would call them frameworks rather than 
prescriptive curricula. It is not surprising that they would get better child outcomes, because it 
means the staff members are organized around a central position and set of beliefs about how 
children learn. They have probably been provided with more consistent and coherent staff 
development, training, and supervision. Both models focus on supervision. Implementation is 
another focus. We do not know to what extent they were true to the curriculum model, but it is 
good that they could articulate it. The existence of "other" programs is not surprising. 

1 want to address the other comment you made, that Head Start employees with degrees did 
not necessarily have better child outcomes. A 1999 study by Anne Epstein looked at Head Start, 
public school, child care and professional development, and in-service training. She found that 
Head Start programs provide more and better quality in-service training than public schools. 

The variable of teacher preparation at the Bachelor degree level was significant for public schools 
because their initial preparation was significantly related to their quality of teaching and the 
outcomes for children. For Head Start, it was not as significant of a relationship because they 
have ongoing in-service education, which addresses those kinds of competencies. 

Sroufe: It is difficult to do this type of research. One has to know what the intervention is and 
be able to describe it. Then one has to know what the outcome is that is being received. 





685 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Bancroft: Nick Lyons, on President Bush's team, spoke recently in the Northwest. He provided a 
sweeping condemnation of the higher education/early-childhood area, making broad generali- 
zations that those people— those of us in this room— are going around teaching our kindergar- 
ten teachers and preschool teachers not to use letters and numbers. However, when they are 
surveyed, they go home and teach their own children letters and numbers. I am concerned that 
if research comes out saying that higher education degrees from early-childhood departments 
are not an important factor, it will be likely that the training will go in a different direction than 
the higher education or early-childhood field. 

Brunson-Day: It is important for early-childhood people not to circle the wagons and get overly 
defensive because the fact is that there are weak teacher preparation programs out there, both at 
the Associate and the Baccalaureate level. There is certainly a body of persuasive research 
showing that college degrees are good. It is better for early-childhood teachers to have degrees 
than not to have them. However, having said that, we do have to be honest and strategic about 
acknowledging the validity of the criticism for teacher education at the early-childhood level 
and at the elementary and secondary levels. 

Sroufe: Like all sessions on Head Start and early childhood, we end up thinking that advocacy 
might be an important aspect of our work. I found the demographic data fascinating. These were 
probably familiar data to many people, but I found it quite interesting, particularly the com- 
ment that Head Start teachers felt unprepared to teach in inclusive classes. 




686 



692 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Meeting the Challenge and Opportunity of Diversity 

CHAIR: Gerald Sroufe 

PRESENTERS: Donald J. Hernandez, Howard Markel, Betty Ansin Smallwood 

Gerald Sroufe: First, we will offer some information about the demographics, including who 
the people are in childhood programs, some insights about immigrant experiences in the United 
States, and the health and well-being, and cognitive learning of children. Betty Smallwood will 
focus on working with child-care providers to address issues of multiculturalism. 

Howard Markel has a fascinating background, but what caught my eye is that Mayor Giuliani 
named him the "Centennial Historian of the City of New York," based on his research on public 
health and immigration in New York City. Markel is a practicing pediatrician, a medical educa- 
tor, and a medical historian. He has written a number of books about pediatrics including 
The Practical Pediatrician, named "Best Book of the Year" by Child Magazine. One of his recent 
books is especially relevant to our discussion today, Formative Years: Children's Health in the 
United States, 1880-2000. Markel will personalize some immigrant experiences and inject 
personalities into the data. 

Donald J. Hernandez is a professor in the Department of Sociology and Center for Social and 
Demographic Analysis at the State University of New York at Albany. For many years, he was 
Chief of the Marriage and Family Statistics Branch of the U.S. Bureau of the Census. He devel- 
oped the 10-year panel study to assess the consequences of Welfare Reform legislation on 
children. He has written and edited several books, including Children of Immigrants from Genera- 
tion to Generation: The Health and Well-Being of Immigrant Children. 

Betty Ansin Smallwood is a coordinator of school services for English language learners at the 
Center for Applied Linguistics in Washington, DC. She has been there since 1996, providing 
staff development, conducting needs assessments and program evaluations, writing curriculum 
materials, and coordinating national programs for educators who work with English language 
learners. 

Howard Markel: Over the last 10 years, I have been writing about the history of immigration 
and health in America. It is an extremely fascinating history that unfolds every day. I would like 
to present excerpts from the first chapter of a book I recendy sent off to my publisher. It is called 
When Germs Travel: American Stories of Imported Infections. The book looks at the last 100 years of 
instances where immigrants were diagnosed with infecdous diseases or imported them into the 
United States. Each chapter revolves around an individual immigrant or a few immigrants, 
because one of the lessons that I have learned as both a historian and physician is that stories 
have power. They explain situations, people connect to them, and while there are many other 
forms of data, stories are what I like most for this complex issue. 

Under the shadow of the Ambassador Bridge, a thoroughfare that spans the intemadonal 
border between Detroit, Michigan in the United States and Windsor, Ontario in Canada stands a 
century-old ramshackle former convent on the grounds of Detroit's oldest Catholic church, St. 
Ann's. Today, the red brick building with its 40 bedrooms, 2 bathrooms, kitchen, offices, and 
common areas serves as a hostel for refugees who come to the United States seeking asylum. It is 
apdy named Freedom House, and is situated on a barren stretch of land near Detroit's Mexican 
village. Along with the Ambassador Bridge, the church is one of two identifiable landmarks in 
the desolate neighborhood inhabited primarily by outdated industrial buildings, Mexican 
immigrants, and crack houses. 

Over the past few decades, however, Detroit has become a stop on the underground railroad 
of our era. It is a popular way station for many refugees and immigrants who arrive with the 
intention of crossing still another international border to Canada. At any given time, 25 to 40 
different nations are represented at Freedom House, making every interaction a linguistic and 




693 



687 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



cultural challenge. The residents travel routes vary, but the predominant means of transporta- 
tion are jet airplanes that can bring anyone from any point of the globe to the United States in a 
matter of hours. Large airports such as John F. Kennedy in New York or Miami International are 
as permanently implanted in the minds of today's most recent immigrants as Ellis Island was for 
so many newcomers a century ago. 

In fall of 1997, the executive director of Freedom House asked me to volunteer some time. In 
addition to the complexities of assimilation and social hostilities, the workers at Freedom House 
wrestled with a portfolio of problems that accompany today s immigrants; problems that might 
have shocked their predecessors. These problems include harrowing escapes from political 
turmoil, physical violence and death in war-tom nations, dmg and alcohol abuse, few social 
support networks or relatives living in the United States, and a host of other legal, economic, 
psychiatric, and medical problems. 

As a physician who studies health and immigration, I was naturally eager to help, but I had 
relatively few illusions that either the staff or the residents were interested in me based on my 
years spent in libraries or seminar rooms writing and arguing about these topics. No high-flown 
academic theories were needed in this living, breathing, and social laboratory of human 
experience. Instead, I was recmited because of my medical license and willingness to provide 
basic and free medical care for the children and adults who found their lives dismpted and 
unfolding at Freedom House. 

Let me begin by describing my first visit in January of 1998. Dominating the entranceway of 
Freedom House was a large and somewhat unstable appearing staircase that sagged in the center 
of each step, as if an elephant had just climbed and left an imprint. Off to the side of the steps 
was a pay phone with phone numbers written on the surrounding wall. Most memorable, 
however, were the 15 residents standing in the vestibule, from Africa, the Middle East, and 
Central and South America. Despite the ethnicity many wore on their faces, their clothes were 
primarily drawn from the collection box at Freedom House; hence the odd ensemble of a 
Muslim woman wearing a veil and a Detroit Lions sweatshirt and sweatpants. 

The most striking sensation during my first entry into the harsh realities of the modem 
immigration experience was the overpowering smell. The odors were strong and attacked my 
nose with relentless aggression, redolent with the scent of 60 people living in crowded condi- 
tions, combined with the remains of countless meals prepared in the kitchen just behind the 
staircase and a faulty toilet two floors above. It was not difficult for my mind to be transported 
to a different time and place, such as one of the holding rooms at Ellis Island, which were filled 
with immigrants who had just come off the boats without bathing for a week or more. 

The Ellis Island doctors, of course, lived in a period where one was hardly shy about making 
the obvious, if not cmde, observation, "You stink." They lived in the era when many ascribed the 
spread of epidemic disease to smells and gases emanating from rotting garbage, sewage, and ill 
people. Consequently, when confronted with the overpowering odor of so many unwashed 
bodies, the Ellis Island physicians often worried that such exposure might prove injurious to 
themselves or others. 

Fast-forward a century to our modern era of medicine and there I was in Detroit, crinkling my 
nose and slowing my breathing pattern as if such a preemptive move might protect me against 
an invisible illness. Catching myself in my mind's eye, I tried to mask my revulsion with the 
equanimity of the doctor's visit. However, I know that a few, if not all, of the immigrants knew 
exactly what was going through my mind, as though my thoughts were being telegraphed. The 
sour smells, the broken toilet, the anxiety and sadness Aat pervaded the crowded shelter that 
day serve as a powerful reminder of how vastly different the lives of these immigrants are from 
the American doctors and health-care professionals assigned to their care. 

Among the residents who first befriended me was a trio of brothers who were born in 
Ethiopia: Musa, age 18; Abraham, age 16; andTodel, age 12. As a result of war and famine in the 
late 1980s, the boys and their mother fled to Windsor by way of Saudi Arabia, the United 




688 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Kingdom, and the United States. They finally came to Canada because immigrant services, up 
until recently, were more receptive to welcoming immigrants than the United States. The family 
stayed in Canada for 6 years, when they received a letter from the Immigration Services stating 
that they had to return to the last international port they entered, which happened to be 
Detroit Metropolitan Airport. Hence they left Windsor for Detroit, and they found lodging at 
Freedom House. 

The three boys though Muslim in background attended a Catholic parochial school con- 
nected to St. Ann's. At first glance, such a situation reflects a confusing melange of cultures, but 
the boys mastered their situation with aplomb. Indeed, they flowed from one culture to the 
next, depending on the demands of the immediate situation. They speak with their mother, who 
knows little English and relies primarily on Arabic, their schoolmates, who are predominately 
Latino and Afhcan American, their fellow residents at Freedom House, or visitors like me. They 
are citizens of the world and understand better than most adults that national boundaries are far 
more arbitrary and artificial than we care to admit. 

The middle brother, Abraham, was an especially thoughtful young man. One afternoon, he 
and 1 discussed his experiences at Freedom House and more broadly, his experience as a refugee 
moving from country to country without finding a permanent home. He said the following: 

"It is like being on a long and monotonous train ride that has no destination, only you do 
not know that at first. It took me a long time before 1 realized that instead of being on a trip 
that went from point A to point B, I was on a circular track that goes around and around. The 
train stops at several points on the track, and newcomers get on and get off, like those four 
over there." 

At this point, Abraham pointed to a young couple and two small children who had just 
arrived from Rwanda. While worn out and tired from their journey, they were clearly excited to 
be at Freedom House. Abraham continued: 

"You may be excited to arrive, especially at the first few stops, but soon you realize that the 
path you are on is an endless circle. You never know when someone will get off and appear at 
your doorstep or if the conductor will tell them to get back on the train. Sometimes the train 
doors open and you're at a place like Freedom House or somewhere in Canada and you say, this 
is it, 1 am free, I can finally begin living my life. But, soon, you have to get back on the train. By 
the third or fourth time around, you finally get the picture; at least 1 did." 

There was no bitterness or rancor in Abraham's voice, simply wisdom that belied his young 
face. Indeed, he had brilliantly described the immigration experience of the late 20th Century as 
it unfolded for refugees: people with national origins but not countries, and those without 
papers or legal standing to ease the migration process. These refugees, especially those with little 
chance of being granted political asylum, an extremely difficult achievement even under the 
most extenuating circumstances of physical horror and danger, represent some of the saddest 
immigrant stories 1 have heard. 

Shortly after talking with Abraham, he introduced me to his little brother Todel, a 12-year- 
old boy who wore baggy jeans three sizes too big for him and other accoutrements of the hip- 
hop generation. Todel approached me suspiciously and asked me if I was a lawyer. "No," I 
replied. "Are you an INS inspector?" Again, I responded negatively and added that I was a 
doctor. Somewhat puzzled, Todel retorted, "They boot you out too?" All three of us laughed 
loudly at his wisecrack, even as I explained I was a United States citizen merely visiting Freedom 
House. Nevertheless, Todel's observations of the refugee's world were almost as apt as those of 
his older brother. 

Another refugee I became quite close to was a 19-year-old African man named Yves. Unlike 
many of the other African refugees we saw at Freedom House, Yves was the son of a successful 
businessman based in a small town on the border between Rwanda and what is today the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In May of 1994, Yves' father was brutally executed and the 
family home was burnt to the ground. Yves heard about this while he was attending school in 



O 

ERIC 



695 



689 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/ CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Spain, although he never learned whether these horrific crimes were perpetrated by the Hutu 
warriors or by Congolese rebels. Yves left Spain for Portugal that fall and lost his papers in his 
hasty flight from Madrid. He quickly realized that circumstances being what they were, it would 
not be wise to return home to his village. 

While in Lisbon, Yves hooked up with the immigration underground. This is a group of 
nefarious businessmen who are around in many countries, selling everything a refugee might 
require to make a permanent trip to America: clothes, baggage, English lessons, plane tickets and 
most important, doctored passports. For $5,000, one dealer booked a coach ticket from Lisbon 
to John F. Kennedy Airport in New York. The package included the rental of a Portuguese 
passport that had been professionally altered to feature Yves' photo on the identification page. 

Once the two men made it through customs at JFK, Yves had to hand back the forged 
passport to the dealer, who promptly boarded a return flight to Lisbon to begin the process 
anew with another aspiring immigrant. This is not an isolated story; it is a common situation. 
However, the arrangement left Yves in a financially precarious situation, since it had taken him 
3 years to earn the $5,000. It also deposited him in the middle of a busy international airport, 
literally feet away from United States customs officers, without a shred of identification or 
legitimate legal status. 

With the story getting better by the minute, I asked Yves what he did next. He confidently 
smiled and replied, "It was a long trip. I walked through the airport and saw a giant food court. 
There was a wonderful pizza place there, so I went over and ordered a large one with everything 
and a beer. It was delicious." Charming might well have been Yves' middle name. At the pizze- 
ria, he sat next to two young women who were returning to New York from a year of studying 
abroad. After 30 minutes of pizza, beer, and a complete recounting of his life story, the young 
women decided to help him. "Do you know anyone in the United States? they asked. Do you 
have anywhere to go?" Yves recalled some of his friends in Lisbon talking about Canada and 
that it would be a good place to go. But, if they could not get to Canada, they often went to 
Detroit, so Yves told his newfound friends that he would like to go to Detroit. 

The young women pooled together a few hundred dollars and instructed Yves on how to 
reach the Port Authority bus terminal in Manhattan. Once there, he purchased a ticket and 
boarded a bus for Detroit. However, one problem that Yves did not consider is that if one wants 
to enter Canada via Detroit, one needs a passport or some official form of identification. 

Yves was nothing if not a successful immigrant. In the annals of the American Immigration 
experience, replete with such souls who make the best of every possible situation and rely upon 
their wits, personality and charm to wriggle out of tight situations that would bring most of us 
to our knees. Yves explained that he simply did not have time to wallow in dejection or self-pity. 
He wandered the streets of Detroit for 3 days and ate his meals at a soup kitchen. He spent a 
few nights at a shelter before heading to the West side of the city where he could see the Ambas- 
sador Bridge. 

Once he arrived there, he looked longingly across the span, thinking that if he could only get 
to Canada, he might be safe and his long nightmare might finally end. That night, he slept 
outside in a small park near the bridge. It was bitter cold, and the following morning when he 
came across a local police precinct, he decided to go inside. Seated inside the battered old 
precinct house was a 45-year-old African American police sergeant who had a son about Yves' 
age. The obviously distressed refugee explained his story of tragedy and flight. During Yves' 
monologue, the police officer was calculating in his mind the various permutations of how to 
handle the situation: call the INS or the federal prison, put Yves in the precinct's holding cell? 

After locating the forms required when encountering illegal aliens, the police officer began 
asking the standard questions that typically lead to a refugee being whisked off to a jail until a 
hearing decides his ultimate fate. "What is your name? What is your place of birth? What is your 
date of birth?" Mundane questions to be sure, but it was this last question that turned out to be 
Yves' open sesame to America. "July 4th, 1979," said Yves. The policeman's pen and jaw 



Q 690 

ERIC 




MISCELLANEOUS 



dropped simultaneously and he replied, "Friend, this is your lucky day." He tore up the INS 
forms, put on his coat, and drove Yves to Freedom House, where he was accepted at once. When 
Yves and I met, this experience was less than 48 hours old and he was clearly euphoric over his 
good fortune. After hearing this remarkable tale, I reached out to shake his hand and exclaimed, 
"Welcome to America, Yves!" 

When Yves learned about the murders of his mother and two younger brothers a few weeks 
later, he was heartbroken and devastated. He refused to eat, rarely left the tiny bedroom he 
shared with three other boys, and spent most of his days crying. The rest of us who fervently 
wanted to help him had absolutely no idea of how to go about it. What do you say to a young 
man whose entire family has been slaughtered? 

One spring morning, a few weeks after the arrival of several Rwandan families, I received an 
urgent call from one of the Freedom House workers, whose voice almost vibrated with panic as 
she explained there was a serious outbreak of something in the house. "Outbreak? Outbreak 
of what?" I asked. The staff worker explained how the night before, one of the Rwandan 
children had developed a severe case of diarrhea that would not abate. By morning, his little 
brother, Yves, and another teenager were all experiencing the same problem. They all shared the 
same room and the night before they had shared a carry-out pizza as a reward for cleaning up 
the kitchen. 

At this point, she asked if I thought there was some kind of medical connection. "Well, I do 
not know, but there have been cases of cholera in the Rwanda refugee camps. When was the 
most recent arrival to Freedom House of a Rwandan from one of the camps?" Unfortunately, 
she provided the answer I most dreaded. "Only a few days ago. But, you do not seriously think 
it is cholera?" 

In retrospect, I am not entirely sure I believed it myself, but the period between possibly 
contracting the infection in an African refugee camp to the appearance of diarrhea made for a 
compelling clinical scenario. Indeed, the incubation period for cholera can be anywhere from 
hours to 5 days after exposure. I ended the telephone conversation by telling her to try to get the 
children to drink as much as possible and that I would be at Freedom House in one hour. 

Cholera is a disease I am well acquainted with as a historian, but one 1 have never seen in my 
medical practice. Still, it was high on my list of differential diagnoses as I drove into Detroit, for 
far more than quaint historical reasons. Most important were Ae reams of the epidemiological 
reports between 1994 and 1998 describing numerous outbreaks of cholera in the Rwandan 
refugee camps and other points of their migration pathway. In fact, cholera appears with great 
regularity in the world today, particularly after acute crises resulting in the destruction of water 
lines and sewage facilities, either by natural disasters or human means, most typically war. A 
recent World Health Organization report identified cholera as one of the world's top ten 
infectious killers. In fact, the hottest zone for cholera today and during that time was Africa, 
where 70% of all the world's cases are occurring. 

I was nervous that afternoon when I finally pulled up in front of Freedom House. I had very 
little in my doctor's bag, save my stethoscope, never used bandage scissors (but no bandages), 
some tongue depressors, a few specimen cups, and a prescription pad. When I walked into the 
house, the same group of immigrants I saw only a week earlier greeted me. There were no smiles, 
no hellos, only eyes opened wide and a clear communication of fear despite the silence. Mothers 
held their children close to them as if a maternal hug might protect their charges from contract- 
ing whatever had entered their home. Others simply averted their eyes, perhaps in the hope that 
avoiding a doctor's gaze might help them escape the mysterious disease. I must confess that as I 
ascended the staircase, clutching the handle of my African American doctor's bag as tightly as 
the mothers held their children, I worried that I might contract whatever was going around 
that day. 

At Freedom House, I was far closer to being a physician of the late 19th-century than one that 
was practicing in the 1990s. I had neither x-rays nor laboratory tests to confirm or deny a 



697 



691 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



potential diagnosis. I had no prepared IV fluids, let alone the needles, tape, tubing, and such 
that are required to set up such a procedure. Even though I had spent the better part of my 
internship inserting IV needles into the tiny veins of infants and children, I had not started a 
line in about 8 years. Even with the right equipment, my success in treating the patients I was 
about to greet was doubtful. 

The four boys were lying on cots in the same tiny room. I went first to the youngest boys, 
because they were in greatest risk of dehydration due to their size. While they had dry chapped 
lips, their physical examinations were not compatible with any other signs of severe dehydra- 
tion. The same could also be said for the 20-year-old young man with diarrhea. The most 
obvious ill person in the room was my good friend Yves. On further examination, even he did 
not appear to be dehydrated to the point of needing an immediate transfer to the hospital. 

I asked one of the aides to get me some of the soda pop they had stored in the refrigerator. I 
poured out four large cups for them and a smaller one for myself, and I asked the boys to begin 
taking small sips every few minutes and I stayed to make sure they were able to hold it down. 

Without access to a microscope to look at the diarrheal stools the boys were producing, I had 
no objective evidence that febrile cholera, the idiopathic agent of cholera, was in fact the culprit. 
But, this no longer mattered. Despite a clinical scenario that was not entirely consistent with the 
science and symptoms of cholera, I had already formed a conclusion. The propensity for germs 
to travel and the fact that the other Rwandans had just arrived from refugee camps where there 
were reports of cholera outbreaks— along with many historical episodes swimming in my 
head— all led to one answer. Yves and the boys must be suffering from cholera. 

I asked each boy for a stool sample in the little plastic cups I had in the bottom of my bag. 
After instructing one of the aides to make sure that the boys continued to slowly drink as much 
as they could hold, I decided to drive the specimens myself to a local hospital to get a better 
sense of what was causing the outbreak. The hospital was only a mile away, and I went directly 
into the emergency room where I introduced myself and explained what I was after. The chart 
nurse asked me to wait in the visitor s area while one of the physicians sent a specimen to the 
hospital laboratory for analysis. Although I complied, I instantly hated this woman, unknown 
to me before and since this brief encounter, for so quickly relegating me to the civilian status 
of visitor. 

Like countless civilians forced to sit out in the doctor's waiting room, I picked up an old 
magazine to waste time and calm my nerves. After what seemed like hours, a senior resident 
came out to the waiting room to speak to me. He looked about 1 8 years old, even though he 
was at least 30. In what I perceived to be a dismissive tone, he asked, "Doc, who said these guys 
have cholera?" "Well," I stammered, knowing exactly where this dialogue was headed, "No one 
made a definitive diagnosis, per se, it is just that given the combination of symptoms and that 
some of the patients lived in Rwanda, it was a concern ... as I trailed off in volume and 
conviction. The younger doctor smiled at me in a way that I have done as well with physicians 
who referred a patient to me with a grossly incorrect diagnosis. 

He somewhat sarcastically uttered the word "rota as he turned on his heels and walked back 
into the treatment area. By "rota" he means rotavirus, one of the most common causes of 
diarrhea in the world. No minor footnote to a medical textbook, rotavirus is responsible for 
more than 140 million episodes of diarrhea per year and one million deaths worldwide. In the 
United States alone, there are more than 5 million cases annually, and 50,000 of these cases are 
severe enough to warrant hospitalization. Each winter and spring, almost every American 
pediatrician sees dozens, if not hundreds, of miserable children with the runs and their 
exhausted parents searching for an end to the foul-smelling diarrheal river they have tried 
desperately to dam. 

The two-syllable diagnosis, rota, demonstrated far more than the fact that my initial call of 
cholera was incorrect. The word screamed, if only I could hear the shouting. You fool. You 
made the assumption that these immigrants imported cholera when they were suffering from a 
form of diarrhea that is as American, if markedly less palpable, as apple pie." 




692 



MISCELLANEOUS 



When I was in medical school a professor was fond of a peculiar axiom: When you hear the 
sound of hoof beats, it is more likely to be horses than zebras. Like many native-born Americans 
treating foreign patients, 1 chose to track down a zebra rather than a local horse. That afternoon, 

I could envision the real epidemics of cholera that had been reported in AJfrica over the past few 
years. From my viewpoint, 1 was convinced, or at least 1 convinced myself, that the threat of 
imported infection is imminent. This was an excellent lesson. It was only at Freedom House that 
I began to appreciate how difficult it is to protect the public's health against the ingress of so-called 
foreign germs, without overlooking the health threats that often exist in our own backyards. 

Although they could easily have occurred, not a single cholera germ traveled across the ocean. 
Not this time. These patients contracted their malady in my hometown of Detroit, Michigan. 

Donald J. Hernandez: 1 will focus on the current demographic transformation that is dramati- 
cally increasing the range of ethnic diversity of our children, while in the process of creating a 
new American majority. Historically racial and ethnic minorities, including Latinos, African 
Americans, Asians, and American Indians, have constituted substantially less than half of the 
American population. Taken as a whole, these racial and ethnic groups are growing much more 
rapidly than the non-Latino White population, with the result that these groups are destined to 
become a numerical majority within the next few decades. 

The emergence of racial and ethnic minorities as a majority population is rapidly occurring 
and will become a reality first among children. Consequently, as we think about the future of 
education, health care, labor force, and culture in the U.S., we must increasingly focus on todays 
racial and ethnic minorities. 1 will focus on children in immigrant families, because this is the 
fastest growing population of children, and because immigration and births to immigrants and 
their descendents is driving the historic transformation of the U.S. population. 

1 will especially draw on my work done a few years ago as a study director of the Committee 
on the Health and Adjustment of Immigrant Children and Families, which was convened by the 
Board on Children, Youth, and Families, under the auspices of the Institute of Medicine and 
National Academy of Sciences. If you are interested in more in-depth issues, you can find the 
information on the National Academy press website at www.nap.edu. 

In conducting our work, we adopted a generational framework in order to understand the 
process of assimilation and adaptation of children in immigrant families, both through time 
and across generations. We distinguished and studied three generations of children under 18 
years of age. First-generation children were born in a foreign country. Second-generation 
children were bom in the U.S., but with one or both parents foreign-born. Taken together, the 
first- and second-generation constitutes children who live in immigrant families. In contrast, 
third and later-generation children are born in the U.S. to parents who were both born in the 
U.S. These are children in U.S. -born or native-born families. 

Using this framework, we found that 20% of children less than 18 years of age and living in 
the U.S. in 1997 were children of immigrants with one or both parents foreign-born. That 
means 14 million children were living in immigrant families, or 1 of every 5 children in the U.S. 
Between 1990 and 1997, the number of children in immigrant families grew by 47% compared 
to 7% for children in U.S.-born families. 

Consequently, the number of children and youth in immigrant families expanded seven 
times faster than the number in native-born families. By 1990, about one half of children in 
immigrant families were of Latino origin, and about one fourth were Asian. This greatly contrib- 
utes to the diversity of the U.S. child and youth population. As of the year 2000, the proportion 
of Asians had declined slightly to 22%, but the proportion with origins in Latin America had 
jumped to 62%. In 2000, the combined total of Latino and Asian children was 84% of all 
children form immigrant families. 

We look to the future driven by third-world population growth and economic opportunities 
in the U.S. According to U.S. Census Bureau projections, most future population growth will 




699 



693 



SYMPOSIA/ ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



occur through immigration and birthed immigrants and their descendents. Because most 
children in immigrant families belong to Latino or non-White racial and ethnic minorities, 
Census Bureau projections indicate that the proportion of children under age 18 who are 
African American, Latino, Asian, or some other racial and ethnic minority will rise to about 50% 
of the child population between 2035 and 2040, up from only 31% in 1990. 

In the year 2030, the baby boom generation born between 1946 and 1964 will be in the 
retirement ages of 66 to 84 years old. The Census Bureau s projections indicate that by 2030, 

74% of the elderly will be non-Latino White, compared to only 59% of working-age adults and 
52% of children. As a result, as the growing elderly population of the predominately White baby 
boom generation reaches the retirement ages, it will increasingly depend on the productive 
activities and civic participation, which is to say voting, of working-age adults who are members 
of racial and ethnic minorities for its economic support. Many of these workers will have grown 
up in immigrant families. Consequently, as we look to the future of education, health care, and 
the labor force in the U.S., we must increasingly attend to the circumstances of children and 
racial and ethnic minorities in immigrant families. These groups have culture orientations that 
may differ from the current non-Latino White majority, and they have often experienced limited 
social and economic opportunities in the past. 

However, immigrant children are not spread evenly across the U.S. Instead, children in 
immigrant families are concentrated in a handful of states and in less than a dozen major 
metropolitan areas. In each of six states, including the largest states of California, New York, 
Texas, and Florida, children in immigrant families account for at least 20% of all children. In an 
additional ten states they accounted for at least 10% of children. These numbers will no doubt 
be larger when we get results from the 2000 U.S. Census. 

The Committee looked at a variety of childhood risk factors in conducting its work. In 
general, children living in a one-parent family have shown negative consequences for educa- 
tional attainments and occupational success later during adulthood. The proportion living in 
one-parent families is substantially smaller for children in immigrant families than for children 
in U.S.-born families, at 17% versus 26% in 1990. Thus, children in immigrant families are 
substantially more likely than those in U.S. -born families to have both parents in the home. In 
fact, both first-generation and second-generation children are less likely than third- and 
later-generation children to live in one-parent families. These results indicate that children in 
immigrant families are more likely to benefit from strong, stable two-parent families than are 
children in U.S.-born families. For children generally, negative educational and employment 
outcomes have also been found to result from instability and parental employment and low 
parental educational attainments that lead to poverty level family incomes. 

The overwhelming majority of children in immigrant families, like those in U.S. -bom 
families, have fathers who are in the labor force, at 88% compared to 95%. We also found that 
children in immigrant and native-born families are equally likely to have mothers in the labor 
force. These results indicate that the children in immigrant and native-born families live with 
families who have equally strong work ethics. There is little difference in children in immigrant 
families from those in U.S.-born families in the proportion with parents who are highly edu- 
cated. As of 1990, a nearly identical 24 to 26% of children, both in immigrant and U.S.-born 
families, had fathers with 4 or more years of college education. Similarly, a nearly identical 16 to 
1 8% had mothers who were college graduates. 

However, children in immigrant families are much more likely to have a father or a mother 
who has completed 8 years of schooling or less. The proportion of children in immigrant 
families who have a father or a mother with no more than eight years of schooling is 25% 
compared to only 3% for children in native-born families. Therefore, about one fourth of 
children in immigrant families have parents with extremely limited educational attainments, 
with potentially important implications for the educational and employment projections of 
these children during the coming years. 




694 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Focusing on poverty, we found that children in immigrant families are somewhat more likely 
than those in U.S.-born families to live in official poverty; 22% versus 17% in the 1990 Census. 
The first generation was especially likely to live in poverty, at 33%. However, reflecting the 
enormous diversity and the circumstances of children in immigrant families with various 
countries of origin, poverty rates for children in immigrant families ranged from a low of 4% for 
children with origins in Ireland to a high of 51% for children with origins in Laos. Thus, at one 
extreme, children with origins in about two dozen countries had poverty rates that were equal to 
or substantially less than the rate of 11% for non-Latino White children in native-born families. 
These two dozen countries are spread across Latin America, the Caribbean, Asia, Europe, the 
Middle East, and Africa. At the other extreme, most of the poverty among children in immigrant 
families was concentrated among children with origins in 1 2 countries who experienced poverty 
rates in the range of 26 to 51%, depending on the country of origin. 

Many officially recognized refugees come from five of these countries: the former Soviet 
Union, Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam. Immigrants from El Salvador, Guatemala, 
Nigeria, and Haiti have fled countries experiencing war or political instability. Many migrants 
who seek unskilled work are from Honduras and the Dominican Republic. The 12th country is 
Mexico, which currently sends the largest number of both legal and illegal immigrants and 
which has been an important source of unskilled labor for the U.S. economy throughout the 
20th Century. The overall poverty rate for children in immigrant families from these 12 coun- 
tries was 35% in the 1990 Census. 

In view of the negative risks associated with poverty, the situation of children from these 12 
countries may be particularly serious. Mexico alone accounted for 31% of all children in 
immigrant families, but they accounted for 50% of all children in immigrant families who lived 
in poverty. Taken together, children with origins in these 12 countries accounted for about 46% 
of all children in immigrant families, but they accounted for about 80% of all children in 
immigrant families who lived in poverty. This is where the largest concentration of poverty is 
among immigrant children. 

Although the overwhelming majority of children in immigrant families are from these 12 
countries, 90% had fathers in the labor force, 40% had fathers who did not work full-time year 
round, 46% had fathers with only 8 years of schooling, and 40% lived in linguistically isolated 
households where no one in the home aged 14 years or older speaks English exclusively or well. 
Thus, the high poverty rate for children from these 12 countries is not strongly related to a lack 
of labor force participation among fathers or mothers. Instead, it is strongly associated with a 
lack of full-time year round work among fathers, with extremely lower educational attainments 
among mothers and fathers, and with linguistic isolation from English-speaking society. 

Turning to language use and language ability of children, one fourth of children in immi- 
grant families live in linguistically isolated households, and about two thirds speak a language 
other than English at home. Nearly three fourths of children in immigrant families speak 
English exclusively or well. The proportion of children in immigrant families who speak English 
exclusively or well jumped sharply from 55% for the first generation to 81% for the second 
generation. Thus, language assimilation occurs rapidly across immigrant generations. 

Finally, because lack of U.S. citizenship has, with Welfare Reform, become a potential risk 
factor for children and parents and immigrant families, it is important to note that about one 
fifth of children in immigrant families were not U.S. citizens in 1990. About two thirds were 
either not citizens themselves or lived with at least one parent who was not a citizen. This is 
important because parents who are not citizens may be unaware of their children's eligibility for 
important services or may fear contact with government authorities on behalf of their children. 

A substantial portion of children in immigrant families may be at risk of not receiving the 
important public benefits or services for which they are eligible as children born in the U.S., as 
American citizens. 

This fnay especially be the case among children with origins in the 12 countries with high 
poverty rates. Not only do high proportions of children live in poverty, but many of them are 




701 



695 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



not citizens, or have parents who are not citizens. Noncitizen immigrants experience the largest 
and most immediate reductions in benefit eligibility under Welfare Reform. As a result, it is 
essential to study the effect of Welfare Reform in order to understand the circumstances of 
children in immigrant families. It is also essential that immigrants provide a major focus for our 
research so that we may understand the overall effects of Welfare Reform. 

To provide a baseline for such studies, our Committee commissioned new research regarding 
the extent to which children in immigrant and U.S.-born families, prior to Welfare Reform, were 
living in families that received AFDC, SSI, or other public assistance, such as food stamps, 
Medicaid, housing or heating assistance. We commissioned new research specifically on health 
insurance coverage and access to health services and have reviewed and commissioned research 
assessing the health and well-being of children in immigrant families. 

Available evidence suggests that prior to Welfare Reform, compared to third- and later- 
generation children and adolescents, those in immigrant families were, on average, exposed to 
greater socioeconomic risks. They also had less access to health insurance and health care. Those 
at greatest socioeconomic risk were less likely to be in families receiving a range of welfare 
benefits and services. Surprisingly then, children in immigrant families were doing at least as 
well or better than third- or later-generation children for a wide variety of indicators measuring 
physical health, mental health, and school adjustment. 

This broad conclusion must be tempered, however, for four reasons. First, the evidence pieced 
together and generated by the Committee regarding the health and well-being of children in 
immigrant families is consistent across a wide variety of domains, but it is limited both in its 
quality and in the number of domains for which research is available. Second, available evi- 
dence suggests that there is enormous variability across children with various countries of origin 
for many indicators. Third, the health and well-being of children in immigrant families appear 
to deteriorate over time and across generations. This suggests that the protective benefits of 
immigrant culture may become more diluted the longer they live in the U.S. Fourth, the recent 
Welfare Reform places many children in immigrant families at risk of losing potentially impor- 
tant economic and health resources. To be effective, policies and programs designed to foster the 
adjustment of children in immigrant families to American society must be founded on rigorous 
scientific knowledge about their needs, the processes that generate these needs, and approaches 
to addressing them. 

Unfortunately, few major data collection efforts provide a scientifically sound basis for 
monitoring or studying the health status and resources available to children in immigrant 
families. To expand knowledge needed to improve public and private programs and policies, the 
Committee developed five recommendations for new research studies, new data collection, and 
new information dissemination. They are aas follows: 

1. The federal government should fund a large longitudinal study of children and youth in 
immigrant families. This study should measure physical development, psychological 
development, and the range of contextual factors influencing the development of these 
children. It is essential that this study include, for comparative purposes, large subsamples 
of children in U.S. -born families belonging to diverse racial and ethnic groups. 

2. There should be a series of ethnographic studies on the physical and mental health of 
children and youth in diverse immigrant families. They vary enormously in their culture 
and circumstances. 

3. Both quantitative and qualitative research should be conducted on the effects of Welfare 
Reform and health-care reform for children and youth in immigrant families. Access to, 
and the effectiveness of, health care services and other services are affected by the provi- 
sion of culturally competent care. None of the major evaluations of reforms in welfare 
and health care focuses on the consequences for children in immigrant families. At a 
minimum, such studies should include substantial subsamples of children in immigrant 
families. They should also pay attention to factors uniquely relevant to outcomes for 



ERIC 




696 



MISCELLANEOUS 



these children, such as their circumstances of migration, the duration of child and 
parental residence in the U.S., and immigrant status of siblings and parents. 

4. The federal government should collect and code information on country of birth, 
citizenship status, and parents' country of birth in key national data collection systems. 

5. In the future, as the federal government develops new surveys or draws new samples to 
supplement or extend existing surveys, it should select and include subsamples that are 
large enough to reliably monitor the circumstances of children and youth in immigrant 
families as a whole, and where feasible, for specific countries of origin. 

The point of these recommendations is to increase our knowledge about the nature and 
determinants of health and well-being among children in immigrant families compared to those 
in U.S.-born families, including the role that Welfare Reform may play during the coming years. 
The implementation of these recommendations would enormously expand our knowledge 
about the development and well-being of all children. However, several issues must be ad- 
dressed to accomplish this. 

First, attention must be paid to the role of racial and ethnic discrimination and intergroup 
relations as they affect children in immigrant and native-born families, either similarly or 
differently. Second, particular attention should be paid to neighborhood and national social 
networks, to family traditions and expectations, and to connections to ethnic communities and 
resources within the U.S. Third, these issues should be addressed in the context of the great 
diversity of children in immigrant and native-born families, regarding their socioeconomic 
status, economic opportunities, race and ethnicity, family circumstances, and the social context 
in which they live. The nature and causes of different childhood trajectories, and whether they 
involve assimilation and access to "middle class" opportunities, are extremely truncated. Access 
to social and economic opportunities must be monitored and understood by comparing 
longitudinal changes over time and across generations, as experienced by children who conipose 
important subgroups of the new American majority. 

As the Rowing elderly population of the predominately White baby boom generation 
reaches retirement ages, it will increasingly depend on the productive activities and voting of 
working-aged adults who are members of racial and ethnic minorities, many of whom lived in 
immigrant families as children. Consequently, as we look to the future, we must increasingly 
attend to the circumstances of racial and ethnic minorities, including immigrants. The future of 
our economy and political organizations depends on improved understanding, public and 
private policies, and programs to assure healthy development, high educational attainments and 
labor for success of these children. 

Patricia Home McGee: How are immigrants affected by Welfare Reform? How does that 
compare to their eligibility pre- Welfare Reform? 

Hernandez: There is a great deal of variability to address. The new immigrants are not eligible 
for some programs but they are eligible for others. Immigrants, as you know, often come as 
young adults, and they have children when they are here. Their children are not immigrants; 
they are citizens and they are eligible— theoretically at least— for a variety of programs. It is 
important to continue to look at the incoming immigrants and their children, as well as the 
previous ones, to understand how Welfare Reform may have differential effects. Over time, 
especially if immigrants become citizens, they will become eligible. It is important to under- 
stand what these processes are, especially for children. 

It is also important to look at resources generally on welfare. Resources from public programs 
are just one set of resources. The reauthorization of Welfare Reform is going to occur over the 
next 6 months or so, and one of the issues is whether food stamp benefits should be increased. 
President Bush, for example, has argued that at least some of the immigrants who are excluded 
should be brought back into the food stamp program. Unfortunately, there is not much men- 




703 



697 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES /CONVERSATION HOURS 



tioned about immigrants, or children for that matter, in their discussions. Work and marriage— 
those are the two big words— have little to do with children at all. Looking at the population of 
children receiving TANF, we find that the recipients are mainly children, and then mothers and 
some fathers. 

1 would argue that we need to focus on children generally, and immigrant children in 
particular, as it pertains to policy now. However, this policy is potentially subject to change over 
time, and may well be changed during the coming months. We will see if it is for better or for 
worse. 

Gloria Johnson-Powell: We have trouble identifying which countries in Africa people come 
from. We have not been able to obtain much data, beyond 1996. Could you tell us where we 
could get some information about the migration to various states after 1996? 

Hernandez: There are two main sources of data, including the U.S. Immigration and Natural- 
ization Service (INS), which indicate where people say they are planning to live when they enter 
the country. They may not have gone there at all, for that matter. Your question is well timed, 
because the 2000 U.S. Census data are expected next week, and will begin coming out over the 
next four or five months on a state-by-state basis. 1 think they are starting with Vermont because 
it is small and easy. The data will have information on country of birth, and local levels of 
geography, so you can get a sense of where people of different countries of origin within Africa, 
and elsewhere, were physically located as of 2000. 

The U.S. Census Bureau is also planning an American Community Survey, which is a huge 
survey of 3 million households a year. The plan is that the survey will provide local area data to 
states and metropolitan areas every year. It will track on a 5-year moving average basis, starting 
in 2003. We will not get the track level until 2008. Thus, starting in 2003, there will be large 
survey data that will offer at least some information about metropolitan areas and states. 

Sroufe: Will the children that Markel described be in this count at all? 

Hernandez: They will be in it, but it is a problem because refugees are not identified in the U.S. 
Census, so their whereabouts are not known. It also depends on where those refugees are in 
their own asylum process. 

Johnson-Powell: We are now using a network that we have acquired over several years among 
African immigrants, to determine where the refugee populations are. We hear from newspaper 
reports, for instance, that there is a large settlement of African refugees in Fargo, North Dakota. 

Betty Ansin Smallwood: Yes, 1 work in North Dakota, and some of Sudan's "Lost Boys" were 
resettled in Fargo. 

Hernandez: Especially for those countries that send a lot of refugees, you caii at least use the 
U.S. Census data and local inquiries as a screen to see if children are refugees or not. It makes a 
big difference what reasons people come with, whether they are educational, humanitarian, 
financial capital, or other reasons. Do they end up going to awfiil schools in the center of New 
York City, or do they end up with better opportunities? 

Nicole Fedoravidus: Is there a standard undercount we should know about regarding the 
census data? 

Hernandez: It has not been estimated separately as far as 1 know. One can look at the number 
for Latinos, but most of the Latinos now in the U.S. are immigrants. Whatever underadjustment 



698 



704 



MISCELLANEOUS 



applies to Latinos probably applies more so for Latino immigrants. The U.S. Census Bureau 
estimates that half of the illegal immigrants are missed and about half are in the Census. Like 
the refugees, they cannot be specifically identified because that immigrant status information is 
not collected. 

Smallwood: I have been asked to respond to the excellent presentations that were made, in 
terms of how they may affect education. I was an English as a Second Language (ESL) classroom 
teacher for over 16 years, and I had the opportunity to go on, through government funding, and 
become a teacher of teachers. When my diildren ask what I do, I reply that I teach the teachers 
to teach the children. Most of my time was spent in elementary schools and preschools. 

I think that this session has been a wonderful learning opportunity, and I want to offer some 
responses. From an educators point of view, it is wonderful to have the opportunity to hear 
people from professional fields, because in education we do not always get this kind of respect 
or this level of information. MarkeLs stories make it clear why working with immigrants takes so 
much time in schools. It is important for teachers to hear the stories and know what these 
immigrants go through. This builds compassion for the students. It builds an awareness of what 
these children face when they enter schools, and why our task involves so much more than just 
teaching them English. 

My second comment is that preschool teachers and immigrant families have different 
approaches to education. Among many immigrants, the place for young children is in the home 
with their parents. Because they are in a new environment, and it is difficult for them to sepa- 
rate, it is oftentimes a struggle to enroll them in programs, even when the children qualify for 
Head Start and preschool programs. We know that, educationally and linguistically, it is impor- 
tant for them because they need the extra time. Attending Head Start or preschool, and having 
opportunities to play with language, gives them that time. But there can be a cultural clash. 

The other reality, as Hernandez pointed out, is that many of these children are born in the 
United States, so they come into the schools as citizens. The children are entitled by law to 
schooling and yet the parents are afraid. They are afraid to send their children to school, and 
this is especially true at the preschool age with Head Start. 

Another comment I want to make is that, as Hernandez and Markel mentioned, education 
should focus upon immigrant services, just like the fields of medicine and sociology. Yet, the 
amount of time in education that is devoted to understanding the linguistic issues and cultural 
issues related to these services, including ESL, is little. The amount of time devoted to this issue 
in preservice courses is minimal. We are talking about course work in multicultural and 
crosscultural understanding, as well as second language acquisition. The teachers do not come 
in with sufficient training, and there are many statistics that show this; in fact, only 5 or 10% 
have had relevant training. With these numbers, it becomes everyone's job to educate these 
children. It is not just the ESL teachers; it is all teachers. California is one of the few states that 
have special training in that way. 

Another issue that came up was the importance of cultural differences and discrimination. 
One of the lesssons that I have learned in training Head Start teachers is that the dialogue needs 
to be intercultural and crosscultural, so that the understanding goes both ways. There is misun- 
derstanding by Head Start teachers, and there is misunderstanding by immigrant families. 

At one of our training sessions, we put together a panel of families. One of the African 
women on the panel was from Ghana, an educated woman with university training. She 
attended, discussed her background, and answered all the questions, but her life was not at all 
similar to the immigrant parents that faced the Head Start teachers. We need to do more than 
invite the parents in to talk about their experiences; the process must be sensitive. 

In a Head Start program where I was involved, there was considerable disrespect by the 
immigrant families toward the Head Start teachers. This situation created a racial issue, since the 
disrespect was channeled from African immigrants towards African American teachers. They 




705 



699 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



brought me in, and I said, "I am just a little White lady, what do you want me to do?" They 
wanted me to mediate between these two groups. As a Quaker, 1 have some background in 
crosscultural communication and conflict resolution, and we made some progress. It is a 
sensitive situation that requires two-way communication. Because the Head Start teachers are 
working hard for these children, they need to have the respect of the parents as well. 

One last issue worth mentioning is that in our field, we talk about the difference between 
social language and academic language. It is a misnomer to think that just because children 
begin to speak English, that they are at a level of being able to do academic work. It is true when 
you see children at the secondary level. They can go out and order food at McDonald's, but they 
cannot function in physics class. This is also true in Head Start and at the preschool level. Do 
they have the academic language? Are they able to use dirertional words? 

Another comment 1 would like to make addresses literacy. The traditional thinking in our 
field is that it is important to develop literacy in home language, because from first-language 
literacy you can make the transfer to English. However, a grave problem quickly presents itself if 
the parents are not literate in their home language. Our research says that if one speaks English 
to immigrant children they are denied that base language; this idea becomes complicated in 
regard to literacy. It is important to bring parents into the school to have those two-way dia- 
logues, and to give the preschool teachers time to understand the linguistic background in order 
to build upon proper practices. 

Mary Ann Malta: Can you talk more about immigrants from the Middle East? 

Markel: Middle Eastern immigration is quite fascinating, and one of the largest communities is 
right outside Detroit in Dearborn, Michigan. It began after World War 11 with the Chaldean, or 
the Christian, Iraqi migration. In the succeeding years, people have immigrated from Egypt, 
Lebanon, Pakistan, Syria, and so forth. The Detroit metropolitan area is a living social laboratory 
of Middle Eastern immigration that has not been tapped. 1 work at the University of Michigan, 
and we have talked about doing something to study it, but we have not taken great advantage of 
it. One problem is that the community is not at all monolithic. It is quite complicated because 
someone who is Lebanese may not talk to someone who is Egyptian, Palestinian, or what have 
you. 

It is also interesting that there are social support groups, which are far more rudimentary than 
some of the older immigration groups. For example, Russian Jews relied on German Jews, who 
were already settled here, and had developed social services, educational services, and so forth. 
Support is far more rudimentary for the Middle Easterners, and is incredibly rudimentary for the 
Africans, because a lot of them are fleeing situations in their home countries. They are not 
immigrating; they are escaping with their lives. 

Some of the community members are also wary of university researchers coming into the 
community. That said, it is a fascinating topic to study, and it is particularly fascinating since 
September 11th. 1 must receive a dozen questions a week from parents on issues relating to 
September 11th. 1 have colleagues who work in New York, and there are children who saw the 
events occur before their eyes. There are children who go to Stuyvesant High School, for ex- 
ample, right next to the World Trade Center. 

Think about the fact that if you are of Arabic heritage, you wear your ethnicity on your face, 
especially if you are a Muslim women wearing a burka, hood, or veil. These are the kind of 
physiological issues that 1 would like to see studied, among many others. The economic issues 
in Michigan, including various foods and businesses developed by the Middle Eastern popula- 
tions, are also fascinating. 

Smallwood: There is a book called The Day of Ahmed's Secret that some of you may know. It is a 
lovely, respectful story of an Egyptian boy and his secret. The secret is that he learns to write his 
name. It is good for preschool, because there is a lot of language in it. There are not that many 



700 




MISCELLANEOUS 



books about the Arab culture available in the multicultural schools. It is important to bring in 
many books to reflect the cultures of all the children. 

Children are not monolithic. Teachers sometimes make mistakes of grouping children 
together. One year, I had just returned from living in Nigeria, and I had children from Israel, 
Palestine, Peru, and Chile in a cooperative learning group. Grouping the children was an 
important consideration, because they were not getting along in the classroom. They carried 
many issues from their families, and the Israeli boys said, "I am not sitting with him, I am not 
talking with him, I am not working with him. You can put us in any group you want but that 
group." The problems of the homes do not all disappear when children enter the classroom. It 
takes a lot of sensitivity. The same occurs with Latino children. There is the assumption that 
since they all speak Spanish, they should be put together, and that they will get along. It is more 
complicated than that, and we need sensitivity to understand those issues. 

Mary Ann Walker: Could you please discuss tension between teachers of different ethnicities 
and cultures? 

Smallwood: Some of the recent immigrants arrive well-educated, with teacher training from 
their own country. But because their training is not from the U.S., they come into Head Start 
programs or preschool programs as aides. Some of the tension between teachers stems from the 
fact that some immigrants qualify only as aides, but they are better educated and better trained 
than the teachers they are supposed to assist. I encourage them to follow the system, get addi- 
tional training, and become a teacher. 

Sroufe: Do we have any information about other international experiences? We often think of 
the United States as the only country that is receiving immigrants; in fact, many countries, 
including Germany and those in Scandinavia, are receiving immigrants. How are they accom- 
modating them? 

Markel: The European situation is interesting, because they are far more homogeneous in their 
population. Britain had a tough time grappling with this issue in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s 
when Africans and Middle Easterners moved there. Germany is having the most critical prob- 
lems right now in Europe. 

Smallwood: With their population from Turkey. 

Hernandez: It is interesting that many of these other countries are mirroring what has occurred 
in the U.S. Using Walt Whitman's term, we are a "nation of nations," and that is our unique role 
in world history. But many of the same issues of displacement persist, and one generation with 
power often cedes their power to a new up-and-coming group. Think of the Yankees, who had to 
give up their power to Irish politicians a century and a half ago, and Germans, and East Euro- 
pean Jews, and so on. This is now playing itself out across the Atlantic Ocean. It brings up a 
much broader issue that goes beyond the American immigration experience. What it comes 
down to is the common propensity for a society to label some people as outsiders, or "others." 

It is a frightening situation. 

One of the reasons I study immigrants and contagion is that it demonstrates a scenario of 
wanting to avoid somebody. If somebody walked in here with bubonic plaque, we would all 
want to get out of the room. No one would say we were being culturally insensitive. But when 
one combines a serious, contagious disease with a socially undesirable or "other" group, there 
are interesting dynamics worth studying. This is not particularly scholarly to say, but it comes 
down to a turf issue: "I was here first. You look different than I do. This is not the face of my 
country." This is happening all across the world. 





701 



SYMPO SI A/ ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



Recently, I spent a week in Paris visiting their early-education programs, corresponding to 
Head Start. We were looking specifically at how they address immigrant issues. They take an 
assimilationist point of view, which in France they call their republican model: Everyone should 
become French. They put a lot more resources into early-education centers that have a high 
proportion of immigrants than they do into the others. They are making an effort to support 
their point of view, by providing resources to make it happen. 

We were surprised that they have not done any research. They have been doing this for about 
20 years, but there is no research on what effect anything they are doing has on the immigrants; 
whether it makes a difference, whether it is good, whether it is bad. They have not considered 
alternative approaches. In about 6 months, we are going to put together a report to offer the 
perspectives on how this could or could not be a model for the American situation. 

Hernandez: We had the same policies here in the 1920s and 1930s. It is called Americanization. 

Smallwood: If one scratches immigration beyond the surface, one realizes that it is complex. Let 
me mention another children's book, called GTandfathevs Journey, by Allen Say. It is his immigra* 
tion story and family history. The last line of the book says, "Whenever I am in one country, I 
am longing for the other." When I share that in literature circles with ESL and mainstream 
teachers, it reminds people that immigration is not a one-way situation. When one comes to 
America, there is an experience between the countries and it is ongoing and worth exploring. 

The United States inherits many of the other immigration sagas. For example, the Germans 
said that the Gypsy Romas could stay for 5 years. Where did they go after the 5 years? They have 
now come to the United States, to North Dakota. However, North Dakota has out-migration, 
which means that people are leaving the state. It is difficult to understand why they have out- 
migration when they are so welcoming to immigrants. The other information I can share about 
immigration is based on one of my summer projects, helping the St. Louis Public School system 
develop an ESL curriculum. When we discussed the topic of immigration, we realized that they 
were also studying migration, including westward expansion and emigration. I always encourage 
people not to be monolithic and think that everyone is coming to America. There are many 
reasons for people to leave the country. There are books about this topic, especially about 
American Jews going to Israel. 

Hernandez: I have some thoughts on the importance of crosscultural communication. One 
story I heard was about an Arab child in Detroit who was probably third generation. In third 
grade, the children were telling him to go back to his own country. This behavior lacks the 
sensitivity and understanding of how we were all immigrants once. This child's father was a 
second-generation immigrant, a middle-aged adult who probably came to the U.S. in the 1940s. 
He seemed to be well integrated, but after the events of September 11th, he asked his American 
friend, "Can we still be friends?" He felt that "otherness." 

After September 11th, we realized how bereft we are in the intellectual capacity of addressing 
Arabic language and culture, which constitutes at least one fifth of the world's population. These 
stories, from the micro-level of children and second-generation adults to global terrorist threats, 
demonstrate the importance of communicating and understanding each other. 

Sroufe: Robert Coles did a lot of work in similar fields and has a book that looks naively 
optimistic. It is about children in places of conflict. As I recall, he concluded that children knew 
their parents' prejudice but did not share them. The Israeli and Palestinian children could play 
together, but when they went back to their homes they would begin with the epithets again 
because it was expected behavior. This seems more optimistic than our current situation, and we 
have a challenge before us. 




702 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Effective and Strategic Communication 
of Research to the Media 

CHAIR: Ruby Takanishi 
MODERATOR: Cathy Trost 

PRESENTERS: Carol Guensburg, Rachel Jones, Kristin Moore 

Ruby Takanishi: We will begin with brief preliminary remarks, and then we will engage with 
the audience on the subject of how researchers can better communicate their work, their 
findings, and the significance of their findings to the various media. Cathy Trost will moderate 
the session. Trost is the founding director of the Casey Journalism Center on Children and 
Families at the University of Maryland. She is a former Wall Street Journal reporter, and she has 
recently completed a book that compiles an oral history of journalists who covered the events of 
September 11th. 

Rachel Jones is a science editor for National Public Radio (NPR). Jones is from southern 
Illinois, and she was enrolled in the first summer of Head Start. 

Carol Guensburg is a journalist who serves as Director of the Journalism Fellowship Program 
in Child and Family Policy at the University of Maryland. She was the former Associate Editor of 
the American Journalism Review, and she is also a former reporter. 

Kristin Moore is President and Senior Scholar at Child Trends, a nonpartisan, nonprofit, 
research organization in Washington, DC. We wanted to have a researcher on the panel who has 
a lot of experience with the media, and who is often quoted in the media. Moore's particular 
expertise is teenage pregnancy. 

Cathy Trost: What I want to talk about today is the notion that we are two different cultures — 
journalists and researchers. We have different customs, habits, expectations, and timeframes for 
our work. We hope this panel will help bridge the gap between those two cultures, help you 
better understand journalism, as well as understand through the eyes of a researcher who has 
incredible mastery of communicating to the media. We are trying to figure out how to translate 
our work to one another, which is critical if the world is going to be a better place for children 
and families. 

We will discuss issues that you may not understand about journalism. This is a perfect 
opportunity to get the story behind the secret society, and to find out what goes on in news- 
rooms. It is also an opportunity to think about what issues are not covered by reporters and 
what you think is not on our radar screens. 

One fascinating question arose: What is a typical day like for a journalist? It is revelatory to 
find out what a journalist faces when he or she walks into the office each morning. I will ask 
Guensburg and Jones to describe what they confront when they walk into the newsroom in the 
morning and what that means in terms of the work, getting it on the air, and getting it into 
print. 

Rachel Jones: This is a good time for me to talk along those lines, because for the past month 
and a half, I have been working on a profile of a program on racial disparity of the Urban 
Health Institute at the Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. I have been developing this 
profile and talking with people in the Institute and the community about their perceptions of 
Johns Hopkins. I had just completed a first edit and was thrilled about it. It was almost like 
giving birth. It was an intense process to get this story together, have it edited, and be dose to 
having it on the air. 

I came into the office on Wednesday morning. At NPR, there is a 9:30 am meeting every 
morning when all the editors of the different desks and shows sit around a huge conference 



O 

ERIC 



709 



703 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLES /CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



table and decide how to make the lives of reporters miserable. Actually, they decide the major 
topics of the day the stories that need to be covered, and which pieces should go to which 
shows. 

I arrived at the office at about 9:45 am that morning, and apparently that days meeting had 
been short. When I walked over to my editor s desk, I told her I was ready for the next edit on 
the Johns Hopkins story and that, hopefully, it would make it on one of the upcoming weekend 
shows. She replied that a story in the Washington Post had described a study of spanking that 
recently appeared in the American Psychological Association Journal. She asked if I was available to 
probe a bit deeper into the debate on spanking children. 

I could say, "No, I really want to stick to and finish this Johns Hopkins piece," or I could 
continue to work at NPR, so I agreed. I was also curious about the spanking study, because as 
somebody who grew up in a family of ten children, spanking was the only way that my parents 
could have any kind of sanity. I was curious what the research and conclusions were based on. 

1 spent the past few days on the telephone, and interestingly enough, most of the people to 
whom 1 wanted to talk were here in Washington for this conference. I arranged an interview 
yesterday with the woman who did the meta-analysis, involving 88 major studies on spanking 
over the years. This is the first time anybody looked at them all and tried to measure them on a 
variety of indicators. It is a 45-page study, and I had 2 days to weed through all the charts, along 
with fhe three accompanying commentaries by doctors and psychologists who refuted the 
results. 

When I finally set up an interview with Elizabeth Gershoff of Columbia University, I felt as 
though I had to go into it by saying, "I know I am doing you an injustice here. You have spent 
the past 7 years looking at these studies. You have thought about it from every possible angle, 
and I need to get to the heart of it with a 3-minute story for this week's All Issues Considered." She 
was receptive and understanding, and she boiled it down to the major points and the "take 
home message" for listeners. 

Today I will interview one of the commentators who wrote the other piece, and ask him 
about the counterpoint argument. But then, I still have to find a third person to mediate it and 
help me put this in context. As a listener, reader, and consumer of news, I often get frustrated 
when there is back and forth head-butting, as opposed to giving some insight into what a piece 
means. 

The point I want to convey is that sometimes, Trom day to day, a journalist does not know 
what they will cover. They do not know what they will need to wear. They do not know what 
perspective they will have to take or how deep they will have to delve. I am doing a story on a 
New England Journal of Medicine study that is fairly straightforward, which I can whip out in 3 V 2 
minutes without a problem. However, a topic as politicized as the spanking debate —an issue 
based on a wide analysis that has people deeply entrenched on one side or the other — can 
pose a challenge, even to the most dedicated journalist who wants to do more than just skim 
the surface. 

From our perspective, it can be enormously challenging to come in on a daily basis and 
attempt to get our arms around the work of researchers. It has to be a give and take process. We 
must create more empathy, which is why I enjoy and appreciate engaging in conferences such as 
this one. 

Carol Guensburg: Two days of preparation is 1 V 2 days more than most reporters get. I want to 
add that Jones comes to social science issues with some specialized training. 

Jones: You are absolutely right, it does make a huge difference. I try to transmit to researchers 
that I have spent the past 8 years with a primary focus on issues affecting children and families 
in the United States. First my focus was on policy and now it is more on research. 

However, the average journalist may not have similar insight or knowledge. Journalists are 
thrown into fields everyday where their expertise may be extremely limited or nonexistent. One 



ERIC 



704 



710 



MISCELLANEOUS 



has to pick up the phone and talk to these knowledgeable people, who spend all their time on 
their studies, and ask them to explain issues in a way that can be fed back to readers and 
listeners. This is an enormous challenge for us, and we face it on a daily basis. 

Guensburg: These days, I run a program called Journalism Fellowships in Child and Family 
Policies. 1 am not in a newsroom, and that allows me some perspective and time to reflect on 
what happens in a newsroom. 1 can be the first set of eyes on copy produced by our fellows. 
Some ask me to take a look at their work, but for the most part, any editing takes place in the 
newsrooms of our fellows. 1 have spent 20 years in newsrooms m)^elf, working most often as 
writing editor, so my experiences are different from Jones' and more typical of what is seen at 
smaller papers or at other media. The largest paper that I worked for was the Milwaukee Journal 
and then the Journal Sentinel where I eventually became the Sunday Magazine editor. I had also 
been the food editor, features editor, and had similar positions at other papers around the 
country. 

Jones explained that many journalists come to their jobs as generalists. We have liberal arts 
backgrounds, often with minimal exposure to statistics and other fields. Sometimes, we are 
confronted with studies that require us to weigh evidence or produce something cogent out of a 
study summary that someone tossed across the desk. There is little time to grapple with it as a 
reporter or as an editor. 

A smaller paper or broadcast station has additional threats to address. Typically, there is a 
small staff. It is challenging to get expert commentary, because people may not call you back. 
The former Bureau Chief of the Milwaukee Journal confessed to me that when he would place 
calls to Washington, he would mumble "blank, blank, blank from the blank Journal" into the 
phone. If one tried hard enough, it might sound like the Wall Street Journal Later in the conver- 
sation after the channels of communication had clearly been opened and he was getting the 
needed information, he would point out that he represented the Milwaukee Journal. 

Again, one is grappling with a lot of information. I was editing a story for the Wisconsin 
Magazine on the challenges faced by incarcerated mothers in maintaining relationships with 
their children. I encouraged the reporter to go back and give us more than that superficial read, 
to nurture the stories and help our readers see the challenges to the child's development. I sent 
my reporter back to speak to social scientists about the potential impact on the child and 
programs to address these problems. This approach provides the anecdotal story with substan- 
tive context. 

Takanishi: What are some of the revelations that you could share with us about the culture of 
journalists from your years of working with them? 

Kristin Moore: I have found that journalists are always in a hurry because they are on a 
deadline. 1 do not think academia gives points for being in the newspaper; similarly, one does 
not get tenure for being a good newspaper reporter. I have also learned to be brief. Scientists 
always want caveats, complexity, and subgroups, which means they will not be quoted. I learned 
this from Doug Besharov in Washington; he was a model for how to make statements. He would 
be the one who got quoted, not me. Afterward, I would think about how to shorten the message. 
1 remember talking about programs for teenage parents and deciding in advance to say that the 
programs are too late, too short, and too cheap; it got quoted. I found a way to say what I 
wanted, and then I worked on it. 

One of my colleagues also taught us to plan ahead. If one is not ready to talk to the press, ask 
to call them back in 5 minutes, not the next day. One should plan out what to say and the words 
to be used, so that one does not say, "um, well, and then on the other hand." One needs to be 
brief, succinct, and choose colorful adjectives. Many researchers are also fairly quantitative and 
introverted, and that makes this task difficult. Journalists are verbal, and they are often extro- 



O 

me 



711 



705 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



verted. One has to think about what will sell, and what will interest a person of a different 
personality who has no interest in research. 

Trost: Research culture is enormously filled with time, study, and reflection; journalism is not. It 
is the first draft of history, for better or for worse. Research and development in journalism is 
literally a lunchtime conversation with the person who is handing off their beat to you, with a 
couple of days to get up to speed. Unless one chooses to be a foreign correspondent, who 
typically receives language lessons and cultural training about their country, reporters usually get 
no briefing in the complicated issues they cover. Reporters are informationally under siege. I left 
the field before email, but I cannot imagine how many emails reporters receive per day. What 
number of calls, emails, and faxes do you receive? 

Jones: I primarily receive email because I think it is much easier to handle, and I encourage 
people to do the same. I can print out attachments and take my time to review them. On the 
opposite end, if someone calls me and I am on deadline or have to make another call in 15 
minutes, I may be watching my watch and not listening carefully to what is being said. I appreci- 
ate a call to say that an email will be sent with some attachments about the latest study, re- 
search, or whatever it may be. 

On average I may get 10 or 15 emails a day from groups like the National Institute for Child 
Health and Human Development. I also get about 10 emails per day from the Kaiserrietwork.org 
listserv, on customized topics such as child development, HIV/AIDS, women's health issues, and 
other issues. I do not understand people who get frustrated by so many emails, because a look at 
the headers can help one decide whether or not to be bothered. There are some journals and 
publications that the Science Desk has decided we will not work with, so I can hit the delete key 
and move on to the next email. But again, it does pay to call the reporter; tell him or her what 
you would like to send and do not just send it cold because the message might wind up deleted. 

As for calls, I have done a fairly good job over the past few years at NPR of letting people 
know that I will talk to them and hear what they have to say, but I simply do not have the time 
to go into a long telephone pitch. That has been kept to a minimum, and I receive maybe a 
dozen calls a week. It depends on what is happening. 

Question: I am a researcher at the University of North Texas, where generally, our procedure of 
releasing information to the press is to go through our university press officer. We often find 
ourselves involved in that process. How does one go about this process? 

Jones: I primarily work with those press office types, because I often work with the major 
journals such as the Journal of the American Medical Association and the New England Journal of 
Medicine. If I pick up the phone and directly call someone with a study in such a publication, 
they probably would not be able to speak to me unless it was cleared through the public 
information office. 

On the other hand, if one's work is not attached to a brand new study coming out in a major 
journal, it is a good idea to identify a reporter that covers that kind of research, and give them a 
heads up. One might say, "I have been doing some research on a study that will be coming out 
in a few weeks, and I really admire your work. You have done a few stories on this, and I would 
really like to let you know more about it. Maybe we can have lunch or you can come by to talk 
about it. " 

For the spanking story that I am working on, I spoke with one of the auxiliary editorial 
writers on one of the pieces, and he helped me wade through the issues on both sides of the 
debate. He mentioned that he is currently doing research to measure the effects of spanking, or 
what goes on in a child's mind at the time that he or she is spanked. The argument that nobody 
can seem to answer is whether that spank on the thigh makes the child view the mother and 



706 




MISCELLANEOUS 



father as scary predators, and if that is the seed of neurosis that will follow them for the rest of 
their lives. He is measuring heart rate, blood pressure, and levels of fear, so that we can begin the 
research-based discussion on what impact that has on the child. I told him to give me a call 
when he reached a point of having something ready to submit to a journal, because I would 
love to follow up with it. I would encourage you to do issues like that. You will also do a service 
to journalists, because it will help the reporting of the person you contact and inform along 
those lines. 

Comment: We are constandy jockeying for attention within the university. If the scientists 
release information on their nitrogen car, or the economists release a report, we get bumped 
down. It is like a competition of who has offered the biggest story first. 

Guensburg: You are also talking about establishing a relationship, and that is critical. You have 
every opportunity and every right to pick up the phone and acknowledge that you see what the 
reporter s beat coverage is. Another good way for a journalist to handle this, to keep the lines of 
communication open with a communication staff member, is to say, "I have had an informal 
conversation with X." Another approach we advocate is having a "rabbi relationship" with some 
sources who can provide contextual background or sourcing. You could be that person. 

Moore: Researchers often play the roles of background contacts. Newspapers are about news, 
and scientists are rarely the owners of breaking news. We may have a result, but that typically 
happens only several times in a lifetime. We have a lot of trend and background data.. One has 
to think about how one's research fits into what people are thinking about. If people are 
thinking about school violence, does your work carry a message that should be raised, that will 
be relevant to the person writing a story? 

Another important quality about researchers is that many of them know more than they 
think they know, and the narrow study that they are working on now is not the sum total of 
what they know. If a researcher can figure out how to briefly describe a literature review, he or 
she can provide that context for a "moment of the day" story. 

Takanishi: Can you give an example of how you have integrated your work into a current social 
issue? 

Moore: Welfare reform is currently a huge issue in Washington, DC, and Child Trends has done 
a lot of work in this area. I have also done a lot of work on adolescent childbearing. The rate of 
adolescent childbearing has been decreasing for 10 years, so the journalists are not interested in 
that trend anymore. However, in the context of welfare reform, we said that adolescent child- 
bearing was decreasing even before welfare reform, and we linked it to the reauthorization 
debate. 

Takanishi: Back to the journalists for a moment. What do you expect from research? What do 
you expect from a researcher in terms of what is needed to get a story in the paper or on the air? 
How can someone best prepare? 

Jones: Moore already hit on the major issue of brevity, which can be frustrating for researchers. I 
ask people to give me the thesis statement. If there were only 5 minutes to convey the most 
important outcome, aspect, or trend associated with your work, what would it be? That is always 
a good starting point, because that helps me frame it in my mind and think of the kinds of 
questions I need to ask. It also helps me to think of the listeners for whom I am writing. 

I have to keep those kinds of parameters on the conversation, because a researcher may have 
spent years working on an issue, and will have numerous caveats and contextual subcurrents in 




713 



707 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLES/ CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



mind. To do my job effectively and to do a service to listeners, I must think in discrete sections 
that help me connect one step to the next. 

I want a researcher to challenge me. I want him or her to say ''you are not getting this," or "let 
me make sure that you are getting it right. " If I throw a question back at him or her and it is not 
relevant to the research, I am not offended. There is a lot at stake for me to put a story on a 
national network and have it be wrong. I want to make sure that I have accurately interpreted 
the research. Thankfully, I hear more often than not that I have understood what was described. 
Nonetheless, a researcher does me a huge favor of steering me if I am not quite on point. 

I also want to speak with a researcher who will say, where appropriate, "I am not the best 
person to talk with about this, but here are five other people for you to contact." Researchers 
must understand that we are in the business of adding context that broadens the scope of an 
issue, so we will not do a one-source story. We will want to find somebody who perhaps has a 
diverging point of view, or who has done a different kind of research. People can make them- 
selves look good by offering a couple of other names of people that have research or perspec- 
tives to share. Those are some of the basics that I appreciate in working with researchers. 

Guensburg: I would build on what Jones said; they are all great suggestions. I would also 
appreciate it if a researcher could point me to a concise piece of background material that can 
help me get a better understanding of a weighty topic. As Jones also said, it helps to have an 
idea. I probably would ask, "Is there a thoughtful critic or someone else who can add another 
perspective regarding your work or on this subject?" Finally, what also needs to be recognized is 
that multiple conversations are involved in most cases. I may need to get back to the researcher 
to verify information, make sure that I understood everything, or check back later if I receive 
confounding information. 

Moore: We had a story in the Wall Street Journal yesterday on welfare reform and children. It 
began at a breakfast with A1 Hunt about a week and a half ago and was followed up by a phone 
call. He asked for specific information, and somebody stayed late at work to produce materials 
for him. There was an interview the following day and then an urgent final interview. Out of 
four contacts, three of them were urgent. One has to commit to being available. 

I want to address something from the point of view of the researcher because we all face the 
issue of being misquoted. We want to do rigorous science and also share the results, and these 
two goals can be in conflict. We have (hopefully) solved this problem at Child Trends by 
creating different versions. We produced a synthesis of 10 experimental studies of welfare reform 
that included children, and we have a full report with tables. We then wrote a chapter, which 
appeared in The Future of Children journal. We also created a single version of it that is 15 pages 
long for people who want this information. We wrote a 2-page version specifically for the press, 
and they can get other versions of the report upon request. These 2-page versions provide 
credibility; someone like Jones might read them, but most journalists will not. We also have a 1- 
page press release. When the information appears, it will likely only be a couple of columns. If 
one can get comfortable with that process, the science is there; we have done it carefully because 
there is no point in getting it out if it is not good. I am sure we are all committed to that 
principle. But, it must be short. 

Takanishi: Do you ever go down to the level of talking points? 

Guensburg: Absolutely. We had an interesting experience, where staff members met with a 
public relations firm on the topic of welfare reform because we wanted children to be an 
important component of the welfare reform discussion. We did not want to be bested, so our 
entire staff worldng on welfare reform issues went to the offices of a public relations firm in 
Washington, DC. We spent an afternoon free associating and talking about what we had found 



708 



714 



MISCELLANEOUS 



in sharing these materials, and then they sent back to us what they believed we were saying. 

After some clarifications, we ended up with a series of points. I passed around the handout 
"Children and Welfare Reform Authorization: A Golden Opportunity or Missed Opportunity?" 
The language used attracts people's attention to the issue. We have received quite a bit of 
coverage. I do not know if children are still the central focus of welfare reform, but we were 
more effective with that strategy than we would have been otherwise. 

Trost: One of the hardest issues to do is to think like a journalist, but it is essential to put 
yourself through the exercise of looking at a story and seeing its infrastructure. Typically, there is 
a headline, followed by an anecdotal lead. By the third paragraph or so, one sees what journal- 
ists call the nut paragraph, which is the thesis statement Guensburg described. Try to put your 
work into a nut paragraph. Try to be rigorous and boil down your work into the thesis para- 
graph or the nut paragraph. It is difficult. One sees the difficulty for reporters who have that type 
of rigorous boilerplate to follow and also why stories get written about as they do. There are 
ways to break through those formulas, but many journalists still follow them. Journalists often 
ask me if I know somebody in that area of research that they can talk to. I can lead them to 
someone, but often not to the whole truth. 

Jones: If it is a reporter from NPR, please provide it! In fact, in talking with thfe researcher 
yesterday, I was trying to be cheeky, and I asked if she had been spanked. She said that she had 
been spanked as a child, but it was rare and done only as a last resort. I will be able to use that 
somewhere in the story, but my point is, even if a reporter does not use it, it helps them to think 
about the issue in a way that is more anecdotal and conversational than a description about the 
odds ratio for the meta-analysis. The researcher does not need to write the anecdote, but it can 
be conveyed to us. 

For example, I did a story on Downs Syndrome. Researchers have found that the rates of 
Downs Syndrome, or deaths of Downs Syndrome children, among African Americans was much 
higher than other racial or ethnic groups. I talked with the researcher for 15 minutes before he 
told me of his own daughter with Downs Syndrome and the struggles he had with her and with 
finding information. That story helped to humanize the research, it helped humanize him, and 
it helped the flow of conversation. This is a personal decision. I would not ask everybody to dig 
into his or her psyche and come up with some personal anecdote to help me understand my 
story. But, if it comes naturally, it can be helpful. 

Trost: It is good if one can describe what led to the research. If one offers a wonderful source, 
that is helpful too. If someone tries to dictate the source, as a journalist I pull back fast. If one 
tries to force feed information or come across as having a pronounced point of view or agenda, 
it makes me skittish as a journalist. 

Guensburg: One of the difficult parts for researchers is that the media often wants counter- 
poirit, and a researcher is often in the middle. A researcher often wants to give them the facts or 
the more complex version, which is not on either extreme. It is a difficult place to be, and is 
often not interesting, so that is why we are sometimes in the background. 

Question: I wanted to know what news is and when the process turns from an idea into a story. 
Who makes that decision? How much influence does the reporter have in determining the story? 
As a researcher, one has ideas about the importance of one's own work and how to get those 
visions across to a wider audience. 

Jones: It is an excellent question, and I will use this spanking story again as an example. There 
are many studies on corporal punishment and the spanking of children. This particular story 



715 



709 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLES/ CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



became newsworthy because it was the first time someone had looked at all the major studies. 
Size can be important if there are two studies and one of these is a study of 1 2 children in a 
day-care center in Poughkeepsie and the other looks at 20,000 children in centers across the 
country. Unless the first study was resoundingly different, an editor will typically choose one 
that has more weight or statistical significance. If it is the first time this kind of research or study 
has been done, or if the results are completely different than anything that has ever been found 
before about this topic, it becomes newsworthy. The undercurrent here is that it has to be 
something different or new. 

The joke is that news occurs when man bites dog. There is some truth to that when it comes 
to thinWng about what one is doing in research. The research may be important and mean a lot 
to the researcher, but in our newsrooms, we fight for 2 minutes of time to do a topic, while the 
national desk may want 5 minutes on a Supreme Court ruling. We have to think about those 
kinds of concerns as we look at the pool of research, story ideas, and pictures that come across. 
An issue has to rise above a basic measure of why people should care about the topic. 

Guensburg: My editor often used to ask, "How does this move the ball forward?" We do not 
want to go baclwards. We are talking about the ball of the story, the ball of the research, the ball 
of the trend. We may have written on this topic of child care forever. How does this move the 
ball forward? It is often a tough hurdle to overcome. 

Takanishi: There is another aspect that you have raised, which is perhaps a poor reflection on 
our craft. Sometimes these stories will develop because news happens when it happens to the 
editor s child. 

Jones: Or to the editor. 

Guensburg: Now that more women are becoming editors, concerns in the newsroom are likely 
broadened. Obviously, there are men who have the sarne concerns. But for a long time, news- 
rooms were dominated by one gender and certain issues were not as important. 

Trost: 1 have another comment for researchers on how to think in a strategic fashion. If one is 
doing a story on school readiness, one might want to think about releasing it when school 
starts, not when everybody is leaving on vacation. Think about what you want to accomplish. 

Question: Is there any possible relationship between the trade media and the general media in 
terms of supplying sources for anecdotes, or anything like that? Do you think there is potential 
for cooperation, or can the trade be used in one's work? 

Guensburg: The trade media are often our sources; they are springboards for stories, and we 
sometimes borrow from them quite liberally. Any smart reporter will find the trades that cover 
the field and read them religiously. 

Trust: There are perfectly legitimate outlets that those trade publications and newsletters reach, 
especially for the people in America who are involved in children's issues. Where 1 come from, 
we think they have high status. 

Takanishi: Do you find the media does not pick up the stories covered in your magazine? 
Comment: It does not. 

Takanishi: Are the stories readable? 



710 



716 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Comment: Yes. One of the joys of working for the family support field is working for people 
who want to read about their approaches in partnering and parenting. They want to understand 
the information and share it with everybody in their community. A few years ago, we made a 
strategic shift in how we present our information. We even have a color photograph on the front 
and back covers of the publication. Despite our great potential, I ultimately have not found 
much opportunity to get these stories out into the wider audience. 

Trost: I am curious about how your magazine is distributed at this point, and if you target select 
publications, broadcast oudets, or others. If you are not sending to those, should you be? 

Comment: That is an excellent suggestion. I am trying to develop this. 

Trost: It is a matter of exposure for you, and if people are not aware of your magazine, they will 
not look for it. There is such an abundance of literature and media information right now. I 
would assemble a mailing list. 

Jones: NPR offers reporters more leeway than my other reporting experiences have. If a reporter 
comes across an interesting study, he or she can approach an editor and say, "Hey, there is this 
new, obscure, yet intriguing study in a journal that is done well, so we should do a story on it." I 
have done that on numerous occasions myself. In my reading, I might have come across a study 
in a journal or read a news brief about it in another magazine, and approached my editor to 
suggest writing a story. However, the other, more truthful, answer is that in many situations, we 
are driven by what is in the New York Times and the Washington Post. If we have not already seen 
it ourselves, but it is in one of those publications, then we know it has been vetted to a certain 
degree, and maybe we should look into it. We will not do the story just because they run it, 
because they may have gotten something wrong. However, if we understand why they chose to 
do the story, we might look at it more closely. 

It depends on what the research is. On the science desk, we look at how rigorously the study 
was conducted, whether it is valid, and as Guensburg was saying, whether it moves the discus- 
sion forward. If it is an interesting study, but it does not say anything that has not been said 100 
times before, we typically will not run a story on it. 

If I am talking to researchers, I am not just looking for somebody who has a great sounding, 
mellow, smooth voice. I am looking for somebody who can articulate and get to the point. The 
irony is this: Hypothetically I may talk to two researchers. One researcher may be okay — she 
does not get at the depth of the issue but she is well spoken — while the other researcher is 
brilliant and I know that if I had 2 hours to sit and listen to her, I would thoroughly understand 
the issue. This second researcher's voice, however, is flat and sounds like a buzz saw. Engineers 
mixing the story will choose not to run it. In a 5-minute story, if there is a 2-minute dead zone 
of a person's droning voice, it will not work. I spent 12 years as a print reporter before coming to 
NPR, so these are a different set of concerns that I must now think about. 

Takanishi: As Moore mentioned, sound bytes also count in print media. It matters who is 
presenting the information. The responsibility also falls to the reporter and to the news organi- 
zation to ensure that the final story is reflective or contextual. As Guensburg says, offering what 
research has shown to date should advance the ball. How does this new information fit into the 
greater scheme? We are not always good at that. Sometimes, the more prevalent voice heard is 
the one that is most strident. 

Question: Is it a point well taken that brilliance is often left out of journalism because listeners 
do not have the patience or because speakers are unable, or unwilling to communicate in a way 
that is easily understood. 





711 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Jones: I would not say that this happens often, but it definitely happens. The flip side of that is 
the glib person who just goes on and on and sounds good, even if we have determined that the 
research is not sound, or they are affiliated with an institution or organization of questionable 
repute. We will not put them on the air only because they sound good. For my reporting, I rely 
on organizations like the National Institutes of Health (NIH), National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development (NICHD), and the major teaching and research institutions. If I put a 
story on NPR that is flawed, or with the wrong research, I will hear it from 100 people moments 
after it mns. I have to make sure that I am talking to smart people. 

During my fellowship at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) a couple of 
years ago, I learned that they offer their scientists and researchers training in how to speak with 
the media. There was supposedly an uproar against it; some researchers felt insulted that the 
CDC had dared to bring in a media consultant to tell them how to converse and offer sound 
bytes. The director for media at CDC listened to all the complaints and essentially told them to 
get over it because this is a new millennium. This is a new way of getting information across, 
and a training session can begin to help people thinking about these issues. 

Question: How important is training? 

Moore: From a researcher's point of view, we have gone through this same process of wanting a 
media presence, because we are nonpartisan and we are in Washington, DC, which is filled with 
partisanship. We thought there should be a voice for nonpartisan work on children. It is 
extremely uncomfortable for researchers who feel that they did not go to graduate school to 
learn how to communicate in short sentences. That is not what caused us to choose our profes- 
sion. But, if one wants to get the message out, one has to do that. 

We have solved the issue in a variety of ways. We have undergone training, we practice, and 
we never give a talk at a conference without rehearsing it. We practice bullet points before calling 
back a press peirson, and we write out quotes in our press releases. That is a comfortable ap- 
proach, because I can read and rewrite until I am saying what I want to say. On a telephone 
interview, even with a lot of experience, one can worry that one has not provided the right 
nuance, so that has been a helpful strategy for me. Give them the quote, not just paragraph after 
paragraph. 

Question: Like the good politicians, do you also have strategies for capturing back territory? Do 
you have a strategy to steer the conversation to what you think is important? 

Moore: Yes. Right before this conference, I did an interview with Black Entertainment Television 
(BET) on nonmarital childbearing in the African American community. We have some points on 
the issue about what is unexpected, and about the stereotypes around nonmarital childbearing. 
Most people think these numbers are due to first births, high school girls, and minority commu- 
nities. In feet, 70% of nonmarital childbearing occurs among women 20 years of age and older; 
half of these nonmarital births are second, third, or fourth births; and they occur mostly in the 
White community. The rate is going up among Whites and down among African Americans. Put 
all those trends in the context of stereotypes. What people think is not always correct. That is 
effective for journalists, right? That is an effective transmission device. 

Question: Does NPR's usual liberal stance affect what you report on? 

Jones: Particularly on the science desk, it should not. A good example of that was a story I did a 
while ago on same-sex parenting. I got two emails, one that said we NPR liberals should not 
even be talking about this issue, and one from somebody who was equally angry that we had 
not said enough or delved deeply into the issue. The story was about the fact that the American 



712 



718 



MISCELLANEOUS 



Academy of Pediatrics was condoning it or had issued a support statement saying that the 
nonbiological parent in same-sex unions should be supported. 

One anticipates the fact that some people will have liberal views about an issue, or other 
views that vary along the spectrum. I do not think we spend much time worrying about that; we 
do try to make sure that the stories are balanced, and we try to cover as many of the bases or 
arguments as possible. 

Takanishi: Would you have spent as much time doing a study that found spanking was good 
for children? 

Jones: If it was the first time that research had ever been done, if it was done by a reputable 
research organization, and if it was thorough in its analysis, then it is possible. What was 
interesting about the conversation with this particular researcher is that she said she did not go 
into this study with any preconceived notions or personal opinions about spanking, she just 
wanted to gather the research. She said that if she had found that the major studies showed a 
positive benefit to spanking, she would have been just as willing to publish that finding. We 
would have probably been just as willing to do the story as we are now, because it was some- 
thing new and different. 

Question: How do you decide whether a story is news or a feature? 

Jones: That is a good question, and I will again refer to the same-sex parenting story. We 
thought it was a historic decision for the Academy to stick its neck out by issuing a controversial 
statement of support on this topic. If I had had 6 or 7 minutes, it probably would have been a 
feature story where I would have found a couple, and spent time with them. Given the fact that I 
ultimately wanted to put 3 V 2 minutes on it, I had to stick with the news that the American 
Academy of Pediatrics today issued this statement, and what it means, and so forth. 

When it comes to doing features, one looks for the texture of the story, for whether or not the 
research or the study even lends itself to finding a real person who could be the way into the 
story. Generally speaking, if it is something that just happened today and is the breaking news, 
one is more concerned with getting out the basic news information. The next day, or three days 
later, one may try to think about a feature story. What is the long-term implication of this, how 
will this change the trend, how will this make America look different 10 years from now, and so 
on. One tries to find that person who typifies a change in the trend. 

Guensburg: That is the missed opportunity for many people in the field. They think the story is 
over after the initial, breaking news story. The most expansive, contextual stories are often the 
follow-ups, the weekend stories, and the feature stories that take longer to do. For example, 
people are working on stories right now about the effectiveness or noneffectiveness of charter 
education while the Supreme Court makes a decision on the issue. Those are the kind of issues 
that Moore described, about looking at the trend, the story in the news, and figuring out a way 
to get to the deeper stories. 

Trost: Whether a story plays as a news piece or as a feature is decided, in part, at editorial 
meetings. If news then decides that it wants to take the story to run, maybe it is going to hold. 
One never knows how many ads will come in, but ads arrive at the last minute and the story gets 
cut on the board. The reporter will have no say. The editor who handled the story and knows 
what has to be inserted to make it a good story is not the same person deciding what three 
graphs are trimmed out at the last minute. Stories that move on the news side are far more 
vulnerable than anything in the features section. 



O 

ERIC 



719 



713 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Comment: I have been with the Society for Research in Child Development for many years. We 
have looked at ways to facilitate communication about our research and ideas, but it seems that 
in recent years, there is a new technology involving the use of websites and electronic communi- 
cation. In many ways, it seems to be more effective, and we are more satisfied with it than 
dealing with newspapers, television, or radio. We have our own website, and we also work with 
a service that reviews different websites that have information about or for children, parents, 
teachers, and so forth. The service provides a useful resource in looking at whether the issue or 
report is credible. It gives us some guidance and information on what is available. 

Our website has many links, and we provide information, including our social policy reports. 
In addition, another website we are putting some money into helps to screen all the different 
websites that address children and their education, health, and other needs. It is a way that 
people can get a credible opinion from professionals. There is a big problem with the prolifera- 
tion of websites; I also teach at a university, and students now turn in papers with 7 credible 
sources and 10 that are gibberish, from unfamiliar electronic sources. But, electronic communi- 
cation has provided another way for people to access information. 

Guensburg: I am somewhat familiar with the Family Web Guide from Tufts University and with 
their evaluation sources. That is one good source for journalists to know about, because again, it 
provides vetted information, if you will. That is also why we turn to Child Trends, because those 
are good background sites. 

Question: Do you do any background checks to orient your thinking before you start the story? 

Jones: I do. If it is something I am completely unfamiliar with, obviously I do not want to talk 
to the researcher without knowing anything or having any perspective on it. Background 
knowledge always helps one to communicate better. 

Question: How would you determine which website to go to? 

Jones: Clearly, one looks at who is funding this organization, and who is on the board of 
directors. It is great if one can find this information on the website. If the website does not have 
it, then one almost has to go with a gut instinct. If it is an unfamiliar person's website on child 
development, then one should stay away from it. But, if it can be determined that it is affiliated 
with a recognizable organization, university, or research institution with a board of directors or 
people that you know, that offers more confidence in the quality of information. One must be 
careful, because anybody can set up his or her own webpage. 

Comment: Another good, nonpartisan, background source for information on child education 
and development is the ERIC System. Both our websites and our information services are 
available through an 800 number and are heavily used by media sources. They can provide 
reliable and quick background information. 

Question: I am with a city office of policies and communication. I receive calls from reporters 
asking me to find a researcher for them to interview. I will frantically seek out a researcher who 
is qualified to speak with them. More often than not, when I give the researcher the reporter s 
name and subject of the story, I hear, "I think I better not." What is the best way to work with 
researchers? How does one explain the position of the journalist? 

Jones: We have thought about that, and as I mentioned, I work on the sensitive issue of adoles- 
cent childbearing. We have asked ourselves if we want every researcher in the country interfacing 
with the press. What I have seen people do is to identify and develop the capacity of spokesper- 




714 



720 



MISCELLANEOUS 



sons. They do not turn the journalist completely off. They go with the advocates and are also 
credible. That is where we have come down on it, but it may depend on the issue. 

We also do referrals for people who 1 know will speak to the press. One must think about 
who will do a good interview and who will return a phone call. For many researchers, this is 
stressful; they are afraid of being misquoted. There has to be a combination of ability and desire 
to engage. We could talk about developing a list of people like that. 

Comment: Over the last two weeks, someone in Washington was talking about all the usual 
suspects being quoted. The critique from NPR was the reporter's need to expand his or her 
rolodex. 



Guensburg: Absolutely. Are there any suggestions about not turning to the same people over 
and over? 

Jones: It is the kind of proposal that is difficult to impose, particularly for somebody who is on 
deadline every day. National Desk reporters have it so tough, particularly in these times with so 
many different emerging issues. Every day, it is something new. If one is going to be on All Issues 
Considered at 4.00 in the afternoon, one may take information from whomever answers the call. 
A reporter may be interested in diversity and want to get different opinions, but he or she has to 
be in the studio and have the story mixed, produced, and ready to go on the air. Still, there have 
been attempts to get people to realize that the net should be widened. 

Question: Who determines the headline? 

Guensburg: Editors decide the headlines. Unfortunately, reporters generally have no say about 
the headline appearing over their name. Having been an editor, it is rare for me to ever turn in a 
story without a suggested headline. I say "suggested" because sometimes editors are busy and 
they do not have time to think of a headline on their own, or maybe there is not enough space. I 
want you to know that I did not write the headline "Bully Factories" on the handout; in fact, it 
was one of the toughest battles I have ever had and lost. 

Takanisbi: What is the story about? 

Guensburg: The story is about coverage of the NICHD's early child-care study. There were 
different camps, and certain statements were taken out of context. The coverage developed over 
several days, different media handled it, researchers presented the news, and there was a whole 
range of comments. This was not the suggested headline. This gets back to Moore's message to 
be punchy and alliterative. 

However, it is often a distillation process, and what I often say to people is to split the 
difference. It is good if most of what you wanted to get in the story is put in without grave 
misrepresentation. Too often, people let themselves get refereed out of the debate over minor 
issues like a headline. Obviously, one should complain if it misrepresents the story; but other- 
wise, people are too quick to parachute out of social discourse because they feel offended by a 
headline or small change that was made. 



Comment: It is better to be interviewed than not to be interviewed, no matter what. 



Takanisbi: Absolutely. What are the worst issues reporters have done to you? What are the real 
issues that you see as difficult to get past? 

Comment: Spending time on the telephone and never seeing the story. 





715 



SYMPOSIA/ROUNDTABLES/CONVERSATION HOURS 



Trost: Do you spend much time talking to reporters? 

Comment: I have to tell a reporter what 1 want the reporter to know. Depending on the topic, it 
will be encompassed within my university's official position. But, then 1 will say, "Well, if it 
makes the news or it hits the paper or a magazine, let me know, and please send me a copy." 

Trost: Your issue is less that you are not sure it gets in, but rather that you never see it? Do you 
have a clip service or something? 

Comment: Our cutting service does not go nationwide. It is only local. 

Jones: It is incredibly difficult to keep track of seven interviews and to mail out stories to each 
person. It rarely happens. To be honest with you, I do depend on a source to call and remind me 
for a copy of the story. I am off to the next story after I have finished producing this story. 
Hopefully, I am forgiven if I do not remember to mn downstairs and get engineering to make a 
copy to put in the mail. Sadly, I have moved on to the next topic. People who are diligent about 
it will remind me, and I will post a note to remind myself, but it is difficult. Make it a habit of 
getting the reporter's email address, then make a mental note to send them an email the 
following week asking for a copy of the story. 

Takanishi: Are there other challenges? 

Comment: This rarely happens with big-time media outlets but oftentimes with smaller voices, 
they expect to be speedily answered via email. I always feel that I am writing their story for 
them, and I do not appreciate it. The process of writing an answer to a question is different than 
the process of being quoted as an expert. That frustrates me, and I make sure not to do that to 
anybody when overseeing journalists in the writing of the stories. 

Takanishi: Is email a tactic that either of you use? 

Jones: I use email on rare occasions, but by the same token I am suspect of email. I do not 
know who is responding. 

Comment: We always send a respondee, since our emails are public record. They are university 
property and one does not know who will be reading one's email. 

Jones: The only time I have ever done it was when I knew somebody was far away, and I needed 
some basic information, and they had offered that option. 

Co mm ent! I will propose the option of answering in writing, because then I have better control. 
In my experience, when reporters send tapes based on the interview, I am surprised to hear what 
is said. Sometimes, major points are missed, while minor points are amplified. I think it is 
wonderful to be able to put it all in writing. 

Moore: That is an interesting point about the cultures. In the research culture, we often critique 
each other's work, and we constantly edit. Rarely can a journalist send a source what they have 
written for a critique prior to publication . How does that occur in terms of your own work? 

Jones: I have never been in a situation where that was seen as acceptable practice by the journal- 
ism organization I was with. I do not want to say or give the impression that I do not want the 
researcher's input, but particularly if I am on a deadline, one might read something on a fine 



ERIC 



716 



722 



MISCELLANEOUS 



level and open a whole new can of worms. Journalists want to get it right, and they want people 
to work with them to help them get it right. But, from a timeframe perspective, it is not practical 
for me to send a script, wait for additional comments, and so on. 

Trost: I am intrigued by the reluctance of the academic community, which is stronger than I 
would have anticipated, to be part of the journalistic enterprise. What is it that is offensive about 
writing text? Could you say more about why people do not want to participate? 

Comment: Sometimes it is the name of the publication that they do not want to be associated 
with because it is not big enough or they feel that they may not be fairly represented. For the 
most part, I just give them the fax from the reporter as it is received. More often than not, they 
are hesitant and do not want to speak with anyone. I do not know what their fear is, and I 
cannot relay the journalist's intention. 

Jones: As a reporter dealing with complex issues, I do not have any hesitation about calling and 
reading back select passages to make sure that I understood what was going on. I would be fired 
if I ever submitted text to somebody for review without being sure of the content. I would rather 
receive comments. 

Comment: You asked a question about reluctance from the academia; I thought you must work 
in a university. Sometimes the issue is time. Also, interface with the media does not count 
toward promotion and tenure. Finally, the worry of being misquoted, the perceptions and 
reactions from one's colleagues, as well as one's own professional integrity are some reasons 
why academics may hesitate to respond. 

Comment: The topic or the question presented may not be a good match to other knowledge 
that is available. For example, last week I got a call from a reporter from the Detroit News. Some 
movie theaters in Detroit had recently said teenagers could not come to the movies without 
their parents or an adult. This caused uproar, so this reporter called and wanted to know our 
take as professionals. Should teenagers go to the movies or not? We turned it into a good 
conversation, looking at parenting styles, and so forth. I also gave her the name of another 
person to call. 

Trost: I also think reporters are eager to be challenged about their questions. 

Comment: I find that eventually, if one takes time with them, common ground is found. I had 
another call about the development of play in young children. We were able to offer informa- 
tion, and the story did end up on NPR. 

Jones: One of the ideas that I try to transmit when talking to researchers is that if one views 
oneself in this exchange as the vulnerable lamb waiting to be preyed upon by the vicious 
journalist, one will always be suspicious and fearful of being misquoted. It is a natural response 
for that kind of mindset. I try to encourage researchers to walk into the interview as an equal 
partner, or perhaps even having the upper hand, and to feel empowered in the interaction. There 
are simple ways to do that. Feel free to tell a reporter that they are off track, or do not under- 
stand the research. Feel free to tell them they should talk to somebody else and you are not the 
right person. 

A perfect example of this was with one of the researchers I called for the spanking story at a 
time when I was desperately trying to reach someone and could not find anyone to respond. 

The public affairs person called me back and asked if this story would be on All Issues Considered, 
if it would just be 4 minutes long, or just a news brief. At first, I wanted to say, "Get over it, lady. 




717 



SYMPO SI A/ROUNDTABLES/CON VERS ATI ON HOURS 



can you do the interview or not?" I had to step back and remember that she had a right to know 
this information. If she wants to participate and she wants to know the story format, she has as 
much right to ask those questions as I have to ask her to be part of the story. These kinds of tools 
can help a researcher feel like they are not at the mercy of a journalist. 

Takanishi: The most important point is that we are all trying to figure out ways to bridge the 
gap so that there can be better understanding about the complicated problems facing children 
and families. What is the best advice you can give to help us come together? 

Jones: One word: empathy. Journalists have to better understand the lives of researchers, what 
they have to go through, the effort that they put into their work, and their desire to get that work 
out to the public. Meanwhile, researchers have to understand what it is like for us in the news- 
room atmosphere. Like it or not, we have to boil information down and bring it to people in a 
basic format. We need your help to do that. There has to be mutual understanding. 

Guensburg: Building on empathy, I would say that respect is also important. Respect the job 
that someone else has to do. Demand respect for yourself as well, and remember that the people 
you pass off today might be with a different publication or a different media outlet later on. 

Jones: Especially if you have a study that you want publicized. 

Moore: The research community needs to give this more time and priority, and it takes prepara- 
tion and effort on their part if we want to affect the public dialogue. Many of us do, but we have 
to be willing to give it the time and energy required to translate good science into a language 
and timeframe that matches the needs of the journalist. 

Talranishi: Empathy, respect, and time. That is the take home message. 




718 



724 



Posters 




Head Start Graduate Student 
Research Grantees 



Identifying the Relationship Between Language Delays 
and Behavior Problems in Head Start Children 

Cathy Huaqing Qi, Ann Kaiser 

PRESENTERS: Cathy Huaqing Qi, Ann Kaiser 

Young children with language delays are at increased risk for later behavioral problems (Kaiser, 
Hancock, Cai, Foster, & Hester, 2000) and social problems (Fujiki, Brinton, Isaacson, & Sum- 
mers, 2001); conversely, early social and problem behaviors may influence the development of 
language skills. Children in Head Start programs exhibit relatively higher levels of language 
delays and behavior problems than the general population (Harden et al., 2000), but the 
relationship between the two problems in these children has not been studied extensively. The 
purpose of the study was to examine (a) the relationship between language delays and problem 
behaviors in Head Start children, (b) the social/behavioral characteristics of preschool children 
observed in the classrooms, and (c) the relationship between observations and teacher reports of 
problem behavior. 

Sixty participants were recruited from 256 three-and four-year-old children who were 
screened in the course of a larger project in six Head Start centers in Nashville, Tennessee. 
Children were predominantly African American (84%); 53% were boys. Two subgroups were 
selected to participate in the study based on language test data: 32 children with language delays 
and 28 children with normal language. Children's language development was assessed using the 
Preschool Language Scale-3 (PLS-3; Zimmerman, Steiner, & Pond, 1992), and the Peabody 
Picture Vocabulary Test-111 (PPVT-111; Dunn & Dunn, 1997). Children's behavior and social skills 
were evaluated using teacher reports of the Child Behavior Checklist/2-5 (C-TRF; Achenbach, 
1997) and the Social Skills Rating System (SSRS; Gresham & Elliot, 1990). A total of 120 
minutes of classroom behavior was observed for each child. The observation protocol (Qi & 
Kaiser, 2001) was a modification of Webster-Stratton's Observation System (1999). This 
MOOSES (Tapp, Wehby, & Ellis, 1995) format coding protocol permitted data to be collected 
using handheld computers. 

The results of the study indicated: 

1 . Children's observed physical aggression, verbal aggression, disruptive behavior, and 
noncompliant behavior were significantly negatively correlated with their receptive 
language abilities. Children's observed physical aggression and disruptive behavior showed 
negative correlations with expressive language abilities. 

2. Children with language delays exhibited significantly more physical aggression, disruptive 
behavior, noncompliance, and negative responses than did children with normal lan- 
guage. Children with language delays had fewer initiations and shorter duration of 
engagement than did children with normal language. 

3. Teacher reports of problem behaviors correlated with some of children's observed behav- 
iors, but not all. 





721 



POSTERS 



The study has two implications. First, Head Start children with language delays exhibit more 
problem behavior and fewer prosocial behaviors than children with normal language, although 
teacher reports of behavior problems alone do not always indicate that this is the case. Thus, it is 
important to observe children in the classrooms, especially children with language delays, to 
determine if they are at risk for behavior problems, rather than depending only on teacher 
reported problem behaviors. Second, the data suggest that children with delays in either lan- 
guage comprehension or language production may be at risk for problems in physical aggres- 
sion and dismptive behaviors. Thus, it may be important to provide both language and behavior 
interventions to children with language delays. 

References 

Achenbach, T. M. (1997). Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist/2-5 and 1997 Profile. Burlington: 
University of Vermont, Department of Psychiatry. 

Dunn, L, & Dunn, L. (1997). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Third Edition. Circle Pines, MN: 
American Guidance Service. 

Fujiki, M., Brinton, B., Isaacson, T, & Summers, C. (2001). Social behaviors of children with 
language impairment on the playground: A pilot study. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services 
in School, 32, 101-113. 

Gresham, F. M., & Elliott, S. N. (1990). Social Skills Rating System. Circle Pines, MN: American 
Guidance Service. 

Harden, B. ]., Winslow, M. B., Kendziora, K. T, Shahinfar, A., Rubin, K. H., Fox, N. A., et al. 
(2000). Externalizing problems in Head Start children: An ecological exploration. Early 
Education and Development, 11, 357-385. 

Kaiser, A. P, Hancock, B. T, Cai, X., Foster, E. M., & Hester, P. P. (2000). Parent-reported behav- 
ioral problems and language delays in boys and girls enrolled in Head Start classrooms. 
Behavioral Disorders, 26, 26-41. 

Qi, H. C., & Kaiser, A. P. (2001). Observation coding manual. Unpublished manuscript, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, Tennessee. 

Webster-Stratton, C. (1999). Observation System. Unpublished manual. University of Washing- 
ton, Seattle. 

Tapp, J., Wehby, ]., & Ellis, D. (1995). A multiple option observation system for experimental 
studies: MOOSES. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 27(1), 25-31. 
Zimmerman, I. L, Steiner, V. G., & Pond, R. E. (1992). Preschool Language Scale-3. New York: 
Psychological Corporation. 




722 



HEAD START GRADUATE STUDENT RESEARCH GRANTEES 



Including Children With Disabilities 
in Early Head Start: Four Case Studies 

Jennifer Tschantz 

PRESENTER: Jennifer Tschantz 

Early Head Start (EHS) is required to enroll and serve at least 10% children with disabilities. Part 
C of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA; U.S. Department of Education, 

1997) stipulates that services for eligible children are to be provided in "natural environments," 
and collaboration across various service providers and programs is cmcial. This poster presenta- 
tion focuses on a qualitative research project exploring collaboration and service integration 
across EHS and Part C. The following research questions were the focus of this study: (a) Who 
are the young children with disabilities enrolled in EHS? (b) What specific strategies do different 
EHS communities (and their Part C counterparts) use to integrate services and collaborate to 
meet the needs of young children with disabilities and their families? (c) Do services across EHS 
and Part C meet the needs of individual families and their children? (d) What local contextual 
factors impact services and collaborative efforts? 

A multiple case studies design was used across four different EHS communities. Individual 
participants included professionals working for or with the EHS programs and families receiving 
services from both EHS and Part C. A total of 33 professionals and 10 families participated. Data 
collection involved interviews with participants, review of general documents and individual 
children's records, and observations. Case and family descriptions were utilized to organize 
initial data analysis; then, a cross-site analysis was conducted. 

Three of the four EHS programs in this study were serving at least 10% children with disabili- 
ties. Children with a wide range of disabilities, including significant disabilities, were enrolled in 
all four EHS programs. Across the four communities, collaboration in cross-program referrals 
and service delivery was strong. There was limited EHS involvement in Part C evaluations and goal 
development. Families were overwhelmingly satisfied with services and generally pleased with Part 
C-EHS coordination. EHS was described as a "saving grace" for families needing child care. 

In all four programs facilitators to collaboration emerged. EHS direct service and administra- 
tive staff were positive and committed to \vorking with young children with disabilities, and the 
EHS direct service staff generally felt supported. In the two rural communities, cross program 
collaboration was facilitated by EHS agencies being relatively independent, smaller numbers of 
families and staff, stable leadership, and a sense of community. High EHS staff turnover was a 
problem and a barrier to service integration in all four sites. In the two urban programs several 
other barriers to cross program collaboration emerged, including complexity and large size of 
both EHS and Part C, high turnover in key leadership positions, and struggles with family 
involvement. 

Findings from this study point to several implications: 

1. High EHS staff turnover needs to be examined and addressed. , 

2. EHS involvement in the Part C process should be increased. 

3. More resources are needed for EHS programs serving high numbers of young children 
with disabilities, especially for programs serving children with significant disabilities. 

4. Strong EHS leadership within communities needs to be fostered. 

5. Ongoing technical assistance and support should be provided for EHS and Part C 
programs struggling with family involvement. 

Reference 

U.S. Department of Education, Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, Office of 

Special Education Programs. (1997). Individuals with Disabilities Education Act. Part C: Infants 

and Toddlers with Disabilities (PL 105-17). Washington, DC: Author. 




728 



723 



POSTERS 



The Cross-Language Transfer of Phonological 
Awareness in Latino Head Start Children 

Lisa M. Lopez, Daryl B. Greenfield 

PRESENTER: Lisa M. L6pez 

Both oral language skills and phonological ability are major precursors to reading in English. 
Research has confirmed that these skills are present in preschool-aged children, with low- 
income children performing at a lower level than middle- to upper-income children (Lonigan, 
Burgess, Anthony, & Barker, 1998; Maclean, Bryant, & Bradley, 1987). The cross-language 
transfer theory (Durgunoglu, Nagy, & Hancin-Bhatt, 1993) suggests that once metalinguistic 
skills have been mastered in one language (LI) they can be performed in a second language 
(L2), given both languages contain an alphabetic script. 

The present study addresses the literacy needs of Latino Head Start children. This study focuses 
on the oral language proficiency and phonological awareness of this population, in both English 
and Spanish. The major objectives of this study were to explore the relationship between oral 
language proficiency and phonological awareness skills in English and Spanish, independently, 
and test the cross-language transfer theory of phonological awareness with this population. 

This study consists of 100 Latino, 4-and 5-year-old preschool children. All children were in 
Head Start and were first language Spanish speakers. They were individually assessed for oral 
language proficiency and phonological awareness in both English and Spanish. Oral language 
proficiency was measured using the preLAS2000 (Duncan & DeAvila, 1998). Phonological 
awareness was measured with the Phonological Sensitivity Test for Preschoolers developed for 
use in this study. It consists of three subtests: (a) rhyme matching, (b) alliteration matching, and 
(c) sentence segmenting. 

In order to determine the relationship between oral language proficiency and phonological 
awareness within language, a series of correlations were calculated. This analysis indicated that 
oral language proficiency and phonological awareness are significantly correlated within 
language. There were no significant differences between language correlations related to oral 
language proficiency. V 

In determining the existence of a cross-language transfer of phonological awareness skills it 
was necessary to look at the unique effect of phonological awareness in Spanish on phonologi- 
cal awareness in English using a hierarchical multiple regression. Performance on the English 
phonological awareness measure was entered as a dependent variable, with English oral profi- 
ciency, Spanish oral proficiency, and Spanish phonological awareness entered as independent 
variables in a stepwise multiple regression format. Spanish phonological awareness uniquely 
and significantly accounted for 6% of the variance associated with English phonological 
awareness, accounting for proficiency in both English and Spanish. 

English oral language proficiency, as measured by the preLAS2000 was related to English 
phonological awareness, as measured by the Phonological Sensitivity Test for Preschoolers. A 
similar relationship was found in Spanish between oral language proficiency and phonological 
awareness. This implies that there are overlapping mechanisms between these two measures of 
language development that transcend language barriers. The children s phonological awareness 
in Spanish was also found to have an effect on their phonological awareness in English beyond 
the influence of proficiency. This finding justifies the past research pioneered by Durgunoglu et 
al. (1993) in which phonological awareness skills in one language have an effect on phonologi- 
cal skills in a second language. In the present study phonological awareness in English was 
directly related to phonological awareness in Spanish beyond language proficiency. 



er|c 



724 



729 



HEAD start graduate STUDENT RESEARCH GRANTEES 



References 

Duncan, S. E„ & DeAvila, E. A. (1998). preLAS2000. Monterey, CA: CTB/ McGraw-Hill. 

Durgunoglu, A. Y., Nagy, W. E., & Hancin-Bhatt, B. J. (1993). Cross-language transfer of phono- 
logical awareness. Journal of Educational Psychology, 85, 453-465. 

Lonigan, C. }., Burgess, S. R., Anthony, }. L., & Barker, T. A. (1998). Development of phonologi- 
cal sensitivity in 2- to 5-year-old children. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90(2), 294-311. 

Maclean, M., Bryant, R, & Bradley, L. (1987). Rhymes, nursery rhymes, and reading in early 
childhood. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 33, 255-281. 



Early Math Interest and Emergent Math Skills: 

An Understudied Relationship 

Paige Helaine Fisher, David H. Arnold 

PRESENTER: Paige Helaine Fisher 

Mathematical skills are an important component to economic success in this society, acting as a 
"critical filter" to many scientific and technological careers (Betz & Hackett, 1983). However, in 
the last several decades, U. S. students have routinely performed below international standards 
of mathematics achievement (Geary, 1996). Despite this consensus that early math experiences 
are critical, not enough is known about the emergent stages of math development. 

Studies suggest that school attitude is related to the math skills of young, disadvantaged 
children (Reynolds, 1989; Stipek & Ryan, 1997), and researchers have called for increased 
attention to motivational factors in models of achievement (Reynolds; Wigfield et al., 1997). 
Hidi, Renninger, & Krapp (1991) suggest that interest, with interest being defined as topic- 
specific enjoyment, has "a profound effect on cognitive fimaioning and the facilitation of 
learning" (p. 565). 

With preschool children, there is no research to date on the specific relationship between 
math interest and achievement. Reading research with this population demonstrates that early 
reading interest can be an important predictor of later literacy skills (Lonigan, Anthony, Arnold, 
& Whitehurst, 1994; Van Kraayenoord & Schneider, 1999). Such findings, when combined with 
the math interest research with older children, suggest that math interest in young children 
likely influences the development of math ability and that ability might influence interest. 

This study uses a longitudinal correlational design to investigate the relationships between 
early math interest and mathematical skills. Participants in this project were 112 children, ages 
3 to 5 years, from eight Head Start classrooms. Children's math interest and math ability were 
assessed in early winter and again in late spring. Mathematics ability was assessed using the Test 
of Early Math Ability (TEMA-2; Ginsburg & Baroody, 1990). To assess interest, children were 
asked how much they liked mathematics activities using an adaptation of the Feelings About 
School Measure (Stipek, Feiler, Daniels, & Milbum, 1995). Teachers also completed two brief 
math interest scales for each child. 

Preliminary results of children's self-reported data indicate that math interest is marginally 
related to concurrent math ability (r = .26, p < .00), interest at Time 1 is moderately related to 
interest at Time 2 (r = .29, p < .06), and math ability at Time 1 predicts interest at Time 2 when 
controlling for interest at Time l(r = .23, p < .02). 

Results of teacher reported child interest suggest similar findings: Child math ability is 
strongly related to concurrent math interest (r = .48, p < .00), interest at Time 1 is moderately 
related to interest at Time 2 (r = .49, p < .00), and math ability at Time 1 modestly predicts child 



730 



725 



POSTERS 



interest at Time 2 when controlling for child interest at Time 1 (r = .22, p < .02). Additionally, 
there is a trend for math interest at Time 1 to minimally predict math ability at Time 2 (r = .11, 

p<.08). 

This study suggests that there are already relationships between interest and ability in 
children who have not yet begun formal schooling. Future studies are necessary to identify at 
what age this relationship begins to emerge, both to provide information about young children's 
development and to suggest the optimal time for intervention. 



Betz, N. E., & Hackett, G. (1983). The relationship of mathematics self-efficacy expectations to 
the selection of science-based college majors. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 23, 329-345. 

Geary, D. G. (1996). International differences in mathematical achievement; Their nature, 
causes, and consequences. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 5, 133-137. 

Ginsburg, H. R, & Baroody, A. J. (1990). Test of Early Mathematics Ability (Second Edition). Austin, 
TX: Pro-ed. 

Hidi, S., Renninger, K. A., & Krapp, A. (1991). The present state of interest research. In K. A. 
Renninger, S. H. Hidi, & A. Krapp (Eds.), The role of interest in learning and development (pp. 
433-446). Hillsdale, NR Erlbaum. 

Lonigan, G. J., Anthony, I. L., Arnold, D. H., & Whitehurst, G. J. (1994). Child interest in literacy: 
Compounded daily? Paper presented at the 102nd Annual Gonvention of the American 
Psychological Association, Los Angeles, GA. 

Reynolds, A. (1989). A structural model of first-grade outcomes for an urban, low socioeco- 
nomic status, minority population. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81, 594-603. 

Stipek, D., Feiler, R., Daniels, D., & Milburn, S. (1995). Effects of different instructional ap- 
proaches on young children's achievement and motivation. Child Development, 66, 209-233. 

Stipek, D. J., & Ryan, R. H. (1997). Economically disadvantaged preschoolers: Ready to learn but 
further to go. Developmental Psychology, 33, 711-723. 

Van Kraayenoord, G. E., & Schneider, W. E. (1999). Reading achievement, metacognition, 
reading self-concept and interest: A study of German students in grades 3 and 4. European 
Journal of Psychology of Education, 14, 305-324. 

Wigfield, A., Eccles, J. S., Yoon, K. S., Harold, R. D., Arbreton, A. J. A., Freedman-Doan, G., et al. 
(1997). Ghange in children's competence beliefs and subjective task values across the 
elementary school years: A 3-year study. Journal of Educational Psychology, 89, 451-469. 



Go-to-Work, Go-to-School: The Impact of Recent Social Policy 
Mandates on Parent Involvement and School Readiness 
Outcomes for Urban Head Start Children 

Mario A. Perry, John Fantuzzo 

PRESENTER: Marlo A. Perry 

The first of the National Education Goals states that by the year 2000, all American children will 
start school ready to learn (U.S. Department of Education, 1992). Unfortunately, the life 
experiences of vast numbers of economically disadvantaged preschool-aged children seriously 
endanger the attainment of this goal. Ghildren living in poverty have more health problems, are 
more likely to fall behind in school, and are less likely to obtain a well-paying job as adults 
(Ghildren's Defense Fund, 1998). Head Start is the largest federally funded program established 



References 





a 



HtAU START GRADUATE STUDENT RESEARCH GRANTEES 



to promote school readiness among low-income children, by providing comprehensive services 
to these children and their families that are designed to help combat these risk factors. 

From its inception, Head Start was designed to be a two-generational early childhood 
intervention that emphasizes the importance of parent involvement in education. In fact, the 
Head Start Performance Standards (U.S. Dept, of Health and Human Services, 1996) mandate 
parental involvement as a condition for participation in the program. Juxtaposed to this 
mandate are recent state welfare-to-work statutes requiring parents to go to work. Single parents 
are especially vulnerable to the tension between these two seemingly disparate yet well-inten- 
tioned mandates. They are forced to figure out how to balance being the primary wage earner 
and primary caregiver for their children. 

The overarching objectives of this study are two-fold: 

1. First, to explore the relationship between demographic variables, including employment 
and welfare status, on children's school readiness outcomes. 

2. Second, to explore the role of contextual variables, such as level of poverty, within these 
relationships. For example, do single mothers who are employed full time live in different 
concentrations of poverty than single mothers who are not employed outside the home? 
Additionally, this objective also seeks to determine if such contextual variables are related 
to children's school readiness outcomes. For example, are children who live in communi- 
ties with higher levels of social disorganization less likely to gain the necessary school 
readiness skills? 

In order to meet these objectives, and in order to benefit the city's Head Start program as a 
whole, it was necessary to build capacity within the system to collect these kinds of information. 
The focus of this presentation was on the primary activities that comprised this "building 
capacity" stage of this student research grant. These activities included the following: (a) the 
development of a comprehensive, relational database that will house pertinent information for 
the city's Head Start program (which serves approximately 5,000 children and families), 
including developmental assessments, emotional and behavioral screenings, registration and 
demographic information, and health data; (b) the collection of neighborhood and community 
contextual variables, including block level information on blight and poverty and data on social 
disorganization; (c) the collection of school readiness variables collected program-wide in both 
the fall and the spring, including a developmental assessment [Child Observation Record 
(COR); High/Scope Educational Research Foundation, 1992] and an emotional behavioral 
screener [Adjustment Scales for Preschool Intervention (ASPI); Lutz, Fantuzzo, & McDermott, 
2002 ]. Future activities, data analytic strategies, and implications were also discussed. 

References 

Children's Defense Fund. (1998). The state of America's children. Boston: Beacon Press. 
High/Scope Educational Research Foundation (1992). Child Observation Record manual 
Ypsilanti, MI: Author. 

Lutz, M. N., Fantuzzo, J., & McDermott, P. (2002). Multidimensional assessment of emotional 
and behavioral adjustment problems of low-income preschool children: Development and 
initial validation. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 1 7(3), 338-355. 

U.S. Department of Education. (1992). Starting school ready to learn: Questions and answers on 
reaching National Education Goal 1: By the year 2000, all children in America will start school 
ready to learn (Resource Document). Washington DC: Author. (ERIC Document Reproduc- 
tion Service No. ED355013) 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (1996). Final rule - Head Start Performance 
Standards, 45 CFR Part 1304 (Federal Register, 61, 57186-57227). Washington DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office. 



/ 




732 



727 



POSTERS 



The Effects of Responsive Caregiver Communication 
on the Language Development of At-Risk Preschoolers 

Carol D. Stock 

PRESENTER: Carol D. Stock 

Research in the last 2 decades has consistently demonstrated the strong relationship between 
early language skill and both literacy and social skills (Catts, Fey, Zhang, & Tomblin, 1999; 
Robertson & Weismer, 1999). These findings have critical implications for children living in 
poverty as they more often demonstrate low language skills in preschool and experience higher 
rates of reading failure and social-emotional difficulties in the elementary grades (Duncan, 
Brooks-Gunn, & Klebanov, 1994). 

Research by Hart and Risley (1995) indicates that caregivers' amount and diversity of lan- 
guage, valence of feedback, guidance style, and responsiveness to child behavior is highly related 
to linguistic competency in the preschool and elementary years (Walker, Greenwood, Hart, & 
Garta, 1994). Furthermore, caregivers living in restricted economic circumstances are less likely 
to demonstrate high levels of these behaviors. Despite these findings, few interventions have 
been aimed at improving the language skills of this population or have included caregivers as 
active participants. 

The responsive interaction (RI) model of language intervention focuses on enhancing 
caregiver-child communicative interactions by supporting caregivers in their use of contingent 
feedback, balanced turn taking, and extension of their child's topic (Weiss, 1981). Studies 
utilizing this approach have found that children demonstrated significant gains in social 
communication skills (Kaiser et al., 1996; Tannock, Girolametto, & Siegel, 1992). The majority 
of studies, however, have targeted children with severe language delays and included caregivers 
who were well educated, middle class, and highly motivated. 

This study examined the effectiveness of a responsive interaction language intervention in 
increasing caregiver use of verbal interaction strategies and child language skills. It sought to 
expand the external validity of previous studies through its inclusion of families from low- 
income backgrounds and children with mild language delays. 

Subjects were three caregivers and their preschool-aged children who attended Head Start. 
Participating children scored between .5 and 1.5 standard deviations below the norm on the 
Developmental Indicators for the Assessment of Learning-Revised (DIAL-R; Mardell- 
Gzudnowski, & Goldenberg, 1990) and the Expressive One-Word Picture Vocabulary Test- 
Revised (EOWPVT-R; Gardner, 1990). Garegivers exhibited low levels of targeted verbal interac- 
tion strategies prior to implementation of the intervention. 

This study employed a multiple baseline across subjects, single case design to determine 
whether there was a functional relation between implementation of the intervention and 
increases in caregiver skill use, and between increases in caregiver skill use and increases in child 
language skills. Families received nine weekly visits that focused on three verbal interaction 
strategies: (a) balanced turn taking, (b) following their child's lead, and (c) contingent feedback 
strategies. Observational measures of caregiver-child verbal interactions, created by the investi- 
gator, were used to assess caregiver use of (a) descriptive talk, (b) expansions, (c) affirmations, 
and (d) questions, as well as child use of (a) one, (b) two to three, and (c) four or more word 
utterances within observations of caregiver-child free play. Results of this study indicated that 
the intervention was successful in increasing caregiver use of contingent feedback strategies 
within the training sessions. The effects of the intervention on children s language skills were 
more modest. 



728 




ERIC 



u 



HEAD START GRADUATE STUDENT RESEARCH GRANTEES 



References 



Catts, H. W„ Fey, M. E„ Zhang, X., &Tomblin, J. B. (1999). Language basis of reading and 
reading disabilities: Evidence from a longitudinal investigation. Scientific Studies of Reading, 
3(4), 331-361. 

Duncan, G. J., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Klebanov, P. K. (1994). Economic deprivation and early 
childhood development. Child Development, 65, 296-318. 

Gardner, M. (1990). Expressive One-Word Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised. Novato, GA: Academic 
Therapy Publications. 

Hart, B. M., & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful differences in the everyday lives of young American 
children. Baltimore: Brookes. 

Kaiser, A. P, Hemmeter, M. L., Ostrosky, M. M., Fischer, R., Yoder, P, & Keefer, M. (1996). The 
effects of teaching parents to use responsive interaction strategies. Topics in Early Childhood 
Special Education 16(3), 375-406. 

Mardell-Gzudnowski, G., & Goldenberg, D. S. (1990). The concurrent and predictive validity of 
a new screening test for young gifted children. Early Child Development <S Care, 63, 47-53. 

Robertson, S, B., & Weismer, S. E. (1999). Effects of treatment on linguistic and social skills in 
toddlers with delayed language development. Journal of Speech, Language, <S Hearing Research, 
42, 1234-1248. 

Tannock, R., Girolametto, L, & Siegel, L. S. (1992). Language intervention with children who 
have developmental delays: Effects of an interactive approach. American Journal on Mental 
Retardation, 97(2), 145-160. 

Walker, D., Greenwood, G., Hart, B., & Garta, J. (1994). Prediction of school outcomes based on 
early language production and socioeconomic factors. Child Development, 65, 606-621. 

Weiss, R. S. (1981). INREAL Intervention for language handicapped and bilingual children. 
Journal of the Division for Early Childhood, 4, 40-52. 



Strengthening Families in Head Start: The Impact of a Parent 
Involvement Program on the Emotional Well-Being of Latino Families 

Helena Duch, Diane Darwish 

PRESENTERS: Helena Duch, Carmen Rodriguez 

Ghanges in welfare laws have significantly shifted the stmcture of states' support for low-income 
families. The Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) requires recipients to accept a 
work assignment or community service work as a condition to receiving benefits within the first 
6 months of receipt (Tweedie & Reichert, 1997). This legislation has redefined the ability of 
Head Start parents to maintain their level of involvement in Head Start and has challenged 
practitioners and policy makers to develop a parent involvement component in such a way that 
it meets the self-sufficiency needs of families (Lamb-Parker, Piotrkowski, Horn, & Green, 1995). 

Integration of time and training requirements in Head Start may be a strategy to reduce 
psychological stress for parents who are engaged in self-sufficiency activities and highly involved 
in Head Start. Two-generation programs, because of their ecological approach, may have greater 
potential for reducing a range of known risk factors in the lives of disadvantaged children 
(Smith, 1995). Program Fortalecerse (Spanish for "Strengthen Yourself") was developed in 1996 
within a Head Start program in upper Manhattan in an attempt to integrate education and 
vocational training services for parents in the stmcture of the Head Start services offered to 
families. 



ERIC 




729 



POSTERS 



This study evaluates the impact of program Fortalecerse in four outcome variables for the 54 
Latino preschool children and their parents participating in the study— measures of social 
competence and behavior problems for the children and self-development and depression for 
the parents. 

Families in the intervention group participated in Fortalecerse, a program designed to provide 
comprehensive training and education to parents in areas related to ESL, Computers, Child 
Development Associate, and Literacy. Classroom teachers completed social and behavioral 
ratings for children pre and postintervention. Parents completed behavioral ratings for their 
children and self-report measures of depression and ego development at similar intervals. 
Preliminary results indicate significant individual differences over time: Children's externalizing 
behavior problems (teacher report) decreased and they showed more prosocial behaviors in the 
classroom. Parents' self-reported depression decreased and their ego development level in- 
creased. Between-group differences were also present: Children in the intervention group were 
rated significantly lower by parents and teachers on externalizing behavior problems and 
significantly higher on social skills. Further analyses are being undertaken to account for the 
effect of other variables. 

Although there may be many other factors impacting depression and self-development (such 
as isolation, parenting, and environmental stress), integration of education and training 
programs within Head Start has a positive impact in the self-development perception of mothers 
participating in this study. More systematic data need to be collected to guide the implementa- 
tion of programs that assist families in the difficult task of integrating parenting responsibilities 
while responding to legislative mandates and fulfilling their self-sufficiency goals. Nonetheless, 
this study starts to highlight the complex relations among some of these variables and how 
integration of training and education programs aimed at increasing self-sufficiency in Head Start 
parents may impact the mental health of Latino mothers and their preschool children. 

References 

Lamb-Parker, F, Piotrkowski, C. S., Horn, W. F, & Greene, S. M. (1995). The challenge for Head 
Start: Realizing its vision as a two-generation program. In S. Smith (Ed.), Tivo generation 
programs for families in poverty: A new intervention strategy. Advances in applied developmental 
psychology (pp. 135-160). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Smith, S. (1995). Evaluating two-generation interventions: Current efforts and directions for 
future research. In S. Smith (Ed.), Tlvo generation programs for families in poverty: A new strategy. 
Advances in applied developmental psychology (pp. 251-270). Norwood: Ablex. 

Tweedie, J., & Reichert, D. (1997). State welfare reform. Paper presented at the National Confer- 
ence of State Legislatures, Conference on Tracking and Follow-up Under Welfare Reform, 
February 1998, Falls Church, VA. 



Capturing the Nuances of Father Involvement and 
Its Relation to Head Start Children's School Readiness 

Jason Downer, Rebecca Horwitz 

PRESENTERS: Jason Downer, Rebecca Horwitz 

The recent emergence of research on father involvement has enhanced awareness of the 
uniquely positive and significant role that fathers can play in young children's development 
(Mackey, 1998). Studies suggest that both residential and nonresidential fathers assume a variety 



O 

ERIC 



730 



735 



HEAD START GRADUATE STUDENT RESEARCH GRANTEES 



of family roles and exhibit extensive influence on the competencies related to children's school 
readiness (Booth & Crouter, 1998; Marsiglio, Amato, Day, & Lamb, 2000). However, a 
longstanding challenge of fatherhood research, particularly in low-income communities, has 
been locating and contacting men in order to secure participation (Cabrera, Tamis-LeMonda, 
Lamb, & Boiler, 1999). We have partnered with preschool programs to document the process of 
recruiting men to participate in a project that examines the relationship between father involve- 
ment, familial factors, and preschoolers' school readiness. 

One purpose of this study was to document successes and challenges during the recruitment 
process of fathers in order to inform future research efforts on how to better locate men and 
have them participate in Head Start-university partnership endeavors. Due to multisystemic 
influences on an individual's behavior, a second goal was to explore the relationships between 
self-reported fathering activities and a variety of individual and familial factors. Finally, we 
hypothesized that self-reported father involvement would be positively correlated with compre- 
hensive measures of children's school readiness. 

Participants were 70 African American fathers and their children who attended Head Start 
programs. For this project, the term "father" was inclusive of the following categories: (a) birth 
father in the child s home, (b) birth father out of the home whom the child has seen in the past 
year, or (c) "father figure" reported by the child's primary caregiver. Fathers completed surveys 
about their involvement with the preschool child and teachers provided school readiness 
information. 

Qualitative data indicated that the most extensive barriers to recruitment were phone contact 
problems. Bivariate correlations indicated that father-child activities were significandy and 
positively related to the number of children in the father's home and the parenting alliance. 
Fathers home-based educational involvement had significant relations with reported parenting 
efficacy and the parenting alliance, while fathers' school-based educational involvement was 
positively related to their level of education. Additional bivariate correlations revealed that no 
father involvement variables were significantly related to any of the school readiness variables. 

The current project addressed several limitations of past father involvement literature by 
utilizing a multifaceted recruitment strategy, broadening the definition of "father," and expand- 
ing the conceptualization of involvement. Qualitative recruitment information indicated a need 
to diversify and intensify father contact methods, perhaps placing greater emphasis on face-to- 
face contact and community networking. In addition, father involvement was significantly 
related to individual and family system factors, suggesting potential strategies for promotion of 
father-child interactions (i.e., strengthening the parenting alliance). Finally, father involvement 
was not significandy related to children's school readiness; however, recent literature emphasizes 
the importance of defining father involvement in terms of both quantity and quality. Coupled 
with the high reported rates of father— child play in the current project, this information suggests 
that father-child interaction quality may be more related to child competence than self- 
reported, quantifiable involvement. 

References 

Booth, A., & Crouter, A. C. (1998). Men in families: When do they get involved? What difference does 
it make? Mahwah, NJ; Erlbaum. 

Cabrera, hJ. J., Tamis-LeMonda, C. S., Lamb, M. E., & Boiler, K. (1999, August 2—3). Measuring 
father involvement in the Early Head Start evaluation: A multidimensional conceptualization. Paper 
presented at the National Conference on Health Statistics, Washington, DC. 

Mackey, W. C. (1998). Father presence; An enhancement of a child's well-being. The Journal of 
Men's Studies, 6, 227-244. 

Marsiglio, W., Amato, P, Day, R., & Lamb, M. E. (2000). Scholarship on fatherhood in the 1990s 
and beyond. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 62, 1173-1191. 





731 



POSTERS 



Head Start Children's Scaffolding of a 
Novice Adult's Problem-Solving Behaviors 

Jason T. Hustedt 

PRESENTER: Jason T. Hustedt 

Broadly defined, scaffolding is an interactive process by which a more-skilled tutor and less- 
skilled learner work together to reach a goal that would have been difficult for the learner to 
reach independently (Wood, Bruner, & Ross, 1976). Although research suggests that responsive 
parent-child interactions may be a buffer against risks associated with poverty (Chase-Lansdale 
& Brooks-Gunn, 1995), only recently have investigations of scaffolding begun to focus on low- 
income families (e.g., Hustedt & Raver, 2002; Kermani & Janes, 1999; Rogoff, Mistry, Goncu, & 
Mosier, 1993). This study further extends scaffolding research to low-income families by 
focusing on the extent to which Head Start children transfer what they have learned during 
previous mother-child scaffolding interactions to later social interactions. 

Four-year-old Head Start participants played with a series of toys during two scaffolding 
episodes at their schools. At Time 1, children played with the toys while their mothers were 
present. Four weeks later at Time 2, the children assisted a female adult, trained to act as a 
novice with the toys. By including this trained confederate, it was possible to create a uniform 
task for 4-year-old tutors that provided a clear test of their teaching skills. 

Fifty-one 4-year-olds participated in this study; 51% of these children were female, and 78% 
were White. Thirty-two experimental group children interacted with both their mothers and the 
confederate; 19 additional control group children played alone while their mothers were present 
and then interacted with the confederate. Both verbal (e.g., instmctive speech and recruitment to 
the task) and nonverbal (e.g., manual assistance and demonstration) scaffolding behaviors were 
microanalytically coded from videotapes of problem-solving interactions for both easy and 
difficult tasks. Gohen's kappa values were high: K = 0.82 for verbal codes and K = 0.91 for 
nonverbal codes. 

Pearson correlations were used to test the hypothesis that experimental group children would 
exhibit tutoring behaviors similar to those used previously by their mothers. Results provide 
moderate support for the hypothesized relationship, but only for tutoring of the easy task. The 
strongest relationships were found for two similar speech categories: recruitment and attention- 
maintaining speech. Specifically, mothers who used recruitment and attention-maintaining 
speech had children who were significantly (p < .01 and p < .05, respectively) more likely to also 
use those strategies. 

Gonsistent with my hypothesis, the problem-solving behaviors of 4-year-old tutors while 
interacting with novice learners do reflect those previously used by their mothers. Although 
mothers typically used recruitment and attention-maintaining speech less frequently than 
instructions overall, when these speech types had been used at Time 1, children tended also to 
use them during later teaching interactions. This pattern of results is suggestive of a relatively 
complex relationship between mothers’ teaching behaviors and those of their children. There 
does not seem to be direct correspondence between mothers' and children's tutoring behaviors. 
Rather, distinctive types of behaviors — including encouraging types of speech and, to a lesser 
extent, "supervisory" behaviors such as onlooking — seem to be transferred from mother to child. 

R0f0V0tlC0S 

Ghase-Lansdale, R L., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (Eds.). (1995). Escape from poverty: What makes a 
difference for children 1 New York: Gambridge U niversity Press. 

Hustedt, J. T, & Raver, G. G. (2002). Scaffolding in low-income mother-child dyads: Relations 
with joint attention and dyadic reciprocity. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 26, 
113-119. 




732 



737 



HEAD START GRADUATE STUDENT RESEARCH GRANTEES 



Kermani, H„ & Janes, H. A. (1999). Adjustment across task in maternal scaffolding in low- 
income Latino immigrant families. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 21, 134-153. 

Rogoff, B., Mistry, Goncu, A., & Mosier, C. (1993). Guided participation in cultural activity by 
toddlers and caregivers. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 58 (8, 
Serial No. 236). 

Wood, D., Bmner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of 
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 1 7 , 89-100. 



Parental Awareness and Management of Emotion: 

Implications for Parenting and Child Outcomes 

Rebecca C. Cortes, MarkT. Greenberg 

PRESENTER: Rebecca C. Cortes 

Meta-emotion theory (Gottman, Katz, & Hooven, 1997) describes the central role played by 
parents specific emotion-related cognitions, such as awareness and management of their own 
emotions, in the socialization process and the development of children's social-emotional 
competence (SEC). Awareness and management of emotion reflects the degree to which parents 
are able to differentiate their emotions by type and intensity, the value they place on both their 
own and their children s emotional experiences, and the healthy management of emotions. SEC 
represents the skills and knowledge (e.g., regulation, perspective taking) children use in negoti- 
ating effective peer relationships (Denham, 1998). Parents' awareness and management of 
emotion may be associated with children's SEC through emotion-related parenting practices that 
combine support and teaching about emotions in emotion-eliciting situations (Eisenberg, 
Cumberland, & Spinrad, 1998). The present study examined the relations among these constructs. 

The participants (n = 101) in this cross-sectional study were recruited from two central 
Pennsylvania Head Start programs that were the target of a larger, randomized clinical trial 
funded by the Head Start-University Partnership program. Participating parents were mostly 
biological mothers (94%) with a high school degree or GED (73%), and about 50% of the 
children (aged 48 to 60 months) were females. The Thoughts and Feelings About Emotions 
Scales (Cortes, Greenberg, & Gottman, unpublished) assessed parental awareness and manage- 
ment of their feelings of anger and sadness separately. Emotion-related parenting practices were 
assessed with the Coping with Children' s Negative Emotions Scale (CCNES; Fabes, Eisenberg, & 
Bernzwieg, 1990). Emotion coaching items that assessed the extent to which parents defined 
and taught their children about emotions were added to the CCNES. Teachers completed the 
Head Start Competence Scale (Domitrovich & Cortes, unpublished) and the Preschool and 
Kindergarten Behavior Scales (Merrell, 1996) to assess children's SEC and externalizing behavior 
(EB). Parent reports were obtained from home interviews and teacher reports were obtained 
from the larger study. All analyses controlled for child age and parental social desirability. 

The findings provide support for meta-emotion theory. Children of parents who reported 
having a high awareness of anger were rated by teachers as having greater SEC and exhibiting 
fewer EBs. Parents who reported positive anger management also reported using more emotion- 
related parenting practices, and their children received more favorable ratings by teachers on 
measures of SEC. Parents who reported having a high awareness of sadness reported using more 
emotion-related parenting practices; however, no relations were found between parents' aware- 
ness and management of sadness and teacher reports of children's SEC or EB. Unexpectedly, 
parental discomfort with anger was positively related to teacher reports of children's SEC and 
negatively related to EB. Also, parental emotion-related practices were positively related to EB. 



733 



ERIC 




POSTERS 



These findings have implications for interventions that (a) focus on reducing the detrimental 
effects of parental anger on child outcomes, and (b) aim to link school-based intervention goals 
(e.g., promoting social skills) to parenting practices. Future research should focus on identifying 
the mechanisms through which parental awareness and management of emotion influences 
child outcomes. 



References 

Cortes, R. C., Greenberg, M. T, & Gottman, J. M. (2000). Thoughts and Feelings About Emotions 
Scales. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA. 

Denham, S. (1998). Emotional development in young children. New York: Guilford Press. 

Domitrovich, C. E., & Cortes, R. C. (2000). Head Start Competence Scales. Unpublished manu- 
script, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA. 

Eisenberg, N., Cumberland, A., & Spinrad, T. L. (1998). Parental socialization of emotion. 
Psychological Inquiry, 9, 241-273. 

Fabes, R. A., Eisenberg, N., & Bernzwieg, J. (1990). The Coping with Children's Negative Emotions 
Scale: Procedures and scoring. Tempe: Arizona State University, available from authors. 

Gottman, J. M., Katz, L. F, & Hooven, C. (1997). Meta-emotion: How families communicate 
emotionally. Mahwah, NI: Erlbaum. 

Merrell, K. W. (1996). Social-emotional assessment in early childhood: The Preschool and 
Kindergarten Behavior Scales. Journal of Early Intervention, 20, 132-145. 



Maternal Mental Health Characteristics and Attachment Security 
Among Early Head Start Children: Relations With Self-Efficacy 
and Depression Within the Context of Family Risk 

Abbie Raikes 

PRESENTER: Abbie Raikes 

Existing research demonstrates that adverse maternal mental health increases likelihood of 
adverse child outcomes. In particular, depression has been linked to adverse child outcomes 
such as internalizing and externalizing behavior problems. Yet maternal self-efficacy may be a 
protective factor for positive child outcomes for families facing high risk levels, because self- 
efficacy appears to erihance maternal responsiveness in times of stress. Maternal mental health 
may be more important when families are already facing economic hardship. This poster, 
describing preliminary research findings, addressed maternal mental health characteristics, 
particularly self-efficacy and depression, and the attachment security of toddlers enrolled in 
Early Head Start (EHS). Using preliminary results from a small sample, the following hypoth- 
eses were addressed: (a) Mothers with higher levels of self-efficacy and lower levels of depression 
will have more securely attached children, (b) Statistical relationships between mental health 
and attachment security will be more pronounced among families with higher levels of contex- 
tual risk, and (c) efficacy and depression will be stronger predictors of attachment security 
among the highest risk families. 

Using a preliminary sample of 25 children aged 24 to 36 months, observer sorts of the 
Attachment Q-Sort (Waters, 1995), the Pearlin Mastery Scale (Pearlin & Schooler, 1978), and the 
CES-D measure of depression (CES-D; Radloff, 1977), the relation between maternal self- 
efficacy and attachment security among 24- to 36-month-old EHS children whose families face 
various risks was examined. Contextual risk is defined by (a) low levels of maternal education; 



ERIC 



734 



739 



nc/\LF oiAKl LiKAUUATE STUUbNl KE5EARCH GRANTEES 



(b) lack of adequate transportation, housing, or food; (c) a family member or child with a 
substantial disability; (d) divorce or separation in the past year; and (e) homelessness, or an 
adult in the family who does not speak English. Emotional risks include family members with 
alcohol or dmg abuse issues, presence of sexual abuse, domestic violence, or anger control 
problems, problems with parenting or an open case with Child Protective Services. For this 
poster, high, medium, and low levels of risk were defined according to one third and median 
splits; when possible, given the variation in the middle-risk group, the sample was divided into 
3 groups. However, for some analyses, it was necessary to use a median split given the small 
sample size. 

Results indicate that this Early Head Start sample is characterized by high depression, low 
efficacy, and low levels of attachment security on average (Af = 0.22, compared with middle- 
class means of 0.48). Overall, attachment security seems to be strongly influenced by total level 
of risk the family is experiencing, with higher risk levels associated with lower levels of attach- 
ment security. High efficacy and low depression are also associated with higher attachment 
security scores. While relationships between depression, self-efficacy, and attachment security 
are powerful, the relationships among these variables seem to change when considering risk 
levels. In particular, efficacy and depression are stronger predictors of attachment security 
among families with the highest risk levels (defined by median split). Type of risk also influ- 
ences relationships between variables, as efficacy may be more strongly influenced by contextual 
risk factors, while attachment security is more sensitive to emotional risks. 

References 

Pearlin, L. I., & Schooler, C. (1978). The stmcture of coping. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 
19, 2-21. 

Radloff, L. S. (1977). Center for Epidemiological Studies of Depression scale. In K. Corcoran & J. 
Fischer (Eds.), Measures for clinical practice: A sourcebook, (3rd ed., 2 vols., pp. 154-155). New 
York: Free Press. 

Waters, E. (1995). The Attachment Q-Set. In E. Waters, B. E. Vaughn, G. Posada, & K. Kondo- 
Ikemura (Eds.), Caregiving, cultural, and cognitive perspectives on secure-base behavior and 
working models. Monograph of the Society for Research in Child Development, 60(2/3, serial No 
244), 247-254. 



Children's Aggressive Behavior in a Head Start Sample: Its Relation 
to Caregiver Factors and Children's Attachment Representations 

Ann M. Stacks, Brandon Silverthorn 
PRESENTER: Ann M. Stacks 



This study investigated caregiver factors that contribute to children's attachment representations 
and subsequent child behavior at home and at school. Specifically, this study addressed two 
broad questions: (a) Are caregiver factors associated with children's attachment representations? 
and (b) Do children's mean aggression scores, mean internalizing scores, and mean externaliz- 
ing scores at home and at school vary as a function of attachment representations? 

Families from 7 full-day and 15 part-day Head Start classrooms in Ingham and Eaton 
Counties in Michigan were sampled. Sbcty-three families met study criteria. Primary caregivers 
completed self-report measures about themselves. These measures included (a) The Social 
Support Questionnaire (SSQ; Sarason, Levine, Basham, & Sarason, 1983), (b) The Brief Symp- 




\ 




735 



POSTERS 



tom Inventory (BSI; Derogatis, 1993), (c) The Schedule of Recent Events (SRE; Daly, 1984), and 
(d) a demographic questionnaire. 

Child characteristics were a major outcome of the study. Caregivers completed the Child 
Behavior Checklist (CBCL; Achenbach, 1991). Teachers completed the Teacher Rating Scales 
(TRS; Reynolds & Kamphaus, 1992). Children's attachment representations were measured 
using the Six- Year Attachment Doll Play Classification System (George & Solomon, 1990, 

1996, 2000). 

Cross tabulation was used to determine the association between caregiver factors and 
children's attachment representations. The contingency coefficient was used to gauge the 
strength of the association. Due to the small number of children in this sample classified as 
secure (N = 4), the expected cell size was less than 5. As a result, secure children were not 
included in the analysis. Stressful life events were not associated with attachment representa- 
tions, and the strength of the association was small (C = .283), %^(4, N = 50) = 4.37; p = .359. 
The availability of support and satisfaction with support were not associated with children s 
attachment representations, and the strength of the association was moderate (C = .35), 

X"(4, N = 49) = 6.75; p = .150; (C = .361), %"(4, N = 50) = 7.51; p = .111, respectively. Caregiver 
psychological well-being was associated with children's attachment representations, and the 
strength of the association was moderate (C = .329), %^(2, N = 50) = 6.08; p = .048. 

Six separate ANOVAs were run to determine if aggression, externalizing behavior, and 
internalizing behavior at home or at school varied as a function of children s attachment 
representations. Aggression at home F(3, 50) = 4.73, p = .006 and externalizing behavior at 
home F(3, 50) = 4.60, p = .006 varied as a function of children's attachment representations. 
Internalizing behavior at home F(3, 50) = 1.08, p = .368; aggression at school F(3, 50) = 1.39, 
p = .255; externalizing behavior at school F(3, 50) = 1.42, p = 1.42; and internalizing behavior at 
school F(3, 50) = 1.10, p = .360 did notvary as a function of children's attachment representations. 



References 

Achenbach, T. M. (1991). Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist/4-18 and 1991 Profile. 

Burlington: University of Vermont, Department of Psychiatry. 

Daly, E. B. (1984). Relationship of stress and ego energy to field-dependent perception in older 
adults. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 59, 919-926. 

Derogatis, L. R. (1993). Brief Symptom Inventory: Administration, scoring, and procedures manual 
(3rd ed.). Minneapolis, MN: National Computer Systems. 

George, C., & Solomon, J. (1990, 1996, 2000). Six-Year Attachment Doll Play Classification System. 

Unpublished classification manual. Mills College, Oakland, CA. 

Reynolds, C. R., & Kamphaus, R. (1992). Behavior Assessment System for Children manual. Circle 
Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 

Sarason, I. G., Levine, H. M., Basham, R. B., & Sarason, B. R. (1983). Assessing social support: 
The social support questionnaire. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44(1), 127-139. 



O 

ERIC 



736 



741 



HEAD START GRADUATE STUDENT RESEARCH GRANTEES 



Assessment of Curriculum Practices in Head Start 

Stacey A. Storch 

PRESENTER: Stacey A. Storch 



School readiness is a complex phenomenon including a spectrum of skills in health, social, 
emotional, motor, and intellectual development. The most recent federal reauthorization of 
Head Start places special emphasis on children's emergent literacy skills, with a focus on 
preparedness for learning to read, a skill influencing virtually all areas of academic performance. 
Recent reports of data from the Head Start Family and Child Experiences Survey (FACES; U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, 2000) indicate that while children in Head Start 
attend classrooms that are generally of good quality, these children are behind in the area of 
emergent literacy. 

As a result of the new legislative focus on enhancing Head Start program quality in ways that 
promote school readiness, local Head Start agencies are under pressure to introduce a curricu- 
lum into their programs that teaches emergent literacy skills. However, though scientific research 
on reading and emergent literacy provides very clear indications of what children need to know 
to learn to read, the same research provides much less guidance on how children should be 
taught that knowledge. Head Start teachers and the organizations that employ them exhibit a 
wide range of commitment to instruction in emergent literacy and a wide range of approaches 
to such instruction when it is part of the curriculum. We have little knowledge regarding the 
approach individual teachers take to teaching school readiness skills, yet the emphasis and 
approach of individual teachers is likely to be of considerable importance in advancing 
children's skills. 

This study, supported by a Head Start Research Scholars Grant, proposes to develop a 
Preschool Curriculum Q-sort measure to be used in assessing the degree to which engagement 
in particular classroom activities by teachers promotes language and literacy development in 
Head Start children. Specific objectives of the study include (a) developing a Q-sort measure to 
assess preschool curriculum practices that is practical to use and comprehensive in measuring 
literacy and language activities, (b) instnicting teachers in the use of the Q-sort and having them 
complete it at specific points during the school year, (c) validating the measure using indepen- 
dent observers, and (d) assessing the degree to which teachers' responses to Q-sort items relate 
to student growth in school readiness skills, particularly emergent literacy. 

This poster reports on Year 1 of the 2-year project. In the fall of the 1st year, we collaborated 
with a pilot group of preschool teachers in the development, testing, and revision of the curricu- 
lum measure. In the spring of the 1st year, a sample of 42 Head Start teachers and aides from 23 
classrooms completed the Q-sort. Children from these classrooms were tested on an extensive 
battery of language and literacy measures upon their entrance to and exit from Head Start. 

Development work from Year 1 will be presented including the final Q-set item list, teacher 
instructions, and Q-sort materials. In addition, preliminary results of data gathered from the 42 
Head Start teachers including mean response rankings of each item, cluster analysis of the Q-set 
items, and correlations between teachers' cluster scores and child outcomes will be presented. 

Reference 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families, 
Administration on Children, Youth and Families, Commissioner's Office of Research and 
Evaluation and the Head Start Bureau (2000). Head Start Family and Child Experiences Survey 
(FACES). Available from the Head Start Web site: http://www. Headstartinfo.org/publica- 
tions/catalog/ 





737 



POSTERS 



The Relationship Between Emotional and Behavioral 
Adjustment in Head Start and Social Adjustment 
and Academic Achievement in Primary Grades 

Rebecca J. Bulotsky, John W. Fantuzzo 

PRESENTER: Rebecca J. Bulotsky 

The Surgeon General's National Action Agenda on Children's Mental Health calls for a renewed 
national commitment to the mental health needs of young children and families. The Agenda 
underscores the need for early identification and intervention for vulnerable populations who 
are chronically underserved (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2001). Early 
interventions guided by quality information provide hope that children s early needs will be 
addressed so that future problems can be mitigated. Early intervention efforts, however, must be 
guided by an empirical understanding of the emotional and behavioral development of vulner- 
able children. 

Head Start's capacity as a comprehensive early intervention program to adequately target the 
educational needs of preschool children is dependent upon an empirical understanding of their 
trajectories. In order to inform appropriate and effective interventions, more empirical research 
concerning preschool emotional problems and their impact on children s developmental 
trajectories is necessary. Several scholars in the field have called attention to the lack of adequate 
information in regard to preschool emotional problems in Head Start (Lopez, Tarullo, Forness, 

& Boyce, 2000; Yoshikawa & Zigler, 2000). 

In response to this need, this project aimed to conduct a longitudinal follow-up study of a 
cohort of 938 Head Start children who are now currently in primary school grades within a large 
urban school district. The overarching goal was to investigate the relationship between children's 
preschool emotional and behavioral adjustment and their primary grade social adjustment and 
academic achievement. The project aimed to examine multiple dimensions of preschool 
adjustment problems using a multidimensional measure, the Adjustment Scales for Preschool 
Intervention (ASPI; Lutz, Fantuzzo, & McDermott, in press) and its relationship to multiple 
academic and social outcomes in primary grades. 

This presentation outlined the major activities accomplished over the past 10 months of the 
1st year of this grant. They were the further validation of the ASPI, which included the develop- 
ment and implementation of a direct observational coding system and the collection of inter- 
rater reliability data from teacher assistants, and the partnering with school district personnel to 
track the longitudinal study sample and to identify key outcome variables within the district 
computer database that could be collected for those students located within the school system. 
These data included primary school outcome variables such as children's report card grades, 
attendance information, achievement scores, contextual and demographic information, and 
special needs status. In addition, a measure of children s social adjustment, the Adjustment 
Scales for Children and Adolescents (McDermott, Marston, & Stott, 1993), was sent out to 
primary grade school teachers of the children in the longitudinal study sample to complete. 

RcJ'Ctcti CCS 

Lopez, M. L, Tarullo, L. B„ Forness, S. R., & Boyce, C. (2000). Early identification and interven- 
tion: Head Start's response to mental health challenges. Early Education and Development, 11 , 
265-282. 

Lutz, M. N., Fantuzzo, J. F, & McDermott, P. (in press). Contextually relevant assessment of the 
emotional and behavioral adjustment of low-income preschool children. Early Childhood 
Research Quarterly. 



O 



738 





HEAD START GRADUATE STUDENT RESEARCH GRANTEES 



McDermott, P. A., Marston, N. C„ & Stott, D. H. (1993). Adjustment Scales for Children and 
Adolescents. Philadelphia: Edumetric and Clinical Science. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2001). Report of the Surgeon General's Confer- 
ence on Children's Mental Health: A National Action Agenda. Washington, DC: Author. 
Yoshikawa, H., & Zigler, E. (2000). Mental health in Head Start: New directions for the twenty- 
first century. Early Education and Development, 11, 247-264. 



Multimethod Assessment of Head Start Children's 
Inhibitory Control Abilities: Reliability and Concurrent 
Validity of Behavioral, Parent-, and Teacher-Report Data 

Beth Phillips 

Presenter: Beth Phillips 
(Summary not available) 



Head Start Children at Risk for Emotional Behavioral Disorders: 
An Examination of Personal and Programmatic Characteristics 

Kevin P. Quinn, Dana Abbott 

Presenters: Kevin P. Quinn, Dana Abbott 
(Summary not available) 



739 




Action Research 



The ACCESS Study of Child Care and Family Service Hubs 
in Rural and Disadvantaged Communities 

Collette Tayler, Ann Farrell, Lee Tennent 

PRESENTER: Carla Patterson 

Accumulating evidence from around the world confirms the importance of children s participa- 
tion in effective early care and education services (McCain & Mustard, 1999; Pascal et al., 1999, 
Schweinhart & Weikert, 1997). Furthermore, initiatives such as the Head Start Programs in the 
U.S. and Early Excellence Centers in the U.K. suggest that access to, and awareness and respon- 
siveness of, community services are enhanced when services are integrated (Johnson, 1993; 
Bertram & Pascal, 2001). It is also possible that service integration has the potential to build 
community social capital. In Australia, there is now widespread interest in the potential of 
service integration for all families. This interest is embedded in notions of enhancing family and 
community capacity through the building of social capital — defined as the networks of social 
relations characterized by norms of trust and reciprocity (Stone & Hughes, 2000). In 
Queensland, government funding has been allocated to the development of integrated child 
care and family support hubs— community driven initiatives designed to improve access to a 
range of child and family services (Department of Families, 1999). To date, there is no Pub- 
lished Australian research to guide and support the integration of services for communities, 
particularly in the context of building social capital. 

Phase one of our pilot study examined community perceptions and anticipated usage of 
two developing hubs: in a rural community and in a disadvantaged urban community. Surveys 
(N = 143) elicited demographic information and insights about existing services along with 
suggestions and perceived benefits associated with potential hub services. Levels of community 
social capital were gauged using a 36-item instrument (Onyx & Bullen, 1997) that asked about 
(a) community participation, (b) friends and family connections, (c) neighborhood connec- 
tions, (d) value of life, (e) proactivity, (f) tolerance of diversity, (g) trust, and (h) safety. Eight 
questions reflecting these dimensions were adapted and asked of a sample of children (N = 138) 

aged 3-9 from each community. • • u • 

Data analysis indicated distinct gaps in service provision in both communities. For those m 
the rural community, the hub would provide a venue for much needed health services. In the 
disadvantaged community, needs centered upon a range of recreational and educational 
services. Numerous explanations as to how the hub would benefit children, parents, and other 
community members were given. For many, the hub would simply bring the community 
together." 

Substantial differences between the communities in terms of demographic charactenstics and 
levels of social capital were found. Compared with the rural community, those in the urban 
community generally had more children, lower incomes and education levels, and had lived in 
the community for fewer years. Levels of social capital in this community were also lower. 



ERIC 



740 



745 



ACTION RESEARCH 



particularly in relation to the dimensions Feelings of Trust and Safety, Value of Life, and Partici- 
pation in the Community. 

In relation to the child social capital questions, the majority of children agreed that they felt 
safe living in their area. However, children in the rural community were less likely to be involved 
in clubs or visit friends, relatives, or neighbors. While most children agreed that they would help 
friends with schoolwork if needed, and that they trusted most people, agreement was more 
pronounced in the urban community. Children in the urban community were also significantly 
more likely to agree that they liked being with people who were different from them. 

This study was made possible through funding from the Queensland Department of Families, 
the Commonwealth Department of Family and Community Services, Education Queensland, 
Queensland Health, the Commission for Children and Young People, and the Creche and 
Kindergarten Association of Queensland. 

References 

Bertram, T, & Pascal, C. (2001). Early Excellence Centre pilot programme annual evaluation report 
2000 (Research Report No. 258). Norwich, UK: Department for Education and Employment. 
Department of Families. (1999). Queensland Child Care Strategic Plan 2000-2005. Brisbane, 
Australia: Author. 

Johnson, R. H. (1993, November 4-7). Head Start demonstration project: Family Service centres. 
Minutes of a conversation hour at the Annual National Head Start Research Conference, 
Washington, DC. 

McCain, M., & Mustard, F. (1999). Reversing the brain-drain. The early years study. Final report. 
Toronto, Canada: Children's Secretariate. 

Onyx, ]., & Bullen, P. (1997). Measuring social capital in five communities. CACOM Working 
Paper Series No. 41. Sydney, Australia: University of Technology. 

Pascal, C., Bertram, T, Gasper, M., Mould, C., Ramsden, E, & Saunders, M. (1999, July). Research 
to inform the Early Excellence Centre's pilot program. Worcester, UK: University College. 
Schweinhart, L. J., & Weikert, D. P. (1997). Lasting differences: The High/Scope preschool 

curriculum comparison study through age 23. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 2(2), 117- 
143. 

Stone, W, & Hughes, J. (2000). What role for social capital in family policy? Family Matters, 56, 
20-28. 



Pathways to Shared Food Learning for Young Children 

Julie Appleton, Carla Patterson, Nadine McCrea 

PRESENTERS: Julie Appleton, Carla Patterson 



An audit of food and nutrition education resources in Australia (Curriculum Corporation, 

1996) and research in early childhood services (Appleton, Patterson, & Giskes, 2002) showed 
that there is a dearth of suitable resources for young children, particularly for use in early 
childhood services. 

The framework developed by the National Nutrition Education in Schools project (Reynolds 
& Dommers, 1995; Reynolds, 2000) provides a basis for appropriate methodology for food and 
nutrition education that it is believed will make healthy food choices easier. Specific teaching 
and learning strategies should be relevant to students' needs, skills, interests, abilities, and experi- 
ences and consider the physical, cognitive, emotional, social, and spiritual dimensions of health. 



746 



741 



POSTERS 



This learning should be undertaken using an inquiry-based process, which involves gather- 
ing, analysing, and evaluating information related to either their own diets, or to societal factors 
that impact on food beliefs or habits. As a result of the evaluation, decisions can be made 
regarding whether or not action is necessary. Associated goals are set and barriers/enablers in 
relation to these goals are identified. Plans and actions to overcome the barriers to achieve the 
goals reflect upon outcomes. 

The development of such skills must include selecting foods, preparing foods, and advocat- 
ing. These are the focus areas of this inquiry-based process and complimentary to a health 
promoting approach in early childhood settings. 

Broad consultation was undertaken with stakeholders from university, early childhood, and 
parent groups, and the resource was based on the already developed Food and Nutrition 
Curriculum Development Framework. It was developed using an action research process and 
was trialed twice in early childhood settings and redrafted each time on the basis of feedback 
received. This ensured that the resource is practical and useful for the needs of early childhood 
services. It insists children learn about food in ways that are appropriate to their age and 
development and is also a useful reference book for staff. 

The trials and consultations raised awareness of the resource in the target population, and 
this assisted with implementation. The result of this process is the publication of There s More to 
Food Than Eating: Food Foundations for Young Children Birth to Eight Years (Appleton, McCrea, & 
Patterson, 1999) and Do Carrots Make You See Better? (Appleton, McCrea, Patterson, & Ashby, 
2001). This book. Do Carrots Make You See Better?, takes a holistic approach to food learning, 
and its major focus has many practical experiences for young children including involvement in 
decision making and science, math, and food cycle activities. Children are also encouraged to 
(a) practice motor skills while preparing nutritious foods and (b) use popular children s 
literature as a starting point for food learning. 

Food and nutrition information, guidelines and recommendations for young children, and 
managing food issues in early childhood services are discussed, including development of 
policies and ideas for negotiating with families if differences arise. 

References 

Appleton, J., McCrea, N., & Patterson, C. (1999). There's more to food than eating: Food foundations 
for children birth to 8 years. Sydney, Australia: Pademelon Press. 

Appleton, J., McCrea, N., Patterson, C., & Ashby, G. (2001). Do carrots make you see better? 
Beltsville, MD: Gryphon House. 

Appleton J., Patterson C., & Giskes, K. (2002). Ffealth promotion and food practice in Early Child- 
hood Services in Queensland. Unpublished manuscript. 

Curriculum Corporation. (1996). Food and nutrition in action. Canberra, Australia: Common- 
wealth Department of Human Services and Health. 

Reynolds, J. (2000). Teaching and learning considerations for school-based adolescents food 
and nutrition education. Journal of the Home Economics Institute of Australia, 7(1), 14-26. 
Reynolds, J., & Dommers, E. (1995). Translating a theoretical framework for food and nutrition 
education into classroom action. Journal of the Home Economics Association of Australia, 2(4), 
7-12. 




742 



747 



ACTION RESEARCH 



Ready, Set, Grow! Passport: Report on 
Program Development and Evaluation 

Jessica V. Barnes, Colleen M. Determan, Hiram E. Fitzgerald, Velma P. Allen 

PRESENTERS: Jessica V. Bames, Hiram E. Fitzgerald 

Evaluation of outcomes has been an integral feature of the Passport Initiative from the begin- 
ning of the planning process. Evaluation was conceptualized as a key mechanism for determin- 
ing the effectiveness of Passport as a community networking strategy to enhance connections 
between families being served, the results of such services for young children, and the features of 
Passport that most account for positive outcomes. 

In the process of evaluation, program evaluators provide feedback to the community about 
program strengths and concerns. The community then responds to the feedback by making 
adjustments in program policy. The community and evaluators must address the evaluation 
plans again, ensuring programmatic changes are reflected in the evaluation model. This dynamic 
approach to evaluation is utilization-focused (Patton, 1997) in that the evaluation is conducted 
in order to inform the community. This process allows for greater community empowerment 
(Bartunek, Foster-Fishman, & Keys, 1996); the community is able to use evaluation feedback to 
strengthen service delivery and the impact these services have on community members. Local 
ownership is thus enhanced (Butterfoss, Goodman, & Wandersman, 1993). 

Since January 1, 1998, 8,039 children were enrolled in the Passport Initiative. Data concern- 
ing the utilization of Passport services point to strengths and concerns about Passport service 
delivery. The key strengths and concerns identified in the current report involve three areas of 
Passport service delivery: (a) enrollment, (b) service utilization, and (c) community involve- 
ment. For enrollment, the strengths include representation of families with a variety of educa- 
tional levels and the high representation of minority ethnicity families enrolled in Passport. The 
concerns identified include the low percentage of families enrolled before the birth of the child 
and the low percentage of families enrolled with an education level below 9th grade. For service 
utilization, the strengths include the high frequency of use and satisfaction with the educational 
manual. Although most families report they have not received the Passport newsletter (a 
concern), a high frequency of the families who have received the newsletter report being 
satisfied with it. Another concern identified about service utilization is the low frequency of use 
of the incentive system. However, of those families who do use the incentive system, most report 
a high level of satisfaction with the use of the incentives. Another strength identified involves 
the high frequency of family contacts that have been made within the past year. However, there 
are still a high number of families Passport has been unable to contact. 

No concerns were identified in the area of community involvement. The three strengths 
identified include the high number of businesses involved in the incentive system, the regular 
attendance at committee meetings, and the continuance of community funding. The strengths 
and concerns identified have been and should continue to be addressed by the Passport com- 
munity in order to strengthen the support provided to families with young children in Genesee 
Gounty. As the program is modified in response to community and member needs, the evalua- 
tion plan will adapt to the programmatic changes. 

References 

Bartunek, J. M., Foster-Fishman, P. G., & Keys, G. B. (1996). Using collaborative advocacy to 
foster intergroup cooperation: A joint insider-outsider investigation. Human Relations, 49(6), 
701-733. 

Butterfoss, F., Goodman, R., & Wandersman, A. (1993). Gommunity coalitions for prevention 
and health promotion. Health Education Research, 8(3), 315-330. 

Patton, M. Q. (1997). Utilization- focused evaluation: The new century text. Thousand Oaks, GA: 

Sage. 





743 



POSTERS 



Continuous Process Improvements: Primer and Discussion 
Around the Experiences of Three Programs 

Mark S. Innocenti, Lori A. Roggman, Vonda K. Jump, James F. Akers, Patty Walker 

PRESENTERS: Mark S. Ifinocenti, Lori A. Roggman 

Continuous program improvement (CPI) is a process focused on improving program quality. It 
values input from all stakeholders (administrators, staff, families, and university partners), and 
all ideas have equal value. CPI operates on the philosophy that no matter how effective a 
program, there is always room for improvement. With increased emphasis on program effective- 
ness and recent questions raised about the universal effectiveness of any single approach, CPI 
has become even more important. The CPI process is useful in focusing programs toward a 
unified goal(s) through a consistently implemented process. CPI includes program defined data 
collection. The data collection of the CPI process may serve as short-term outcomes working 
toward longer-term outcomes and are easily implemented with stakeholders. We have worked 
with three programs that have used the CPI process. We have learned that the CPI process varies 
based on the goals of the program and the program context. As a result, we have learned several 
lessons and some of the challenges encountered in implementing CPI. 

The reasons for partnerships with the three programs varied, as did the role of the program 
staff in the partnership. The role of the trainers varied, but consisted of some common aspects. 
Trainers served more as facilitators than presenters of the "right way to go. Training built on the 
skills the staff already possessed and on the goals of the program. The staff were active in all 
training activities. The identification of process/program data by the staff, the collection of these 
data, and the provision of the results of the data to the staff were key aspects. 

A number of important lessons have emerged from our experiences. Programs starting the 
continuous program improvement process may benefit from the experiences of other programs. 
These lessons fall under the following headings: (a) system change/getting started, (b) building 
relationships, (c) identifying process and outcomes, and (d) working together. The lessons have 
assisted us in bypassing some of the challenges inherent in conducting CPI, but a number of 
challenges still exist. In reality, there will always be challenges in implementing and improving 
early childhood programs. We have identified five areas that need to be considered both by 
programs wishing to become involved in the CPI process and by partners with whom programs 
work. These challenges include (a) program readiness, (b) philosophy change, (c) initial 
commitment, (d) facilitate rather than instruct, and (e) each at his/her own pace. 

Our experience has shown that the CPI process can be an exciting, empowering process for 
both programs and partners working with programs to improve outcomes. We hope others can 
use this information to form more effective and collaborative partnerships. 




744 



Assessment/Diagnosis 



Assessment as a Mediator of Teacher-Parent Partnerships 

Rhonda Douglas Brown, Kurt Kowalski, Kristie Pretti-Frontczak 

PRESENTERS: Rhonda Douglas Brown, Kurt Kowalski 

Collaborative partnerships between agencies, teachers, and parents are critical components of 
effective early childhood education (Zigler, Kagan, & Muenchow, 1982). The current study 
examined the role of assessment in mediating teacher-parent partnerships. Seventy-two parents 
of children attending 55 publicly funded preschool programs in Ohio participated in structured 
interviews designed to investigate parents' use, knowledge, and satisfaction with assessment 
information. Parents cited the following as sources of information about their child's skills 
and interests: (a) teacher reports (66.7%), (b) assessment information (62.5%), (c) personal 
observation (37.5%), and (d) other sources (25%). Parents were provided with a list of assess- 
ment instmments and asked to indicate whether their child's preschool used each one 
(responses may not reflect actual use). 

Results revealed that 38.9% of parents indicated the Galileo System for the Electronic 
Management of Learning (Bergan, Bergan, Rattee, & Feld, 2001); 11.1% indicated the BRI GANCE 
Diagnostic Inventory of Early Development, Revised Edition (BDIED-R; Brigance, 1991) and the 
Denver Developmental Screening Test-II (Frankenburg et al., 1989); 9.7% indicated "other"; 
5.5% indicated the Battelle Developmental Inventory Complete Version (Newborg, Stock, & 
Wnek, 1998); 4.1% indicated the Developmental Indicators for the Assessment of Learning- 
Revised (Dial-R; Mardell-Czudnowski & Goldenberg, 1990) and the Peabody Picture Vocabulary 
Test-Third Edition (PPVT-III; Dunn & Dunn, 1997); and 0% indicated the Portage Guide to 
Early Education (Doan, Wollenburg, & Wilson, 1994). Forty-two percent of parents indicated 
that they did not know which assessments were being used or that no assessments were being 
used, and were forwarded to the end of the interview. Of the remaining 42 participants (58% of 
total sample), 26 participants (62% of subset; 36% of total sample) indicated that they received 
assessment reports from specific instmments. Fifty percent of these participants reported 
receiving them several times a year, 19.2% once a month, 11.5% once a week, 7.6% several times 
a month, and 11.5% provided other responses. Thirty-eight percent indicated they did not 
receive reports or did not know. Thus, approximately 35% of parents contacted were aware of 
specific tools used by preschools to assess their child's skills and abilities and had received 
assessment reports. This subset of parents provided ratings of information in assessment reports 
using a likert scale, ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree. 

Results also indicated that parents agreed that assessment reports are (a) useful and easy to 
understand, (b) include important developmental skills for preschoolers, (c) accurately describe 
their child's skills and abilities, (d) provide frequent and current feedback about their child's 
skills and progress, (e) help them set goals and plan activities for their child, and (f) facilitate 
communication between themselves and their child's teacher. Parents somewhat agreed that 
report information helps them determine their child's developmental level and were neutral 



745 



ERIC 




POSTERS 



concerning whether the skills are difficult to observe. When asked what they would change 
about the reports, parents reported wanting to receive reports more frequendy. Recommended 
practice advocates allowing families to determine their involvement in the assessment process 
(Winton & Bailey, 1997). 

Our results indicate that parents use assessments as a source of information about their 
children's skills and abilities, but do not necessarily know about instruments used with their 
children. Parents that acknowledged receiving reports were satisfied with the information 
provided and expressed interest in receiving reports more frequently. 



Bergan, J. R., Bergan, J. R., Rattee, M., & Feld, J. K. (2001). The Galileo System for the Electronic 
Management of Learning. Tucson, AZ: Assessment Technology. 

Brigance, A. H. (1991). BRIGANCE Diagnostic Inventory of Early Development, Revised Edition 
(BDIED-R). Billerica, MA: Curriculum Associates. 

Doan, M. A., Wollenburg, K., & Wilson, E. (1994). Portage Guide to Early Education. Portage, WI: 
Cooperative Educational Service Center 5. 

Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Third Edition (PPVT-III). 
Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 

Frankenburg, W. K., Dodds, J., Archer, P., Bresnick, B., Maschka, P., Edelman, N., et al. (1989). 

Denver Developmental Screening Test-II. Denver, CO: Denver Developmental Materials. 
Mardell-Czudnowski, C., & Goldenburg, D. S. (1990). Developmental Indicators for the 
Assessment of Learning-Revised (DIAL-R). Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 
Newborg, J., Stock, J. R., & Wnek, J. (1998). Battelle Developmental Inventory Gomplete Version. 
Chicago, IL: Riverside. 

Winton, P. J., & Bailey, D. B. (1997, February). Family-centered care: The revolution continues. 
Exceptional Parent, 16-20. 

Zigler, E., Kagan, S. L, & Muenchow, S. (1982). Preventive intervention in the schools. In C. 
Reynolds and T. Gutkin (Eds.), Mental retardation: The developmental-difference controversy (pp. 
3-8). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 



The Testability of Preschoolers on Stereotests 
Used to Detect Vision Disorders 

Paulette P. Schmidt 

PRESENTER: Paulette P. Schmidt 

Questions have been raised about the testability of young preschool children on stereotests. Our 
purpose was to compare the percentage of children aged 3 to 3.5 years who could complete each 
of three stereotests: (a) the Preschool Randot (Birch & The Retina Foundation of the Southwest, 
1996), (b) the Random Dot E (RDE; Stereo Optical Company, Inc., 1974), and (c) the Stereo 
Smile (Ciner, 1997). These tests have the best theoretical characteristics among all tests available 
for screening young children. 

Participating were 118 preschoolers from five centers involved in Vision In Preschoolers, a 
ixiulticenter research study supported by the National Eye Institute. Subjects were between 3 and 
3.5 years of age, able to complete cover testing at near and far distance, and not strabismic 
(based on cover test results). Each child was tested on the three stereotests in a variable, bal- 
anced order. Prior to stereotesting, the testability for each test was determined by the child's 



References 



ERIC 




746 



ASSESSMENT/DIAGNOSIS 



ability to identify nonstereo images and large disparity stereo images of the targets for each test. 
Testing followed the manufacturer's instructions. 

After pretesting a child with two-dimensional targets, the tester showed each child the stereo 
plates in Book #3 at 40 cm (800 arc seconds of disparity) and asked the child to identify/match 
the shapes. If the child identified at least two of three shapes, the result was scored as testable. 
The same procedure was followed using Book #1 at 54 cm (150 arc seconds of disparity). If the 
child identified at least two of three shapes, the result was scored as "pass." After pretesting the 
child with the model E, the tester presented the stereo E versus the blank card five times at a 
distance of 150 cm (168 arc seconds of disparity), with the position (left, right, up, down) of the 
E varied from trial to trial. If the child correctly identified the position of the stereo E at least 
four times, the result was scored as "pass." After pretesting the child with the nonstereo smile face, 
the tester presented the stereo smile card at a distance of 44 cm (150 arc seconds of disparity) for 
five trials, with the left-right position of the stereo smile varied ftom trial to trial. If the child 
correcdy identified the position of the smile at least four times, the result was scored as "pass." 

The percentage of children able to perform the test was higher for the RDE and Stereo Smile 
than for the Preschool Randot. Testability was greater for the Stereo Smile than for the Preschool 
Randot. The difference in testability between the RDE and the Preschool Randot was of border- 
line statistical significance and the RDE and Stereo Smile were not significantly different. The 
testability of young preschoolers was greater for the Stereo Smile and RDE tests than for the 
Preschool Randot test. Among testable children, the proportion passing the test was similar for 
all three tests. Using stereoacuity in preschool screenings shows great potential since reduced 
stereoacuity may indicate the presence of amblyopia, strabismus, and refractive error. 

References 

Birch, E. E., & The Retina Foundation of the Southwest. (1996). Randot® preschool stereoacuity test. 
Chicago: Stereo Optical. 

Ciner, E. (1997). Randot® stereo smile test. Chicago: Stereo Optical. 

Stereo Optical Company, Inc. (1974). Random Dot E. Chicago: Author. 



Relationship of Parent and Teacher Temperament Ratings 
to Child Social and Cognitive Outcomes 

Susan L. Churchill, Jeanne Stolzer, Zolinda Stoneman 

PRESENTER: Susan L. Churchill 



The current study examined the relationships between teacher and parent ratings of tempera- 
ment to both social and cognitive outcomes. In addition to individual temperament ratings, the 
study utilized three different agreement measures: (a) absolute difference score, (b) mean score, 
and (c) intraclass correlation (ICC). The sample consisted of 120 Head Start children, their 
teachers, and mothers. Individually, mothers' and teachers' ratings showed differential correla- 
tional patterns for girls and boys. Mothers' ratings were more strongly related to girls' outcomes, 
while teachers ratings were more closely associated with boys' outcomes. The three indices 
calculated to represent agreement between teacher and parents showed various utility. The 
absolute value difference score showed very few correlations with child outcomes — both the 
mean score and intraclass correlation (ICC) were more strongly associated with child outcomes. 
The ICC did show more and stronger correlations overall for boys than girls. For cognitive 





747 



POSTERS 



outcomes, the ICC showed higher correlations than the mean score, but the opposite was true 
for social outcomes. 

This study serves to highlight the importance of multiple informants when documenting 
child characteristics, especially when using rating scales. 



Head Start Vision Screening: Identifying and Targeting 
Population Specific Vision Problems 

Irene Adams, Frances Lopez, Candice Clifford, Erin Harvey, Joseph Miller 

PRESENTER: Irene Adams 

Members of theTohono O'odham Nation, a Native American Tribe, have a high prevalence of 
astigmatism (Kershner & Brick, 1984; Dobson, Tyszko, Miller, & Harvey, 1996). When not 
wearing eyeglasses, people with astigmatism have poor near and distance vision. Correction of 
astigmatism while children are young is important for healthy visual development; If astigma- 
tism is not corrected with eyeglasses while children are young, it can lead to the development of 
amblyopia — poor visual acuity even while wearing eyeglasses. 

Most presdiool vision screening programs focus on detection of poor visual acuity and 
strabismus, problems that are most prevalent in most populations. These screening programs 
may not be effective in a population that has a high prevalence of astigmatism. In Study 1, we 
compared screening effectiveness of four different methods for detecting high astigmatism 
(Miller, Dobson, Harvey, & Sherrill, 2001), and in study 2 we evaluated a vision screening 
protocol developed based on the findings of the first study (Dobson, Miller, Harvey, & Sherrill, 
2001 ). 

Participants were 379 preschool children enrolled in the Tohono O odham Head Start 
program in fall 1997 or fall 1998 (Study 1), and 167 children enrolled in the Tohono O odham 
Head Start program in fall 2000 (Study 2). In Study 1, four screening methods were evaluated: 
(a) Lea Symbols distance visual acuity test (Hyvarinen, 1976), (b) MTl Photoscreener (Medical 
Technology, Inc., Cedar Falls, lA), (c) Nidek KM-500 autokeratometer (Marco Ophthalmic, Inc., 
Jacksonville, FL), and (d) Retinomax K-plus autorefractor (Nikon Instmments, Inc., Melville, 
NY). The screening results were compared to the results of an eye examination, which deter- 
mined if astigmatism was present. Analyses provided an estimate of screening effectiveness 
(ability to "fail" children who have astigmatism and "pass" children who do not). Based on 
screening effectiveness and cost effectiveness, a screening protocol recommendation was made 
to the Head Start program. In Study 2, the vision screening protocol was implemented by Head 
Start staff, and the results were evaluated. 

Study 1 indicated that the autorefractor was most effective, followed by the keratometer, the 
photoscreener, and Lea Acuity screening. Since the keratometer was almost as effective as the 
autorefractor and the cost of the keratometer was significantly less than that of the autorefractor, 
the keratometer was recommended for use in screening. Acuity screening was also recom- 
mended since keratometry cannot detect some serious eye problems such as cataract. The 
recommended screening protocol was (a) screen using keratometer, referring all children who 
"fail," (b) screen children who pass keratometry screening with Lea Symbols test, and (c) 
rescreen children who "fail" acuity screening, referring all children who fail. Using this 
protocol, 61/65 (94%) children with astigmatism were correctly identified as having astigma- 
tism, and 75/102 (74%) were correctly identified as not having astigmatism. 



er|c 



748 



753 



ASSESSMENT/DIAGNOSIS 



These studies resulted in the development of a vision screening protocol that has proven to 
be effective in a population with high astigmatism. This protocol would not be effective in most 
populations, but may be useful in other populations that have a high prevalence of astigmatism, 
for example, some other Native American tribes. 

References 

Dobson, V., Miller, J. M., Harvey, E. M., & Sherrill, D. L. (2001). A screening protocol for pre- 
school children who are members of a population with a high prevalence of astigmatism. In 
Vision science and its applications, OSA technical digest (pp. 154-157). Washington, DC: 

Optical Society of America. 

Dobson, V., Tyszko, R. M., Miller, J. M., & Harvey, E. M. (1996). Astigmatism, amblyopia, and 
visual disability among a Native American population. In Vision science and its applications, 
Technical digest (Vol. 1, pp. 139-142). Washington DC: Optical Society of America. 
Hyvarinen, L. (1976). Lea Symbols distance visual acuity test. Helsinki, Finland: Lea-Test, Ltd. 
Kershner, R. M., & Brick, D. C. (1984). Prevalence of high corneal astigmatism in Papago school 
children. Investigative Ophthalmology & Visual Science, 25(Suppl), 217. 

Miller, J. M., Dobson, V., Harvey, E. M., & Sherrill, D. L. (2001). Comparison of preschool vision 
screening methods in a population with a high prevalence of astigmatism. Investigative 
Ophthalmology & Visual Science, 42, 917-924. 



The Philadelphia Pilot: An In-depth Look at 
Mental Health Screening in Urban Head Start 

John Fantuzzo, Rebecca Bulotsky, Samuel Mosca, Yumiko Sekino, Carrie Steinberg, 

Janelle Brown, Pelin Munis 

PRESENTERS: Rebecca Bulotsky, John Fantuzzo, Yumiko Sekino 

As a comprehensive service delivery program. Head Start serves as one of the earliest mecha- 
nisms for identification and intervention with low-income children and their families 
(Yoshikawa & Knitzer, 1997; Lopez, Tarullo, Forness, & Boyce, 2000). Specifically, the Head Start 
Performance Standards call for programs to "provide prevention, early identification, and early 
intervention in problems that interfere with a child's development" (U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services, 1996). Logically, early intervention efforts are dependent upon the 
systematic identification of children's needs. More research is needed in partnership with Head 
Start programs to construct a screening process utilizing quality information that systematically 
identifies high priority children. The study addresses this need by implementing a mental 
health-screening pilot in a large, urban Head Start program. The study's purpose was threefold: 
(a) identify known risks at school entry in order to create a screening system utilizing normative 
and contextual data, (b) explore empirical relationships between these risks and children's 
emotional and behavioral problems at the beginning of the year, and (c) explore empirical 
relationships between risks and emotional and behavioral problems screened at the beginning 
of the year and children's outcomes at the end of the year. The participants in this study were 
171 children, ranging in age from 38 to 71 months (46% male and 54% female), enrolled in 
two large centers in a large city for the 2000-01 school year. 

Information about hypothesized risk factors was collected at the beginning of the year. These 
included (a) health risk variables (e.g., asthma, high lead, low birth weight), (b) educational risk 
variables (e.g., attendance, referrals to disability coordinator), (c) key demographic variables 




749 

754 



POSTERS 



(e.g., year in Head Start, parental education, and marital status), (d) a multidimensional teacher 
measure of children's emotional and behavioral'adjustment within the classroom, and 
(e) contextual information reflecting a level of neighborhood risk. 

Children's emotional and behavioral adjustment at the beginning of the year was assessed 
using the Adjustment Scales for Preschool Intervention (Lutz, Fantuzzo, & McDermott, in press). 
At the end of the year, classroom learning competencies, social competency, emergent numeracy, 
and learning behaviors were assessed using the Child Observation Record (Schweinhart, McNair, 
Barnes, & Lamer, 1993), Penn Interactive Peer Play Scale (Fantuzzo, Coolahan, Mendez, 
McDermott, & Sutton-Smith, 1998), Test of Early Mathematics Ability, Second Edition 
(Ginsburg & Baroody, 1990), and the Preschool Learning Behavior Scale (McDermott, Green, 
Francis, & Stott, 1996). 

The study children were more likely to be exposed to higher levels of health, educational, and 
neighborhood risk variables than children in the entire program. Analyses suggest also that 
these children were at higher risk of emotional and behavioral problems at the end of the year. 
Finally, a number of health, educational, and contextual risk variables (such as low attendance 
rate, year in Head Start, and referral to disability coordinator) significantly increased children's 
risk of emotional and behavioral problems at the end of the Head Start year. 

References 

Fantuzzo, J. E, Coolahan, K. C., Mendez, J. L., McDermott, P. A., & Sutton-Smith, B. (1998). 
Contextually-relevant validation of constmcts of peer play with African American Head Start 
children; Penn Interactive Peer Play Scale. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 13(3), 411-431. 
Ginsburg, H. P, & Baroody, A. J. (1990). Test of Early Mathematics Ability, Second Edition. Austin, 
TX: PRO-ED. 

Lopez, M. L., Tamllo, L. B., Fomess, S. R., & Boyce, C. A. (2000). Early identification and 

intervention; Head Start's response to mental health challenges. Early Education & Develop- 
ment, 11 {3), 265-282. 

Lutz, M. N., Fantuzzo, J. E, & McDermott, P. (in press). Contextually relevant assessment of the 
emotional and behavioral adjustment of low-income preschool children. Early Childhood 
Research Quarterly. 

McDermott, P. A., Green, L. E, Francis, J. M., & Stott, D. (1996). Preschool Learning Behaviors 
Scale. Philadelphia; Edumetric and Clinical Science. 

Schweinhart, L. L, McNair, S., Barnes, H., & Lamer, M. (1993). Observing young children in 
action to assess their development; The High/Scope Child Observation Record study. 
Educational and Psychological Measurement, 53, 445-455. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (1996). Final mle - Program performance 

standards for the operation of Head Start programs by grantee and delegate agencies, 45 CFR 
Part 1304, Federal Register, 61, 57186-57227. Washington, DC; U.S. Government Printing 
Office. 

Yoshikawa, H., & Knitzer, J. (1997). Lessons from the field: Head Start mental health strategies to 
meet changing needs. New York; Center for Children in Poverty and American Orthopsychiat- 
ric Association. 




750 



755 



ASSESSMENT/DIAGNOSIS 



The Testability of Preschoolers on Two Visual 
Acuity Procedures for Detecting Vision Disorders 

Bruce D. Moore 

PRESENTER: Bruce D. Moore 

Vision disorders are a highly prevalent cause of disability in children. They occur in about one 
quarter of Head Start children and may have a significant adverse effect on a child's ability to 
function in the classroom. The most important and common disorders affecting children's 
vision include amblyopia (poor vision not improvable solely by eyeglasses), strabismus (crossed 
or turned eyes), and significant refractive error (blurred vision correctable with eyeglasses). 
Comprehensive eye examinations are recommended for preschool children by every major 
professional organization concerned with the vision of children. However, fewer than 15% of all 
preschool children receive an eye examination. Screening preschool children has been advocated 
as a way to identify children most in need of a comprehensive eye examination, and Head Start 
mandates vision screening early in the school year. However, screening methods and referral 
criteria vary widely across the country, with little agreement on the best way to implement vision 
screening. 

Testing of visual acuity is the most widely used method of screening children for vision 
problems. Children with significant refractive error, amblyopia, and many with strabismus will 
manifest deficits of visual acuity in comparison to age norms. This study compares the ability of 
children between the ages of 3-3 V 2 to complete two visual acuity tests. 

The two tests we evaluated were the Mentor B-VAT crowded HOTV acuity test (Mentor O & O, 
Norwell, MA) and the Lea Symbols chart (Hyvarinen, 1976). The National Eye Institute (NEI) 
funded Amblyopia Treatment Study (ATS) has developed and is using a standardized protocol 
for measuring visual acuity with the B-VAT crowded HOTV test to measure acuity in preschool- 
aged children. In the present study, the ATS testing protocol was adapted for use with the Lea 
Symbols chart, which is composed of four symbols — an apple, square, circle, and house — which 
are repeated on multiple lines of S 3 mrbols decreasing in size from 10/100 to 10/5. 

Subjects were 87 Head Start children between 3-3 V 2 years old. The children participated 
through four centers involved in the Vision In Preschoolers (VIP) Study, a multicenter research 
project supported by the NEI. VIP Clinical Centers are located in Berkeley, California; Boston; 
Columbus, Ohio; Philadelphia; and Tahlequah, Oklahoma. 

Pretraining was provided immediately prior to the administration of each of the visual acuity 
tests. A modified, rapid staircase procedure was used to determine monocular threshold acuity 
levels. Monocular threshold visual acuity could be measured using the crowded HOTV letters in 
68% of the children and using the Lea Symbols in 73%. Ninety-two point one percent of the 
children achieved monocular visual acuities of 20/50 or better on the HOTV test. However, the 
HOTV acuity was on average two lines better than the Lea Symbols acuity. 

Both of the visual acuity tests were found to result in high testability in children aged 3-3 V 2 
years. The HOTV test did result in a higher estimate of visual acuity than the Lea Symbols test. 

Reference 

Hyvarinen, L. (1976). Lea Symbols chart. Helsinki, Finland: Lea-Test, Ltd. 




756 



POSTERS 



An Evaluation of Emergent Numeracy Strategy Understanding: 
Development of a More Sensitive Measure for Head Start Assessment 

Adam DiBella, Shannon C. Monahan, Douglas A. Frye 

PRESENTERS: Adam DiBella, Shannon C. Monahan 

Understanding numeracy at the beginning of school has important implications for later 
learning in math and science (Entwisle & Alexander, 1990); therefore, promoting early math 
skills is an essential component of school readiness for urban, low-income children placed at 
risk for school failure. Previous research indicates children develop a partially ordered sequence 
of informal counting strategies that are applied in mathematical contexts (Ginsburg, Klein, & 
Starkey, 1998). As strategy knowledge is closely linked with math understanding (Kuhn, Garcia- 
Mila, Zohar, & Anderson, 1995; Siegler, 1987; Siegler & Robinson, 1982), a precise assessment 
of strategy knowledge can facilitate effective instruction. In line with previous studies that have 
examined the validity and developmental appropriateness of assessment measures for urban 
Head Start children (Fantuzzo, McDermott, Manz, & Hampton, 1996), this study evaluated the 
sensitivity of various assessment methods for early math strategies. The research questions 
addressed in this study included (a) What is the most sensitive methodology for assessing urban 
Head Start children s strategy knowledge? (b) What information does this methodology provide 
about how children acquire an understanding of early math? 

The strategy knowledge of children in two Head Start centers (N = 54; M = 58 months) was 
assessed within three categories of emergent numeracy: (a) counting, (b) ordinality, and (c) 
addition. One assessment procedure adapted from Siegler and Crowley (1994), asked children 
to evaluate a single strategy using a 3-point scale (very smart, kind of smart, not so smart). 
Utilizing this procedure, student performance was not significantly above chance in any of the 
categories measured. To ascertain whether these results signified an absence of strategy knowl- 
edge or a lack of sensitivity with the assessment methodology, a different procedure was created. 
Children were given a forced-choice, paired-comparison assessment format and asked to judge 
between two strategies presented side-by-side ("Which is the better way?'"). Within the addition 
category, children made a significant distinction between counting all of the items correctly 
versus an illegitimate addition strategy, with over 75% making the correct choice. 

Results from a second study (n = 28) confirmed our previous finding that paired comparisons 
offer a more sensitive assessment methodology. A different item set targeted other salient 
features of numeracy within the counting category. Using the single-judgment method, children 
were able to identify a correct count sequence as a critical feature of counting. However, the 
paired-comparison method was more informative, demonstrating that a correct count sequence 
and counting all members of a group were critical features. Furthermore, the paired-comparison 
methodology demonstrated that children s preferences for different features were hierarchically 
organized. Participants preferred the strategy for counting all members of a group, even in the 
presence of an incorrect count sequence and incorrect one-to one-correspondence. Therefore, 
this study identified a feature of counting with developmental importance that has not been 
adequately recognized in previous research. 

A precise assessment of individual strategy understanding provides the instructional informa- 
tion necessary for targeting critical areas limiting the rate of learning. Furthermore, as an 
instructional technique, paired-comparison methodology may promote children's learning by 
facilitating identification of the critical features that distinguish two strategies. 

References 

Entwisle, D. R., & Alexander, K. L. (1990). Beginning school math competence: Minority and 
majority comparisons. Child Development, 61, 454-471. 



ERIC 



752 



757 



ASSESSMENT/DIAGNOSIS 



Fantuzzo, J. W„ McDermott, P. A., Manz, P. H„ & Hampton, V. R. (1996). The Pictorial Scale of 
Perceived Competence and Social Acceptance; Does it work with low-income urban chil- 
dren? Child Development, 67(3), 1071-1084. 

Ginsburg, H., Klein, A., & Starkey, P. (1998). The development of children's mathematical 
thinking: Connecting research with practice. In 1. Sigel & A. Renninger (Eds.), Handbook of 
Child Psychology: Vol. 4. Child Psychology and Practice (5th ed., pp. 401-476). 

Kuhn, D., Garcia-Mila, M., Zohar, A., & Andersen, C. (1995). Strategies of knowledge acquisi- 
tion. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 63(2-3, Serial No. 254). 

Siegler, R. S. (1987). Strategy choices in subtraction. In J. A. Sloboda & D. Rogers (Eds.), Cogni- 
tive processes in mathematics (pp. 81-106). 

Siegler, R. S., & Crowley, K. (1994). Constraints on learning in nonprivileged domains. Cognitive 
Psychology, 28, 194-226. 

Siegler, R. S., & Robinson, M. (1982). The development of numerical understandings. In H.W. 
Reese & L. P. Lipsitt (Eds.), Advances in child development and behavior. New York: Academic 
Press. 



Multiple Perspectives on Interpersonal Competence: 

An Ecologically Valid Assessment of Head Start Children's 
Social and Emotional Competence With Peers and Teachers 

Sandra A. Graham-Bermann, Julie Eastin, Eric A. Bermann, Sandhya Krishnan 

PRESENTERS: Sandra A. Graham-Bermann, Eric A. Bermann 

Many measures of preschoolers' social competence were validated with middle income and 
White families and do not take the needs of poor children, minority children, or the classroom 
setting into consideration. This poster describes two studies used to develop a brief screening 
measure of Head Start children's social and emotional competence that takes both culture and 
context into account (Graham-Bermann, Bermann, & Huesmann, 2002). There were 146 
children and 214 children ages 3-4 in each study, respectively. Seventy-nine percent attended 
schools in urban settings while the rest were rural. Ethnicity was diverse: 52% White, 48% 
minority. More than 55% had two parents in the home. In order to create an ecologically 
sensitive and valid measure, focus groups and workshops were held with Head Start teachers, 
teacher assistants, administrators. Advisory Council members, and university researchers. This 
community-based, grounded approach is recommended by ecological researchers (Jensen, 
Hoagwood, & Trickett, 1999). The goals were to ascertain the local perspective on children's 
behavior in school and to forge a mutual, meaningful vocabulary for evaluating their social and 
emotional competence. Three independent sources were used to assess children in Jackson 
(urban) and Hillsdale (rural), Michigan: (a) teachers, (b) teacher assistants, and (c) reliably 
trained observers. Researchers observed 31 aspects of each child's behavior using the Interper- 
sonal Competence Scales for Children (ICSC; Cairns, Leung, Gest, & Cairns, 1995) in Head Start 
classrooms during 15 minutes of free play on three separate occasions. Teachers, teacher 
assistants, and parents evaluated children on these 31 dimensions using rating scales. 

Principal Components (PC) analysis of observation data in Study One identified five reliable 
factors accounting for 63% of the item variance: (a) Child-Peer Competence, (b) Child-Teacher 
Competence, (c) Interpersonal Aggression, (d) Fearful Withdrawal, and (e) Social Appeal. PC 
analyses of Teacher ratings highlighted four factors accounting for 57% of item variance: 

(a) Child-Peer Competence, (b) Interpersonal Aggression, (c) Fearful Withdrawal, and (d) Social 



ERIC 



758 



753 



POSTERS 



Appeal. A four-factor pattern described Teacher Assistant data. Similar constmcts were positively 
and significantly intercorrelated across different reporters. Evidence of construct validity was 
obtained by comparing ICSC scores with the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL; Achenbach & 
Edelbrock, 1983) scores of Social Problems, Aggression, Anxiety/Depression, and Withdrawal, 
and Howes' (1980) measure of play complexity. In the replication study, factor analyses revealed 
similar, reliable scales across reporters. Children s social and emotional adjustment did not 
differ by maternal marital status. Despite a restricted range (> 90% of families below poverty 
level), income was negatively associated with Interpersonal Conflict in both studies. Boys were 
higher than girls in Interpersonal Conflict, and girls were higher than boys in Competence with 
the Teacher. Teacher ethnicity and classroom setting were salient elements: Minority teachers 
rated children lower in Competence but higher in Social Appeal, Conflict, and Withdrawal than 
White teachers. Children from urban classrooms were lower in Child-Peer Competence and 
higher in Fearful Withdrawal than children from mral settings. 

Thus, preliminary evidence is demonstrated for the ICSC as an age-appropriate, brief, reliable, 
and valid measure for screening and evaluating Head Start children's social and emotional 
competence. Further, it expands the range of valid and reliable categories to include assessments 
of social competence with the teacher and social appeal. 

References 

Achenbach, T. M., & Edelbrock, C. S. (1983). Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist and Revised 
Child Behavior Profile. Burlington, VT: University Associates in Psychiatry. 

Cairns, R. B., Leung, M. C., Gest, S. D., Cairns, B. D. (1995). A brief method for assessing social 
development: Stmcture, reliability, stability, and developmental validity of the Interpersonal 
Competence Scale. Behaviour Research & Therapy, 33(6), 725-736. 

Graham-Bermann, S. A., Bermann, E. A., & Huesmann, R. (2002). [Community, Family, and 
Media Violence: Risks To Preschool Children's Optimal Development. University-Head Start 
Partnerships Research Projects DHHS Grant #90-YD-0066j. Unpublished raw data. 

Howes, C. (1980). Peer Play Scale as an index of complexity of peer interaction. Developmental 
Psychology, 16(4), 371-372. 

Jensen, P. S., Hoagwood, K., & Trickett, E. (1999). Ivory tower or earthen trenches? Community 
collaborations to foster real-world research. Applied Developmental Science, 3(4), 206-212. 



Children's Emergent Numeracy Understanding: 

A Longitudinal Perspective 

Adam DiBella, Shannon C. Monahan, Douglas A. Frye 

PRESENTERS: Adam DiBella, Shannon C. Monahan 

The task of characterizing emergent numeracy understanding to detect a developmental pathway 
to early math learning is a valuable step in promoting school readiness for Head Start children. 
Past studies have indicated that young children's acquisition of counting and cardinality 
principles underlies subsequent learning and is related to their understanding of a sequential 
count sequence and one-to-one correspondence (Frye, Braisby, Lowe, Maroudas, & Nicholls, 
1989). This study examined children's emergent numeracy understanding as a function of a 
numeracy operation composed of three components: (a) correct count sequence (Count 
Sequence), (b) correct one-to-one correspondence (One-to-One), and (c) counting the total 
members of a set (Count Total-Group). The study investigated whether the developmental 



O 

ERIC 



754 



759 



ASSESSMENT/DIAGNOSIS 



trajectory of children's emergent numeracy understanding could be characterized by changes in 
the hierarchical organization of components of a numeracy operation. 

The Head Start participants (N = 56; M = 62 months) were given a forced-choice, paired- 
comparison assessment that allowed for an evaluation of the relative strength of children's 
preferences for the different components. Results from binomial analysis indicated that children 
were able to identify the three components of the numeracy operation: (a) Count Sequence (p < 
.001), (b) One-to-One (p < .01), and (c) Count Total-Group (p < .001). Log-linear analysis' 
indicated that participants' approach to the numeracy operation was characterized by a prefer- 
ence for Count Total-Group over Count Sequence and One-to-One. 

The longitudinal sample (N = 29; M = 71 months) was given an identical forced-choice, 
paired-comparison assessment in kindergarten. Although the sample size was reduced, analysis 
indicated that the longitudinal sample was comparable to the original sample. Whereas earlier 
understanding of the numeracy operation in preschool was governed by a forced-choice prefer- 
ence for the Count Total-Group component, children in kindergarten displayed a forced-choice 
preference for the One-to One component. 

This significant change in the organizational hierarchy of the numeracy operation compo- 
nents establishes a previously unidentified link between counting and cardinality in the devel- 
opmental trajectory of young children's emergent numeracy learning and understanding. 
Furthermore, this pattern in the organizational hierarchy and the relations between the compo- 
nents have important implications for classroom practice. Instruction directed toward the 
acquisition of one-to-one correspondence may facilitate an important shift in emergent 
numeracy understanding and be useful in promoting school readiness. 

Reference 

Frye, D., Braisby, N., Lowe, J., Maroudas, C., & Nicholls, J. (1989). Young children's understand- 
ing of counting and cardinality. Child Development, 60, 1158-1171. 





755 



Behavioral Issues of Early Childhood 



Early Identification and Intervention With Latino Preschool Children 
Who Present With Internalizing and Externalizing Behavior Problems 

Robert D. Wells, David Halpern, Karen Carey 

PRESENTER: Robert D. Wells 



A collaborative project was initiated to determine the feasibility of identifying and intervening 
with high-risk children in Head Start and early elementary school settings. This project com- 
bined the resources of a county school district, a local university, a children's hospital, and 
several Head Start programs serving Latino children from migrant farm-working families. Using 
the Early Screening Project (ESP) Child Find Process, teachers in two Head Start programs and 
one public elementary school were asked to rate children in their class who posed the most 
significant risks for internaliziiig and externalizing behavior disorders. One hundred forty-five 
children were identified by their teachers as being "at risk" and were subsequently screened for 
emotional and behavioral problems. Using cut-off scores, 46 (32%) of the 145 children met 
criteria for having a significant internalizing or externalizing disorder and were enrolled in 
weekly social skills training. Children who were enrolled in the project tended to be slightly 
older (p < .01) and were initially more aggressive (p < .0001), less socially adaptive (p < .0001), 
and demonstrated more inappropriate behaviors (p < .0001) than children who did not meet 
the enrollment criteria. Fifty six percent were male and forty four percent were female. The mean 
age was 6.5 with a range from 4.5 to 8.5. Classroom teachers completed ESP questionnaires at 
the beginning of the school year and again at the completion of the project 9 months later. This 
project offered weekly group-training sessions aimed at improving social skills, classroom, and 
emotional functioning. 

For those who completed the 9 months of group intervention, teachers noted significant 
improvements when comparing pre and post intervention questionnaire data. Using within 
subject repeated measures analysis of variance, children who completed the intervention were 
significantly less aggressive (p < .0001), more socially adaptive (p < .0001), and demonstrated 
fewer inappropriate behaviors (p < .0001) after the intervention than they did at baseline. When 
compared to the normative data provided by ESP, the sample was initially rated at the top 99th 
percentile (3 standard deviations above the mean) on all 3 measures. At the end of the year, 
these children were rated at the top 93rd percentile (1.5 standard deviations above the mean) 
for aggressive behavior and at the 84th percentile (1 standard deviation above the mean) for 
socially adaptive and inappropriate behaviors. The intervention was also able to demonstrate a 
modest impact on those with internalizing disorders. These children appeared to be more 
responsive and socially engaged after the intervention than before (p < .02). This suggests that 
this intervention had a reasonably powerful effect in improving children's social behavior and 
reducing aggressiveness. 

As a pilot project, this study did not include a no treatment control group, and thus the data 
may be influenced by various factors that were not taken into account. We were able to demon- 



ERIC 



I 



756 



761 



BEHAVIORAL ISSUES OF EARLY CHILDHOOD 



strate that despite targeting a highly mobile, largely indigent population of young children, the 
project was able to retain a significant proportion of high-risk children and to engage them in 
an ongoing social skills intervention program. Teachers were able to adequately identify those at 
risk, and the data suggests that these teachers noted significant improvements after the interven- 
tion when compared with their functioning at the start of the school year. Having documented a 
positive pilot project, this collaborative effort recently was awarded additional funding to 
expand the project to a larger sample of similarly at-risk children. 



Investigation of the Relationship Between Emotional and 
Behavioral Adjustment to Preschool and School Readiness 
for Urban Low-Income Children 

John Fantuzzo, Rebecca Bulotsky, Paul McDermott, Samuel Mosca, Megan Noone-Lutz 
PRESENTERS: Rebecca Bulotsky, John Fantuzzo 

Recendy, there has been much national attention paid to the need for more quality research to 
investigate the impact of preschool children's emotional and behavioral problems on early 
school experiences (Huffman, Mehlinger, & Kerivan, 2000; USDHHS, 2001; Yoshikawa & Zigler, 
2000). This research is particularly critical for low-income children living in urban areas who are 
disproportionately at risk for evidencing these adjustment problems and for school failure 
(Garbarino, 1995; USDOE, 1996). 

Head Start, the nation's largest most comprehensive response to the mental health needs of 
vulnerable children and families, recently escalated its efforts to identify and provide interven- 
tion for children's mental health needs (Yoshikawa & Knitzer, 1997). In order for Head Start to 
respond to these needs, quality research is needed using assessment methods constructed in 
partnership with educators to identify patterns of emotional and behavioral problems that have 
the most adverse effect on the early learning and school adjustment of vulnerable preschool 
populations. 

The present study addresses this need by using a unique multidimensional measure, the 
Adjustment Scales for Preschool Intervention (ASPI; Lutz, Fantuzzo, & McDermott, in press), 
recently developed in partnership with Head Start teachers as a more appropriate alternative to 
traditional measures of psychopathology in preschool children. The primary purpose of this 
study was to examine the relationship between multiple dimensions of preschool emotional 
and behavioral adjustment assessed early in the Head Start year and children's school readiness 
competencies at the end of the year. Specifically, this study addressed two questions: First, do 
multiple dimensions of adjustment problems observed at the beginning of the Head Start year 
relate to emergent literacy, classroom learning, and social competency assessed at the end of the 
year? Second, is the ASPI a stable measure of preschool children's psychological adjustment? 

The participants in this study were 829 children enrolled in a large urban Head Start program 
in the Northeast during the 1998-99 school year. Children's emotional and behavioral adjust- 
ment was assessed in the fall with the ASPI. At the end of the year, the same cohort of children 
was assessed in the areas of social competency, emergent literacy, and classroom learning 
competencies. 

Results indicated a consistent pattern of stability over time in the ASPI dimensions. As well, 
canonical variance analyses indicated several significant multivariate relationships between 
ratings of children's adjustment at the beginning of the year and school readiness at the end of 
the year. Overactive behavior problems such as aggressive and oppositional behavior at the 



er|c 



u 



762 



757 



POSTERS 



beginning of the year predicted disruptive peer play at the end of the year. Underactive behavior 
problems, however, predicted both difficulties with play as well as classroom learning compe- 
tencies at the end of the year. Children with such needs at the beginning of the year were 
significandy more likely to show disconnected peer play, the lowest levels of cognitive, social 
engagement, movement, and coordination skills, as well as the lowest receptive vocabulary 
scores at the end of the year. 

References 

Garbarino, J. (1995). Raising children in a socially toxic environment. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Huffman, L. C., Mehlinger, S. L., & Kerivan, A. S. (2000). Off to a good start: Research on the risk 
factors for academic and behavioral problems at the beginning of school. The Children Mental Health 
Foundations and ^encies Network (FAN). Washington, DC: National Institutes of Mental Health. 

Lutz, M. N., Fantuzzo, J. F, & McDermott, P. (in press). Contextually relevant assessment of 
the emotional and behavioral adjustment of low-income preschool children. Early Childhood 
Research Quarterly. 

U.S. Department of Education. (1996). Urban schools: The challenge of location and poverty. 
Washington, DC: Author. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2001). Report of the Surgeon General's 
Conference on Children's Mental Health: A National Action Agenda. Washington, DC: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Health and Human Services. 

Yoshikawa, H., & Knitzer, J. (1997). Lessons from the field: Head Start mental health strategies to 
meet changing needs. New York: Center for Children in Poverty and American Orthopsychiatric 
Association. 

Yoshikawa, H., & Zigler, E. (2000). Mental health in Head Start: New directions for the twenty- 
first century. Early Education & Development, 11, 247-264. 



Development of Behavior Problems in 
Poor, Low Birth Weight Children 

Nicola Allison Conners, Leanne Whiteside-Mansell 

PRESENTERS: Nicola Allison Conners, Leanne Whiteside-Mansell 



Children living in poverty are at risk for a variety of developmental problems, including behav- 
ior problems, and children with biological risk foctors of low birth weight and prematurity are 
also believed to be more likely than normal children to develop later behavior problems. More 
research is needed to examine the processes by which poverty contributes to poor outcomes in 
children at biological risk. 

The present study was guided by two primary goals: (a) to identify patterns of development 
of behavior problems over the early childhood period in persistently poor, low birth weight 
children, and (b) to investigate which child, family, neighborhood, and intervention characteris- 
tics discriminate among children with different patterns of development. The sample included 
196 children who participated in a longitudinal study of the Infant Health and Development 
Program (IHDP). Children in the IHDP study were randomly assigned to either an intervention 
or a follow-up only group, and the intervention was comprised of three primary components: 
home visits, attendance at child development centers, and parent group meetings. The analysis 
plan for this study included the use of hierarchical cluster analysis to identify groups of children 
who demonstrate different patterns of development of behavior problems from age 3 to 8 years. 




758 



763 



BEHAVIORAL ISSUES OF EARLY CHILDHOOD 



Children's total behavior problem T scores on the Child Behavior Checklist (Achenbach, 1991) 
at ages 3, 5, and 8 years were used as the criterion variables in the cluster analysis. 

Next, a discriminative analysis was performed to determine whether clusters of children 
characterized by similar patterns of changes in behavior scores from ages 3 to 8 could be 
distinguished on the basis of child (neonatal health, temperament), family (maternal warmth 
and use of discipline at age 3, harsh discipline at age 8), neighborhood, and intervention 
characteristics (intervention or follow-up only group). Through cluster analysis, seven different 
patterns of development were identified. One cluster included children whose scores were 
consistently good throughout early childhood, and one cluster included children whose scores 
were consistently poor from ages 3 to 8. Two groups included children whose scores improved 
throughout childhood, while another two groups included children whose scores worsened. 
Another group of children had scores that were initially high, dropped to average, and then were 
quite high again by age 8. 

The results from the discriminative analysis show that difficult temperament and harsh 
parenting combined to discriminate between the seven groups of children. Children whose 
behavior was either worsening or was consistently problematic tended to have parents whose 
styles were harsh and who rated their children as temperamentally difficult, while the opposite 
was tme for children whose behavior was consistently good or improving. The findings suggest 
that the behavioral development of these at-risk children is varied and not always problematic, 
and that both child and parent characteristics impact the path of development. 

Reference 

Achenbach, T. M. (1991). Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist/4-18 and 1991 Profile. 

Burlington: University of Vermont, Department of Psychiatry. 



Evaluation Processes for a Behavior Disorder Prevention Program: 

A Community-Based, Family Focused Preschool Program 

Mary R. Talen, Janeece Warfield, Maria Goldman 

PRESENTER: Mary R. Talen 

Mental health prevention programs with preschool children are still in their early stages of 
development even though there is a significant rise of psychosocial disorders in 3- to 5-year-old 
children (Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 1999a, 1999b; Cowen, Hightower, 
Pedro-Carroll, & Work, 1996; Lavigne et al., 1998; Miller, 1998; Speltz, DeKlyen, & Greenberg, 
1999). Recent research also suggests that early intervention is an important ingredient in 
preventing or decreasing the high prevalence of aggressive behaviors, depression, and anxiety 
disorders in young children and adolescents (Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 
1999a; Lavigne et. al., 1998; Webster-Stratton, 1998). 

Few prevention programs specifically target preschool children. The Parent's Early Childhood 
Education/ Positive Action Choices Training (PECE-PACT) was designed as a culturally respon- 
sive and multilevel program to prevent behavior disorders in young children by building a 
community of cooperation between parents, children, and teachers. This program consists of 10 
weeks of (a) intensive classroom training for children, (b) modeling and training for preschool 
teachers, and (c) a 10-week evening training session for parents. The curriculum incorporated 
materials from empirically validated prevention and established intervention programs (Eyberg 
& Boggs, 1998; Shure, 1992; Webster-Stratton, 1998). 



ERIC 




759 



i 



POSTERS 



This research design was a pre-post comparison group design. The participants in the study 
were (n = 86) 3-to 5-year-old children enrolled in a full-time Head Start program. There were 
five classrooms selected at random. The majority of the children were African American, and 
47% of the children were boys. The parents (n = 32) in the treatment groups and control group 
(n = 9) completed pre and post evaluations on the Child Behavior Checklist 4-18 (CBCL; 
Achenbach, 1991) and the Parenting Stress Index (PSl)— Parent Domain. The teachers completed 
the CBCL Caregiver form (2-5)— intervention group (n = 72) and control group (N = 14). The 
parents and children were assessed on the revised Marschak Interaction Method (MIM, Jernberg, 
1991) before and after the 10-week program. 

Based on the teacher ratings, children in the treatment groups made significant changes on 
four of the CBCL subscales: (a) anxious-depressed, (b) somatic, (c) immature, and (d) aggressive 
behaviors. The control group did not show significant differences between the pre and post 
measures. The parents reported changes in their children s behavior on six of the subscales, 
withdrawn, anxious-depressed, social problems, attention problems, aggressive behavior, 
externalizing. There were no significant differences between the treatment and control group. 

The PSl showed no significant changes in the treatment or control group. 

The parent-child interactions were measured with six standard tasks based on attachment 
and the MIM concepts. A test of marginal homogeneity supported significant differences in 
parent-child interactions in the areas of structure and challenge. On the postprogram evalua- 
tions, parents reported improvement in listening, providing structure, understanding develop- 
ment, and playfulness. They did not report significant changes in nurturing and involvement. 

In summary, this program demonstrated promising results in the improvement of preschool 
children's anxious and aggressive behaviors and the quality of parent-child relationships. Future 
studies using follow-up measures, evaluation of the MIM-R psychometric properties, and a larger 
comparison group would improve the evaluation of this program. 

References 

Achenbach, T. (1991). The Child Behavior Checklist/4-18. Burlington: University of Vermont. 
Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. (1999a). Initial impact of the fast track preven- 
tion trial for conduct problems: I. The high-risk sample. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 67, 631-647. 

Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group. (1999b). Initial impact of the fast track preven- 
tion trial for conduct problems: II. Classroom effects. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 67, 648-657. 

Cowen, E. L, Hightower, A. D., Pedro-Carroll, L L., & Work, W. C. (1996). School based prevention 
for children at risk: The primary mental health project. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 

Eyberg, S., & Boggs, S. R. (1998). Parent-child interaction therapy: A psychosocial intervention 
for the treatment of young conduct-disordered children. In J. M. Briesmeister & C. E. 

Schaefer (Eds.), Handbook of parent training: Parents as co-therapists for children's behavior 
problems (2nd ed., pp. 61-97). New York: lohn Wiley & Sons. 

Jernberg, A. (1991). Assessing the parent-child interaction with the Marschak Interaction 
Method (MIM). In C. E. Schaefer, K. Gitlin, & A. Sandgrund (Eds.), Play diagnosis and 
assessment (pp. 493-515). New York: John Wiley. 

Lavigne, J. V, Gibbons, R. D., Christoffel, K. K., Arend, R., Rosenbaum, D., & Binns, H., et al. 
(1998). Prevalence rates and correlates of psychiatric disorders among preschool children. In 
M. E. Hertzig & E. A. Farber (Eds.), Annual progress in child psychiatry and child development 
(pp. 303-318). Philadelphia: Brunner/Mazel. 

Miller, L. (1998). Preventive intervention for families of preschoolers at risk for conduct disor- 
ders. In J. M. Briesmeister & C. E. Schaefer (Eds.), Handbook of parent training: Parents as co- 
therapists for children's behavior problems (2nd ed., pp. 177-201). New York: John Wiley & Sons. 



behavioral issues of early childhood 



Shure, M. B. (1992). / can problem solve: An interpersonal cognitive problem-solving program. 
Champaign, IL: Research Press. 

Speltz, M. L., DeKlyen, M., & Greenberg, M. (1999). Attachment in boys with early onset 
behavior problems. Journal of Development and Psychopathology, 11, 269-285. 
Webster-Stratton, C. (1998). Adopting and implementing empirically supported interventions: 
A recipe for success. In A. Buchanan & B. L. Hudson (Eds.), Parenting schooling and children's 
behavior. Brookfield, VT: Ashgate. 



Understanding Parents' and Teachers' Respective Perceptions 
of Behavioral Problems in Preschool Children 

Joshua S. Smith 

PRESENTER: Joshua S. Smith 

Preschool students at risk for emotional and behavioral disorders (EBD) often experience a 
myriad of problems both in and out of school. Once established, EBD are relatively stable, 
persisting into adolescence and adulthood (Patterson, DeBaryshe, & Ramsey, 1989; Pierce, 
Ewing, & Campbell, 1999). In general, interventions at all levels have shown relative short-term 
success in either home or school, but few have demonstrated long-term positive effects across 
domains (Keizdin, 1987; Reid, 1993; Webster-Stratton, 1993). One explanation for the lack of 
sustained intervention effects is that parents and teachers may perceive the problem differently 
(Loeber, Green, & Lahey, 1990). 

The purpose of this research was to examine the nature of the similarities and differences in 
parents' and teachers' perceptions of preschool children exhibiting behavior problems. Specifi- 
cally under investigation was the extent to which parents' and teachers' respective perceptions 
were similar or different in four areas including the (a) causes of the behavior, (b) severity of 
behavior, (c) best solutions, and (e) quality of communication. 

This study was conducted at a Head Start program in a medium-sized city in the Northeast. 
Five female teachers and five female parents/caregivers were interviewed for the study. 
Semistructured interviews were held at the Head Start Center. The interview followed a predeter- 
mined set of questions, but spontaneous follow-up questions to probe, clarify, and interpret 
information were utilized throughout. Each interview was transcribed verbatim into a Microsoft 
Word document in preparation for the thematic analysis (Aronson, 1994; Miles & Huberman, 
1994). A within-case analysis provided for a thorough examination of the particularly cogent 
aspects of each participant's perspectives on the issues in the interview. The cross-case analysis 
provided for comparisons both by dyad and aaoss all parents and teachers in the study. 

Around the issue of causes of behavior, participants presented several unique perceptions, 
and in only one case were the parent and teacher recorded as being in agreement. Three parents 
and three teachers cited the child's environment as a major causal factor of their behavioral 
problems. In terms of the severity of the behavior, more disagreement than agreement was 
recorded. In only one case were the parent and teacher recorded as being in agreement, and in 
three of the dyads, disagreement was reported. For the third research question, parents and 
teachers applied a multitude of strategies or solutions to address behavior problems. Four of the 
dyads were classified as being equivocal on the issue, and the remaining dyad presented strate- 
gies that were clearly in disagreement. The results of the final research question showed that four 
out of the five dyads were communicating frequently about the child and his development, even 
though the dyads were not in complete agreement on all aspects of the communication. Three 




766 



761 



POSTERS 



of the parents felt that muc±i of their communication was about behavior, while teachers 
described their communication as including behavior, but not as the primary reason. 

References 

Aronson, J. (1994). A pragmatic view of thematic analysis. The Qualitative Report, 2. 

Kazdin, A. E. (1987). Treatment of antisocial behavior in children: Current status and future 
directions. Psychological Bulletin, 102, 187-203. 

Loeber, R., Green, S. M, & Lahey, B. B. (1990). Mental health professionals' perception of the 
utility of children, mothers, and teachers as informants on childhood psychopathology. 
Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 19, 136-134. 

Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Patterson, G. R., DeBaryshe, B.D., & Ramsey, E. (1989). A developmental perspective on antiso- 
cial behavior. American Psychologist, 44, 329-335. 

Pierce, E. W., Ewing, L. J., & Campbell, S. B. (1999). Diagnostic status and symptomatic behavior 
of hard-to-manage preschool children in middle childhood and early adolescence. Journal of 
Clinical Child Psychology, 28(1), 44-57. > 

Reid, J. B. (1993). Prevention of conduct disorder before and after school entry: Relating 
interventions to developmental findings. Development and Psychopathology, 5, 243-262. 
Webster-Stratton, C. (1993). Strategies for helping early school-aged children with oppositional 
defiant and conduct disorders: The importance of home-school partnerships. School Psychol- 
ogy Review, 22, 437-457. 



Inclusion of Children With Emotional or Behavioral Challenges 
in Child-Care Settings: An Observational Study 

Eileen M. Brennan, Shane M. Ama, Lynwood J. Gordon 

PRESENTER; Lynwood J. Gordon 

The observational study reported here is part of a 5-year project funded by the National Institute 
on Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR; H133B990025), focused on identifying, 
describing, and analyzing key features of a selected group of model child care programs. The 
inclusive programs meet children's needs for a nurturing, developmentally appropriate setting, 
and family needs for quality child care for children with emotional or behavioral challenges 
(Ghild Gare Bureau, 1997; Emlen, 1997; Harvey, 1998; Rosenzweig, Brennan, & Ogilvie, in 
press; Rafferty & Boettcher, 2000; Warfield & Hauser-Gram, 1996). 

Observations focused on three research questions: (a) What are the ways in which caregivers 
work toward inclusion of the child in activities and in social interactions? (b) Do child-to-child 
interactions give evidence of inclusion? (c) In what ways is the child supported by center staff 
during transition periods? A total of 25 target children were observed for this study — 5 from 
each of five child care centers selected for their inclusion of children with identified emotional 
or behavioral challenges. Ghildren observed were of varied ethnicities including African Ameri- 
can, Asian American, European American, Native American, and Mexican American, and faced 
such challenges as ADHD, depression, and attachment disorders. 

Each child was observed in natural settings by two researchers in the same 1-hour block. 
Observational blocks were selected so that each involved times of transition (e.g., lunch periods, 
going out to or coming in from play, or leaving the care center for school). All activities, behav- 
iors, and conversations involving the child targeted for observation were recorded by hand. 
Qualitative data were coded for major themes and subthemes by three independent coders. 



BEHAVIORAL ISSUES OF EARLY CHILDHOOD 



Analyses of observation narratives revealed comparable inclusion of children with challenges 
and children with typical development in center activities and social interactions. Environments 
and routines were set up to encourage cooperation and self-regulation. Staff built upon strong 
relationships with individual children and anticipated social and emotional challenges. Peers 
were taught to respond appropriately to challenging behavior and to the special needs of their 
classmates. Mental health service provision was integrated into classroom activities. Building on 
opportunities structured by teachers, children accepted differences in their peers with challenges 
and included them in activities and friendships. Staff used predictable schedules, multiple 
developmentally appropriate cues, and physical calming techniques to ease children with 
challenges through transitions. Multiple staff members with well rehearsed roles worked to 
facilitate transition times. 

The study has demonstrated that staff members of child care centers are able to structure 
environments and social interactions that successfully include children with emotional or 
behavioral challenges. Using developmentally appropriate practice as a basis, staff employed 
techniques that addressed individual children's needs, permitting their retention. Specialized 
resources observed in these centers such as on-site mental health providers (Cohen & 

Kaufmann, 2000; Donahue, Falk, & Provet, 2000) and therapeutic equipment, coupled with low 
child-staff ratios may be crucial for successful inclusion (Irwin, Lero, & Brophy, 2000). Funding 
should be augmented to subsidize the supports that providers require to serve the needs of these 
children and their families, who frequently have been excluded from child care centers. 

References 

Child Care Bureau. (1997) Passages to inclusion: Creating systems of care for all children. Monograph 
for State, Territorial and Tribal Administrators. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services. 

Cohen, E., & Kaufmann, R. (2000). Early childhood mental health consultation. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Center for Mental Health Services, Sub- 
stance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 

Donahue, P. J., Falk, B., & Provet, A. G. (2000). Mental health consultation in early childhood. 
Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes. 

Emlen, A. C. (1997, May). Quality of child care and special needs of children who have emotional or 
behavioral problems. Paper presented at Building on Family Strengths: A National Conference 
on Research and Services in Support of Children and their Families. Portland, OR. 

Harvey, E. (1998). Parental employment and conduct problems among children with attention- 
deficit/hyperactivity disorder: An examination of child care workload and parenting well- 
being as mediating variables. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 1 7 , 476-49. 

Irwin, S. H., Lero, D. S., & Brophy, K. (2000). A matter of urgency: Including children with special 
needs in child care in Canada. Wreck Cove, Nova Scotia, Canada: Breton Books. 

Rafferty, Y., & Boettcher, C. (2000, June). Inclusive education for preschoolers with disabilities: 
Comparative views of parents and practitioners. Presentation at Head Start's Fifth National 
Research Conference, Washington, DC. 

Rosen^eig, J. M., Brennan, E. M., & Ogilvie, A. M. (in press). Work/ family fit for parents of 
children with emotional or behavioral disorders: A qualitative study. Manuscript accepted 
for publication in Social Work. 

Warfield, M. E., & Hauser-Cram, P. (1996). Child care needs, arrangements, and satisfaction of 
mothers of children with developmental disabilities. Mental Retardation, (34), 294-302. 



ERIC 



768 



763 



POSTERS 



Community Innovstion in Fsmily— Teschor Collaboration: A Training 
Curriculum Addressing the Mental Health Needs of Young Children 

Lynwood Gordon, Barbara J. Friesen, Steffen L. Saifer, Leslie Wuest, Vilma Banek 

PRESENTERS: Steffen L. Saifer, Leslie Wuest 

Project SUCCEED in Head Start (Supporting and Understanding Challenging Children's 
Emotional and Educational Needs) is a 4-year (1998-2002) research and demonstration project 
funded through the U.S. Department of Education, Office of Special Education Programs. A 
university-based research center and a countywide Head Start program collaborate on the 

project. . . 1 • 

Project goals include (a) increase family and teachers' skills and confidence in helping 

children with challenging behaviors; (b) reduce family and teachers' stress; (c) improve the 
home and classroom environment; (d) reduce problem behaviors of children and increase their 
social, cognitive, and emotional competence; (e) decrease the incidence of kindergarten failure; 
and (f) increase families' empowerment and advocacy skills. A key component is the develop- 
ment and implementation of a training curriculum that addresses social and emotional develop- 
ment and strategies for addressing challenging behaviors at home and in the classroom. Family 
members and Head Start staff are involved with all phases of the project and have central roles 
serving as curriculum developers, reviewers, and trainers. The curriculum was developed through 
a joint parent and teacher workgroup, and is implemented by and for groups of parents and 

teachers. . 

For the final program year, 100% of participants (N = 35) indicated that the training met their 

needs as a parent or teacher "well" or "very well," while 91% responded well or very well 
when asked how well the program helped in dealing with children's challenging behaviors. 

For the evaluation, a total of 136 preintervention family interviews were completed (82 
intervention and 54 comparison); 65 %were conducted in Spanish. Pre and post intervention 
data were collected using the following measures: the Early Childhood Environment Rating 
Scale (ECERS; Harms & Clifford, 1980); the Devereux Early Childhood Assessment (DECA; 
LeBuffe & Naglieri, 1998; parents and teachers); the Preschool and Kindergarten Behavior Scales 
(Merrell, 1994; parents only); the Caregiver-Teacher Report Form (CTRF; Achenbach, 1991; 
teachers only); and a general measure of teaching stress. Other parent measures included the 
Family Support Scale (Dunst, Trivette, & Deal, 1998), a component of the Family Empowerment 
Scale (Koren, DeChillo, & Friesen, 1992), and the Parenting Stress Index (Abidin, 1995). 

Analysis of baseline DECA data revealed that many parents rated their children's develop- 
ment and behavior in the clinically significant or "Concern" range (Self-Control = 21.6 %, 
Attachment = 32.8%, Initiative = 22.4%, Behavior Concerns = 61.2%). Teachers, however, 
generally reported lower frec^uency of Concern scores (Self-Control = 13.3%, Attachment — 
20%, Initiative = 23.0%, Behavior Concerns = 20.0%). 

Only teacher data were available for posttest analysis at the time of this presentation. DECA 
Behavior Concern ratings for children in the intervention classrooms improved (decreased) over 
the year (ns) and increased (p < .05) in the comparison classrooms. Teacher stress related to 
challenging behaviors remained fairly stable from pretest to posttest for the comparison group, 
while intervention teachers' scores decreased. 

This review of Project SUCCEED suggests that the program model can be successfully 
implemented and that families' and teachers' collaboration in curriculum review and training is 
both feasible and valuable. Preliminary findings suggest important positive changes associated 
with the intervention. 



O 

ERIC 



764 



769 



BEHAVIORAL ISSUES OF EARLY CHILDHOOD 



References 

Abidin, R. R. (1995). Parenting Stress Index. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources. 

Achenbach, T. M. (1991). Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist/ 4-18 and 1991 profile. 
Burlington: University of Vermont, Department of Psychiatry. 

Dunst, C. J., Trivette, C. M., & Deal, A. G. (1998). Enabling and empowering families: Principles and 
guidelines for practice. Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books. 

Harms, H. T., & Clifford, R. M. (1980). Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale. New York: 
Columbia University Teachers College Press. 

Koren, P. E., DeChillo, N., & Friesen, B. J. (1992). Measuring empowerment in families whose 
children have emotional disabilities: A brief questionnaire. Rehabilitation Psychology, 37, 305- 
321. 

LeBuffe, P, & Naglieri, J. (1998). The Devereux Early Childhood Assessment. Lewisville, NC: Kaplan 
Press. 

Merrell, K.W. (1994). Preschool and Kindergarten Behavior Scales. Brandon, VT: Clinical Psychology. 



Psychological Correlates of Relational Aggression 
in Preschool Children 

Lorraine Simon, David S. Glenwick 

PRESENTERS: Lorraine Simon, David S. Glenwick 
(Summary not available) 



Head Start Children at Risk for Emotional Behavioral Disorders: 
An Examination of Personal and Programmatic Characteristics 

Kevin P. Quinn, Dana Abbott 

PRESENTERS: Kevin P. Quinn, Dana Abbott 
(Summary not available) 



Providing Intensive Behavioral Support to Young Children 
in Child Care at Risk for Expulsion 

Deborah F. Perry 

PRESENTERS: Deborah F. Perry, Roxane Kaufmann 
(Summary not available) 



770 



765 



Child Care 



Child-Care Program Directors' Level of Knowledge 
About Asthma and Factors Associated With Knowledge 

Young J. Juhn, Jennifer St. Sauver, Eugene D. Shapiro, Paul L. McCarthy 

PRESENTERS: Young J. Juhn 

The purpose of this study was to assess child-care directors level of asthma knowledge and 
factors associated with greater knowledge about asthma. Although parents knowledge of 
asthma has been assessed in previous studies, asthmatic children spend a significant amount of 
time in child-care programs, and little is known about child-care program directors knowledge 
about asthma and what factors influence directors level of knowledge about asthma. 

A telephone interview was conducted with directors of a randomly selected sample of all 
licensed child-care centers and group day-care homes in Connecticut. We evaluated directors 
knowledge about asthma using a questionnaire formulated from the Knowledge, Attitude, and 
Self-Efficacy Asthma Questionnaire (Wigal et al., 1993) and obtained information about 
characteristics of the directors and their child care programs. 

Of the 115 directors contacted, 100 (87%) agreed to be interviewed. Ninety-five percent of 
directors were willing to admit asthmatic children to their centers, and their mean score on the ^ 
questionnaire was 75.5 ± 5.7 (SD). Based on bivariate analyses, factors associated with directors' 
higher levels of knowledge about asthma included shorter tenure as a director (r = -^.25, 
p < 0.02), and directing a program that received child-care assistance funds from the state 
(77.6 ± 5.7 vs. 74.9 ± 5.6, p < 0.03). The multivariate model indicated that directors' duration 
of tenure was the only factor associated with a higher level of knowledge about asthma. Direc- 
tors with shorter tenure were more likely to have higher levels of knowledge about asthma 
[P( regression coefficient) = -0.23; 95% Cl: -0.41 to -0.04; p < 0.03]. 

Results indicate that directors of most child-care programs were willing to admit asthmatic 
children to their programs, but their knowledge about asthma needs to be improved. Directors 
who have served for long periods of time may be a target group for additional education about 

asthma. 

Reference 

Wigal, J. K„ Stout, C„ Brandon, M„ Winder, J. A., McConnaughy, K„ Creer, T. L„ et al. (1993, 
October). The Knowledge, Attitude, and Self-Efficacy Asthma Questionnaire. Chest, 104(4), 
1144-1148. 




766 



771 



CHILD CARE 



Quality of Child Care: A Comparison Between 
Subsidized and Unsubsidized Centers 

Julie Jones-Branch, Julia Torquati, Susan L. Churchill 

PRESENTERS: Julie Jones-Branch, Julia Torquati, Susan L. Churchill 

The purpose of this study was to examine the quality of child care in subsidized and 
unsubsidized center settings in Lancaster County. Based on financial need, families are eligible 
for child-care subsidies as long as they are working or attending educational/training courses 
(Ross, 1998). Child care subsidy is designed to help families become more self-sufficient. 
However, the quality of subsidized care has yet to be examined (Raikes, 1998). 

The sample included 19 subsidized programs and 15 unsubsidized programs, all licensed by 
the Nebraska State Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). Program quality was 
assessed using the Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale-Revised (ECERS-R; Harms, 
Clifford, & Cryer, 1998). Descriptive statistics and a chi-square analysis were used to determine 
whether subsidized care is different from unsubsidized care. 

A 13-item follow-up survey was sent to all participating directors with questions regarding 
profit status, community resources used by the program, subsidy, teacher salary, and teacher 
education to obtain more information about each center. Descriptive statistics and a one-way 
ANOVA were used to determine differences between the groups regarding types of care. A 
Pearson Correlation was used to determine the relationship between teacher salary and quality 
as it relates to subsidy status. 

The overall ECERS-R scores ranged from 1.78 (just above Inadequate) to 6.33 (just below 
Excellent). The mean overall ECERS-R score for all centers regardless of subsidy status was 3.7 
(between Minimal and Good). Results from a one-way ANOVA indicated that the overall 
ECERS-R score between groups was significant, F(l,32) = 4.6, p < .05, with the Unsubsidized 
group rating higher. A comparison between the groups showed that Unsubsidized centers rated 
higher than Subsidized centers on all seven subscales and significantly higher on Language- 
Reasoning, Activities, and Interactions. Results of the director's survey showed that Unsubsidized 
centers had higher educated teachers and were paid more. A chi-square analysis indicated that 
teacher education was significantly (x^ = 11.8, df, 2,p< .01) associated with quality and subsidy 
status. The salary for full-time teachers averaged $8.20 per hour for the Unsubsidized group 
and $7.57 per hour for the Subsidized group. Results of a Pearson Correlation showed that 
teacher salary was significantly associated [p < .05) with both subsidy status (.36) and overall 
quality (.47). 

The results from this study indicate that children receiving child-care subsidies are not being 
cared for in settings that could potentially enhance their development, with some centers rating 
just about a 1 (Inadequate), which on the ECERS-R does not meet basic needs. Theoretically, 
children in these environments would be unable to develop along a smooth continuum in the 
self-actualization process (Maslow, 1970). 

This research adds support to the argument that more research needs to be done on the 
quality of the environments in which children from low-income, and in particular, children 
receiving government subsidies, are being cared for. We hope the results from this study can be 
beneficial to policy makers, families, and children, in the pursuit of understanding child-care 
issues within our community. 

References 

Harms, T., Clifford, R. M., & Cryer, D. (1998). Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale-Revised. 
New York: Teachers College Press. 

Maslow, A. H. (1970). Motivation and personality (2nd ed.). New York: Harper & Row. 

Raikes, H. (1998). Investigating child care subsidy: What are we buying? Society for Research in 



O 

ERIC 



772 



767 



POSTERS 



Child Development. Soda/ Po/icy Report, 12(2), 1-19. 

Ross, C. (1998, December). Sustaining employment among low-income parents: The role of child care 
costs and subsidies: A research review. Washington, DC: Mathematica Policy Research. 



Helping Child Care and Head Start Teachers to Implement 
Mathematics Standards: Evaluation of a Math Enhancement Initiative 

Edna Neal Collins, Edith L. Skipper 

PRESENTERS: Edna Neal Collins, Edith L. Skipper 

A mathematics enhancement initiative carried out by UNC Wilmington and New County Smart 
Start was evaluated. Little previous research has explored effective ways to encourage child-care 
and Head Start teachers to increase mathematics learning opportunities. This training was 
designed for teachers who may lack the knowledge to apply mathematics standards (NCTM, 
2000) appropriately and may use approaches that are either too haphazard or too teacher- 
directed to maximize preschool children's learning. 

To respond to the needs of teachers at early stages of professional development (Katz, 1977; 
Vander Ven, 1988), training revolved around on-site demonstration of mathematics activities 
that are easy to implement, highly engaging, and connected to state and national curriculum 
standards. Participants were 38 teachers of 3- to 5-year-olds from 18 child-care and Head Start 
facilities. Teachers in 17 classrooms from 8 child-care and Head Start facilities constituted the 
comparison group. Comparison classrooms had recently chosen to be assessed with the Early 
Childhood Environment Rating Scale-Revised (ECERS-R; Harms, Clifford, & Cryer, 1998) as part 
of North Carolina's rated licensing system. 

Participating classrooms, some of which had also been assessed for rated licenses, received six 
visits including activity demonstrations from a consultant during 1 academic year. Three related 
workshops were offered. A box of manipulatives circulated among classrooms, including take- 
home packs to increase home-school connections (Kokoski & Downing-Leffler, 1995). Smart 
Start provided $50 for each participating classroom to purchase materials. 

To assess mathematics materials before and after the project, observers completed a riine-item 
checklist based on the Math/number item of the ECERS-R, and teachers completed a 27-item 
self-assessment indicating how often they offered selected activities related to the NCTM (2000) 
standards. Mean pretest and posttest scores on the materials checklist were 4.3 and 6.4 for 
participants (n = 37), versus 6.5 and 5.7 for the comparison group (n = 17). Mean pretest and 
posttest scores on the teacher self-assessment (possible range 27-108) were 75.7 and 81.2 for 
participants (n = 25), versus 85.4 and 83.5 for the comparison group (n = 11). 

Paired samples t-tests indicated significant differences between pre and posttest scores on the 
materials checklist for both participating, t = -9.22, p < .001, and comparison, t = 2.87, p < .05, 
classrooms. Note that participants' mean score increased, whereas the comparison group mean 
declined. Differences between pre and posttest scores on the teacher self-assessment approached 
statistical significance for participants only (t = -1.88, p = .07). A repeated measures ANOVA 
indicated that the amount of change made by the two groups on the materials checklist differed 
significantly, F(l,52) = 56.82, p < .001, but no such difference was found for activities self- 
assessment scores. 

Results indicate that the project helped teachers to make more appropriate math matenals 
available. The decline in materials scores for comparison classrooms suggests that they did not 
maintain the improvements they probably made in preparation for rated license assessment. 



er|c 



768 



773 



CHILD CARE 



Although improvements in activities self-assessment scores were not statistically significant, the 
average amount of improvement made by participants may have been meanin^l to children. 
For example, an increase of 5 points on this measure might mean that a teacher began offering 
five new mathematics activities occasionally. However, results suggest that improvements in the 
mathematics materials available in classrooms do not guarantee improvements in the way they 
are used. 

References 

Harms, T., Clifford, R. M., & Cryer, D. (1998). Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale, Revised 
edition. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Katz, L. G. (1997). Teachers' developmental stages. In L. G. Katz (Ed.), Talks with teachers: 

Reflections on early childhood education (pp. 7-13). Washington, DC: National Association for 
the Education of Young Children. 

Kokoski, T. M., & Downing-Leffler, N. (1995). Boosting your science and math programs in early 
childhood education: Making the home-school connection. Young Children, 50 (5), 35-39. 
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM). (2000). Principles and standard for school 
mathematics. Reston, VA: Author. 

Vander Ven, K. (1988). Pathways to professional effectiveness for early childhood educators. In 
B. Spodek, O. N. Saracho, & D. L. Peters (Eds.), Professionalism and the early childhood practitio- 
ner (pp. 137-160). New York: Teachers College Press. 



Parent-Teacher Communication in a 
Culturally Diverse Early Childhood Setting 

So-Young Sung 

PRESENTER: So-Young Sung 

The purpose of this study was to examine ways teachers and parents communicate during 
transition times (i.e., during drop-off and pick-up periods) at a culturally diverse preschool. The 
study explores how this communication affects parent-teacher relationships, and whether it 
promotes mutual cultural understanding. 

Much research has looked at parent-teacher relationships and parental involvement in early 
childhood, but litde research has looked at daily communication in multicultural settings. 
Parent-teacher communication, an essential component of parent-teacher partnerships, affects 
the quality of programs in early childhood education (Ghazvini & Readdick, 1994). Across 
cultural research (e.g.. Gable & Cole, 2000; Tudge et al., 1999) shows that parents from various 
cultural groups have differing notions about their relationship and role with respect to teachers 
in early childhood settings. 

This research was conducted at a parent-cooperative preschool located in a university town in 
the Midwest where I was working as a teaching assistant. The children at the preschool were all 
temporary residents representing a range of culturally diverse backgrounds. Fieldwork was 
conducted over 1 2 weeks. The main research participants were 2 European American teachers 
and 9 parents (1 Chinese, 1 Indian, 5 Korean, 1 Taiwanese, and 1 TurWsh). I used standard 
participant observation methods and semistructured interviews for data collection. Parent- 
teacher communication and interviews were tape-recorded. The interviews were transcribed and 
translated into English. Analyses focused on how different people make sense of their experience 
from the perspective of a participant (Erickson, 1986). 



O 

ERIC 



774 



769 



POSTERS 



At transition times, teachers communicate with parents about child behavior, child develop- 
ment, and school activities. In addition, teachers talk with parents about other subjerts such as 
family's daily life and culture. Through daily communication, teachers understand different 
cultural practices in childrearing, and parents from other cultures understand how American 
parents raise their children; parents then try to achieve a balance between their own childrearing 
and American methods and values. This exchange of information helps parents and teachers 

form close relationships with each other. i • r-* 

Daily communication is heavily influenced by parents language ability and personality. One 
potentially important finding was the difference between parents' expectations of the school, 
and the school's actual curriculum. This disparity could result in an area of potential conflict 
between teachers and parents. Teachers' experiences with various cultures, their respect for other 
cultures, and their sense of humor are important elements for building good relationships with 
parents. Because of parents' and teachers' differing cultural habits and values, they may uncon- 
sciously make mistakes with each other; therefore, such sharing is important. Sometimes such 
sharing is achieved through a trust relationship and open mindedness. 

As facilitators of parent-teacher communication, teachers and directors should create 
strategies such as adjusting daily schedules for parent- teacher communication and using parents 
as a resource for understanding different cultures. Understanding and balancing teachers and 
parents' perspectives will create ideas about what is best for a child and what are desirable 
teacher-parent relationships (Powell, in press). Multicultural education should be flexible in its 
approach and reflect the setting in which it takes place. 



Erickson, E (1986). Qualitative methods in research on teaching. In M. C. Wittrock (Ed.), 
Handbook of research in teaching (S''* ed., pp. 119-161). New York: Macmillan. 

Gable, S., & Cole, K. (2000). Parents' child care arrangements and their ecological correlates. 
Early Education & Development, 11, 549-572. 

Ghazvini, A. S., & Readdick, C. A. (1994). Parent-caregiver communication and quality of care m 
diverse child care settings. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 9, 207-222. 

Holloway, S. D. (2000). Accentuating the negative: Views of preschool staff about mothers in 

]apan. Early Education & Development, 11, 617-632. 

Powell, D. R. (in press). Visions and realities of achieving partnership: Parent-school relation- 
ships at the turn of the century. In A. Goncu & E. L. Klein (Eds.), Children in play, story, and 
school. New York: Guilford. 

Tudge, J. R. H., Hogan, D. M., Lee, S., Meltsas, M., Tammeveski, P., Kulakova, N. N., et al. (1999). 
Cultural heterogeneity: Parental value's and beliefs and their preschoolers activities in the 
United States, South Korea, Russia, and Estonia. In A. Goncu (Ed.), Childrens engagement in 
the world (pp. 62-96). New York: Cambridge University Press. 



770 



775 



CHILD CARE 



Lessons Learned From 30 Years of Child-Care Policymaking 

Sally S. Cohen 

PRESENTER: Sally S. Cohen 



This multicase comparative study analyzes the politics of child-care policymaking over the past 
3 decades (Cohen, 2001). In studying three major episodes in child-care polic 3 nnaking (1971, 
1990, and 1996) and their aftermath, this study identifies the political forces that have shaped 
current policies. In 1971, President Nixon vetoed comprehensive universal child-care legislation. 
In 1990, President Bush enacted landmark child-care provisions. In 1996, under President 
Clinton, important changes in child-care policymaking were enacted as part of welfare reform 
legislation. 

This study answers three research questions: (a) Why did child-care legislation take the course 
it did at each of the critical junctures and the intervening years? (b) How did institutional 
structures interact to influence child-care policy outcomes? (c) What do the politics of child-care 
legislation over the past 30 years suggest for the future? 

The research uses Baumgartner and Jones's (1993) model of punctuated equilibrium, which 
describes how structural shifts within political institutions and hanging definitions of the 
policy problem create periods of a "relative stability" and then periods of a "rapid change." The 
latter create new structures to guide subsequent polic 3 nnaking efforts. 

The research for this study included 114 semistructured interviews with legislative and 
executive branch officials, representatives from organized interests, and researchers involved 
with child-care policymaking since 1971. Purposive and snowball sampling were used. In 
addition to the interviews, the researcher reviewed all federal government documents on child 
care since 1 971 . Archival research was conducted at the Department of Health and Human 
Services, the National Archives and Records Administration, and the Minnesota Historical 
Society. All interview transcriptions and other documents were content analyzed for key themes 
related to the study questions. Validity was ensured by having several key informants review the 
analysis of the data and by discussing the results with well-informed experts. 

The findings from this study show how interactions among American political institutions 
(Congress and the executive branch) and organized interests have influenced the outcomes of 
child-care policymaking. The results identify legacies that have influenced current child-care 
policies. These include a reliance on the Child Care and Development Block Grant, an emphasis 
on parental choice, and a reluctance to accept federal child-care standards. The findings also 
debunk common myths about child-care policymaking. For example, significant advances in 
child-care policies occurred under divided government (different parties in control of the 
legislative and executive branches of government) and with Republicans in control of Congress 
or the White House. This is primarily because of child-care advocates' success in framing child 
care as a solution to other policy problems, thereby facilitating bipartisan consensus. Moreover, 
this research depicts the minimal or inconsistent involvement of many women's groups in child- 
care policymaking. 

The results of this research can be used to enhance the ability of child-care advocates to 
develop effective strategies for improving future child-care public policies, especially in terms of 
defining the problem and widening the array of involved organized interests. 

References 

Baumgartner, F. R., & Jones, B. D. (1993). Agendas and instability in American politics. Chicago: 

University of Chicago Press. 

Cohen, S. S. (2001). Championing child care. New York: Columbia University Press. 





771 



POSTERS 



Parental Views of Children's Longitudinal School Success 
in Relation to Early Child-Care Experiences 

Ellen S. Peisner-Feinberg, Noreen Yazejian 

PRESENTER: Ellen S. Peisner-Feinberg 

This poster describes findings from a follow-up study of the Cost, Quality, and Child Outcomes 
in Child Care Centers Study. In the initial 1993 study, 828 children in child-care centers in four 
states were followed from age 3 through second grade to examine the relations between pre- 
school child-care quality and children's development (Cost, Quality & Outcomes Study Team, 
1995; Peisner-Feinberg et al„ 1999). The present study examines parent survey data on these 
children through the end of elementary school to study longer-term indicators of school success. 

The sample for this follow-up study included 339 children and families, representing 
children from most of the original centers (128 of 176) and classrooms (150 of 183) included 
in the longitudinal outcomes component. At the time of data collection, most children had 
completed sixth grade, so we were able to gather data about the entire elementary school years. 

The present analyses include two aspects of child-care quality from children's 3-year-old year: 
classroom practices and teacher-child relationships. The quality of classroom practices was 
measured using three observational measures: (a) the Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale 
(Harms & Clifford, 1980), (b) the Caregiver Interaction Scale (Arnett, 1989), and (c) the Adult 
Involvement Scale (Howes & Stewart, 1987). The quality of teacher-child relationships was 
measured with the closeness factor of the Student-Teacher Relationship Scale (Pianta, 1992). 

The surveys asked parents to provide updated demographic information and ratings of 
children's adjustment to school and school performance. As seen in Table 1, most parents 
reported their children's school adjustment and performance as generally positive. However, 
inferential analyses revealed significant relations of child-care quality with parent perceptions of 
the overall direction children are headed and longitudinal school adjustment, with maternal 
education serving as a moderator. For example, among children whose mothers had a high 
school education, the log-odds of having a 'very positive' overall direction was 4.8 times more 
likely for children in good quality classrooms than children in poor quality classrooms, while 
there was little difference for children whose mothers had a college education. Similarly, among 
children whose mothers had a high school education, children's school adjustment scores were 
substantially lower for children who experienced low-quality preschool child care than children 
in good quality care, while there was little difference for children with college educated mothers. 



Table 1. Parental Report of Children's School Performance 



Parent Report Variables M SD 

Overall School Adjustment" 7.74 1.54 



Overall Direction Child Headed 


Percent 


Number 


Very positive 


69 


234 


Somewhat positive 


26 


87 


Somewhat negative 


5 


17 


Very negative 


0 


1 


Parental Expectations for Child Education 
Less than bachelor s 


11 


38 


Bachelor's degree 


57 


193 


Master's or doctorate 


32 


108 



Max 

10.00 



777 



772 



CHILD CARE 



Table 1 continued 



Overall School Performance 


Percent 


Number 


Excellent (As) 


44 


149 


Above average (Bs) 


37 


126 


Average (Cs) 


15 


52 


Below average (Ds) 


4 


12 


Unsatisfactory (Fs) 


0 


0 


Identified as Gifted 


35 


120 


Retained in Grade 


5 


18 


Referred for Special Services; Academic 


14 


49 


Referred for Special Services: Behavioral 


6 


19 


Suspended or Expelled 


10 


33 


Current lEP 


13 


43 



^School adjustment data were also gathered in kindergarten, first, and second grade. 

The findings reported here offer evidence that child-care quality continues to predict 
children's development and school success throughout elementary school, especially for 
children at greater risk. These results, combined with findings from previous study phases 
(Peisner-Feinberg et al„ 2001), provide support for the importance of high-quality preschool 
experiences not only for promoting school readiness, but also for ensuring positive developmen- 
tal trajectories throughout elementary school, especially for children at greater risk. 

References 

Arnett, J. (1989). Caregivers in day-care centers; Does training matter? Journal of Applied Develop- 
mental Psychology, 10, 541-552. 

CQO Study Team. (1995). Cost, quality, and child outcomes in child care centers, technical report. 
Denver: University of Colorado at Denver. 

Harms, T, & Clifford, R. M. (1980). The Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale. New York: 
Teachers College Press. 

Howes, C., & Stewart, P. (1987). Child's play with adults, toys, and peers: An examination of 
family and child care influences. Developmental Psychology, 23, 423-430. 

Peisner-Feinberg, E. S., Burchinal, M. R., Clifford, R. M., Culkin, M. L., Howes, C., Kagan, S. L., 
et al. (2001). The relation of preschool quality to children's cognitive and social develop- 
mental trajectories through second grade. Child Development, 72, 1534-1553. 
Peisner-Feinberg, E. S., Burchinal, M. R., Clifford, R. M., Culkin, M. L., Howes, C., Kagan, S. L., 
et al. (1999). The children of the Cost, Quality, and Outcomes Study go to school: Technical report. 
Chapel Hill; University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Frank Porter Graham Child 
Development Center. 

Pianta, R. C. (1992). The Student-Teacher Relationship Scale. Unpublished manuscript. University 
of Virginia, Charlottesville. 





773 



POSTERS 



Entry Into Child Care: The Influence of Family Economy, 

Demographics, and Parenting Beliefs on Timing and Type of Care 

Anne Wolf 

PRESENTER: Anne Wolf 

This project examines how families vary in their decisions about the timing (age at entry) and 
type (center, relative, family day care) of children’s initial child care arrangements. Data were 
collected as part of the NICHD Study of Early Child Care (NICHD, 1994). The sample includes 
1,342 families recruited in 1991 from 24 hospitals in 10 sites around the country at the time of 
the child s birth. Parent, child, and child care data were collected through surveys and observa- 
tions as often as every 3 months until children were 3 years old. Although not nationally 
representative, the sample is ethnically and socioeconomically diverse. Using competing-risks, 
discrete- time survival analysis (Singer & Willett, 1991), this study examines (a) whether and 
when children begin nonparental care for the first time, (b) what is the likelihood of entering 
different types of care when first beginning child care, and (c) how family characteristics g / 
economy, social class, ethnicity, parenting, and work attitudes) affect the timing and type of 
children's initial arrangements. 

Results from this study indicate that 50% of children enter child care for at least 10 hours/ 
week by 4 months old. By 36 months old, 81% of children have begun child care. Coinciding 
with the end of maternity leave before the Family and Medical Leave Act, children are most 
likely to begin child care at 2 months old. Among children not already in child care before 2 
months old, 25% begin at this time: 10% begin family day care, 8% begin relative care, 4.4% 
begin center care, and 2.5% begin sitter/nanny care. After this peak at 2 months, the likelihood 
of beginning child care for the first time tends to decline over time. By 7 months old, only 3.7% 
of children not already in care begin child care; this percentage declines to 1.7% by 36 months. 
This decline after 7 months is not apparent for center care. 

The likelihood and timing of entry into child care of different types varies depending on 
family characteristics. Regardless of type, the effects of economic factors are pronounced. The 
odds that mothers who worked before birth begin using child care at birth are 4.6 times the 
odds for mothers who did not work (p < .001); this differential declines over time (p < .001). 
Mothers with higher incomes before birth are more likely to use child care and do so earlier 
than those with lower incomes; however, mothers with the highest prebirth incomes are an 
exception to this trend and begin using child care later, if at all (p < .001). Demographic factors, 
other than two-parent/single-parent status, tend to have varied effects depending on what type 
of care children begin. Regardless of type, single parents are more likely to use child care and do 
so earlier (p < .001). However, the effects of race/ethnicity, maternal education, and maternal age 
at first birth, are only apparent among children entering relative care for the first time. Alterna- 
tively, maternal work attitudes affect the likelihood and timing of entry only for children who 
first begin family day care or center care. Details of these findings and their implications for 
researchers and policymakers are discussed. 

References 

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (1994). Child care and child development: The 
NICHD Study of Early Child Care. In S. L. Friedman & H. C. Haywood (Eds.), Developmental 
follow-up: Concepts, domains and methods (pp. 377-396). New York: Acadetnic. 

Singer, J. D., & Willett, J. B. (1991). Modeling the days of our lives: Using survival analysis when 
designing and analyzing longitudinal studies of duration and the timing of events. Psycho- 
logical Bulletin, 110, 268-290. 



Er|c 774 



779 



CHILD CARE 



Self-Care Among Young Children: 

Variations by Family and Child Characteristics 

Kathryn Tout Sharon Vandivere, Martha Zaslow, Jeffrey Capizzano 

PRESENTERS: Kathryn Tout, Sharon Vandivere, Martha Zaslow 

The way children spend their time when they are not in school concerns families, communities, 
and policymakers (Lamer, Zippiroli, & Behrman, 1999). Children who spend time alone or 
unsupervised by adults miss opportunities to participate in organized activities and it may 
increase their risk of accidents and injuries. Understanding the circumstances surrounding the 
use of self-care can enhance the development of programs and policies aimed at providing 
supervised and stmctured after-school options for children and families. Recent data from a 
nationally representative household survey was used to examine how various characteristics of 
families and children — including parental time, family resources, perceptions of risk, and 
children's maturity — are related to school-aged children's participation in unsupervised self-care. 
Specifically, we conducted separate logistic regression analyses to investigate the predictors of 
self-care for young school-aged children (ages 6 to 9) and for children from low-income families 
(with incomes below 200% of the federal poverty level), as these groups have been identified as 
more at-risk for potential harmful effects of self-care (Vandell & Shumow, 1999). 

Data for the analyses are from the 1999 National Survey of America's Families (NSAF), a 
survey of approximately 42,000 households. Parents answered questions about 6- to 12-year- 
olds' care arrangements, including self-care, defined as a child regularly spending time alone 
each week or with a sibling younger than 13. Parents also provided information about the 
child's health, school engagement, and behavior problems, as well as their own mental health 
and perceptions of parenting stress. 

Nationally, 15 % of 6- to 12-year-olds regularly spent time in self-care in 1999. Older 
children were significandy more likely to spend time alone than were younger children (7 % 
of 6- to 9-year-olds compared to 26 % of 9- to 12-year-olds). Self-care was also more prevalent 
among families with higher-incomes (17 %) than families with low-incomes (12 %). 

The results of the logistic regression analyses indicate that a child's age is the strongest 
predictor of the use of self-care. Beyond age, we found that characterisdcs across the domains 
examined were associated with the propensity to use self-care. Differing patterns of predictors 
were not obvious among the subgroups of children examined. Some exceptions are that several 
factors predicted self-care for older children but not for younger children including (a) having a 
single parent, (b) the absence of addidonal adults in the household, (c) being the only child 
under 13, (d) being White (compared to being Ladno), and (e) not having any supervised care 
arrangement. In contrast, younger children who had teenage siblings or who did not have a 
limiting health condition were more likely to participate in self-care, but this was not true for 
older children. Comparing the income subgroups, having teenage siblings was associated with 
self-care for higher-income children, while having a parent who reports symptoms of poor 
mental health was associated with self-care for younger children. 

References: 

Lamer, M. B., Zippiroli, L., & Behrman, R. E. (1999). When school is out: Analysis and recom- 
mendations. The Future of Children, 9, 4-20. 

Vandell, D.L. & Shumow, L. (1999). After-school child care programs. The Future of Children, 9, 

64-80. 




775 



POSTERS 



An Oasis of Quality: Early Head Start/Head Start 
Child-Care Partnerships in Region VII 

Helen Raikes, Lisa Knoche 

PRESENTERS: Helen Raikes, Lisa Knoche 

In this poster presentation, provider characteristics and observed quality of Early Head Start ^ 
(EHS) or Head Start (HS) child-care partners are compared to all other child care in the states. In 
these partnerships, child-care providers contract to meet the Head Start Performance Standards 
in exchange for training, guidance, and resources from EHS/HS programs and provision of care 
for EHS/HS children. The Midwest Child Care Research Consortium surveyed 2,022 child-care 
providers by telephone following a randomized sampling design, in Region VII (Iowa, Kansas, 
Missouri, Nebraska). Observations of program quality were also completed in 365 of the 
providers' programs. 

There were many significant differences between these partners and other child-care provid- 
ers, demonstrating that EHS/HS partnerships seem to be offering an oasis of quality. EHS/HS 
child-care partners reported about twice as many training hours, were three times as likely to 
have completed a CDA, and were more likely to have completed a 2-year college degree. If EHS/ 
HS partners had a degree, it was more often in child development. EHS/HS child-care partners 
completed more training of the following types: Heads Up, Reading, Parents as Teachers, 

Creative Curriculum, West Ed, High Scope, First Connections, CPR, and First Aid. Partners more 
often (a) viewed child care as their profession and (b) reported they had the training they 
needed to do their jobs right, and less often (a) reported they were in child care to help some- 
one out or for the paycheck, and (b) reported that they would do something else if they could. 

However, EHS/HS partners in centers had more negative attitudes about the materials they 
had to work with, about having a best friend at work, and about the recognition they had 
received. Partners were also more likely to participate in the USDA Food Program and to be 
members of professional organizations. They did not receive higher earnings; however, partners 
in centers were more likely to receive employee benefits. 

Finally, observed quality was higher in EHS/HS partnerships than in other forms of child care 
in the states. Infant Toddler Environment Rating Scale (Harms, Cryer, & Clifford, 1990) quality 
for partners averaged 5.33 compared to 4.34 for quality in all infant— toddler, center-based 
settings; Early Childhood Environment Ratings Scale (Harms & Clifford, 1980) quality averaged 
5.02 for HS partners versus 4.49 for all other preschool center-based programs; Family Day Care 
Rating Scale (Harms & Clifford, 1989) quality averaged 4.78 for EHS partners versus 4.30 for 
other care. Differences between EHS/HS partners and other care were significant in three of the 
four states — the three states that have designated state or federal funds to expand EHS/HS 
partnerships. Implications for state and federal policies are discussed. 



Rc^CTCttCCS 

Harms, T, & Clifford, R. (1989). Family Day Care Rating Scale. New York: Teachers College Press. 
Harms, T, & Clifford, R. (1980). Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale. New York: Teachers 
College Press. 

Harms, T, Cryer, D., & Clifford, R. (1990). Infant Toddler Environment Rating Scale. New York: 
Teachers College Press. 



O 

ERIC 



776 



781 



CHILD CARE 



Child-Care Quality: Research Findings and Policy Recommendations 

Kathy R. Thornburg, Jacqueline L. Scott, Wayne Mayfield 
PRESENTER: Kathy R. Thomburg 

In 2001, university researc±iers and state program partners in four states (Missouri, Iowa, Kansas, 
and Nebraska) initiated the Midwest Child Care Consortium (MCCC). The focus of the work 
was to conduct a large longitudinal study on a range of issues associated with child-care quality 
and conditions. Across the four states, 2,022 child-care providers participated in the study 
representing infant-toddler and preschool centers; licensed centers and homes, and licensed- 
exempt centers; and Head Start/Early Head Start programs. In Missouri, 51 7 providers partici- 
pated in telephone interviews. Of those, 110 providers were selected to have a researcher visit her 
program to conduct an on-site assessment of child-care quality. Each program was observed for 
2 to 3 hours using one of the following instruments: Early Childhood Environmental Rating 
Scale (ECERS; Harms, Clifford, & Cryer, 1998), Family Day Care Rating Scale (FDCRS; Harms & 
Clifford, 1989), or Infant-Toddler Environmental Rating Scale (ITERS; Harms, Cryer, & Clifford, 
1990). 

Statistically significant findings in the following areas: (a) correlations between quality and 
child-care subsidy ratios, (b) workforce characteristics, (c) workforce benefits, (d) and compari- 
sons between Head Start/Early Head Start and Head Start collaboration programs and non-Head 
Start programs were presented. 

Significant negative correlations were found between the ratio of subsidized children in early 
childhood programs and program quality. Programs with lower ratios of subsidized children 
tended to have higher quality scores on the ITERS social interaction scale and the program 
structure scale. No difference in quality was found between subsidy and nonsubsidy preschool 
classrooms as measured by the ECERS. 

Significant negative correlations were identified in the area of workforce characteristics. Early 
childhood programs with lower ratios of subsidized children tend to employ teachers who have 
more education, more experience (as measured by years in the field), and higher salaries. 
Teachers working in programs with a lower ratio of subsidized children also tend to see working 
in the early childhood field as a personal calling and as a career/profession. 

To compare whether there was a relationship between workforce benefits and ratio of 
subsidized children, programs were assigned to three categories: (a) nonsubsidy programs, 

(b) programs with a low ratio of subsidized children (20% or fewer), and (c) those with a high 
ratio (more than 20%). Nonsubsidy programs are more likely to provide health insurance, paid 
sick leave, and retirement benefits for teachers when compared to programs that accept subsi- 
dies. High and low subsidy programs are more likely to provide paid vacation than nonsubsidy 
programs. High subsidy programs are also more likely to provide reduced/no tuition for 
teacher's children than nonsubsidy and low subsidy programs. 

A comparison of Head Start and Early Head Start teachers (including programs with collabo- 
rative relationships with Head Start) and non-Head Start teachers revealed that Head Start 
teachers (a) have more education, (b) are more likely to have majored in child development, 

(c) are more likely to be trained in CPR and first aid, and (d) are more likely to pursue profes- 
sional development membership in NAEYC or NAFCC. 



Harms, T, Clifford, R. M., & Cryer, D. (1998). Early Childhood Environmental Rating Scale 
(Rev. ed.). New York: Teachers College Press. 

Harms, T, & Clifford, R. M. (1989). Family Day Care Rating Scale. New York: Teachers College 
Press. 

Harms, T, Cryer, D., & Clifford, R. M. (1990). Infant-Toddler Environmental Rating Scale. New 
York: Teachers College Press. 



References 



ERIC 




111 



POSTERS 



Tri-County Smart Start Kansas: Enhancing 
Child Care Quality Through Wage Enhancements 

Judith Carta, Tonya Hall 

PRESENTER: Judith Carta 

The Tri-County Smart Start Kansas Initiative is a Kansas City project that provides increased 
compensation to skilled early education professionals in child-care centers in an effort to 
improve child-care provider retention. This initiative is a response to what is commonly referred 
to as the "trilemma" in achieving quality in child care; that is, (a) child-care centers cannot 
charge fees to adequately compensate well educated, well qualified teachers, (b) therefore, good 
teachers cannot be hired or do not stay in child care, and (c) as a result, the quality of child-care 
programs is diminished. The Tri-County Smart Start Kansas addresses this trilemma by increas- 
ing salaries of educators in centers that have received or are working toward accreditation 
through NAEYC or the Head Start Performance Standards. It is anticipated that as the salaries are 
increased, turnover will be reduced, quality of child care will improve, and there will be a 
measurable increase in children's readiness for school. This initiative is funded by Smart Start 
Kansas, a program developed by the Kansas Children's Cabinet with funds from the Master 
Tobacco Settlement. Funds are distributed to Kansas communities to develop comprehensive 
approaches to early childhood education through local partnerships that focus on improving 
children s school readiness. In the Kansas City area, the Tri-County Smart Start partnership, led 
by the United Way of Wyandotte County, provides grants and technical assistance to early 
education programs to enhance salaries, benefits, and the professional development of early 
educations. 

This poster highlights the evaluation design that is comparing quality in centers receiving 
Smart Start funds against comparison centers in the same community that are matched in size, 
accreditation status, and neighborhood. Changes in factors that are a specific focus of the Smart 
Start initiative, such as rate of staff turnover, percentage of teachers with bachelors and associates 
degrees, and status on accreditation or Head Start Performance Standards will be measured every 
6 months in both groups of centers. In addition, other quality indicators about the centers 
include scores on the Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale (Harms, Clifford, & Cryer, 
1998), and the Arnett Scale of Caregiver Behavior (Arnett, 1989). Factors about the teachers/ 
child-care providers expected to change, gathered through a survey every 6 months, include 
monthly salary, perspectives about child care as a profession, length of time in their current 
position, number of clock hours of training they receive, perceived obstacles to obtaining 
child-care training, and job satisfaction. 

Finally, outcomes of children randomly selected from three age cohorts of children are also 
being assessed at 6-month intervals. These include measures of school readiness skills 
(preliteracy, vocabulary, and general knowledge) for prekindergarten-aged children and teacher 
ratings of general development and social behaviors for all three cohorts. In addition, parent 
satisfaction data are being gathered regarding specific features about their child-care centers such 
as convenience, and attitude and competence of the staff. We expect to see changes in quality of 
child care and child outcomes to coincide with reduced staff turnover brought about through 
enhanced wage compensation in Smart Start centers. 

References 

Arnett, J. (1989). Caregivers in day-care centers: Does training matter? Journal of Applied Develop- 
mental Psychology, 10, 541-552. 

Harms, T, Clifford, R. M., & Cryer, D. (1998). Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale. New 
York: Teachers College Press. 





778 



Community Resources 



Community, Neighborhood, And 5- Year-Olds' 

Readiness To Learn At School 

Magdalena Janus, Cindy Walsh, Helena Viveiros, David R. Offord 
PRESENTERS: Magdalena Janus, Cindy Walsh 

Children's readiness to learn at school entry is a well-established predictor of their success in 
school and later in life. Individual characteristics (e.g., socioeconomic status, health, parental 
education) contribute to children's readiness to learn (Kagan, 1992). Recendy, more attention is 
being directed toward the qualities of neighborhoods in which children develop. It is widely 
assumed that community and neighborhood characteristics have important influence on 
fostering healthy early childhood development in all domains relevant to readiness to learn 
(Connor & Brink, 1999). This study investigates the connection between the sociodemographic 
characteristics of neighborhoods and the outcomes of children's early development as measured 
by their school readiness in one large community. 

The Early Development Instmment (EDI; Janus & Offord, 2000) was used to measure school 
readiness in five domains of development: (a) physical health and well-being, (b) social 
competence, (c) emotional maturity, (d) language and cognitive development, and (e) commu- 
nication skills and general knowledge, of all 5-year-old children in the community (1,700 
children, mean age 5.7 years). Population characteristics for seventeen geographical neighbor- 
hoods were retrieved from the census data. Nine variables were considered: (a) low income, 

(b) unemployment, (c) welfare payments, (d) mobility, (e) home ownership, (f) immigration, 
(g) lone parenthood, (h) ability to speak either official language, and (i) education level 
(Connor, 2001). In addition, information was collected locally on programs and services 
available to children aged 0 to 5 years and their families. 

Two sets of data analyses were carried out. First, data from all three sources (EDI, census, 
services) were aggregated to the neighborhood level, and comparisons were made between 
neighborhoods scoring low on school readiness and those scoring high. Second, hierarchical 
linear model analyses (HEM) were applied to establish the contribution of neighborhood 
characteristics to school readiness. 

Eleven neighborhoods were classified as having problems with school readiness because their 
mean scores were below the site mean for at least three domains, and/or the percentage of 
children scoring in the lowest 10th percentile in one or more domains was higher than 20%. 
These neighborhoods had higher percentages of low-income families, single parent families, and 
families who moved within the previous year, but tended to have more services. The two 
variables that showed consistent correlations with the five EDI scales were the percentages of 
low-income families and those who moved recently — the higher these percentages, the lower the 
school-readiness scores. 

Using individual level data for children, their neighborhood characteristics, and based on 
beta-coefficients in HLM analysis, the three neighborhood characteristics that significantly 




779 



POSTERS 



contributed to children's lower school readiness were (a) low ability to speak either official 
language (all five domains), (b) low percentage of adults with high school education (four 
domains), and (c) low income (three domains). The service characteristics did not show a 
significant contribution in the models. 

It appears, therefore, that there is a meaningful association between children's school 
readiness and the sociodemographic aspects of the neighborhoods in which they live. This 
indicates that addressing needs of whole populations in neighborhoods may be a worthwhile 
endeavor in improving children's school readiness. 

References 

Connor, S. (2001). Early childhood development in North York (Strategic Policy Report). Ottawa, 
Canada: Human Resources Development, Applied Research Branch. 

Connor, S., & Brink, B. (1999). Understanding the early years: Community impacts on child develop- 
ment (Working Paper W-99-6E). Ottawa, Canada: Human Resources Development. 

Janus, M., & Offord, D. (2000). Readiness to learn at school. ISUMA, 1(2), 71-75. 

Kagan, S. L. (1992). Readiness past, present and future: Shaping the agenda. Young Children 
November, 48-53. 



Working Together to Create an Ecologically Valid 
Measure of Neighborhood Risks and Resources 

Eric A. Bermann, Sandra A. Graham-Bermann, Mary Cunningham Deluca, Kristen Klug 
PRESENTERS: Eric A. Bermann, Mary Cunningham Deluca 

For each of the past 4 years a number of shootings have been reported at or near Head Start 
schools in Jackson, Michigan— a city of 35,000 persons. Indeed, the safety of neighborhoods has 
long been a concern of the Community Action Agency's Head Start program (Region II Commu- 
nity Action Agency, 1997). When a university-Head Start community collaboration was devel- 
oped in 1997 to investigate the role of multiple forms of violence in the lives of preschoolers 
(Graham-Bermann, Bermann, & Huesmann, 2000-2002) exposure to community-level violence 
was deemed key. Building on the prior efforts of others (Garbarino & Sherman, 1980; Coulton, 
Korbin, Su, & Chow, 1995; Coulton, Korbin, & Su, 1996; Richters & Martinez, 1993), we sought 
to extend their work to our preschool population. Since our collaboration sought not only to 
enhance the validity of existing measures, but also to create procedures and measures inclusive 
of the values and concerns of the local community and population with which we were en- 
gaged, we wished to achieve these ends with the full cooperation and engagement of our study 
informants. 

We began by conducting a series of focus groups with different sets of research informants. 
We met separately with sets of parents. Head Start Teachers, Head Start Family Service Workers, 
and Head Start Bus Drivers, developing with each their conceptions of those factors they 
believed constituted "neighborhoods" (their own and others). The discussions were open, free 
form, and far ranging, including talk of racism, stereotyping, redlining, as well as more standard 
foci such as neighborhood safety, resources, cohesion, disorder, and so forth. Each group then 
generated a set of questionnaire items designed to tap the latter variables, which we subse- 
quently amalgamated by selecting for inclusion items commonly shared across groups. In this 
way, informants felt themselves to be full coinvestigators. Each completed essentially parallel 
forms for the preschool children in the study— the parents, teachers, and family service workers 



O 

ERIC 



780 



785 



COMMUNITY RESOURCES 



doing so for specified target children, the bus drivers for each of the self-demarcated neighbor- 
hoods through which they drove to pick up and drop off the Head Start children. 

In addition to the foregoing, we created a modified version of the Violence Exposure Measure 
(Shahinfar, Fox, & Leavitt, 1996) designed for preschool-age children. This cartoon format 
procedure asks children about what kinds of violence they might have witnessed or experienced 
as victims. Finally, we obtained 1997-1999 crime data for each crime reporting area from the 
Jackson police-sheriff departments, as well as census data for Jackson by census tract-block 
group. These data allowed us to cross-validate the measures of neighborhood quality provided 
by parents, teachers, family service workers, and bus drivers and to compare Head Start 
children's reports of their exposure to community violence with that of the crime data. 

This poster presents an array of tables containing the major results of this study. Included are 
the relationships between variables of neighborhood quality for each set of informants, as well 
as between sets of informants, and of the interrelationships between the various indices of 
neighborhood quality, informant group, census data, and crime statistics. 



Coulton, C. J., Korbin, J. E., Su, M., & Chow, J. (1995). Community level factors and child 
maltreatment rates. Child Development, 66, 1262-1276. 

Coulton, C. J., Korbin, J. E., & Su, M. (1996). Measuring neighborhood context for young 
children in an urban area. American Journal of Community Psychology, 24, 5-32. 

Garbarino, J., & Sherman, D. (1980). High-risk neighborhoods and high-risk families: The 
human ecology of child maltreatment. Child Development, 51, 188-198. 

Graham-Bermann, S., Hermann, E., & Huesmann, R. (2000-2002). Community, family, and media 
violence: Risks to preschool children's optimal development (University-Head Start Partnerships 
Research projects ACYF: DHHS Grant #90-YD-0066). Principal Investigators University of 



Ifrchters, J. E., & Martinez, P. (1993). The NIMH community violence project: I. Children as 
victims of and witnesses to violence. Psychiatry, 56, 36-45. 

Region II Community Action Agency. (1997, February). Region II Community Action Agency Needs 
Assessment Report. Jackson, Michigan: Author. 

Shahinfar, A., Fox, N., & Leavitt, L. (1996). Preschool children's exposure to violence: Relations 
between parent and child perception of prevalence and behavior problems. Unpublished manu- 
script, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 



Future Directions; Community Integration and Health Promotion 
in Early Childhood Settings — Measuring Effectiveness 

Carla Patterson, Collette Tayler, Julie Appleton, Ann Farrell, Lee Tennent 

PRESENTERS: Carla Patterson, Julie Mary Appleton 

This poster presents an opportunity to discuss the challenges, attributes, and possibilities for 
evaluation from two projects in Australia that focus on enhancing social capital and well-being 
through early childhood services: (a) Child Care and Family Support Hubs and (b) the Health 
Promotion In Early Childhood Settings project. 

The aim of the Health Promotion In Early Childhood Settings project was to determine the 
applicability and usefulness of the Health Promotion process and the Health Promoting 
Framework in early childhood settings. This was done by (a) assessing the level and extent of 



References 



Michigan. 



ERIC 




786 ■ 



781 



POSTERS 



health promoting activities already being conducted at the setting using a range of tools; (b) 
supporting centers to implement a process for health promotion; (c) encouraging addressing of 
health issues through the areas of curriculum, teaching and learning, organization ethos and 
environment, and partnerships and services; and (d) monitoring progress as case studies. 

Qualitative data were collected from 12 child-care centers, and evaluation was onping at 
planned intervals and when opportunities arose. Data were gathered at interviews with staff and 
through the review of documents such as minutes of related meetings. Health issues addressed 
include staff stress, provision of food, oral health, communication with parents, parenting 
programs for parents, and behavior management. 

Analysis showed that a modified health-promoting framework for schools is an appropriate 
model for addressing health issues in child-care centers. Depending on the issues addressed, 
centers are able to involve children through the curriculum, develop links with outside organiza- 
tions, and address issues of ethos, organization, and environment, such as policy development. 

The aim of the ACCESS study was to evaluate the Department of Families' new integrated 
service initiative— the Child Care and Family Support Hubs, in terms of (a) perceptions of 
families and children on provision of local services, (b) identifying pathways to integration, 

(c) effectiveness at meeting service needs, and (d) implications for community capacity and 
social capital building. 

Instruments have been developed to collect data from parents, children. Hub personnel, and 
service providers. Survey questionnaires, focus group discussions, and interviews have been 
piloted and will be used in a larger study in the next 3 years. They include (a) The Hub Commu- 
nity Survey Questionnaire (Tayler, Farrell, & Tennent, 2001) that asks about current service 
usage, priorities for hub services, anticipated personal benefits, and family demographics, as well 
as social capital (Onyx & Bullen, 1997); (b) Subjective Sense of Well Being (4-item measure; 
Davidson & Cotter, 1991); (c) Self-reported Health and Locus of Control (two 1-item measures; 
Lynch, Smith, Hillmeier, & Shaw, 2001); and (d) Sense of Community (12-item measure; 
Perkins, Florin, Rich, Wandersman, & Chavis, 1990). (Respondents will also be asked to rate 
their usage and satisfaction with current hub services and describe any positive outcomes in 
terms of health, care, and education associated with use of the services.) Information obtained 
from this study will inform the future direction of Integrated Service provision in Queensland, 
Australia. 

From these two ongoing studies, it is clear that alternatives to health outcomes need to be 
evaluated when working in health promotion in the early childhood sector. Qualitative data 
collected will be specific for each setting and each health issue addressed. Quality early child- 
hood services take a holistic view of children, families, and staff, and the environment in which 
they play, learn, and work. 

References 

Tayler, C., Farrell, A., Tennent, L. (2001). The Hub Community Survey. Technical Paper. Brisbane: 
Centre for Applied Studies in Early Childhood, Queensland University ofTechnolo^. 

Onyx, J., & Bullen, P. (1997). Measuring social capital in five communities (CACOM Working Paper 
Series No. 41). Sydney: University of Technology. 

Davidson, W. B., & Cotter, P. R. (1991). The relationship between Sense of Community and 
subjective well being: A first look. Journal of Community Psychology, 19, 246-253. 

Lynch, J., Smith, G. D., Hillmeier, M., & Shaw, M. (2001). Income inequality, the psychosocial 
environment and health: Comparisons of wealthy nations. The Lancet, 358(9277), 194—200. 
Perkins, D., Florin, P., Rich, R., Wandersman, A., & Chavis, D. (1990). Participation and the 
social and physical environment of residential blocks: Crime and community context. 
American Journal Community Psychology, 18, 83-115. 



O 

ERIC 



782 



787 



COMMUNITY RESOURCES 



The Effects of a Community-Based Intervention to Promote 
Early Literacy Behaviors for Low-Income Families 

Karen Peifer, Linda Perez, Mary Newman 

PRESENTERS: Karen Peifer, Linda Perez 
(Summary not available) 



The Effects of Integrated Behavioral Services on 
Service Access and Utilization by Head Start Families 

Amy B. Lewin, Philip Leaf, Jill G. Joseph, Jocelyn Turner-Musa, Michelle New 

PRESENTERS: Amy B. Lewin, Philip Leaf, Jocelyn Turner-Musa 
(Summary not available) 



Intermediate Effects of Integrated Behavioral 
Health Services in Early Childhood Settings 

Mark Christopher Edwards. Leanne Whiteside-Mansell, Carol Lee, Maggie Freese 

PRESENTERS: Mark Christopher Edwards. Leanne Whiteside-Mansell, Carol Lee 

t 

(Summary not available) 



Disabilities 



Early Head Start and The Individuals 
With Disabilities Education Act, Part C 

Raymond R. Arons, Marilyn Arons 

PRESENTERS; Raymond R. Arons, Marilyn Arons 

From 1975, Head Start and special education have parallel legislative histories, merging in 1986 
in P.L 99-457. This provided incentive grants for handicapped infants and toddlers whose 
primary programs and service sites were in Head Start. Comparison of Head Start (45 CFR, Parts 
1301-1311) and special education services (34 CFR, Parts 303.1-670) finds them to be identical. 
The U.S. General Accounting Office examined this overlap in 1997 (U.S. GAO, 1997), finding 
"mission fragmentation" with more than 90 early childhood programs in 11 federal agencies 
and 20 offices. 

Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. completed research for the U.S. government entided, 
"Leading the Way: Characteristics and Early Experiences of Selected Early Head Start Programs" 
(EHSP), heralded by the Bush administration to demonstrate that 3-year-olds completing Early 
Head Start may need fewer special learning interventions (Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., 
2002; U.S. DHHS, 2002). Simultaneously, the Honorable Robert Pasternack, a member of the 
Presidents Commission on Excellence in Special Education, addressed the Subcommittee on 
Education Reform on "Learning Disabilities and Early Intervention Strategies" (House Commit- 
tee on Education and the Workforce, 2002). The context, therefore, of EHSP is a political climate 
of doing more with less, government restmcturing, and reauthorization of IDEA (Individuals 
With Disabilities Education Act). Domains studied did not examine how many 0-2 children 
and families in Early Head Start received Part C services under IDEA in order to isolate the 
impact of Early Head Start services from those of other funding sources. In 1999-2000 this 
included 1.8% of the nation's infants and toddlers (Office of Special Education Programs, 

2002). Absent such analysis, no conclusions can be made concerning the efficacy of Early Head 
Start alone. 

The revolutionary work of Shonkoff and Phillips (2002) emphasized the country's highly 
fragrriented early childhood policies and practices. Head Start, the largest of all federal early 
childhood programs, is the logical point of entry for all 0-2 children and families, requiring a 
restructured governmental agency that does not separate nature from nurture, or education from 
self-regulation. 

A lack of demographic and socioeconomic patient aggregate data describing Early Head Start 
dramatically contrasts to all other federal programs funded by Health and Human Services (U.S. 
Department of Education, 2002). Therefore, measurement of success or failure of any program 
less than 5 years old and lacking publicly accessible variables is highly unlikely. 

Part C is a funding stream and not a program (U.S. GAO, 2002). Venn and McCollum (2002) 
recently demonstrated that Head Start teachers "did not individualize their plans, but instead 



er|c 



784 



789 



DISABILITIES 



focused. . .on the collective group of students" (p. 220). Part C integration throughout the entire 
Early Head Start system could remedy that problem. 

Since 1975, Head Start has been the least restrictive environment, with Early Head Start 
offering families of young children with disabilities or developmental delays an inclusive 
environment (Head Start Information and Publication Center, 2001). Further examination 
requires analysis of Early Head Start's implementation of Part C's Individualized Family Service 
Plan, as well as publicly accessible data for independent studies funded by independent agencies. 

References 

Head Start Information & Publication Center. (2001). Early Head Start Fact Sheet. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services/Head Start Bureau. 

House Committee on Education and the Workforce Hearing on "Learning Disabilities and Early 
Intervention Strategies: How to Reform the Special Education Referral and Identification 
Process." (2002, June 6). (Available from http://edworkforce.house.gov/hearings/107th/edr/ 
idea6602/wl6602.htm) 

Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. (2002). Early Head Start Research and Evaluation Project. 

Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. 

Office of Special Education Programs. (2002). Twenty-third Annual Report to Congress on the 
Implementation of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (p. 3). Washington, DC: 

Author. 

Shonkoff, J., & Phillips, D. (2000). From neurons to neighborhoods: The science of early 
childhood development. National Academy Press, 395-403. 

U.S. Department of Education. (2002). Early childhood longitudinal study. Washington, DC: « 
Author, Office of Educational Research and Improvement. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2002). Study shows positive results from Early 
Head Start program. HHS News, June 3. 

U. S. General Accounting Office. (1997). Managing for results using the Results Act to Address 
Mission Fragmentation and Program Overlap. Washington, DC: Author. 

U.S. General Accounting Office. (2002). Special education grant programs designed to serve children 
ages 0-5. Washington, DC: Author. 

Venn, M., & McCollum, J. (2002). Exploring the long-and short-term planning practices of Head 
Start teachers for children with and without disabilities. The Journal of Special Education, 
35(4), 220. 



The Development and Evaluation of a 
Web-Based Preschool Intervention Curriculum 

Heather Mariger, Robert Cook, Sarah Rule 

PRESENTER: Heather Ann Mariger 



SPIES (Strategies for Preschool Intervention in Everyday Settings) for Parents is a validated 
Internet-based curriculum designed to inform parents and caregivers of children with disabilities 
about proven intervention techniques. Because it is completely web-based, parents may access it 
when and how they wish. Using everyday settings and daily routines as the context for interven- 
tion, it introduces strategies adults can use to help (a) promote children's development and (b) 
rnaster their lEP or IFSP objectives. SPIES was developed at the Center for Persons with Disabili- 
ties at Utah State University. 




785 

790 



POSTERS 



Designing SPIES for Parents for the web presented many challenges. A diverse user popula- 
tion with disparate equipment, computer configurations, and bandwidth made it very difficult 
to create a "one size fits all" design. Therefore, it was especially important to understand our 
audience and target their expectations. Because the site is stand-alone, it was essential for users 
to be able to easily navigate and understand the site in order to find the information that was 
helpful to them (Graham, 1999). Therefore, we operated from the belief that evaluative feed- 
back from our target users was critical in the development and evaluation of our site (Barnum, 
2002; Hager, Kibler, & Zack, 1999). 

SPIES for Parents was developed in two stages. In the first stage, a prototype was developed 
and revised using comments from focus groups consisting of parents of children with disabili- 
ties. In the second stage, the formal site was created and on-line evaluation instmments were 
developed. Both content and technology/ web design were evaluated. Parents of children with 
disabilities were recmited using email and the NEC*TAS listserv. 

Evaluation results indicate that SPIES for Parents fostered the parents' ability to help their 
children in several important areas. Parents also reported an increased awareness of when and 
how to help their children, an improved sense of control in relationships with professionals, 
and validation of their ability to help their children. Another significant theme was the impor- 
tance of the individuality of each user — every user is different and accesses information in 
different ways. 

The evaluators' response to the website design and layout was positive. They found it easy to 
use, attractive, appropriate for its purpose, and worth spending time on. However, problems in 
downloading and viewing the imbedded videos were found to be a recurring issue. Because 
SPIES and SPIES for Parents incorporate video modeling, the inclusion of videos was considered 
essential to the goals for the website (Norman, Collins, & Schuster, 2001; Reamer, Brady, & 
Hawkins, 1998). Unfortunately, evaluators' greatest difficulties occurred in their attempts to 
view the videos. 

The results of this study indicate that (a) websites can be successfully developed for a diverse 
user population with disparate computer equipment; (b) involving the intended audience in the 
development and evaluation process can greatly enhance the utility of a website; and (c) 
creating a parent-friendly site that provides substantial procedural information in a format that 
is usable, accessible, practical, and convenient in terms of time and layout is possible. Such 
websites, which offer validated, practical guidelines, can benefit parents and caregivers of 
children with disabilities. 

References 

Graham, J. (1999). Build a site not a labyrinth. Internet.com. [online]. Retrieved from http:// 
wwwxlickz.com/mkt/emkt_strat/article.php/814611 
Barnum, C. M. (2002). Usability testing and research. New York: Longman. 

Hager, D., Kibler, C., & Zack, L. (1999). The basics of user friendly web design. Journal for Quality 
and Participation, 22(3), 58-62. 

Norman, J. M., Collins, B., & Schuster, J. W. (2001). Using an instmctional package including 
video technology to teach self-help skills to elementary students with mental disabilities. 
Journal of Special Education Technology, 16(3), 5-18. 

Reamer, R. B., Brady, M. P., & Hawkins, J. (1998). The effects of video modeling on parents' 
interactions with children with developmental disabilities. Education and Training in Mental 
Retardation and Developmental Disabilities, 33(2), 131-143. 





786 



DISABILITIES 



Characteristics of Children Referred to a Therapeutic Nursery Program 

Pamela T. Marsh, Amy Theobald, Tracye Poison, Loring J. Ingraham 

PRESENTERS: Pamela T. Marsh, Amy Theobald, Tracye Poison, Loring J. Ingraham 

For the past 30 years, the scope of early childhood education has been expanding to include 
younger and more severely impaired children (Berlin, O'Neal, & Brooks-Gunn, 1998). Increas- 
ingly, educators and mental health professionals assess behavior and mental health of children 
under 5 in order to provide early intervention programs that simultaneously nurture and protect 
emotional and cognitive growth. These years are a time to support positive change due to 
concomitant neurobiological development, attachment with significant adults, and infant 
learning (Bailey, Aytech, Odom, Symons, & Wolery, 1999). Unfortunately, young children with 
cognitive and emotional delays in development and potential learning disabilities may remain 
unnoticed and without intervention due to challenges in assessment (Odom, Jenkins, Speltz, & 
Deklyen, 1982). 

One type of early intervention program, the therapeutic nursery program (TNP), offers an 
alternative preschool setting that provides a protective environment and supports cognitive, 
language, and socioemotional development in young children who face cognitive and emo- 
tional challenges (Ferber, 1996). The present study intends to provide initial outcome data on 
the strengths and weaknesses of TNP programs as well as the effects of services on child and 
family adaptation. As a child progresses through the TNP program, we expect that he or she will 
progress in language, cognitive, and socioemotional areas— improvements that prepare these 
children to enter a mainstreamed kindergarten setting and reduce the risk of present and future 
school failure. Our outcome study is a 2-year pilot project assessing the effects of a TNP program 
interacting with child and parental characteristics upon children's language, cognitive, and 
socioemotional outcomes. 

The study utilizes a control group of children who are waitlisted for the TNP program. The 
control group provides comparison data on children's language, cognitive, and socioemotional 
skills when youngsters with therapeutic needs are left untreated or placed in alternative settings. 
Our assessment tools include the Weschler Primary and Preschool Scale of Intelligence- Revised 
(WPPSI-R; Gyurke, Marmor, & Melrose, 2000), Developmental Assessment of Young Ghildren 
(DAYG; Bryen & Gallagher, 1991), Preschool Language Scale-3 (PLS-3; Zimmermon, Steiner, & 
Pond, 1992), Preschool and Early Ghildhood Functional Assessment Scale (PEGFAS; Murphy et 
al., 1999), and the Achenbach Ghild Behavior Ghecklist (GBGL; Lengua, Sadowski, Friedrich, & 
Fisher, 2001). 

Initial cognitive results for children attending the TNP, N = 9; Mean age = 52. 1 months (SD = 
8.9) indicate that on the WPPSI-R, Full Scale IQ scores are in the Low Average range, 88.9 (SD = 
14.7), with Verbal IQ, 94.2 (SD = 16.8) higher than Performance IQ, 86.2 (SD = 16.4). On the 
DAYG, TNP children perform at the 21.6 percentile (SD = 18.1) of a normative sample. Results 
from the PLS-3 indicate that TNP children performed near normal, 49.1 percentile (SD = 27.5) 
on auditory comprehension, but with a lower level of performance on expressive language, 39.6 
percentile (SD = 27. 1); scores on both of these scales were highly variable across the sample. On 
the GBGL, TNP children were more likely to have internalizing, 74.9 percentile (SD = 13.0) and 
externalizing behaviors than the normative sample, 72.4 percentile (SD = 16.9). 

References 

Bailey, D. B., Aytech, L. S., Odom, S. L, Synoms, & Wolery, M. (1999). Early intervention as we 

know it. Mental retardation and developmental disabilities research reviews, 5, 11-20. 

Berlin, L. J., O'Neal, G. R., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (1998). What makes early intervention work? The 

program, its participants, and their interaction. Zero to Three, (February/March), 4-15. 

Bryen, D. N., & Gallagher, D. (1991). Assessment of language and communication. In B.A. 



ERIC 



792 



787 



POSTERS 



Bracken (Ed.), The psychoeducational assessment of preschool children (2nd ed„ pp. 187-240). 
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 

Ferber, J. (1996). Therapeutic teacher, therapeutic classroom. In L. Koplow (Ed.), Unsmiling faces: 

How preschools can heal (pp. 45-63). New York; Teachers College Press. 

Gyurke, I. S, Marmor, D. S, & Melrose, S. E. (2000). The assessment of preschool children with 
the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence-Revised. In B.A. Bracken (Ed.), The 
psychoeducational assessment of preschool children (3"* ed., pp. 57-75). Needham Heights, MA. 

Allyn & Bacon. . . 

Odom, S. L., Jenkins, J. R., Speltz, M. L., & DeKlyen, M. (1982). Promoting social integration o 

young children at risk for learning disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 5, 379-387. 
Lengua, L. J,)Sadowski, C. A, Friedrich, W. N., & Fisher, J. (2001). Rationally and empirically 
derived dimensions of children's symptomatology; Expert ratings and confirmatory factor 
analyses of the CBCL. Journal of Consulting & Clinical Psychology, 69(4), 683-698. 

Murphy, J. M., Pagano, M. E., Ramirez, B. A., Anaya, Y, Nowlin, C., & Jellinek, M. S. (1999). 
Validation of the Preschool and Early Childhood Functional Assessment Scale (PECFAS). 
Journal of Child and Family Studies 8(3), 343-356. 

Zimmermon, I. L., Steiner, V. G., & Pond, R. E. (1992). Preschool Language Scale-3. San Antonio, 

TX; The Psychological Corporation. 



The Impact of Inclusion on Language Development and 
Social Competence Among Preschoolers With Disabilities 

Yvonne Rafferty 

PRESENTERS: Yvonne Rafferty, Vincenza Piscitelli, Caroline Boettcher 



Despite the legal, moral, and empirical arguments in support of preschool inclusion (Bailey, 
McWilliam, Buysse, & Wesley, 1998), there is considerable debate in both the literature and in 
practice as to whether or not it hinders or enhances children's language, social, emotional, and 
cognitive development (Odom & Diamond, 1998). Inclusion refers to the process of placing 
children with disabilities in the same classes or programs as their typically developing peers, and 
providing them with the necessary services and supports (Rafferty, 2002; Winter, 1999). Educa- 
tors, parents, and policy makers need to be aware of the impact of inclusion on children with 
and without disabilities, as well as strategies that effectively address attitudinal barriers (Rafferty, 

Boettcher, & Griffin, 2002). 

This study examined the developmental progress of 96 preschoolers with disabilities m 
inclusion and segregated classes, focusing on language ability (auditory comprehension and 
expressive language) and social competence (social skills and problem behaviors). Their ages 
ranged from 33 to 57 months (M = 47.9, SD = 6.0); 71% were male, and 87% were White. Most 
(71%) were in inclusion classes. The preschool was a private agency-run, community-based 
program that provided services for children from birth to age 5. 

Two research questions were addressed; 

1. Which specific attributes of the child, parent, and family show positive relationships with 
children's developmental abilities at (a) pretest and (b) posttest, controlling for pretest 
abilities? 

2. Does placement type (inclusion vs. segregated) interact with degree of disability (not 
severe vs. severe) in predicting developmental progress from pretest to posttest (abilities at 
posttest, controlling for pretest ability)? Specifically, do children with less severe disabili- 
ties make greater progress in inclusion classes, and do children with more severe disabili- 
ties make greater progress in segregated classes? 



er|c 



788 



793 



DISABILITIES 



Level of development at pretest emerged as the strongest predictor of developmental progress. 
Other child, parent, and family attributes were not associated with developmental abilities at 
pretest, or with developmental progress over time. Degree of disability did not moderate the 
impact of placement type on language development or social competence, once pretest scores 
had been taken into consideration. An analysis of effect sizes, however, indicated that posttest 
scores were comparable in both settings for children with "not severe" disabilities, but not for 



higher posttest scores in language development (auditory comprehension and expressive 
language) and social skills than their peers in segregated classes. Problem behaviors at posttest, 
however, were lower for children in segregated classes than for their peers in inclusion classes 
(Rafferty, Piscitelli, & Boettcher, 2002). 

References 

Bailey, D. B., McWilliam, R. A., Buysse, V., & Wesley, P. W. (1998). Inclusion in the context of 
competing values in early childhood education. Early Childhood Research Quarterly 13, 27-47. 
Odom, S. L., & Diamond, K. A. (1998). Inclusion of young children with special needs in early 
childhood education: The research base. Early Childhood Research Quarterly 13, 3-25. 
Rafferty, Y. (2002). Creating high quality inclusion programs for preschoolers with disabilities in New 
York City: A guide for preschool providers. New York: The New York Community Trust. 

Rafferty, Y, Boettcher, C., & Griffin, K. W. (2002). Benefits and risks of reverse inclusion for 
preschoolers with and without disabilities: Parents' perspectives. Journal of Early Intervention, 
24(4), 266-286. 

Rafferty, Y, Piscitelli, V., & Boettcher, C. (2002). The impact of inclusion on language development and 
social competence among preschoolers with disabilities. Manuscript submitted for publication. 
Winter, S. (1999). The early childhood inclusion model: A program for all children. Olney, MD: 
Association for Childhood Education International. 



Teaching Children About Disability 

Cornelia Taylor, M. Irma Alvarado, Zolinda Stoneman 

PRESENTERS: Cornelia Taylor, M. Irma Alvarado 

In order to make inclusion of children with disabilities successful in Head Start programs, it is 
useful to understand what parents of typically developing young children are teaching their 
children about peers with disabilities, because young children are influenced by parent's 
attitudes and experiences about disabilities (Dimond & Innes, 2001; Stoneman, 2001). 

In the current study, the authors investigated how 40 parents of typically developing young 
children taught their children about disability in three naturalistic contexts. The children in the 
sample, recruited from local preschools, had a mean age of 50 months. There were four situa- 
tions: (a) reading a book about children with disabilities, (b) child alone play with a Little Tykes 
toy set including a wheelchair and a ramp, (c) parent-child play with the same toy set, and (d) 
parent-child toy play with large dolls that had various adaptive equipment. Two raters coded all 
videotape sessions; acceptable inter-rater reliabilities were achieved across coding categories. The 
dialogue was coded for teaching/knowledge, positive statements, and familiarity with disability. 
The parents also completed a Q-sort designed for the study that consisted of statements about 
attitudes/values concerning children with disabilities. 

In the book-reading task, 46% of parents talked about the child in the wheelchair, 57% 
talked about the child in the walker, and 6% talked about the child with Down's syndrome. 




ERIC 




789 



POSTERS 



When parents used the large toys to teach their children about disability, 90% of parents talked 
about the wheelchair and 75% talked about the glasses. Nineteen percent of parents made a 
positive comment, and 40% of parents talked about the abilities of the doll in the wheelchair in 
the small toy context. Six percent of parents related the child in the wheelchair to someone 
known by the child; 15% related the child in the walker to someone known by the child; and 
4% related the child with Down syndrome to someone known by the child in the book-reading 
context. Twenty percent of parents associated the wheelchair to someone known by the child in 
the small toy context. 

When the data were compared across situations there was a significant correlation between 
the parents' mention of ability during the book reading session and the child's fantasy play 
during child only play. In the Q-sort, a MANOVA revealed differences in attitudes across the 
three disabilities (behavior disorders, physical disorders, and cognitive disorders). 

One limitation of this study is that the sample had an overrepresentation of families making 
more than $50,000 a year (55%) and mothers with graduate education (44%). Because the 
sample distribution is not representative, care must be taken in the application of the results to 
low-income populations. The correlation between fantasy pl^y during child only small toy play 
and the parents' mention of ability during the book reading session suggests that information 
on abilities is important for inclusion. The observations of parents teaching their children about 
disability reveal that parents spent less time teaching about items familiar to the child. 

References 

Stoneman, Z. (2001 ). Attitudes and beliefs of parents of typically developing children; Effects on 
early childhood inclusion. In M. J. Guralnick (Ed.), Focus on Change. Baltimore; Paul H. 
Brooks. 

Dimond, K. E., & Innes, F. K. (2001). The origins of young children's attitudes toward peers with 
disabilities. In M. J. Guralnick (Ed.), Focus on Change. Baltimore; Paul H. Brooks. 



An Examination of Motor Functioning In Autism and Asperger's 
Disorder: An Analysis of Motor Planning and Cortical Brain Activity 

Nicole J. Rinehart, Bruce J. Tonge, Robert lansek, Peter Enticott, Amanda Dudley, 

John L. Bradshaw 

PRESENTER: Amanda Dudley 

Although movement abnormalities remain a striking feature throughout the developmental 
trajectory of autism and Asperger's disorder (AD), there has been little attempt to quantify and 
describe this area of neurological dysfunction (Ornitz, 1988). Recent studies comparing motor 
functioning in children with autism and AD have suggested children with AD have greater 
motor problems, specifically motor clumsiness, than children with autism (Gillberg, 1^®^' 
Ghaziuddin & Butler, 1998). Others have suggested that both groups demoristrate a similar 
global motor delay (see Rinehart, Bradshaw, Brereton, & Tonge, 2001 for review). 

The purpose of this study was to further examine possible neurobehavioural differences 
between autism and AD by examining movement preparation and execution in these groups 
(Rinehart et al., 2001). Participants were 11 high functioning autism (HFA; M = 8.9 years) and 
12 control participants (M = 9.6 years); 12 AD (M = 12.0 years) and 12 control participants 
{M = 12.3 years). Groups were matched on age, sex, and IQ. 

A serial-choice, button-pressing task was employed using a tapping board. The motor 
reprogramming task involved four buttons, and participants were instmcted to move leftward 



790 



795 



DISABILITIES 



and rightward as quickly as possible between two reciprocally illuminating target buttons. Two 
indices were used: (a) movement preparation (amount of time the button is held down) and (b) 
movement execution (amount of time between the release of one button and the depression of 
the next). Reprogramming of direction was manipulated by the illumination of an unexpected 
'oddball' button during the basic reciprocating sequence. This 'oddball' occurred only once 
during each of the trials, and participants were informed of this. All participants completed four 
blocks of 8 trials, with 32 trials in total. 

The HFA group executed reprogrammed movements at a similar speed to controls, and both 
groups executed programmed movements faster than reprogrammed 'oddball' movements. The 
AD group also programmed movements at a similar speed as^ontrols, and both groups were 
faster at executing programmed movements than reprogrammed 'oddball' movements. The 
control group, unlike the HFA group, was faster to prepare movements after having executed the 
odd ball response; the HFA group showed similar preparation times for movements occurring 
before, during, and after the 'oddball' response (i.e., no difference). 

In contrast to the HFA group, the AD group were actually slower to prepare a movement after 
having executed the 'oddball' reprogrammed movement. 

Results indicate that individuals with HFA and AD have a normal ability to execute move- 
ment in this motor reprogramming paradigm with atypical movement preparation. This 
difference in movement preparation invites speculation about how these disorders may differ 
neuropathologically. The fronto-striatal region, in particular lateral and mesial premotor circuits, 
is involved in movement preparation (Cunnington, Bradshaw, & lansek, 1996) and is therefore 
a likely area to be involved in these disorders. This research suggests that differences in move- 
ment preparation profiles in these disorders reflect differential involvement of the supplemen- 
tary motor area (SMA). 

Using the movement-related-potentials (MRP) experimental technique described by 
Cunnington, lansek, Bradshaw, and Phillips (1995), MRP's were investigated in 16 children with 
high-fiinctioning autism and a matched control group (Rinehart, Bradshaw, Brereton, & Tonge, 
(in submission). Preliminary results indicate that autism is associated with significantly reduced 
premovement activity for externally cued movements, similar to that reported for Parkinson's 
disease patients (Cunnin^on et al., 1995). Cunnington et al. (1995) interpreted this pattern of 
results as indicating impaired internal control mechanisms, operating via the SMA. Reduced 
SMA activation for externally determined movement in children with HFA supports Rinehart et 
al.'s (2001) suggestion that SMA dysfunction is associated with autism. We are currently conduct- 
ing comparative MRP studies with children diagnosed with AD. 



Cunriington, R., Bradshaw, J. L, & lansek, R. (1996). The role of the supplementary motor area 
in the control of voluntary movement [Review]. Human Movement Science, 15, 627-647. 

Cunnington, R., lansek, R., Bradshaw, J. L., & Phillips, J. G. (1995). Movement-related potentials 
in Parkinson's disease: Presence and predictability of temporal and spatial cues. Brain, 118, 
935-950. 

Ghaziuddin, M., & Butler, E. (1998). Clumsiness in autism and Asperger's syndrome: A further 
report. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 42(1), 43-48. 

Gillberg, C. (1989). Asperger syndrome in 23 Swedish children. Developmental Medicine and 
Child Neurology, 32(4), 520-531. 

Omitz, E. M. (1988). Autism: A disorder of directed attention. Brain Dysfunction, 1, 309-322. 

Rinehart, N. J., Bradshaw, J. L, Brereton, A. V., & Tonge, B. J. (2001). Movement preparation in 
high-functioning autism and Asperger's disorder: A serial choice-reaction time task involving 
motor reprogramming. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 31(1), 79-88. 

Rinehart, N. J., Bradshaw, J. L, Brereton, A. V., & Tonge, B. J. (in submission). A clinical and 
neurobehavioural comparison of high-functioning autism and Asperger's disorder. Australian 
and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry. 



References 



ERIC 




796 



791 



Early Education/Family Support 



o 

Preliminary Findings From Year One of the 
National Evaluation of the School of the 21st Century 

Nicole Fedoravicius, Christopher C. Henrich 

PRESENTERS: Nicole Fedoravicius, Christopher C. Henrich 

A substantial body of research provides evidence of the influence of quality preschool learning 
experiences on cognitive and social development, and subsequent academic achievement 
(Peisner-Feinberg et al„ 2001; NICHD Early Child Care Research Network [ECCRN], 2000; 
Barnett, 1995). The School of the 21st Century (21C) is one such school-based early care and 
family support model. It combines affordable and accessible child care, preschool education, 
and parent support services within an organizational and leadership infrastructure that trans- 
forms schools into year-round, extended day, multiservice centers. 

This poster presents preliminary findings from the 1st year of a rnultiyear, multisite evalua- 
tion of the 21 C model by specifically focusing on one of the model's key components, the all- 
day, year-round early care and preschool education for 3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds. Year one data are 
examined to determine whether children s academic achievement, emergent literacy, social 
competence, and parental involvement vary over the course of kindergarten as a function of 
whether or not children attended 21C preschool. 

The sampk consists of 337 kindergarten students from five school districts nationwide, 
representing rural, urban, and suburban communities. The sample is primarily White (78%), 
with 18% Latino, and 3% African American, and is socioeconomically diverse. Children had a 
variety of preschool experiences. In the year before kindergarten 41% were enrolled in 21C 
preschool, 33% attended other center-based care, and 24% had no center-based preschool 
experiences. 

Verbal and math subscales from the Woodcock Johnson 111 Tests of Achievement (WJlll; 
Woodcock, McGrew, & Mather, 2001) and the Early Screening Profile (ESP; Harrison et al., 

1990) were used to assess academic achievement. Three subscales from the Comprehensive Test 
of Phonological Processing (CTOPP; Wagner, Torgeson, & Rashotte, 1999) were used to assess 
phonological awareness. Teachers completed the Social Skills Rating System (Gresham & Elliott, 
1990), which assesses children's social skills and problem behaviors as well as academic 
competence. Parents answered questions about their educational involvement at home and 
at school. 

Children's outcomes in the fall and spring of kindergarten were compared across three 
groups using repeated-measures analyses, controlling for demographic and site effects. • 
Kindergarteners who had attended 21C preschool (n = 137) were compared to groups of 
kindergarteners who had (a) attended other center-based preschool programs (n = 108) or 
(b) had no center-based preschool experiences (n = 80). 

Differences were found across several outcomes. Compared to children with no center-based 
preschool experiences, children with 21 C preschool experiences had greater increases in phono- 



O 

ERIC 



792 



797 



EARLY EDUCATION/FAMILY SUPPORT 



logical processing over the course of kindergarten. Also, children with 21 C preschool started 
kindergarten with higher levels of overall academic competence and some math abilities; 
however, children with no preschool caught up to them by the end of the year. These findings 
suggest that 21 C children entered kindergarten in some respects more ready for school. Children 
with other center-based preschool did not differ from either the 21 C or the no preschool children. 

Future analyses will consider potential moderating effects of factors such as family demo- 
graphics, preschool quality, and kindergarten curriculum. As data collection continues, trajecto- 
ries of children s academic achievement, social competence, and parents* involvement will be 
followed through second grade. 

References 

Barnett, W. S. (1995). Long-term effects of early childhood programs on cognitive and school 
outcomes. The Future of Children, 5(13), 25-50. 

Gresham, E, & Elliott, S. (1990). Social Skills Rating System (SSRS). Circle Pines, MNi American 
Guidance Service. 

Harrison, R, Kaufman, A., Kaufman, N., Bruininks, R., Rynders, J., Ilmer, S., et al. (1990). Early 
Screening Profiles. Circle Pines, MN: AGS Publishing. 

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (ECCRN). (2000). The relation of child care to 
cognitive and language development. Child Development, 71, 823-839. 

Peisner-Feinberg, E. S., Burchinal, M. R, Clifford, R. M., Culkin, M. L, Howes, C., & Kagan, S., 
et al. (2001). The relation of preschool child-care quality to children's cognitive and social 
developmental trajectories through second grade. Child Development, 70, 1534-1553. 
Wagner, R., Torgeson, J., & Rashotte, C. (1999). Comprehensive Test of Phonological Processing. 
Circle Pines, MN: AGS Publishing. 

Woodcock, R., McCrew, K., & Mather, N. (2001). Woodcock- Johnson III Tests of Achievement. New 
York: Riverside. 



School-Based Services: What do U.S. Schools 
Offer Kindergartners and Their Families? 

Elizabeth Rigby, Sharon Lynn Kagan 

PRESENTER: Elizabeth Rigby 

Using school-level data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study— Kindergarten Cohort 
(ECLS-K), this analysis examined patterns in the provision of services by schools in the US. This 
sample of schools (n = 866) is representative of the 72,260 U.S. schools providing kindergarten 
services during the 1998—1999 school year. We focused on the provision of six services by 
schools, as reported by the school administrator/principal: (a) after school care, (b) summer 
school programs, (c) parent education programs, (d) family or adult literacy programs, 

(e) health/social services, and (f) home visits for parent education. On average, schools in the 
US provide almost three (M = 2.6, SD = 1.52) of these six services. Using K-means cluster 
analysis, we identified three patterns of service provision among schools in the U.S.: (a) limited, 
(b) general, and (c) multiple. Schools in the limited services cluster (34.5%) provide low levels 
of provision of all six services. Schools in the general services cluster (41.3%) provide high levels 
of the more general services (after school care, summer school, and parent education) and 
provide low levels of the more targeted services (family or adult literacy, health/social services, 
home visits for parent education). Schools in the multiple services cluster (24.2%) provide high 




793 



POSTERS 



levels of all six services. Utilizing logistic regression to predict membership in each cluster, we 
identified community and school characteristics associated with each pattern of service provision. 

Our results indicate that schools in the limited service cluster were more likely (a) to be 
located in the Northeast or Midwest (vs. West) region, (b) to be in rural areas or small towns (vs. 
suburbs), and (c) to have fewer students enrolled. Schools in the general services cluster were 
less likely to be in the Northeast or Midwest (vs. West), and were more likely to be in the 
suburbs (vs. city or rural locations). In addition, general services schools were often Catholic 
schools or non-Catholic private schools (vs. public schools), schools with larger school enroll- 
ments, and schools with less than 50% of the students in poverty. Schools in the multiple 
service provision cluster were more likely to (a) be located in rural areas, small towns, or within 
cities (vs. suburban locations); (b) be public (vs. Catholic or non-Catholic private), and (c) have 
greater than 50% poverty among the student body. These associations between community and 
school characteristics and patterns of service provision suggest that the availability of school- 
based services for children and families is influenced by the school s location, school type (i.e. 
public), school size, and the poverty level of its student body. 



PBS Ready To Learn Service: A Local/National Model 
of Early Childhood Education Outreach 

Abbe Hensley, Mary LaMantia 

PRESENTERS; Abbe Hensley, Mary LaMantia 



Television is the nation's largest classroom, the electronic hearth around which children and 
families gather to be entertained and informed. Ernest Boyer (1991) in Ready To Learn: A 
Mandate for the Nation described television as the most influential teacher children can have, 
second only to parents. Newton Minnow, former FCC commissioner, saw television as the most 
important educational institution in America. When Congress issued the challenge in 1994 to 
increase school readiness for children across America, public broadcasting rose to the task in a 
way no other broadcast medium could. 

In response to the critical national education goal that by year 2000, all American children 
would enter school ready to learn, public broadcasting, with the Department of Education, 
created a unique and powerful service called Ready To Learn (RTL). For more than 5 years, RTL 
has set the gold standard for quality educational children's programs— from "Sesame Street," 
"Arthur," and "Mister Rogers' Neighborhood" to "Dragon Tales," "Between the Lions," and 
"Clifford the Big Red Dog." Each of these award-winning programs is designed to teach children 
the new three R's of early childhood education: (a) readiness, (b) resiliency, and (c) relation- 
ships. For families with low literacy, limited English proficiency, learning disabilities, or who live 
in rural areas, RTF's broadcast block of children's programming is a lifeline to helping parents 
nurture and guide their children. With bold vision and aggressive planning, PBS uses the line up 
of quality children's programming as a catalyst for high-impact community outreach, building 
an unprecedented range of services and partnerships. A variety of outreach activities and 
materials delivered by local public television stations extend the educational impact of the 
programming for parents, teachers, and other caregivers— for example, workshops that teach 
parents how to connect television to reading and other learning activities, free books for 
children who otherwise would not own them, and a RTL magazine in two languages, PBS 
Families /para la Familia. 



O 

ERIC 



799 



794 



EARLY EDUCATION/FAMILY SUPPORT 



PBS encourages Ready To Learn stations to partner with Head Start, Even Start, 21st Century 
Learning Centers, and other child- and family-focused organizations to deliver outreach in their 
communities. We give examples of the many forms these partnerships take and the ways that 
they help to extend the reach of Ready To Learn in communities around the nation. 

Reference 

Boyer, Ernest L. (1991). Ready to learn: A mandate for the nation. Princeton, NJ: Carnegie Founda- 
tion for the Advancement of Teaching. 



The Ready To Learn Evaluation: 

Early Lessons for Program Development 

Cheri Vogel, Stacey Uhl, Kimberly Boiler, Lindsay Crozier 

PRESENTERS: Stacey Uhl, Cheri Vogel 



Thirty-two years after the launch of Sesame Street, as young children's television viewing time 
continues to increase, our society still questions what the appropriate role of television and 
other media is in the lives of preschoolers. Longitudinal studies and nationally representative, 
cross-sectional research indicate that children's programming on PBS does make a difference in 
young children's lives and helps prepare them for school (Anderson, Huston, Schmitt, 
Linebarger, & Wright, 2001; Zill, 2000). 

Going beyond television itself. Ready To Learn is a national initiative focused on extending 
the learning based on the curriculum in PBS children's programs by conducting community 
outreach. Studies of this approach indicate that caregivers and parents who were targets of 
outreach seemed to use television more wisely, engaged in more coviewing and reading with 
children, and were more likely to link television shows, books, and activities (Bryant, Maxwell, 
Stuart, Ralstin, & Rainey, 1999; Yotive & Fisch, 2000). What is missing is a descriptive study of 
Ready To Learn implementation at the station level that can be linked to a subsequent study of 
Ready To Learn coordinator, parent/caregiver/ teacher, and child outcomes. 

In this poster, we present descriptive findings about implementation of Ready To Learn, 
promising practices, and professional development needs. We include results from a baseline 
Web survey of Ready To Learn Coordinators conducted in spring 2001. The baseline survey data 
include (a) information about the Coordinators' backgrounds, (b) descriptions of the PBS Ready 
To Learn stations, and (c) the areas Coordinators identify as professional development needs. 
Results from our first follow-up Coordinator survey (conducted in spring 2002 and following up 
on the areas surveyed at baseline) are included in the presentation, along with a discussion of 
staff retention and trends over time. By summarizing descriptions from one-day site visits to 20 
stations conducted in the summer of 2001, we also illustrate how stations develop their commu- 
nity partnerships and meet important requirements of the new cooperative agreement (linking 
with child care providers. Head Start, Even Start, and 21st Century Learning Centers and target- 
ing special populations — including families with limited literacy, limited English proficiency, 
children with disabilities, and mral residents). 

We also draw from our evaluation of the 2001 Ready To Learn Coordinator Professional 
Development Seminar to reinforce the themes identified from the other data sources and 
provide grounding for recommendations for technical assistance and program development 
lessons. We review the diversity of community partnerships and identify partnerships that seem 
particularly promising for extending the reach of Ready To Learn. We also use the data from the 





795 



POSTERS 



coordinator surveys, the seminar evaluations, and site visits to identify the expected outcomes of 
Ready To Learn and our plans for the outcomes study. We review our design of the outcomes 
study and how we will work with the stations to recmit study participants. We conclude with the 
Ready To Learn implementation lessons, including challenges stations have faced and their 
successes in extending the reach of children's educational television. 



Anderson, D. R., Huston, A. C., Schmitt, K. L., Linebarger, D., &. Wright, I. C. (2001). Early 

childhood television viewing and adolescent behavior. The recontact study. Monographs of the 
Society for Research in Child Development, 66(1, Serial No. 264). 

Bryant, J., Maxwell, M. S., Stuart, Y., Ralstin, L., & Rainey, A. A. (1999). Longitudinal effects of PBS 
Ready To Learn Outreach Initiative. Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama, Institute for 
Communication. 

Votive, W. M., & Fisch, S. M. (2000). The role of Sesame Street-based materials in child care 

settings. In S. M. Fisch & R. T. Tmglio (Eds.), "G" is for Growing: 30 years of research on children 
and Sesame Street (pp. 181-196). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Zill, N. (2000). Does Sesame Street enhance school readiness?: Evidence from a national survey 
of children. In S. M. Fisch & R. T. Tmglio (Eds.), "G" is for Growing: 30 years of research on 
children and Sesame Street (pp. 115-130). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 



Characteristics and Attributes of 
Effective Primary Programs and Practices 

Katherine M. McCormick, Jennifer Grisham-Brown, Lynley Anderman, Nawanna Privett, 
Annette Bridges, Mary Louise Hemmeter 

PRESENTERS: Jennifer Grisham-Brown, Katherine M. McCormick 
(Summary not available) 



r 



References 



796 




ESL/Bilingual Issues 



A Comparison of Home and Program Variables Associated With 
Cognitive and Socioemotional Outcomes of Spanish-Speaking and 
English-Speaking Children in the Family and Child Experiences Survey 
(FACES) 

Shefali Pai-Samant, Nicholas Zill, Ruth Hubbell McKey 
PRESENTERS: Shefali Pai-Samant, Ruth Hubbell McKey 

Eighty-five percent of the non-English speaking children in FACES (Administration on Children, 
Youth and Families, 2001) speak Spanish as their primary language. This poster identifies 
similarities and differences in the home and program variables for Spanish-speaking versus 
English-speaking children in FACES that can help explain the differences in child outcomes for 
these two groups of children. The FACES subsamples compared here are 197 Spanish-speaking 
children and 1,721 English-speaking children. Spanish children were assessed in Spanish in fall 
1997 and English in spring 1998. 

Information about children's home variables was obtained from parent interviews. Program 
variables were examined with the Early Childhood Environment Rating Scales-Revised (ECERS; 
Harms, Clifford, & Cryer, 1998), Assessment Profile (Abbott-Shim, & Sibley, 1987), Arnett Scale 
of Caregiver Behavior (Arnett, 1989), counts of adults/children, and staff interview. Children's 
cognitive outcomes were assessed with the (a) social awareness task; (b) Peabody Picture 
Vocabulary Test-III (PPVT; Dunn, Dunn, & Dunn, 1997)/Test de Vocabulario en Imagenes 
Peabody (TVIP; Dunn, Padilla, Lugo, & Dunn, 1986); (c) McCarthy Draw-A-Design Task 
(McCarthy, 1970, 1972); (d) color names and counting; (e) Letter-Word Identification Test, 
Applied Problems Test, and Dictation Test from the Woodcock-Johnson Revised Tests of Achieve- 
ment (Woodcock, & Mather, 1989, 1990)/Bateria Woodcock-Munoz Pruebas de 
Aprovechamiento-Revisada (Woodcock & Muhoz-Sandoval, 1996); and (f) story and print 
concepts. Information about children's socioemotional outcomes was obtained through parent 
ratings (FACES Instruments). 

Spanish-speaking children had significandy higher scores in spring compared to fall on draw- 
a-design, color naming, one-to-one counting, and emerging literacy tasks; lower scores on social 
awareness tasks, letter-word identification, applied problems, story and print concepts, and 
assessment behavior; and lower standard scores on the PPVT in spring than on the TVIP in fall. 
When compared to English-speaking children, they had lower scores on all cognitive measures 
except draw-a-design and dictation in fall and draw-a-design in spring (ACYF, 2001). 

Spanish-speaking children had significantly higher scores on social skills and positive 
approach to learning, and lower scores on hyperactive behavior in spring compared to fall. 

When compared to English-speaking children in fall, they had higher scores on hyperactive 
behavior, withdrawn behavior, and total behavior problems, and lower scores on social skills 
and positive approach to learning. In spring, Spanish-speaking children compared to English- 
speaking children had lower scores on aggressive behavior; higher scores on hyperactive. 





797 



POSTERS 



withdrawn, total behavior problems; and higher scores on social skills and positive approach 
to learning. 

When compared to English-speaking children on home variables, Spanish-speaking children 
were better off in terms of being in households that were intact, had less depressed mothers, and 
had caregivers who used less spanking, but were less well off in terms of maternal locus of 
control, education, employment, poverty, and home literacy environment. 

On program variables, Spanish-speaking children compared to English-speaking children were 
more likely to be (a) in Head Start programs that had a moderate average quality factor score and 
high average ECERS language score, but (b) in classrooms that had teachers without degrees, a 
high child-adult ratio, more minority families, and few parents with some college education. 

These findings suggest that Head Start programs attended by Spanish-speaking children 
should focus on (a) promoting child acquisition of English through focus on vocabulary, 
literacy, and numeracy skills; (b) increasing teachers' educational levels, (c) lowering classroom 
adult-child ratio; and (d) supporting families towards improving their health, education, 
employment, and home literacy behaviors. 

References 

Abbott-Shim, M., & Sibley, A. (1987). Assessment profile for early childhood programs. Atlanta, GA: 
Quality Assist. 

Administration on Children, Youth & Families (2001). Head Start FACES: Longitudinal findings on 
program performance. Third progress report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services. 

Arnett, J. (1989). Caregivers in day-care centers: Does training matter? Journal of Applied Develop- 
mental Psychology, 10, 541-552. 

Dunn, L. M., Dunn, L. L, & Dunn, D. M. (1997). Peabody Picture and Vocabulary Test, Third 
Edition. Examiner's manual and norms booklet. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 
Dunn, L. M., Padilla, E. R., Lugo, D. E., & Dunn, L. M. (1986). Test de Vocabulario en Imagenes 
Peabody. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 

Harms, T, Clifford, R. M., & Cryer, D. (1998). Early Childhood Environment Rating Scales-Revised. 
New York: Teachers College Press. 

McCarthy, D. (1970, 1972). McCarthy Scales of Children's Abilities. San Antonio, TX: The Psycho- 
logical Corporation. 

Woodcock, R. W., & Mather, N. (1989, 1990). WJ-R test of achievement: Examiner's manual. In 
R. W. Woodcock & M. B. Johnson. Woodcock- Johnson Psycho-Educational Battery— Revised. 
Chicago: Riverside. 

Woodcock, R. W., & Munoz-Sandoval, A. F. (1996). Bateria Woodcock-Munoz Pruebas de 
Aprovechamiento-Revisada. Chicago: Riverside. 



O 

ERIC 



798 



803 



ESL/BILINGUAL ISSUES 



The Joint Production of Narratives in Preschool: 

A Situated Perspective of Meaning Making 

Alison G. Wishard 

PRESENTER: Alison G. Wishard 

Narrating, or storytelling, is a salient example of how humans universally use language in an 
effort to make sense of new and routine experiences that make up their daily lives (Gee, 1985). 
While adult narratives typically focus on unusual or unexpected events or problems, young 
preschool children's first narratives often focus on probable life events in the here-and-now 
(Imbens-Bailey & Snow, 1997). They use narratives to understand and review basic discoveries 
about the world and to assert their understanding of the world to those around them (Nelson, 
1991; Ochs & Capps, 2001). Particularly, through conversations about past and present, children 
develop the skills to explain or make reference to personal experiences, and through fantasy play 
children develop the ability to talk about fictional events (Hicks, 1991). 

While narratives are found across all cultures and in all languages, the organization and 
delivery of narratives varies widely according to specific cultural values, goals, and ways of 
thinking about the world (Michaels & Cazden, 1986; Heath, 1983). Children from different 
sociocultural communities experience narrative discourse differently in their primary language 
learning environments because they are participating in different social settings. These experi- 
ences early on are the basis for the narrative skills that children bring with them to primary school. 

This study explores how toddlers (ages 18-36 months) in a bilingual preschool for low- 
income families begin to produce narratives in collaboration with their teachers and peers to 
create social meaning of their preschool world. Naturalistic observations and videotaping were 
used to capture the activities in which narrative interactions tend to occur, the personnel 
involved, the language(s) used, and the types and effects of adult scaffolding strategies. Natural- 
istic observations indicated that all children engaged in a narrative interaction at least once. 
Eighty percent of all observed narrative interactions were between child and adult, with 20% 
occurring between peers, and 62% of all narratives occurring within creative play acdvides. The 
video portion of the study indicated that while adults vary in their amount and type of narradve 
scaffolding, the most frequent type of scaffolding was to maintain the narradve topic. Addidonal 
analysis on the effects of the narrative scaffolds suggests that adult involvement in narradve 
interacdons can both promote and inhibit narradve interacdon. 

While the extant research on personal, spontaneous narratives of children below the age of 
3 is limited, the possible implications in early childhood educadon are vast. Preschool is an 
important environment in which to study narradve development, because a rising number of 
children, particularly underrepresented children, are attending half- or all-day programs. 
Narradves have been argued to be an important indicator of literacy acquisition and later school 
outcomes (Heath, 1982; Snow, 1983; Imbens-Bailey & Snow, 1997). Considering that young 
children's narratives are often closely linked to literacy acquisidon and later school outcomes, 
for these children frequent narrative interactions in preschool may be essential experiences to 
prepare them for later social and academic success. 

References 

Gee, J. P. (1985). The narrativizadon of experience in oral style. Journal of Education, 167, 9-35. 
Heath, S. B. (1983). Ways with words. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. 

Heath, S. B. (1982). What no beddme story means: Narradve skills at home and school. Lan- 
guage in Society, 11, 49-76. ^ 

Hicks, D. (1991). Kinds of narrative: Genre skills among first graders from two communides. In 
A. McCabe & C. Peterson (Eds.), Developing Narrative Structure (pp. 55-87). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 





799 



POSTERS 



Imbens-Bailey, A., & Snow, C. (1997). Making meaning in parent-child interaction: A pragmatic 
approach. In C. Mandel & A. McCabe (Eds.), The problem of meaning: Behavioral and cognitive 
perspectives (pp. 261-295). Amsterdam: Elsevier Science. 

Michaels, S., & Cazden, C. (1986). Teacher/child collaboration as oral preparation for literacy. In 
B. Schieffelin & P. Gilmore (Eds.), The acquisition of literacy: Ethnographic perspectives (pp. 
132-154). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Nelson, K. (1991). Remembering and telling: A developmental story. Journal of Narrative and Life 
History, 1, 109-127. 

Ochs, E., & Capps, L. (2001). Living narrative. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Snow, C. E. (1983). Literacy and language: Relationships during the preschool years. Harvard 
Educational Review, 53, 165-189. 



Early Childhood Study of Language and Literacy Development 
of Spanish-Speaking Children: Background and Initial Findings 

Patton Tabors, Mariela P^ez 

PRESENTERS: Mariela P^ez, Blanca Quiroz, Patton Tabors 

Over the last decade. Head Start, along with other early childhood programs, has experienced a 
sharp increase in the number of children enrolled from homes where a language other than 
English is spoken. According to the 2000-2001 Head Start Program Information Report, in 
FY2001, 27% of Head Start children were considered dominant in a language other than 
English. This situation raises questions for educators concerning the language and literacy 
development of young bilingual children. 

The Early Childhood Study of Language and Literacy Development of Spanish-Speaking 
Children (ECS) is a longitudinal project designed to identify the factors that influeiice the 
course of Spanish and English literacy development for young Spanish-speaking children. There 
are three objectives for this study: (a) to describe young Spanish-speaking children's 
proficiencies in Spanish and English as they enter and as they leave prekindergarten, (b) to 
investigate how these children's language and literacy skills in Spanish and English change over 
time from prekindergarten to second grade, and (c) to predict Spanish-speaking children s 
Spanish and English literacy abilities in second grade, based on factors related to the home and 
school contexts. 

The study tracks a sample of 350 at-risk Latino children in communities around Boston, 
Massachusetts and Montgomery Country, Maryland, as well as a comparative sample of 1 50 
children in Puerto Rico, from the time they enter prekindergarten until they leave second ^ade. 
This presentation emphasizes the theoretical background, data collection procedures, prelimi- 
nary family demographics, and preliminary findings for Fall 2001 when the children where 
beginning their 4-year-old prekindergarten school year. 

The language and literacy tasks for the ECS, which are administered one-on-one in English 
and in Spanish for the mainland bilingual sample and in Spanish only for the Puerto Rican 
sample, include assessments of letter word recognition, vocabulary, discourse skills, phonologi- 
cal awareness, general language ability, concepts about print, and listening comprehension. 

Our preliminary results indicate that the children in the study have a variety of abilities in 
their two languages across the tasks. On average, the children in the mainland sample are having 
difficulty in oral language in both languages, and they are doing significantly less well than the 
Puerto Rico sample in oral language in Spanish. We found that the different lanpage tasks were 
positively correlated across children's two languages with the exception of the picture vocabulary 



er|c 



800 



805 



ESL/BILINGUAL ISSUES 



task. The negative correlation between the English and Spanish picture vocabulary task indicates 
that, on average, children who are doing well in one language are not doing as well in the other. 

Information about a more intensive qualitative study with a subsample of 55 families 
stratified by language proficiency, gender, and language use in the home is also presented. These 
families are receiving home visits during which parents are interviewed, asked to read a book, 
and to do a homework sheet with the child. A family mealtime is also tape-recorded. Language 
and literacy data are being collected with the Early Language and Literacy Classroom Observa- 
tion (ELLCO; Smith & Dickinson, 2002) in the subsample children's classrooms, and teachers 
are being interviewed and tape-recorded during a group time activity. Finally, we discuss the next 
steps in data analysis and the future of the study. 

Reference 

Smith, M., & Dickinson, D. (2002). The Early Language and Literacy Classroom Observation 
(ELLCO). Baltimore: Brookes. 



Home Biliteracy Practices and Vocabulary Development 
Among Latino Head Start Students 

Sandra Barrueco, Dor6 LaForett, Manuel Escamilla, Norman F. Watt 

PRESENTERS: Sandra Barrueco, Dor6 LaForett, Norman F. Watt 



The present study aimed to describe the prevalence and nature of Head Start families' home 
biliteracy practices upon entrance of Latino students to the program, as well as to advance 
understanding of the various relationships that exist between home literacy in English and 
Spanish and children's lexical development within and across the two languages. 

The 78 Latino children who participated in the present study were randomly selected from 
students enrolled to begin a Head Start program in a predominantly Latino section of a Mid- 
western city. All of the children had never participated in a day-care or early childhood educa- 
tional program. Fifty-six percent were female, and their mean age was 3.96 years (SD = .46, 
range 3.22 to 4.95). Bilingual examiners assessed the children's receptive and expressive vocabu- 
lary in both English and Spanish over the course of 2 days. Information about their language 
exposure and literacy practices was gathered from the primary caregiver during an interview at 
their home or over the phone. 

On average, the children participated in literacy activities with their families 5 days per week, 
according to caregiver report. The number of days per week of reading across the two languages 
was comparable between the Spanish-dominant children (M = 5.28, SD = 4.03, n = 44) and 
English dominant subjects (M = 6.00, SD = 2.34, n = 27), t = -.83, df = 65, p = .41. Notably, the 
Spanish-dominant children were found to participate in literacy activities in their dominant 
language less frequently than English-dominant children, t = -3.75, df =65, p < .001. Instead, the 
Spanish-dominant children participated in a relatively greater frequency of reading in their 
nondominant language (English). As such, the literacy activities of Spanish-dominant children 
were more likely to be comprised of two languages than the literacy activities of English- 
dominant children, X^(l, 71) = 6.54, p = .01. 

The impromptu conversations with the caregivers during the interviews provided the follow- 
ing insights on the balance of Spanish and English reading: Many caregivers cited difficulty 
locating children's books in the Spanish language. If the caregivers could not read in English, 
they tried to engage their children in drawing and writing activities, and "contandoles unos 




&0S 



801 



POSTERS 



cuentos" or storytelling. Since most books were available in English, some Spanish-dominant 
caregivers asked older siblings and cousins (who were learning English in school) to read to the 

child subjects. . 

Importantly, the number of days per week of reading conducted with the LaUno children m 
their dominant language was positively related to their expressive vocabulary in that language 
(standardized beta = .21, squared semipartial correlation, p < .05). This finding is consistent 
with an array of results demonstrating strong relationships between home literacy practices and 
language development among unilingual children (e.g., ACYF, 1998; Bus, Van Uzendoom, & 
Pellegrini, 1995; Weinberger, 1996). 

This cross-sectional finding provides a preliminary affirmation of the existence of a relation- 
ship between home literacy activities and lexical development among a group of low-income 
Latino young bilinguals. Strong relationships between home literacy practices and language 
development have been demonstrated among children of various socioeconomic backgrounds 
exposed to one language, (e.g., ACYF, 1998; Bus et al., 1995; Weinberger, 1996). 

In all, the study provided the following contributions to the current understanding about 
literacy activities among Latino Head Start Families: 

1. The vast majority of the Latino children were engaged in literacy experiences with their 

families most days per week. 

2. The literacy activities of the Spanish-dominant families included a greater proportion of 
English than anticipated. The scarcity of Spanish children s books in the area and the 
development of English literacy skills among the older children in the household are key 
elements to this finding. 

3. The present study affirmed the presence of a significant relationship between home literacy 

activities and lexical development among a group of low-income Latino young bilinguals 
prior to their entrance into the formal educational system. 

Implications of the set of findings for teachers, psychologists, and researchers were reviewed. 



References . 

ACYF. (1998). Head Start Program Performance Measures: Second Progress Report. Washington, DC: 
U. S. Department of Health and Human Services. Retrieved from http:// www.acfdhhs.gov/ 
programs/hsb/hsreac/ faces 

Bus, A., Van Uzendoom, M., & Pellegrini, A. (1995). Joint book reading makes for success in 
learning to read: A meta-analysis on intergenerational transmission of literacy. Review of 
Educational Research. 65:1-21. 

Weinberger, J. (1996). A longitudinal study of children's early literacy experiences at home and 
later literacy development at home and school. The Journal of Research in Reading, 19(1), 
14-24. 




802 



807 



ESL/BILINGUAL ISSUES 



Early Bilingual Exposure and Lexical Development 
Among Low-Income Latino Children 

Sandra Barrueco, Dor6 LaForett, Manuel Escamilla, Norman F. Watt 

PRESENTERS: Sandra Barrueco, Dor6 LaForett, Manuel Escamilla, Norman F. Watt 

Too little attention has been paid to the linguistic development of children exposed to two or 
more languages in their early years of life. Yet, a solid understanding of the linguistic develop- 
ment of young children exposed to two languages prior to their participation in formal school- 
ing is essential for the valid identification of early language delays, the valid estimation of 
abilities by educators and practitioners working with bilingual children, and the valid assess- 
ment of the effect of educational intervention programs on language development. 

The present study aimed to increase the current knowledge base of early bilingual develop- 
ment in two manners. First, it aimed to describe and thus provide an understanding of, the 
prevalence, range, and sources (i.e., guardian, siblings, extended family, television) of exposure 
to English and Spanish within a Latino Head Start population before the first formal educa- 
tional experience. Second, the present study examined the association of the extent and sources 
of exposure to two languages with receptive and expressive lexical development within and 
across Spanish and English. 

The 78 Latino cJiildren who participated in the present study were randomly selected from 
students enrolled to begin a Head Start program in a predominandy Latino section of a Mid- 
western city. All of the children had never participated in a day-care or early childhood educa- 
tional program. Fifty-six percent were female, and their mean age was 3.96 years (SD = .46, 
range 3.22 to 4.95). Bilingual examiners assessed the children's receptive and expressive vocabu- 
lary in both English and Spanish over the course of 2 days. Information about their language 
exposure was gathered from the primary caregiver during an interview at their home or over 
the phone. 

Utilizing descriptive statistics and polynomial regression, the study revealed numerous key 
findings. First, although few children were exposed to an equal balance of Spanish and English 
before entering school, the vast majority of the Latino children (88%) were experiencing early 
bilingual exposure in unbalanced proportions. Second, Latino children s receptive vocabulary 
development within their dominant language was relatively more developed than their expres- 
sive vocabulary in their dominant language. Finally, the lexical development of both the 
Spanish- and English-dominant children was skewed toward the development of English, 
indicating that Spanish language development may already be at a relative disadvantage for both 
sets of Latino children prior to entry into school. 

Implications of the set of findings for teachers, psychologists, and researchers were reviewed. 




803 



POSTERS 



Teaching a Second Language in an 

Early Childhood Program: The Impact on Children, 

Teachers, and Developmentally Appropriate Practices 

Mary DeBey, Bebe Bullock 

PRESENTER: Mary DeBey 

Brain research has shown us that young children are in a sensitive period for language develop- 
ment. Prior to 5 years of age, children absorb languages effortlessly and are adept imitators of 
speech sounds. This paper reports a study of the implementation of a second language program 
at an early childhood center serving English-speaking children. 

The educational community now recognizes the importance of early language learning. The 
process of studying a second language gives students a cognitive boost that enables them to 
perform at higher levels in some other subjects (Curtain & Pesola, 1994). It has been found that 
bilingual children outperform their monolingual peers in varied tasks including divergent 
thinking, metacognition processing, and nonverbal problem-solving skills (Rubio, 1998). 

In this ethnographic study, a triangulation model was adopted. Data were colleaed through 
interviews, focus groups, observations in the classroom, analyses of children s language use, and 
review of lesson plans. It was hypothesized that the impact on the program would be a positive 
one. A positive impact was determined to be the consistency of developmentally appropriate 
practices in a quality program, teacher and parent satisfaction, and the children s acquisition of 
Spanish both receptively and expressively. 

The early childhood program used in this study is a high quality laboratory school in the 
Northeast. A high quality center was chosen to provide an environment in which the initiation 
of the Spanish program would not be hindered by poor program performance variables. The 
program has highly trained teachers, high teacher/child ratio, small group size, a strong philo- 
sophical base, strong leadership, and a developmentally appropriate emergent curriculum. Spanish 
was taught though daily routines and Spanish group time to 68 children in five classrooms of 
children ages 2-6. In each classroom, a Spanish-speaking teacher was paired with an English- 
speaking teacher. Children in the center included children from varied socioeconomic levels and 
ethnic backgrounds. Five of the children in the program spoke Japanese as their first language. 

The results of the study showed that the second language program was a positive addition to 
a quality program. Administrators, teachers, and parents agreed that the quality of the program 
was maintained and enhanced. Children in all classrooms and at all age-levels gained a limited 
working receptive knowledge of Spanish, and a majority of the children answered questions in 
Spanish during "Spanish time" and expressed basic needs and wants during snack and other 
group times. Amongst themselves, children spoke English, but often incorporated Spanish 
words both indoors and out-of-doors at the center and also at home. 

The relationship between the Spanish-speaking and the English-speaking teachers was seen as 
the most important variable for program success. An unexpected outcome included English- 
speaking teachers learning Spanish along with the children and incorporating it into their daily 
routines with children. 

Difficulties in the implementation of Spanish included less time for developing emergent 
curriculum ideas, which resulted in less developed projects. There was also an increased need for 
time for Spanish and English teachers to plan together in both program models. 

References 

Curtain, H., & Pesola, C. A. (1994). Languages and children: Making the match. White Plains, NY: 
Longman. 

“ Rubio, C. A. (1998). A rationale for immersion in critical issues in early second language learning 
(pp. 15-22). Reading, MA: Scott Foresman-Addison-Wesley. 



er|c 



804 



809 



Family Functioning/Systems 



Predicting Marital Discord and Depression in Early Head Start 
Mothers: A Step Toward Marriage and Family Therapy Collaboration 

Wade Taylor, Lori A. Roggman, Daniel Woodbury 

PRESENTER: Lon A. Roggman 

Early Head Start (EHS) parents are at risk for marital discord because they are typically low in 
socioeconomic status, marry and have children young, and have large families. Many negative 
outcomes are associated with marital discord: divorce, depression, hostile and insensitive 
parenting, child adjustment problems, and insecure parent-infant attachment. The American 
Association of Marriage and Family Therapy (AAMFT) recently sponsored Head Start-Marriage 
and Family Therapy (MFT) program partnerships. The purpose of this study was to identify 
prediaors of marital discord and depression in a local (Utah/Idaho) sample of EHS couples. 

The identification of predictors will inform the theory-intervention link needed as a first step 
toward better EHS-MFT collaboration. 

Cross-sectional and longitudinal research methods were used to study 148 EHS married 
mothers and their spouses. As part of local and national Early Head Start research, both mothers 
and fathers of EHS children were interviewed at three different assessment points: preenrollment 
and child age 10 and 24 months. Married couples were contacted separately and interviewed 
separately, in person or by phone, by trained interviewers. Depression was measured at the 
10-month interviews with both parents by the Center for Epidemiological Studies-Depression 
scale (CES-D; Radloff, 1977). Depression was measured at the 24-month interviews with 
mothers using a measure used for the national EHS evaluation (CIDI-SF; Kessler, Andrews, 
Mroczek, Ustun, & Wittchen, 1998) with two major screening questions and additional ques- 
tions about duration and co-occurring depressive symptoms. Marital discord was measured at 
preenrollment and 10-month interviews by nine items from Dyadic Adjustment Scale (DAS; 
Spanier, 1976). 

Marital discord was measured at the 24-month mother interviews by five questions from the 
conflict subscale of the Family Environment Scale Real Form (FES; Moos & Moos, 1981). Adult 
Attadiment attitudes were assessed at the preenrollment interview for both parents using the 
Relationship Attitudes (RA) scale adapted from the Adult Attachment Scale (Simpson, Rholes, & 
Nelligan, 1992). Age, employment status, education level, religious activity and affiliation, and 
family size, as predictors of marital discord and depression, were derived from background 
information assessed during the preenrollment, 10-month, and 24-month interviews. 

In general, results revealed that EHS married mothers were less depressed and maritally 
discordant than what might be expected of low-income parents and more prone to experiencing 
problems the more children they had. Because up to 22% of the EHS mothers completing 
outcome measures reported marital discord or divorce, it seems that this represents a significant 
area for EHS-MFT collaboration and intervention. The results suggest potential markers predict- 
ing later marital discord and divorce and also suggest directions for developing marital interven- 





805 



POSTERS 



tion strategies with EHS programs. Hopefully, early childhood intervention programs will give 
greater attention to developing marital interventions as well as clarifying adaptive and protective 
marital processes in future research. 

RcJ^c rcTiccs 

Kessler, R. C., Andrews, G., Mroczek, D., Ustun, B., & Wittchen, H. U. (1998). The World Health 
Organization Composite Diagnostic Interview Short-Form (CIDI-SF). International Journal of 
Methods in Psychiatric Research, 7, 171-185. 

Moos, R., & Moos, B. (1981). Family Environment Scale: Manual. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press. 

Radloff, L. S. (1977). The CES-D Scale: A self-report depression scale for research in the general 

population. Applied Psychological Measurement, 1, 385-401. 

Simpson, J., Rholes, W., & Nelligan, J. (1992). Support seeking and support giving within 

couples in an anxiety-provoking situation: The role of attachment styles. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 62, 434-446. 

Spanier, G. B. (1976). Measuring dyadic adjustment: New scales for assessing the quality of 
marriage and similar dyads. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 38, 15-27. 



Low-Income Mothers' Support-Seeking Strategies: 

Stability and Change Over 3 Years 

Laurie A. Van Egeren, Lorraine M. McKelvey, Rachel F. Schiffman 

PRESENTERS: Laurie A. Van Egeren, Lorraine M. McKelvey, Rachel F. Schiffman 

Low-income families enrolled in Early Head Start (EHS) are generally considered at high risk for 
living in stressful environments and, in turn, for poorer parenting (Coyl, Roggman, & Newland, 
2002). Family coping strategies can strengthen or maintain family resources that serve as 
protection from stressful situations. In this study, baseline maternal reports of service use, 
economic need, and social resources were used to predict individual differences in later coping 
behaviors, with EHS program participation examined as a moderator. 

Participants were 152 mothers and their infants from a national randomized intervention 
study of children eligible for Early Head Start. Maternal reports of coping strategies were 
collected at the time of enrollment, and at 14, 24, and 36 months of age. The mean child age at 
enrollment was 4.8 months. Coping strategies, including cognitive reframing and three types of 
support seeking (from family and friends, neighbors, and service providers) were assessed using 
the Family Crisis Oriented Personal Scales (McCubbin, Olsen, & Larsen, 1987). At enrollment, 
perceptions of emotional support, degree of social conflict, use of public assistance, use of 
formal support services, and whether the family participated in EHS were measured (Schiffman 
etal., 2000). 

Growth curve analyses revealed that by the 36-month assessment, use of cognitive reframing 
increased regardless of EHS participation. However, mothers who reported having more con- 
flicted interactions reported less reframing, and mothers who participated in EHS used the 
reframing strategy more consistently than non-EHS mothers, regardless of their degree of social 
conflict or their use of public assistance. For all three support-seeking strategies, relations 
between the predictors at enrollment and later coping were moderated by EHS participation. 
Change in support-seeking from family and friends was relatively stable for mothers in the EHS 
program, but whereas non-EHS mothers who reported having greater levels of emotional 
support increased in support seeking from family and friends over time, non-EHS mothers who 




81 1 



806 



FAMILY FUNCTIONING/SYSTEMS 



reported having less emotional support at enrollment decreased in their use of support from 
friends and family over time, as did non-EHS mothers who reported higher levels of social 
conflict at enrollment. For support seeking from neighbors, mothers who participated in EHS 
demonstrated no change, whereas non-EHS mothers who reported more formal supports were 
more likely to increase in their use of the strategy. For support seeking from service providers, 
EHS mothers sought more support from service providers than non-EHS mothers. Although 
both EHS and non-EHS mothers who had a partner sought less support from service providers 
than those without a partner, non-EHS mothers who did not have a partner were especially 
unlikely to turn to service providers. 

The results indicate that even exceptionally high-risk mothers who participate in EHS are 
more consistent in their use of positive coping strategies compared to non-EHS mothers. Among 
non-EHS mothers, those who perceive their support networks more positively tend to cope in 
similar ways as EHS mothers and those experiencing the highest levels of risk tend to cope 
increasingly poorly over time. Future research should examine whether these effects on coping 
mediate relations between EHS program participation and parenting outcomes. 

References 

Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 

Coyl, D. D., Roggman, L. A., & Newland, L. A. (2002). Stress, maternal depression, and negative 
mother-infant interactions in relation to infant attachment. Infant Mental Health Journal, 23, 
145-163. 

McCubbin, H., Olson, D. H., & Larsen, A. (1987). F-COPES: Family Crisis Oriented Personal 
Evaluation Scales. In H. McCubbin & A. Thompson (Eds.), Family assessment inventories for 
research and practice (pp. 195-205). University of Wisconsin at Madison. 

Schiffman, R. F, Omar, M. A., Keefe, D., Reischl, T. M., Gibbons, C. L., Fitzgerald, H. E., et al. 
(2000, July). Family health model as a guide for evaluation of an Early Head Start program. Poster 
session presented at the Xllth Biennial International Conference on Infant Studies, Brighton, 
UK. 



Protective Factors for Children in African American Families 
With Low Incomes: A Closer Examination of Protective Factors 

Sheila Brookes, Elizabeth Sharp, Kathy Thornburg 

PRESENTERS: Sheila Brookes, Elizabeth Sharp, Kathy Thornburg 

For African American children living in poverty, the support of kin tends to be an especially 
important protective factor (Allen, 1993; Boyd-Franklin, 1989; McAdoo, 1993). In this study, we 
sought to fhrther explore supportive kin networks. Over the course of 5 years, we interviewed 9, 
single African American mothers living in an impoverished inner city neighborhood. We 
interviewed each mother 12 times, and also interviewed relatives, fictive kin, fathers, and father 
figures. Using constant comparative analysis (Glaser & Strauss, 1967), several themes emerged 
from the data. 

The support children and mothers received from their kin included social support such as 
parenting advice and respite child care, and financial support such as the basic necessities of 
housing and food. Four implicit guidelines tended to govern the flow of support in the families 
we studied. These included (a) kin comes first; (b) conflicts are resolved quickly or left unre- 
solved and, therefore, often do not interfere with the provision of support; (c) children's 




812 



807 



POSTERS 



extended family are an important source of support; and (d) fathers should be involved with 
and contribute financially to their children. 

The belief that individuals should lend support to family members first was demonstrated 
through sacrificial giving over and above individuals needs and desires. Despite living in 
poverty, family members provided for one another. For example, in a few cases, grandparents 
living on a fixed income readily "took in" their daughters and grandchildren. 

Support was often sought and provided even when family members were experiencing 
conflict. For example, in a few cases, despite ongoing conflicts between the children's mothers 
and grandmothers regarding mothers' boyfriends, grandmothers still provided support. Con- 
flicts within the support network may have been left unresolved because of high need. 

Children's extended family members offered considerable support over time. In general, 
more female kin provided support than did male kin. However, for most children, there was at 
least one male extended family member who provided support. 

All mothers believed that fathers should provide support to their children. In several cases, 
support offered by fathers was sporadic. Father involvement and financial contribution were 
often contingent on the existence of the romantic relationship between the mother and father, 
new romances of either the mother or father, and father unemployment. In a few cases, when 
biological fathers were uninvolved, social fathers assumed the role of biological fathers. Four 
fathers (two biological, two social) were consistently involved in their children's lives through- 
out the course of our study. 

Consistent with previous studies, our results suggest that for the children in this study, kin are 
an important source of social and financial support. Implicit mles governing exchange of 
support included putting family needs before individuals' needs and desires, providing support 
despite conflict, and the ability to count on extended kin when in need. Although more women 
kin tended to provide support, it is important to acknowledge the support offered by males, 
including grandfathers, fathers, and father figures over the course of this study. 

References 

Allen, W. (1993). Black families: Protectors of the realm. Morehouse Research Institute Bulletin, 93, 

1-3. V 

Boyd-Franklin, N. (1989). Black families in therapy. New York: Guilford Press. 

Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative 
research. Chicago: Aldine. 

McAdoo, H. (1993). Family equality and ethnic diversity. In K. Altergott (Ed.), One world, many 
families (pp. 52-55). Minneapolis, MN: National Council on Family Relations. 




808 



813 



FAMILY FUNCTIONING/SYSTEMS 



Grandparent-Headed Families and Head Start: 

Developing Effective Services 

Andrea B. Smith, Linda Dannison, Phillip Hamburg 

PRESENTERS: Andrea B. Smith, Linda L. Dannison 

Grandparents are being req^ded as parents in increasing numbers. Recent statistics indicate that 
over 3 million children currently live with their grandparents in a home where no biological 
parent is present (Children's Defense Fund, 1997), representing an increase of 53% since 1990 
(Casper & Bryson, 1998). High rates of teenage pregnancy, parental alcohol and other substance 
abuse, incarceration, the death of one or both parents, divorce, child abuse and neglect, HIV/ 
AIDS, unemployment, and other social conditions contribute to this escalating family typology 
(deToledo & Brown, 1995; Smith, Dannison, & Vacha-Haase, 1998). In 1996, over half the 
children living with grandparents were under 6 years of age (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1998). 
Grandchildren in the care of grandparents are often extremely needy. All have experienced 
inconsistencies and instabilities in their earliest environments. Emotional themes common in 
the lives of grandparented children include grief and loss, guilt, fear, embarrassment, and anger 
(Smith, Dannison, & Vacha-Haase, 1998). 

A pilot program partnering a university with a large, countywide Head Start program was 
initiated in 1999 and focused on serving custodial grandparents, their preschool-aged grandchil- 
dren, and Head Start personnel. All three populations participated in a series of pre and posttest 
assessments to determine the effectiveness of the services provided. Grandparents from both 
mral and urban sites were randomly placed in treatment and control groups and were invited to 
participate in an 8-week program focused on educational and support service provision. Topics 
covered included personal well-being, parenting skills, legal issues, financial concerns, and 
working with school and community. 

Simultaneous services were provided to grandchildren, who participated in a series of eight 
educational interactions. Session topics focused on enhancing self-esteem, appreciating diverse 
family types, and on the five emotional themes common in grandparented children's lives. 
Grandparents were informed on weekly topics and were provided with follow-up literature and 
activities to use at home. 

A third programmatic component focused on educating Head Start personnel about the 
unique strengths and challenges associated with grandparent-headed families. Sessions pre- 
sented included strategies for enhancing communication, educating grandparents about child 
development, locating resources and assistance, and adapting curriculum to more effectively 
meet the needs of grandparented children. 

Preliminary pilot data analysis showed positive changes for all three populations. Grandpar- 
ents increased in child development and parenting skills knowledge, self-esteem, and awareness 
of available resources. Decreases were seen in isolation and depression. Grandchildren's use of 
appropriate social skills increased as did self-concept. Most striking was the finding that both 
graridparents and grandchildren perceived their interactions with each other much more 
positively at the conclusion of these sessions. Head Start personnel also demonstrated positive 
gains. Over 90% of Head Start teachers surveyed had grandparented children in their class- 
rooms, but less than 20% had ever received any information targeted at specifically meeting 
their needs. Posttest analysis showed increases in knowledge of phenomenon associated with 
grandparent-headed families, available resources, and strategies for adapting curriculum within 
the classroom environment. 

R^erences 

Casper, L. M., & Bryson, K. (1998). Co-resident grandparents and their grandchildren: Grandparent 

maintained families (Population Division technical working paper, 26). Washington DC; U.S. 

Bureau of the Census. 





809 



POSTERS 



Children's Defense Fund (1997). State of America's children yearbook. Washington DC: Author. 

deToledo, S., & Brown, D. (1995). Grandparents as parents: A survival guide for raising a second 
family. New York: The Guilford Press. 

Smith, A., Dannison, L., & Vacha-Haase, T. (1998). When grandma is mom: What today's 
teachers need to know. Childhood Education, 75(1), 12-16. 

U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1998). Marital status and living arrangements: March 1996 (Current 
Population Reports Series P-20, No. 496). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing 
Office. 



Risk, Progress, and Engagement in Early Head Start 

Lisa L. Knoche, Hilary Abigail Raikes, Lenna L. Ontai 

PRESENTERS: Lisa L. Knoche, Hilary Abigail Raikes 

Family and child risk is one area identified in the literature that has been found to have an 
impact on child and family progress, family engagement in program activities, and rates of 
home visit completion. Understanding high-risk families is important for Early Head Start 
(EHS) programs. In this study, which is part of a program evaluation of a local Early Head Start, 
we attempted to understand the relationship between level of risk at time of enrollment and 
engagement in EHS program activities, and how risk and engagement, including rate of home 
visit completion, are related to the progress made by children and families in EHS. 

The risk information obtained at time of entry was categorized into two indices believed to 
impact child and family progress: (a) maternal risk (mother less than age 17 years at time of 
birth, parental developmental delay, mother with less than an eighth grade education, and 
maternal depression); and (b) emotional risk (documented or suspected child abuse and 
neglect, violence in the home, parental substance abuse, incarceration of family member, 
divorce, and child living outside the home). We also considered the role maternal depression, as 
measured by the CES-D Scale (Radloff, 1977), might play in engagement, progress, and home 
visit completion. 

We found risk, depending on type, to have a differential effect on family and child progress, 
program engagement, and rates of home visit completion. For those families viewed by their 
family advocate to be highly involved, more progress is perceived to occur. Families and children 
are reaping more benefits from the program if they are engaged and involved in EHS program 
activities. Some risks appear to relate more than others to child and family progress. Finally, we 
found that home visit completion and program engagement are unique constructs, each 
measuring a different aspect of program involvement. By understanding the factors related to 
perceived child and family progress, EHS programs can better suit activities and opportunities to 
meet their families' needs. 

Reference 

Radloff, L. S. (1977). The CES-D Scale: A self-report depression scale for research in the general 
population. Applied Psychological Measurement, 1, 385-401. 




815 



810 



FAMILY FUNCTIONING/SYSTEMS 



Relation of Daily Head Start Attendance to 
Children's Outcomes: Moderation by Family Risk 

Laura E. Hubbs-Tait, Anne McDonald Culp, Erron Huey, Rex E. Culp, Huei-Juang Starost, 
Charles Hare 

PRESENTER: Laura E. Hubbs-Tait 
(Summary not available) 



A Year in the Lives of Three Head Start Families: 

Findings From the FACES Case Study 

Michael Vaden-Kiernan, Mary Ann K. D'Elio, Alyssa K. Rothenberg, Robert W. O'Brien 
PRESENTERS: Michael Vaden-Kiernan, Mary Ann K. D'Elio 

(Summary not available) 



Parenting, Family Routines, Family Conflict, and 
Maternal Depression as Predictors of the Behavior of 
African American Preschoolers in Violent Neighborhoods 

Sally A. Koblinsky, Suzanne M. Randolph, Katherine Kuvalanka 

PRESENTERS: Sally A. Koblinsky, Suzanne M. Randolph, Katherine Kuvalanka 
(Summary not available) 





811 



Fatherhood 



A Qualitative Study of Childhood Experiences 
Among Early Head Start Fathers 

Richard Lower, Vanessa Rodriguez, Hiram E. Fitzgerald, Rachel Schiffman 
PRESENTERS: Richard Lower, Hiram E. Fitzgerald, Rachel Schiffman 

Recently, Shears, Robinson, and Emde (2002) reported that fathers' descriptions of their rela- 
tionships with their own fathers were significantly correlated with their self-ratings of father- 
hood and attachment to their toddlers, but were not correlated with their behavioral interac- 
tions with their older children. However, fathers who reported high levels of antisocial behavior 
when they were children rated themselves low on fathering and had low levels of involvement 
with their children. In this study, we focus on the father-son relationship in a nonclinical 
sample using a detailed qualitative interview to ascertain the nature of the father's relationship 
with his father, and then assess whether there is any evidence to support the intergenerational 
transmission of parenting behaviors on father-son interactions. 

The data reported here are part of an ongoing longitudinal evaluation to explore issues 
related to low-income fathers of children eligible for enrollment in Early Head Start. Data were 
gathered from a total of 49 fathers. Fathers had children who had been randomly assigned to an 
Early Head Start program (n = 25) or to a community child care alternative (n = 24). Father age 
ranged fforti 18 to 57 years old (Median = 26). The purpose of the present study was to develop 
an understanding of intergenerational influences on fathers. For this study, the primary data 
collection method was a semistructured open-ended interview conducted in the father's home. 

The researchers analyzed the transcripts to develop a set of emergent themes, using coding 
schemes developed for the larger national data set (Summers et al., 1999). Fathers were divided 
into two groups (fathers who had "good" and "bad" father-son experiences) based on those 
themes. The two groups were then quantitatively compared on fathers' reports of their invest- 
ment with their own Aildren, their disciplinary styles, and depression to further explore the 
emergent themes from the qualitative interviews. 

Although 81% rated the general overall quality of their relationship with their father/father- 
figure while growing up as "excellent" or "very good" or "good," when respondents discussed 
their experiences with their father, their responses were not so clear-cut. Analysis of the coded 
transcripts produced evidence for six major themes descriptive of their relationships with their 
fathers: (a) special outings; (b) limited experiences; (c) sports, play, and recreation; (c) teaching 
values; (e) spending time in general, and (f) alcoholic/violent experiences. Themes classified as 
"major" if the item occurred in the transcribed texts of at least 10 (20%) or more participants. 
The largest number of fathers (n = 22) recalled their father taking them on special trips or 
outings such as vacations, hunting, and fishing. For example, when asked to describe a good or 
fun thing that he did with his father, one respondent replied, "Going to the lake, having cook- 
outs at the park, having just a ball. The most warm and heartfelt experience I had— being with 
my stepfather and my mom, and my brother." Many fathers (n = 15) mentioned having limited 




ERIC 



812 



FATHERHOOD 



experiences with their father. One participant described this as, "Experience with him was hardly 
ever seeing him, like once on a weekend, and then Td get dumped off at my grandparents 
house; he'd go to the bar." Along with special outings, many participants (n = 15) played sports 
and did other types of recreation with their father. For example, a participant enthusiastically 
replied, "One of the things he did that was good for us, me and all the kids, was water sports. 

We had a good ole time; we had one of the best times in my life." When fathers were asked 
about important things their own father taught them, many fathers described the values they 
were taught. This was exemplified by one father who said, "One of the most important things is 
if you're gonna get anywhere in life you gotta go out and work for it. Nobody's gonna hand you 
a new car or house or whatever." Besides being active with their father, some respondents 
(n = 13) talked about just spending general time with their fathers. One respondent mentioned 
that his father "... would give up a lot of things he would like to do to spend time with us." 

The most disheartening major finding was that some participants [n = 10) told stories of having 
alcoholic and/or violent fathers. One father described violent experiences by saying, "Yes, yes he 
hit me, basically just hitting me with an open hand about the head area. There were times when 
I felt he actually hated me and that's why he was doing it to me." Correlation analyses of the 
emergent themes and fathers' reports of their investment with their own children, their disci- 
plinary styles, and depression were not significant. 

References 

Shears, J., Robinson, J., & Emde, R. N. (2002). Fathering relationships and their associations 
with juvenile delinquency. Infant Mental Health Journal 23(1-2), 79-87. 

Summers, J. A., Raikes, H., Buder, J., Spicer, P., Pan, B., Shaw, S., et al. (1999). Low-income 
fathers' and mothers' perceptions of the father role: A qualitative study in four Early Head 
Start communities. Infant Mental Health Journal 20, 291-304. 



Head Start Fathers: Strengths and Challenges in Their Own Words 

Benjamin J. Gorvine, Sandra A. Graham-Bermann 

PRESENTER: Benjamin J. Gorvine 

While research on fathers has been a hot topic in recent years in the social sciences, Head Start 
fathers remain a relatively understudied group of men. In particular, there has been very litde 
research that has taken a qualitative approach in working with this diverse group. This study 
seeks to expand our knowledge base about what Head Start fathers have to say about the 
rewards and challenges of their fathering role, as well as their views on how to foster greater 
involvement with the Head Start program. The study consisted of interviews with 31 Head Start 
fathers and father figures from Jackson and Hillsdale counties in Michigan. Fathers were asked 
three open-ended questions to assess their views on the rewards, challenges, and lessons of 
fatherhood: (a) What are some of the challenges you've faced as a father and/or in your father- 
ing role? (b) What has been the most rewarding thing? and (c) If you had to give advice to 
someone who's just starting out as a father, what would it be? Fathers were also asked two ques- 
tions regarding ways to facilitate greater participation in Head Start activities: (a) What sorts of 
programs would you have liked to see the Head Start offer that they did not offer? and (b) What 
sorts of programs offered by Head Start or other agencies would you be most likely to attend? 

Some of the most common themes to emerge included (a) learning from mistakes, setting 
limits, and making enough time to spend with children (challenges); (b) seeing children grow, 
playing with children, and providing for children (rewards); (c) communication with one's 



818 



813 



POSTERS 



partner, open-mindedness, and patience (advice to new fathers); and (d) outdoor activities, 
parent education programs, and programs at times when fathers are available (suggestions for 
fostering greater involvement). 

In addition to the thematic coding, the content of three questions regarding the rewards, 
challenges, and lessons of fatherhood were analyzed using the Linguistic Inquiry and Word 
Count (LIWC) computer software (Pennebaker & Francis, 1996), which has an exhaustive 
dictionary of positive and negative emotion words. Each father received two scores based on the 
percentage of positive and negative emotion words used across the three responses: (a) a 
positive emotion words score (M = 3.01, SD = 2.11) and (b) a negative emotion words score 
(M = 1.09, SD = 1.15). Intercorrelations were computed to see if these scores were associated 
with quantitative levels of father involvement, as measured via mother and father report based 
on eight items from the "My Family and Friends" measure (Reid, Landesman, Treder, & Jaccard, 
1989). Two interesting findings emerged, with a higher percentage of positive emotion words in 
qualitative responses associated both with higher levels of father companionship and affiliative 
support of children (r = .31, p < .10), and with lower levels of conflict (r = -.32, p < .10) per 
fathers' reports. Additionally, a higher percentage of fathers' negative emotion words was 
associated with higher levels of child internalizing problems on the Child Behavior Check List 
(CBCL; Achenbach, 1991; r = .54, p < .01), as reported by teachers. 

These findings are suggestive of the possibilities for linking quantitative measures of involve- 
ment with qualitative data. 

References 

Achenbach, T. M. (1991). Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist and 1991 Profile. Burlington: 
University of Vermont, Department of Psychiatry. 

Pennebaker, }. W., & Francis, M. E. (1996). Cognitive, emotional, and language processes in 
disclosure: Adjustment to college. Cognition and Emotion, 10, 601-626. 

Reid, M., Landesman, S., Treder, R., & Jaccard, }. (1989). "My family and friends": Six- to twelve- 
year-old children's perceptions of social support. Child Development, 60, 896-910. 



Occupational Patterns and Psychological Health of 
Low-Income Urban Fathers: Implications for Research and Practice. 

Kevin London, Vanessa Rodriguez, Michelle Pelnar, Anna Maria Pinter 

PRESENTERS: Kevin London, Vanessa Rodriguez 

A significant aspect of many fathers' experiences that is often overlooked is the impact of their 
employment status and occupation. In fact, African American and Latino fathers experience an 
unequal burden of job and income loss (Bowman, 1987). With this said, it is imperative to 
investigate the psychosocial impact of joblessness and unstable occupational patterns often 
found in this population of low-income urban fathers. Bowman found that decreased psychoso- 
cial adjustment is evident among African American men who expect to fail in the role of 
primary breadwinner, father, and husband. 

The goals of this investigation are to: 

1. Describe fathers' occupations, occupational status, income level, job satisfaction, level of 
depression, and recent experience of stressful events. 

2. Examine the relationships among fathers' occupational status, income level, job satisfac- 
tion, and experience(s) of stressful events with levels of depression, and test to what extent 



O 

ERIC 



814 



819 



FATHERHOOD 



father's experience(s) of recent stressful events are an added contributor to higher levels of 
father's depressive symptoms. 

3. Explore, through qualitative interviews, the contextual variations of these men's experi- 
ences as fathers. 

This analysis focuses on the impact that becoming a father has had on these men's lives, the 
obstacle(s) that stand in the way of these men being the type of father they would like to be, and 
the various types of help and support they receive. 

Participants were recruited predominantly from Head Start agencies in a large urban city. 
Fathers' mean age was 26 (SD = 10.35). Data collection consisted of qualitative and quantitative 
interviews of 75 ethnically diverse, low-income fathers. Quantitative data included items from 
the Quality of Life Questionnaire (Olson & Barnes, 1982) that asks about var 5 dng aspects of 
parents' financial circumstances. To measure major life events we used selected items from a 
scale of stressful life events that ask whether each of a series of major life events happened in the 
past year (Belsky & Cmic, 1990). This scale is augmented with items from the Difficult Life 
Circumstances Scale (Barnard, 1989). To measure father's level of depression, we used the 
Center for Epidemiological Studies of Depression (CES-D; Radloff, 1977). 

Preliminary analyses were completed to examine the relationship between fathers' job 
satisfaction and level of depression. Results indicated that fathers who reported lower levels of 
job satisfaction also reported higher levels of depression (R = .31, p < .05). Further analyses will 
be completed to examine the relationships among fathers' occupational status, income level, 
and experience(s) of stressful events with their levels of depressive symptoms. 

Based on our analysis of qualitative interviews on a subsample of 20 participants, fathers 
described five paternal role ideologies: (a) the importance of being physically present for 
children, (b) providing for children financially and emotionally, (c) being actively involved in 
children's daily caregiving, (d) spending time playing with and teaching children, and (e) self- 
improvement through education or better jobs. 

References 

Barnard, K. (1989). Difficult Life Circumstances Scale. Seattle, WA: NCAST. 

Belsky, J., & Cmic, K. (1990). Stressful Life Events Parent Interview Important Mediators Scale. 
Bowman, P (1987). Post industrial displacement and family role strains: Challenges to the 
black family. In P. Voydanoff & L. C. Majka (Eds.), Families and economic distress (pp. 75-96). 
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 

Olson, D. H., & Barnes H. L. (1982). Quality of Life Parent Form. University of Minnesota. 

Radloff, J. (1977). Center for Epidemiological Studies of Depression scale (CES-D). Applied 
Psychological Measurements, 1, 385-401. 



External Relationships as Moderators of Father-Child Outcomes 
in Biological-Residential and Biological-Nonresidential Fathers 

Marcel Montanez, Hiram E. Fitzgerald, Rachael Schiffman 

PRESENTER: Marcel Montanez 

Paternal residency status was examined in respect to the father investment in child scores, 
Moderators of this relationship such as father's relationship with his own father, and his 
relationship with the mother of the child were found to be significant moderators of the 
relationship between residency and paternal investment. 





815 



POSTERS 



The categorical analysis of frequency data yielded the following interesting results. 

1 . The odds of having a high child investment score are nearly identical for resident and 
nonresident (1:1); however, this statistic may be misleading when we consider the other 
important variables. 

2. For fathers who reported having a positive relationship with their own fathers, the odds of 
reporting a high child investment score are 6 times greater for biological-nonresidential 
(BNR) fathers when very low levels of arguments with mother are reported than when 
high levels of arguments are reported. 

3. For fathers who reported having a positive relationship with their own fathers, the odds of 
reporting a high child investment score are 1.43 times greater for biological-residential 
(BR) fathers when very low levels of arguments with mother are reported than when high 
levels of arguments are reported. 

4. For fathers who reported a negative relationship with their own fathers and high levels of 
arguments with the mother of the child, the odds of having a high investment in child are 
3 times greater if the father is a resident (BR) than when he is not (BNR). 

The relevance of this work is that it provides information about the complex system of 
relationships within family networks that serve as contributors to the development of current 
and future relationships between fathers and their children. The information generated in the 
current study contributes to the growing knowledge of how fathers contribute to the lives of 
their children. Specifically, this research provides information as to the importance of mother- 
father child relationships in respect to resident and nonresident fathers. The results demonstrate 
that the mother-father relationship is extremely important, especially with rionresidential fathers. 

The relevance to EHS policy and practice is that this information offers insight as to the 
variation between fathering types BR and BNR. That is, the families where the father lives in the 
home may be different in terms of father-child relationships. Secondly the father-child dyad 
between two groups of fathers is moderated by outside relationships. This work provides insight 
to the diversity within EHS families, which are embedded in qualitatively different cultural and 
contextual households. This information should be considered a starting point for discussion as to 
whether differential intervention strategies would be beneficial to diverse EHS fathers and families. 



Are Actions Really More Important Than Words? Fathers' Influences 
on Maternal Psychosocial Health and Infants' Home Environments 

Lauren R. Barton, Leanne M. Kallemeyn, Lee Anne Roman, Joseph S. Moore, 

Judith K. Lindsay, Hiram E. Fitzgerald 

PRESENTERS: Lauren R. Barton, Leanne M. Kallemeyn, Lee Anne Roman, Joseph S. Moore, 
Judith K. Lindsay, Hiram E. Fitzgerald 

Recent research has begun to investigate how father involvement influences child development, 
coparenting relationships, and the family system. This longitudinal study investigated the 
differential impact of two types of biological father involvement: (a) conversational and (b) 
direct child-related activities. Secondary analyses of data from a subset of low-income partici- 
pants in the Michigan Maternal Health Services Study were conducted to explore information 
on mothers' perceptions about the frequency of discussions with the father about child-related 
issues as well as her report about his direct involvement in child-related activities (e.g., direct 
caregiving, supervision and play, or providing resources for the infant). The study investigated 
how father involvement in the 6 months after delivery of a child influenced maternal psychoso- 




816 



821 



FATHERHOOD 



dal health and the infant's home environment. Analyses suggest that low-income mothers who 
reported more frequent conversations with the father of the baby (FOB) in the 6 months after 
delivery had higher levels of self-esteem, maternal self-efficacy, and promoted more positive 
home environments and greater responsivity toward the child at 6 months than moffiers 
reporting less frequent FOB conversational involvement. No significant differences in these areas 
were found between mothers who reported more frequent direct child-related activities by the 
FOB as compared to those with less frequent direct child involvement. Similar patterns of 
outcomes were found when 12-month maternal outcomes were examined. 

The findings suggest that presence of conversational availability is more strongly related to 
maternal psychosodal outcomes and characteristics of the home environment than measures of 
either the father's direct involvement in child-related activities or overall measures of father 
involvement that incorporate both direct and conversational involvement. These findings affirm 
that effective coparenting through open conversation about the child may have beneficial 
outcomes for maternal psychosocial health and responsive maternal-infant interactions. 

This study underscores the need for intervention programs that tend to focus on mothers and 
infants to attend to the broader family ecology and coparenting relationship. Emphasizing the 
important role fathers play in listening and talking to mothers about the child may be an 
intervention strategy that promotes positive maternal and maternal-infant outcomes. Implica- 
tions are discussed for coparenting models and maternal-infant intervention strategies. 



An Experimental Study of an Empowerment-Based 
Intervention for African American Head Start Fathers 

Jay Fagan, Howard C. Stevenson 

PRESENTER: Jay Fagan 

This study examined the effects of an empowerment intervention. Men as Teachers, on African 
American Head Start fathers. Fathers were randomly assigned to the empowerment program or 
to a control group in which participants viewed a five-part videotape series on parenting. This 
study specifically tested the following hypotheses: 

1 . First, there will be a significant and positive association between participation in the 
empowerment-based program and fathers' understanding and beliefs about their ability to 
teach young children and foster children's racial socialization. 

2. Fathers in the empowerment-based program also will demonstrate increased self-esteem 
and satisfaction with the parental role. 

3. However, it is also expected that residential fathers will show greater gains than nonresi- 
dential fathers in self-esteem and parenting satisfaction as a result of their participation in 
the program. 

The curriculum of Men as Teachers consisted of six major areas. The first topic, the meaning 
and value of being a father, focused on the role of fathers, the difference between caregiving and 
providing, being a good role model to children, and relationships with one's own father. The 
second topic, the need to challenge racism in society, covered society's negative images of 
African American men and fathers, the effect of racism on men's health and well-being, the 
influence of racism on fathering, and challenging racism in society. The third topic, obtaining 
control over one's own destiny, focused on why men abuse their children, the affect of drugs and 
alcohol on parenting, finding a way around violence and drugs, and helping children to have 
healthy values. The final three sessions pertained to child rearing. The first of these sessions 



POSTERS 



focused on racial socialization of children. The second child-related session addressed the role 
of parents as teachers. The final child-related session focused on positive discipline strategies. 

The Jackson Personality Inventory (Jackson, 1976) was used to measure self-esteem. Self- 
Perceptions of the Parental Role (MacPhee, Benson, & Bullock, 1986) was used to measure 
fathers' satisfaction with the parental role. The Parent As a Teacher Inventory (Strom, 1984) was 
used to measure fathers' attitudes about the parent-child interactive system, their standards for 
assessing the importance of various child behaviors, and their value preferences concerning 
child behaviors. The Scale of Racial Socialization-Parent Version (Stevenson, 1997) was used to 
measure fathers' attitudes and values regarding the importance of socializing children about 
African American heritage and about the realities of racism. 

Our results revealed a significant improvement in experimental, but not in control, fathers 
attitudes about their ability to teach children. Contrary to expectation, there was no significant 
change in experimental fathers' racial oppression socialization practices. We anticipated that 
improvements in fathers' sense of self-esteem and parenting satisfaction would be greater for the 
experimental group but also would be influenced by the man's residential status. The results 
confirmed the hypothesis. Residential fathers in the experimental group showed significant 
gains in self-esteem and parenting satisfaction. Nonresidential fathers in the experimental group 
did not show improved self-esteem or parenting satisfaction. 

References 

Jackson, D. (1976). Jackson Personality Inventory. Goshen, NY: Research Psychologists Press. 
MacPhee, D., Benson, J. B., & Bullock, D. (1986, June). Influences on maternal self-perceptions. 

Paper presented at the fifth biennial International Conference of Infant Studies, Los Angeles. 
Stevenson, H. C. (1997). Rationale for the measurement of racial socialization beliefs and experiences. 

Unpublished manuscript. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. 

Strom, R. D. (1984). Parent As a Teacher Inventory manual. Bensenville, IL: Scholastic Testing Service. 



African American i-athers' Strategies for Protecting 
Young Children in Violent Neighborhoods 

Bethany L. Letiecq, Sally A. Koblinsky 

PRESENTERS: Bethany L. Letiecq, Sally A. Koblinsky 

In growing numbers of U.S. communities, families are living in neighborhoods plagued by 
violence, crime, and drug activity. African American families are disproportionately represented 
in these violent neighborhoods, where both parents and children may be exposed to robberies, 
physical assaults, and drive-by shootings. Although researchers have begun to identify the 
strategies parents use to protect children from violence exposure, the vast majority of research 
involves mothers and female caregivers. Little is known about the strategies African American 
fathers employ to help their children cope with community violence. 

Given the dearth of research in this area, this qualitative study explored Aincan American 
fathers' strategies to protect children from violence. We conducted three focus groups with a 
total of 18 Head Start fathers who lived in high violence neighborhoods. An African American 
male facilitator led these groups, which were held in Head Start centers in the Washington, DC 
metropolitan area. 

Content analysis of focus group transcripts revealed fathers' use of seven protective strategies, 
organized under three major themes: (a) monitoring children, (b) educating children about 



FATHERHOOD 



safety, and (c) improving community life. Under the monitoring children theme, fathers 
emphasized the need to constantly supervise their children in the home, on the front steps, and 
on the playground. Fathers also restricted neighborhood contact by avoiding interacting with 
neighbors and keeping their mouths shut about crime and other problems. Fathers felt that 
getting involved in the goings-on of their neighborhood would bring danger to adult and child 
family members. 

Under the theme, educating children about safety, fathers taught their children about home 
safety, including how to avoid opening the door for anyone, how to lay on the floor if they 
heard gunfire, and how to dial 911. Second, fathers taught their children about neighborhood 
survival tactics, such as how to avoid drug dealers, which streets were dangerous, and which 
houses/shops children should go to if trouble occurred. Thirdly, fathers taught their 
preschoolers how to handle peer conflict through peaceful, nonviolent behavior, such as 
walking away from fights, or seeking out parents and teachers for help with problems. Some 
fathers also discussed the need to teach sons and daughters how to defend themselves when 
provoked by others so they would not be bullied. 

Under the third theme, improving community life, fathers discussed directly confronting 
neighborhood troublemakers (drug dealers, thugs) to combat community violence and engag- 
ing in community activism (joining Neighborhood Watch groups. Head Start parent councils, 
voter registration drives, and community clean-up campaigns) to increase neighborhood order 
and enhance children's safety in their communities. 

Our study suggests that many fathers would benefit from joining supportive groups that 
address the challenges of living in violent neighborhoods. Reaching out to fathers to join 
neighborhood improvement activities, together with children's recreational and educational 
activities, may enhance fathers' male support networks and thwart the growing isolationism in 
these communities. Programs designed to support parents in their efforts to rear children in safe 
neighborhoods would be strengthened by antiviolence policies that attempt to improve the 
economic infrastructure of low-income communities. 



Father-Toddler Interactions: Measuring Paternal Psychological Factors 

Joanne Joseph, Kevin London, Jacqueline D. Shannon, Vanessa Rodriguez, Ana-Maria Pinter, 
Michele Pelnar 

PRESENTERS: Joanne Joseph, Vanessa Rodriguez, Ana-Maria Pinter 



Men's job satisfaction and depressive symptomology were examined in relation to their interac- 
tions with their toddlers. Specifically, our goals were to (a) characterize the nature of fathers' and 
children's play interactions, (b) assess the associations between the quality of fathers' interac- 
tions with their toddlers, and (c) assess relations between fathers' job satisfaction and depres- 
sion symptomology with father-child interactions. 

Participants were 50 ethnically diverse, inner-city fathers and their toddlers (23 boys). Data 
collection consisted of (a) videotaped father-child interactions; (b) eight items from the Quality 
of Life Questionnaire (QOL; Olsen & Barnes, 1982), which measures aspects of fathers' financial 
circumstances; and (c) the Center for Epidemiological Studies of Depression (CES-D; Radloff, 
1977), which measures fathers' current level of depressive symptomatology. Dyads were video- 
taped for 10 minutes at home during semistructured free play. 

The quality of father-child interactions were coded from videotapes using the Child- 
Caregiver Affect, Responsiveness, Engagement Scale (C-CARES; Tamis-LeMonda, Ahuja, 

Hannibal, Shannon, & Spellman, 2001), a 5-point likert scale. Twenty-one father items 





819 



POSTERS 



(e.g., affect, responsiveness, intrusiveness, language quality) and 16 child items (e.g., affect, 
responsiveness, involvement with toys, and communication) were assessed. 

First, two sets of factor analyses were conducted. Factor analyses on father items indicated a 
three-factor solution (66% of the variance). The first factor, Responsive-Didactic, reflects 
paternal behaviors that were positive, responsive, and didactic. The second factor, Negative- 
Unresponsive-Intrusive, reflects paternal behaviors that were parent driven and achievement- 
oriented, through using highly structured, negative verbal statements, unresponsive, and 
intmsive behaviors. The third factor, Inflexible-Teasing, reflects paternal behaviors that were 
inflexible with high levels of teasing. 

The factor analysis on child items revealed a three-factor solution (72% of the variance). The 
first factor, Cognitive-Playful, reflects child behaviors that were (a) positive in affect, (b) sophis- 
ticated in language and play skills, and (c) highly involved with toys. The second factor. Social, 
reflects child behaviors that were positive, participatory, and responsive toward their father. T^e 
third factor, Regulated-Persistent, reflects child behaviors that were highly regulated and persistent. 

Next, correlations among father and child factors were performed. Responsive-Didactic father 
factors related to all three child factors (ts range = .33 to .73, ps < .05 to .001). Negative-Unre- 
sponsive-Intmsive father factors were negatively associated with child Cognitive-Playful factors 



(t = -.31,p<.05). 

Finally, correlations between father factors, QOL, and CES-D were performed. Findings 
indicate that fathers' job satisfaction negatively related with their depression level (r = .31, 
p < .05). Also, fathers with greater satisfaction with their financial circumstances positively 
related to their Responsive-Didactic factors (r = .34, p < .05). Surprisingly, fathers' depression 
level was unrelated to their behaviors or their children's behaviors. 

Findings from this study may be used to inform intervention services available to fathers 
from impoverished communities, as well as policy-decisions for social and educational services. 
Specifically, this study builds on our current understanding about the different interaction styles 
that ethnically diverse inner-city fathers may exhibit toward their toddlers. These findings also 
contribute to our understanding of how fathers' job satisfaction and current depressive 
symptomology relate to father-child interactions within the plight of poverty. The extent to 
which paternal psychological factors and quality father-child interactions exert meaningful, 
long-term, influence on the father-child relationship remains to be examined. 



References 

Olson, D., & Barnes, H. L. (1982). Quality of Life Scale. Unpublished manuscript. 

Radloff, J. (1977). CES-D; A self-report symptom scale to detect depression from the general 
population. Applied psychological measurements, 3, 385-401. 

Tamis LeMonda, C. S., Ahuja, P, Hannibal, B., Shannon, J. D., & Spellmann, M. (2001). Child- 
Caregiver Affect, Responsiveness, Engagement Scale (C-CARES). Unpublished manuscript. 



Father Presence, Exposure to Violence, and the 
Social Functioning of Head Start Children 

Richard G. Lambert, Irene Kalabaca, Martha S. Abbott-Shim, Jo Ann Springs 

PRESENTER: Richard G. Lambert 
(Summary not available) 



O 

ERIC 



820 



825 



Home Visiting 



A Meta-Ana lysis of Home Visitor Programs: 

Moderators of Improvements in Maternal Behavior 

M. Angela Casady, Laurie A. Van Egeren 

PRESENTERS: M. Angela Casady, Laurie A. Van Egeren 

Early intervention programs for at-risk families were established in the 1960s following the 
Supreme Court desegregation case affirming all children's right to an adequate education 
(Ramey & Ramey, 1998). Evaluations of center-based programs and home visiting family 
support programs followed their development. This paper presents a meta-analysis of the home 
visiting evaluation literature and correlates of program effectiveness, based on the difference in 
maternal behavior between experimental and control groups. 

A search of ERIC, Social Work Abstracts, and PsychLit yielded 93 articles. Criteria for exclu- 
sion from the study were (a) no quantitative data on maternal behavior, (b) a pretest/posttest 
study design, (c) a center-based approach in addition to or instead of a home visitor model, 

(d) program location outside of the United States, and (e) programs for handicapped children. 
Seven studies, including 9 different groups of participants (N = 1,600), met inclusion criteria. 

The mean of the effect size, weighted by sample size, was 0.12, with a 95% confidence 
interval ranging from -.1 to .3. This confidence interval includes an effect size of zero. However, 
a test of heterogeneity of the effect sizes indicated that the studies are heterogeneous and should 
not be combined, Q = 29.58, df= 8,p< .005. In such cases, Hedges (1994) suggests looking for 
a moderating variable. A regression of effect size on home visitation frequency yielded the chi- 
square value of 19.02 (d/= 1, p < .005). Q Residual (10.54, df = 7, p < .025) was not significant. 
Thus, one variable, home visitation frequency, explains all of the variance in effect size. 

Another test for significance of home visitation frequency uses the standard error of the beta 
(.002); the 95% confidence interval (.005 to .013) does not include zero. The resulting equa- 
tion, T = -. 114 + .0093 (number of visits per year), indicates that it is necessary to have more 
than 12 visits per year to achieve an effect size greater than zero. We concluded that home 
visitation does produce a positive effect, dependent on the level of home visitation frequency. 

Other significant variables included (a) date of study publication (Q = 7.96, df= l,p< .005), 
(b) status of administrative organization (Q = 8.25, df= l,p< .005), and (c) size of sample 
(Q = 4.61, df= 1, p< .05). These regressions show that earlier publications tended to have larger 
effect sizes. Government-based programs tended to have smaller effect sizes when compared 
with university or private programs. Larger programs tended to have smaller effect sizes. 

Intercorrelations among the moderator variables indicated that study characteristics might be 
confounded with frequency of visitation. Later studies tended to be larger than earlier studies 
(r = .42). Government funding may have increased the number of participants (r = .66), but the 
frequency of visitation also tended to diminish (r = -.74). A qualitative analysis of early child- 
hood interventions confirmed our findings, suggesting that the intensity of early model 




826 



821 



POSTERS 



programs was diluted during government implementation (Gomby, Lamer, Stevenson, Lewit, 

& Behrman, 1995). 

Rcfcvcttccs 

Gomby, D. S„ Lamer, M. B„ Stevenson, C. S„ Lewit, E. M„ & Behrman, R. E. (1995). Long-term 
outcomes of early childhood programs: Analysis and recommendations. Future of Children, 

Hedges, L. (1994). Fixed effect models. In H. Cooper & L. V. Hedges (Eds.), The handbook of 
research synthesis. New York; Russell Sage Foundation. 

Ramey, C. T., & Ramey, S. L. (1998). Early intervention and early experience. American Psycholo- 
gist, 53, 109-120. 



Factors Contributing to Engagement and Retention 
in Early Home Visiting Family Support Services 

William McGuigan 

PRESENTERS; William McGuigan, Aphra Katzev 



Why do some eligible parents who enroll in home visitation programs never fully engage in 
services? Why do some parents who engage depart before program completion? Two studies 
were conducted to answer these questions. Data came from Oregon Healthy Start (OHS), a 
voluntary home visiting program designed to prevent poor child and family outcomes in 15 
Oregon counties. Engagement was defined as participation in home visiting services for 90 days 
or more. 

Data from 4,057 enrolled families showed that 745 (18%) never actively engaged m services, 
remaining enrolled for an average of 34 days. Multilevel analysis revealed that mothers were 
36% less likely to engage in home wisiting services if They were raising their infant in a county 
that had poor community health. Community health was measured by sue indices from county 
vital statistics including infant death rate and rate of low birth weight infants. Mothers raising 
their infant in isolation, or with a limited support network, were 39% less likely to engage m 
home visiting services. Latino mothers were nearly twice (82%) as likely to engage in home 
visiting services than were White, non-Latino mothers. 

The second study examined data from 1,093 families who were served by one of 71 home 
visitors who worked within 1 of 12 Oregon counties. Multilevel analysis showed that families 
were 16% less likely to remain in home visiting services for 1 year if they were raising their 
infant in a county that had a high level of community violence. Community violence was 
measured by the county's murder, assault, rape, and domestic violence rates. Another important 
finding was that every 1-hour of direct supervision that the home visitor received per month 
nearly doubled (1.89) the likelihood of families remaining in home visiting services for 1 year. 
In addition, older mothers and Latino families were significantly more likely to remain in home 



visiting services for 1 year. 

By identifying factors across multiple levels of influence, home visitors can develop strategies 
to increase engagement and retention rates. Younger, White, non-Latino mothers may be the 
most difficult to engage and retain in early home visiting programs, especially if they live in 
areas of poor community health or high community violence. To engage these mothers, home 
visitors may need to increase the intensity and duration of outreach efforts and obtain addi- 
tional contact information, especially when maternal isolation is identified. Early involvement 




822 



827 



HOME VISITING 



in parent support groups may be another strategy to maximize engagement. Perhaps most 
importantly this study shows that supervision is essential to retain families in service. For multi- 
risk families, supervisors may choose to shadow home visitors on visits and work with visitors 
to develop appropriate service plans. Supervision can also increase program fidelity by reducing 
the ambiguity of the home visitor's role and reminding visitors that their role is to mobilize 
families to act for themselves. By identifying factors that are associated with program engage- 
ment and retention across multiple levels of influence, a number of viable possibilities for 
future research, practice, and policy emerge. 



Evaluating Denver Best Babies Initiative: A Relationship-Based 
Home Intervention for High-Risk Primiparous 
and Multiparous Mothers and Their Infants 

Lorraine F. Kubicek, Janice French, Jeff Brown, Lucy Loomis, John McFee, Perry Butterfield 
PRESENTERS: Emily Hunt, Lorraine F Kubicek, Edith Purcell, Anne Rockenbach 

Prior research shows that a child's healthy beginning starts before birth and that the first years of 
life are crucial for fostering a child's social, emotional, cognitive, and physical growth and 
development (Fox, Leavitt, & Warhol, 1999). Home visitation programs that promote a healthy 
pregnancy and delivery, provide family health and child development education, and encourage 
the development of healthy family attachments can make a positive difference in the lives of 
children and families. This is especially true if they are initiated during pregnancy and continued 
into the first 2 to 3 years of a child's life (e.g.. Olds et al., 1999). 

Denver Health provides maternity care for some of the highest risk women in Denver and 
Colorado. The Denver Best Babies Initiative (DBBI) is a broad-based home intervention pro- 
gram targeted in Denver's poorest neighborhoods. DBBI includes implementation of the Nurse 
Family Partnership Program (primiparous mothers) or the Healthy Futures Program (multipa- 
rous mothers) during pregnancy and continuing until the child's 2nd birthday. Nurses and 
social workers teach mothers about prenatal healthcare and childbirth preparation and help 
them with referrals for healthcare coverage and other community resources. They also incorpo- 
rate Partners in Parenting Education (PIPE; Butterfield, 1996) into their visits. PIPE is a flexible 
and interactive parenting program that emphasizes the importance of healthy parent-child 
relationships in promoting early development. 

Subjects were 40 low-income women and their families living in communities with high 
infant mortality, high rates of low birth weight, and/or child abuse who were receiving prenatal 
care at Denver Health. Half were first-time mothers, and half had prior children. All were at 
increased risk for pregnancy and/or parenting problems. Half of the women in each parity group 
were receiving home visitation services through DBBI; the other half, a comparison group, were 
not receiving these services, but were selected from the same communities. These women were 
among the first recruited for an ethnically diverse sample that will eventually include 450 
women, many of who are teens and/or single parents. 

Our repeated measures design allows us to evaluate continuity and change in the mothers 
and their infants over a period of approximately 25 months. Mothers were interviewed at 36 
weeks gestation, and mothers and their infants participated in a playroom laboratory visit when 
their infants were 4, 12, and 24 months old. This poster focuses on data collected at the first 3 
time points. 




828 



823 



POSTERS 



Analysis and discussion focus on group differences in outcomes between program and 
comparison mothers and their children. Specifically, the following outcomes were evaluated, 
(a) enhanced maternal mental health and functioning; (b) greater understanding of child 
development and more realistic expectations of children; (c) more positive parenting attitudes 
and behavior; and (d) enhanced cognitive, social, and emotional development for children. 



References 

Butterfield, P. M. (1996, August/September). The partners in parenting education program: A 
new option in parent education. Bulletin of ZERO TO THREE: National Center for Infants, 
Toddlers, and Families, 17(1), 3-10. 

Fox, N. A., Leavitt, L. A., & Warhol, J. G. (Eds.). (1999). The role of early experience in infant 
development. Johnson & Johnson Pediatric Institute Pediatric Roundtable Series. 1999. St. 
Louis, MO: Johnson & Johnson Pediatric Institute. 

Olds, D., Eckenrode, J., Henderson, C. R., Jr., Kitzman, H., Powers, J., Cole, R., etal., (1997). 
Long term effects of home visitation on maternal life course and child abuse and neglect. 15- 
year follow-up of a randomized trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 278, 637- 

643. „ . „ 

Powers, S., & Fenichel, E. (1999). Home visiting: Reaching babies and families "where they live. 
Washington, DC: Zero to Three: National Center for Infants, Toddlers, and Families. 



Adherence to an Early Head Start Logic Model and 
Achievement of Early Childhood Development Outcomes 

Todd Sosna, Reyna Dominguez 

PRESENTERS: Todd Sosna, Reyna Dominguez 

Child Development Resources of Ventura County, Inc. is evaluating the relationship between 
adherence to an Early Head Start (home-based option) logic model and achievement of early 
childhood development and family outcomes. Logic models explain how the activities of a 
program are intended to achieve program goals. The articulation and investigation of logic 
models are critical in (a) understanding the impact of programs, (b) supporting quality assur- 
ance activities, and (c) demonstrating that a program is effective. 

Child Development Resources of Ventura County, Inc. is a Head Start/Early Head Start 
provider. The Early Head Start program is an intensive, home-based option with a capacity to 
serve 160 infants/toddlers. The program promotes early childhood development (cognitive, 
physical, emotional, and social), fulfillment of parental responsibilities, and family self- 
sufficiency. 

The Early Head Start home teachers completed a facilitated process to develop a logic model 
that explains the successive impacts of their home-based program. The process was premised on 
the model developed by Mario Hernandez and Sharon Hodges (Hernandez, Hodges, & 
Worthington, 2000). The logic model describes the expected impact of the services at successive 
levels, extending from the provision of direct-services through each link of the logic model 
leading to attainment of child development and family goals. The chain of logic that was 
developed is as follows: 

1. Home-teachers receive intensive training in early childhood development, family partner- 
ship, and developing strength-based agreements. 

2. Trusting relationship with the family is established. 



824 



829 



HOME VISITING 



3. A comprehensive assessment is completed. 

4. A comprehensive plan of care is completed. 

5. Home teaching and services from other agencies are provided across three areas: 

a) Early childhood development 

b) Safe and nurturing home 

c) Empowering parents to act on behalf of their children. 

6. Parents show enhanced skills in early childhood development, parental roles and respon- 
sibilities, and self-sufficiency. 

7. Infant/toddler and family outcomes are achieved. 

Child Development Resources has implemented a longitudinal repeat measures, data 
collection process. Data concerning (a) adherence to program principles and practices, (b) 
evidence of each link in the logic model, and (c) the attainment of infant/toddler and family 
outcomes are being collected. Initial baseline data collected at enrollment, and 3 times annually. 
Data are collected from interviews with parents, home teachers, and review of child charts. 

Preliminary baseline data show strong adherence to some of the logic model activities (e.g., 
developing misting relationships with families and completing assessments) and partial fidelity 
to other activities (e.g., development of formal parmership agreements within the program's 
time frame). These results pinpoint for program managers and staff, areas of program success as 
well as other areas in need of improvement. Implementation of a logic model assists Early Head 
Start programs in ascertaining whether their program's practices and principles have a direct 
impact on early childhood development outcomes. 



Hernandez, M., Hodges, S., & Worthington, J. (2000). Turning ideas into action using theory-based 
framework. Tampa: University of South Florida, Louis de la Parte Florida Mental Health 
Institute, Department of Child and Family Studies. 



Reference 



ERIC 




825 



Infant/Toddler 



What Types of Interventions Best Facilitate Communication Between 
Toddlers Who Are Developmentally At Risk and Adult Caregivers? 

Paula L. Horner 

PRESENTER; Paula L. Horner 

The past 2 decades have spurred dramatic advances in the ability to identify, assess, and treat a 
variety of handicapping conditions in their earliest stages of development (Thomaidis, 
Kaderoglou, Stefou, Damianou, & Bakoula, 2000). When treating a toddler identified as being at 
risk for later social-communicative delays it is important to consider the multiple influences 
that affect development of competent communication (Barnard & Carol, 1990; Guralnick, 1999; 
Kaiser, Hancock, & Hester, 1998; Simeonsson, 2000). Research and theory have come to 
recognize that natural adult-toddler transactions greatly influence many aspects of the child s 
developmental process (Grubbs & Niemeyer, 1999; Hanson, Randall, & Colston, 1999; Weisner, 
1999; Whitehead, Jesien, & Kearns-Ulanski, 1998). Therefore, the present study was guided by 
several general questions and factors of interest that address the critical role played by parents in 
early development. These questions are as follows: 

1. What patterns of interaction emerge in infant-mother dyads during play routines? 

2. What is the relationship between the infant development status and adult interaction style 
(ivlacDonald, 1989)? 

3 . What service delivery model provides for the most effective and stable generalization into 
the home environment (Kaiser et al., 1998)? 

Fifteen mothers and their 12- to 24-month-old toddlers participated in the study. 

Each mother-toddler dyad was assigned to one of three service delivery models: (a) twice- 
weekly group services for toddlers for a 3-month period, (b) once weekly individual interven- 
tion coupled with a weekly parent training session for a 3-month period, and (c) a twice weekly 
parent training program for 10 weeks. As a means of assessing maternal understanding and use 
of these techniques all dyads were videotaped 3 times: (a) before treatment began, (b) immedi- 
ately following the completion of the treatment period, and (c) at a follow-up visit 2 months 
after the treatment program had ended. 

Analysis of the interaction data was an ongoing process throughout the period of the study. 
Data were analyzed in terms of the three service delivery models as well as across individual 
infant-mother pairs. Data from the transcription of videotapes were coded using QSR NUDIST 4. 

Analysis of the field notes indicated that mothers in the individual treatment program used 
more closed-ended questions and directives during play. Mothers with this training background 
usually issued several consecutive questions or directives without providing adequate response 
time. Nor did these mothers consistently respond to overt communicative bids by their toddlers. 
Mothers involved in the parent training only and the group treatment conditions displayed the 
most nondirective and facilitative style of interaction. These mothers responded to toddler vocal 



er|c 



826 



831 



INFANT/TODDLER 



and gestural cues as meaningful, waited longer for responses, and used a more exaggerated facial 

display during play activities. 

References 

Barnard, K. E., & Carol, J. E (1990). Assessment of parent-child interactions. In S. J. Meisels & J. 
P. Shonkoff (Eds.), Handbook of early childhood intervention. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 

Grubbs, P. R., & Niemeyer, J. A. (1999). Promoting reciprocal social interactions in inclusive 
classrooms for young children. Infants and Young Children, 11(3), 9-19. 

Guralnick, M. J. (1999). The nature and meaning of social integration for young children with 
mild developmental delays in inclusive settings. Journal of Early Intervention, 22(1), 51-69. 

Hanson, J. L, Randall, V. E, & Colston, S. S. (1999). Parent advisors: Enhancing services for 
young children with special needs. Infants and Young Children, 12(1), 17-25. 

Kaiser, A. P, Hancock, T. B., & Hester, P. P. (1998). Parents as cointerventionists: Research on 
applications of naturalistic language teaching procedures. Infants and Young Children, 10(4), 
46-55. 

MacDonald, J. D. (1989). Becoming partners with children: From play to conversation. San Antonio, 
TX: Special Press. 

Simeonsson, R. J. (2000). Early childhood intervention: Toward a universal manifesto. Infants 
and Young Children, 12(3), 4-9. 

Thomaidis, L, Kaderoglou, E., Stefou, M., Damianou, S., & Bakoula, C. (2000). Does early 
intervention work? A controlled trial. Infants and Young Children, 12(3), 17-22. 

Weisner, T. S. (1999). Bringing together variable-based and person-based methods. Journal of 
Early Intervention, 22(4), 291-293. 

Whitehead, A., Jesien, G., & Keams-Ulanski, B. (1998). Weaving parents into the fabric of early 
intervention interdisciplinary training: How to integrate and support family involvement in 
training. Infants and Young Children, 10(3), 44-53. 



Predictors and Outcomes of Maternal Teaching During 
Interactions Between Mother and Child at 24 Months 

Kathleen Guinee, Jessica Mercer, Barbara Alexander Pan, Catherine Ayoub 

PRESENTERS: Catherine Ayoub, Kathleen Guinee, Barbara Alexander Pan 

This study investigated trends associated with maternal teaching of 24-month-old, low-income 
children. Previous research, based mostly on studies of middle class families, indicates that 
parenting style is related to child vocabulary growth (Akhtar, Dunham, & Dunham, 1991; 
Baldwin, 1995; Hart & Risley, 1995). Hart and Risley found that parenting style accounts for 
61% of the variation in child vocabulary growth, but their sample included few low-income 
families. This study extends these findings by looking at maternal engagement style in a larger 
group of low-income families. 

The sample consisted of 55 mother-child pairs from a larger sample of low-income families 
eligible for Early Head Start in Windham County, Vermont. At baseline, the mothers' average age 
was 25.5 years (SD = 6.7), and average education was 11.78 years (SD = 1.44). Mothers' verbal 
intelligence (sample mean scaled score = 9.38, SD = 3.41) was measured using the vocabulary 
subscale of the Weschler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS; Weschler, 1981 ). Maternal literacy levels 
(mean grade equivalent = 11.37, SD = 4.29) were assessed using the Woodcock-Johnson Letter/ 
Word Recognition Test (Woodcock, 1978). At the time of observation reported here, children 



O 

ERIC 



832 



827 



POSTERS 



(31 girls, 24 boys) ranged in age from 22.7 to 28.45 months. Children's cognitive functioning 
(mean MDI = 90.69, SD = 13.03) was assessed using the Bayley Scales of Infant Development-II 
(Bayley, 1993). The MacArthur Communicative Development Inventory (CDI; Fenson et al., 
2000) was used to measure children's expressive language (mean number of words = 64.49, 

SD = 23.25). 

Mother-child dyads were videotaped in their homes during 10 minutes of activity with a 
book and two toys. Verbal and nonverbal mother-child interactions were transcribed. In 
addition, maternal engagement was coded using the Social-Emotional-Cognitive Coding 
Scheme (Ayoub, Rowe, Major-Ahmed, & Raya, 1999). We considered mothers to be teaching 
when they were giving definitions, providing explanations, supplying background information, 
or questioning to check the child's knowledge. On average, mothers engaged in teaching during 
27.67% (SD = 10.28) of their interactions, ranging from 2.27% to 47.92%. Multiple regression 
showed that mothers' raw Woodcbck-Johnson (p = 1.11, p < .001) and WAIS (p = -0.22, p < .05) 
scores accounted for 23.22% of the variation in the percentage of teaching engagement used. 
Children's raw Bayley scores (p = 1 .78, p < .001) and mothers' teaching (p = 0.61, p < .01) 
together accounted for 57.18% of the variation in the child s CDI scores. Other demographic 
variables (mother age, mother education, child gender, child age, birth order, household 
income, and participation in Early Head Start) were not significant predictors in either of 
these equations. 

Consistent with earlier studies (Akhtar etal., 1991; Baldwin, 1995; Hart& Risley, 1995), our 
results reveal that, in general, mothers who engage in a higher percentage of teaching behaviors, 
such as defining, explaining, informing, and knowledge checking, have children with larger 
expressive vocabularies. These findings have implications for children's future school readiness 
and performance, especially since vocabulary is the single best predictor of success in reading, 
which in turn, is the single best predictor of success in school (Snow, Burns, & Griffin, 1998) . 



References 

Akhtar, N., Dunham, E, & Dunham, P. (1991). Directive interactions and early vocabulary 
development; The role of joint attentional focus. Journal of Child Language, 18, 41-49. 
Ayoub, C., Rowe, M., Major-Ahmed, M., & Raya, P. (1999). Social-emotional-cognitive coding 
scheme. Unpublished manuscript, Har/ard University Graduate School of Education, 



Cambridge, MA. 

Baldwin, D. A. (1995). Understanding the link between joint attention and language. In C. 

Moore & P. J. Dunham (Eds.), Joint attention: Its origins and role in development (pp. 131-158). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Bayley, N. (1993). Bayley Scales of Infant Development, Second edition: Manual. New York: The 
Psychological Corporation. 

Fenson, L, Pethick, S., Renda, C., Cox, J., Dale, P, & Reznick, S. (2000). Short-form versions 
of the MacArthur Communicative Development Inventories. Applied Psycholinguistics, 21, 



95-115. 

Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of young American 
children. Baltimore: Brooks. 

Snow, C., Burns, M., & Griffin, P. (1998). Preventing reading difficulties. Washington, DC: Na- 
tional Research Council. 

Weschler, D. (1981). Manual for Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised. San Antonio, TX: The 
Psychological Corporation. 

Woodcock, R. (1978). Development and standardization of the Woodcock-Johnson psycho-educational 
battery. Hingham MA: Teaching Resources. 



O 

ERIC 



828 



833 



INFANT/TODDLER 



Noise, Classroom Functioning, and Stress 
in Classrooms for 2-Year-Olds 

Dana Anne M. Tomonari, Dale C. Farran 
PRESENTERS: Dana Anne M. Tomonari, Dale C. Farran 

Exposure to high levels of noise is related to negative physiological, motivational, and cognitive 
effects in school-aged children (Evans & Lepore, 1993; Maxwell & Evans, 2000; Evans & Max- 
well, 1997). More specifically, some literature has shown that exposure to chronic noise is 
related to deficits in the prereading skills of preschoolers (Maxwell & Evans). Furthermore, 
younger children require a better signal to noise ratio than older children do in order to under- 
stand words in context (Evans, Lercher, Meis, Ising, & Kofler, 2001). Studies also show that noise 
effects may be significant for children with preexisting cognitive deficits. (Johansson, 1983; 
Nober & Nober, 1975; Zentall & Shaw, 1980). The adverse effects of noise exposure may create 
larger problems for children already struggling to keep up with their peers. 

A limited amount of work has examined these effects for young children under 3 in group 
care settings. It is, however, an increasingly important area of study for two reasons: (a) changes 
in child care patterns indicate that more young children are being cared for in group-care 
settings (Ehrle, Adams, & Tout, 2001) and (b) enrollment in child care is occurring at times 
when children generally attain important developmental milestones such as language 
(Goldshmied & Jackson, 1994). 

This study explores how classroom noise is related to stress and overall functioning of early 
intervention classrooms serving 2-year-olds. It was hypothesized that (a) higher noise levels in 
classrooms would be related to perceptions of lowered classroom functioning, (b) higher noise 
levels in classrooms would be related to higher tedcher ratings of teacher stress, and (c) higher 
noise levels in classrooms would be related to higher teacher ratings of child stress. 

The study was conducted during the summer session in three early intervention classrooms at 
a university-sponsored preschool that served children under the age of 3. Each classroom scored 
a 5 or higher on the Infant/Toddler Environmental Rating Scale (ITERS; Harms, Cryer, & 

Clifford, 1990). Noise level measurements were obtained daily using a Type 1 Sound Level Meter 
(Larson-Davis System 814) placed in a similar position in each classroom during each observa- 
tion. Six classroom teachers completed daily ratings of stress and classroom functioning. 

These three classrooms were noisy environments by current noise standards. Furthermore, 
Pearson product-moment correlations indicated that higher noise levels were related both to 
higher ratings of child stress and to lower ratings of classroom functioning; there was no 
correlation between noise levels and teacher stress. Further analyses indicated significant 
differences between the three classrooms and across the 2 times of day; these differences did not 
affect the relationships obtained between noise, stress, and classroom functioning. These results 
are especially significant because these classrooms are not typical of many settings serving 
toddlers — they had small numbers of children, well trained teachers, good teacher-child ratios, 
and high ratings on the ITERS. Because toddlers are actively involved in language acquisition, 
future research should examine the longitudinal effect of early exposure to noise on receptive 
and expressive language skills, particularly for more vulnerable populations of children. 

References 

Ehrle, J., Adams, G., & Tout, K. (2001). Who's caring for our youngest children? Child care patterns of 
infants and toddlers (Occasional Report No. 42). Washington, DG: The Urban Institute. 

Evans, G. W., & Lepore, S. J. (1993). Nonauditory effects of noise on children: A critical review. 
Children's Environments, 10(1), 31-51. 

Evans, G. W., Lercher, R, Meis, M., Ising, H., & Kofler, W. W. (2001). Gommunity noise exposure 
and stress in children. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 109, 1023-1027. 



O 

ERIC 



834 



829 



POSTERS 



Evans, G. W„ & Maxwell, L. E. (1997). Chronic noise exposure and reading deficits: The mediat- 
ing effects of language acquisition. Environment and Behavior, 29, 638-656. 

Goldshmied, E., & Jackson, S. (1994). People under three: Young children in day care. New York: 
Routledge. 

Harms, T., Cryer, D., & Clifford, R. M. (1990). Infant/Toddler Environmental Rating Scale. New 
York: Teachers College Press. 

Johansson, C. R. (1983). Effects of low intensity, continuous, and intermittent noise on mental 
performance and writing pressure of children with different intelligence and personality 
characteristics. Ergonomics, 26(3), 275-288. 

Maxwell, L. E., & Evans, G. W. (2000). The effects of noise on pre-school children's pre-reading 
skills. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 20, 91-97. 

Nober, L. W., & Nober, E. H. (1975). Auditory discrimination of learning disabled children in 
quiet and classroom noise. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 8(10), 57-60. 

Zenfall, S. S., & Shaw, J. H. (1980). Effects of classroom noise on performance and activity of 
second-grade hyperactive and control children. Journal of Educational Psychology, 72, 830-840. 



Play Interactions Among Early Head Start Mothers and Toddlers 

Ronit Kahana-Kalman, Jessica Forman 

PRESENTER: Ronit Kahana-Kalman 

This study examined the play interactions among mothers' and toddlers' from a Latino low- 
income background attending an Early Head Start (EHS) program (N = 60). The children ranged 
in age from 15 to 27 months (mean age = 21.07 months). Mothers and toddlers were video- 
taped for 12 minutes in a free play session with a variety of toys. Their play content was coded 
independently episode-by-episode using three mutually exclusive pHy level codes: (s) explora- 
tion, (b) nonsymbolic functional acts, and (c) symbolic or pretense play (see, Damast, Tamis- 
LeMonda, & Bornstein, 1996). 

Findings demonstrated that both toddlers and mothers of this group were primarily engaged 
in nonsymbolic functional play. Although engaging in symbolic play is more developmentally 
appropriate among mothers and toddlers of this age group (Belsky & Most, 1981; Fiese, 1990; 
McCune-Nicholich, 1981), we observed very little pretense play among dyads in this group (on 
average less than 1 minute). Our coding further distinguished between maternal pHy acts that 
were immediately preceding toddlers' play (eliciting play acts) versus maternal play acts that 
occurred immediately following toddlers' play (elaborating play acts). On average, mothers 
made eliciting play acts to 32% of their toddlers' play. That is, more than two thirds of the time 
mothers did not make any play suggestion immediately preceding their toddlers' play. Similarly, 
mothers made elaborating play acts to 34% of their toddlers' play; thus, approximately two^ 
thirds of the time, mothers did not make any play suggestions in response to their toddlers' play 
acts. It is important to note that only 2% of mothers' elaborating play acts occurred when 
toddlers were uninvolved or unfocused. 

These findings have two major implications for practice in the context of Early Head Start. 
First, research suggests that mothers' knowledge about children's early developing abilities, 
including their knowledge about play, relates to their behaviors with the children (e.g., Damast 
et al., 1996; Tamis-LeMonda & Bornstein, 1994). Thus, in the context of early intervention, 
increasing mothers' knowledge about the development of children's play is important for 
enhancing their ability to scaffold more age-appropriate play behaviors among their toddlers. 
Second, in the play interactions we observed, mothers exhibited little evidence of "scaffolding" 



ERIC 



830 



835 



INFANT/TODDLER 



their children's play. For example, the mothers we observed often neglected to follow their 
toddlers' play with a play suggestion at a higher level, especially in terms of scaffolding more 
imaginary play. The lack of scaffolding among these dyads may be related to different cultural 
values these mothers may have about the role of adults in children's play. Given that there is a 
good deal of support in the literature on middle-class Euro American dyads that play enhances 
children's development in a myriad of ways, it is imperative that we understand better the practices 
of play among minority low-income parents and toddlers (McCollum & McBride, 1997). 

References 

Belsky, J., & Most, R. K. (1981). From exploration to play; A cross-sectional study of infant free 
play behavior. Child Development, 17, 630-639. 

Damast, A. M., Tamis-LeMonda, C. S., & Bornstein, M. H. (1996). Mother-child play: Sequential 
interactions and relation between maternal beliefs and behaviors. Child Development, 67, 
1752-1766. 

Fiese, B. H. (1990). Playful relationships: A contextual analysis of mother-toddler interaction 
and symbolic play. Child Development, 61, 1648-1656. 

McCollum, J. A., & McBride, S. L. (1997). Ratings of parent-infant interaction: Raising questions 
of cultural validity. Topics in Early Childhood Special Education, 1 7 , 494-519. 
McCune-Nicholich, L. (1981). Toward symbolic fiinctioning: Stmcture of early pretend games 
and potential parallels with language. Child Development, 52, 785-797. 

Tamis-LeMonda, C. S., & Bornstein, M. H. (1994). Specificity in mother-toddler language-play 
relations across the second year. Developmental Psychology, 30, 283-292. 



Neonatal Factors Affecting Infant Readiness 

Desia Grace, Dana Gunthorpe 

PRESENTERS: Desia Grace, Dana Gunthorpe 

Infant readiness can be conceptualized as a combination of cognitive and temperamental 
qualities that better equip the child with the ability to process stimuli and master his/her 
environment. Deficits in infant cognitive and temperamental functioning have been shown to 
negatively affect childhood adjustment patterns (e.g., Shaw et al., 1998). As children grow, such 
deficits, when not addressed, can continue to impair functioning in a variety of domains. Thus, 
the earlier we can identify which children are at risk for problems with infant readiness, the 
greater the possibility of intervening successfully and avoiding the accumulation of risk factors. 

In the present study, we examined the contribution of a variety of neonatal factors and 
caregiving factors at birth to indices of lower readiness at 6, 12, and 24 months, including 
temperamental and cognitive functioning. One hundred African American mother-baby dyads 
were recruited from the University of Chicago General Care Nursery. Neonates were adminis- 
tered the Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale (NBAS; Brazelton & Nugent, 1995). Pre and 
perinatal factors such as birth weight and obstetrical complications were also assessed. Factors in 
the caregiving environment that were hypothesized to affect infant readiness were measured, 
including sociodemographic factors, maternal depression, and family life stressors. At 6, 12, and 
24 months, infant readiness was assessed through cognitive development scores obtained using 
the Bayley Scales of Infant Development-2nd Edition (BSID-II; Bayley, 1993), and temperamen- 
tal characteristics gathered by mother s reports of child behavior and characteristics. At 12 and 
24 months, emotional regulation and engagement was also assessed through the Bayley Behav- 
ior Rating Scale. 




836 



831 



POSTERS 



Infant cognitive development scores are within average range between 6 and 12 months; 
however# by 12 months declines among scores exist. Relations between neonatal factors and 6- 
month readiness were tested by computing bivariate Pearson Correlation Coefficients. Signifi- 
cant relations were found between neonatal scores on the NBAS and the maternal factors 
assessed, and later indices of readiness, at 6, 12, and 24 months. For example, unpredictability 
at 6 months was associated with neonatal behaviors such as state regulation (r = .260, p < .05) 
and consolability (r = -.282, p < .05) and also with caregiver factors at birth such as difficult life 
stressors (r = .347, p < .01) and depressive symptoms (r = .222, p < .05). Although there are no 
significant associations between neonatal behavior and 12-month cognitive development scores, 
neonatal behavior and 12-month behavior during cognitive testing is significantly associated. 
Low neonatal consolability is associated with low attention (r = .323, p < .05), high frustration 
(r = -.274, p < 1 .00), and low persistence (r = .303, p < .05). 

The purpose of the present study was to identify predictors of early learning readiness. The 
results suggest that newborns that have difficulty with behavioral and emotional regulation are 
more likely to show problems with readiness in the first 2 years of life. If we consider that 
important infant qualities seen emerging as early as 6 months quite possibly set a pattern of 
interference and/or assistance with healthy parent-child relations, then by identifying these at- 
risk neonatal temperaments correlates provides us the opportunity to intervene at the earliest 
point possible. Further examination of which children, in which caregiving environments are at 
risk for suboptimal development is needed to lay a foundation for targeted prevention programs. 

References 

Bayley, N. (1993). Bayley Scales of Infant Development II (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX: The Psycho- 
logical Corporation. 

Brazelton, T. B., & Nugent, J. K. (1995). Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale (3rd ed.). New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Shaw, D. S., Winslow, E. B., Owens, E. B., Vondra, J. I., Cohn, J. F„ & Bell, R. Q. (1998). The 

developmental of early externalizing problems among children from low-income families: A 
transformational perspective. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 26, 95-107. 



Medical Help-Seeking Behavior Among 
Low-Income Mothers of Infants and Toddlers 

Pamela A. Raya-Carlton, Se-Kyung Park 

PRESENTERS: Pamela A. Raya-Carlton, Se-Kyung Park 

African American mothers value their children's health more than their own (Rainey, Poling, 
Rheaume, & Kirby, 1999). However, for many of the young and poor of this group, several 
health vulnerabilities and healthcare issues have been documented (Barnard & Morisset, 1995). 
Caring for the health needs of infants and toddlers, especially when they are chronically ill, 
requires the use of psychological and social-community resources (Tenney & Comer, 2000). 
Indeed, although chronic poor health in children creates an additional burden that an already 
struggling household can barely afford (Perrin, Shayne, & Bloom, 1993), it makes ever more 
critical, appropriate healthcare access and utilization for such families. 

This study investigated the factors that impact maternal medical help-seeking behaviors (i.e., 
healthcare access and utilization) among a group of low-income, inner city African Americans 
who were eligible for Early Head Start (EHS) services. The following question is examined: How 




832 



11 



837 



INFANT/TODDLER 



are children's illness, maternal education, mother-child relationship, and maternal coping skills 
related to maternal medical help-seeking behaviors? 

The mothers (mean age = 19.18, sd = 3.06) from a Midwestern, inner-city area were inter- 
viewed at the time they were identified as eligible for EHS services and then again, 15 months 
thereafter. Mothers' education (MEDUC) level was gleaned from the Head Start Family Informa- 
tion System questionnaire. Maternal coping (MCOPE) was based on subscales (e.g., disengage- 
ment [DISENGAGE], emotionality [EMOTE]) that make up the Ways of Goping Scale (Garver, 
Scheier, & Weintraub, 1989). Mother-child relationship (RELATE) was examined using coding 
of such aspects as maternal sensitivity (PSENS) and mother-child mutuality (DYAD). Goding 
was performed on the video-recordings of the Three-Bag Structured Play Task (Ware, Brady, 
O'Brien, & Berlin, 2000). Illness in children (ILLHEALTH) was identified using items that were 
adapted from the National Health Interview Study by the EHS Research Gonsortium. Maternal 
medical help-seeking behavior was established through Principal Gomponent Analysis. This 
variable was comprised of two clusters of factors: (a) mothers' acquisition and maintenance of 
child medical insurance (HELP-INSURE) and (b) child health screening and testing (HELP- 
SGREEN/TEST). 

Multiple regression main effects were found. HELP-INSURE was predicted by MEDUG, 
PSENS, and DYAD (R^ = .14, df= 3, 91, F = 4.709, p = .004). The relationships among the 
variables indicated that HELP-INSURE required a puzzling combination of better education but 
less sensitivity and mutuality in mothers. This result reflects the probability that better-educated 
mothers held jobs that provided insurance coverage for their children. However, working 
mothers may also have tended to score less on measures of sensitivity and mutuality. Further 
consideration of this result is needed. 

Negative MGOPE (i.e., DISENGAGE, EMOTE) and ILLHEALTH helped explain 11% of the 
variation in HELP-SGREEN/TEST (R^ = .n, df= 3, 91, F = 3.44, p = .02). The regression estimates 
indicated that mothers who engaged less in negative coping and had healthy children were the 
ones who brought their children for health screening and testing. This finding emphasizes the 
need to support low-income mothers whose coping skills are further challenged when caring for 
their sickly children. 



Barnard, K. E., & Morisset, G. E. (1995). Preventive health and developmental care for children; 
Relationships as a primary factor in service delivery with at risk populations. In H. E. 
Fitzgerald, B. M. Lester, & B. Zuckerman (Eds.), Children of poverty: Research, health, and policy 
issues. New York: Garland. 

Garver, G. S., Scheier, M. E, & Weintraub, J. K. (1989). Assessing coping strategies: A theoretically 
based approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 267-283. 

Perrin, J. M., Shayne, M. W, & Bloom, S. R. (1993). Home and community care for chronically ill 
children. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Rainey, G., Poling, R., Rheaume, G., & Kirby, S. (1999). Views of low-income, African-American 
mothers about child health. Family and Community Health, 22(1), 1-15. 

Tenney, R. K., & Gomer, M. J. (2000). Early parenthood among African-Americans: Support and 
personal growth strategies. In. S. L. Logan & E. M. Freeman (Eds.), Health care in the Black 
community: Empowerment, knowledge, skills, and collectivism. New York: The Haworth Press. 

Ware, A., Brady, G., O Brien, G., & Berlin, L. J. (2000). 14-month child-parent interaction rating 
scales for the Three-Bag Assessment. New York: Golumbia University, Teachers Gollege, Genter 
for Ghildren and Families. 



References 



ERIC 




1 1 



833 



POSTERS 



Inner City Mother-and Father-Child Interactions: Similarities and 
Differences in Affect, Responsiveness, Play, and Language Behaviors 

Jacqueline D. Shannon, Bonnie Hannibal, Rachel Blumstein, Elizabeth Fellman, 

Vanessa Rodriguez 

PRESENTERS: Elizabeth Fellman, Vanessa Rodriguez 

The present investigation compared the interaction patterns of mother— child and father— child 
dyads within an underrepresented group of low-income, ethnically diverse families. Specifically, 
the goals were to (a) describe the nature of and examine differences in mother-child and father- 
child behaviors; (b) identify and compare the underlying factor structures of mother, father, and 
child behaviors; and (c) examine the associations between mother, father, and child factors. 

Participants were 50 mother-child and father-child dyads. Children ranged from 24 to 31 
months of age (52% boys). Each dyad was videotaped for 10 minutes at home during 
semistructured free play. The quality of mother- and father-child interactions were coded from 
videotapes using the Child-Caregiver Affect, Responsiveness, Engagement Scale (C-CARES; Tamis 
LeMonda, Ahuja, Hannibal, Shannon, & Spellman, 2001), a 5-point likert scale. Seventeen 
parent behaviors (e.g., affect, responsiveness, intrusiveness, language quality) and 14 child 
behaviors (e.g., affect, responsiveness, involvement with toys, communication) were assessed. 

First, mothers' and fathers' behaviors during play interactions with their children were 
described and examined. A striking finding was that fathers were rated significantly higher than 
mothers on many positive variables such as positive affect, positive touch, responsiveness to 
verbal cues, and emotional attunement. On the other hand, mothers were rated only signifi- 
cantly higher on negative affect. Children showed significantly more positive behaviors and 
affect with fathers, and more negativity with mothers. 

Second, the factor structures for mothers and fathers were compared. Three factors were 
identified for each parent. Mothers and fathers shared a Responsive-Didactic factor. However, 
the mother factor included greater positive affect and responsiveness, whereas the father factor 
included greater sophistication of play and achievement orientation. Mothers and fathers also 
shared an Intrusive-Achievement factor. On the third factor, mothers and fathers diwrged. The 
mother factor. Structured Play, reflected play focused on toys rather than the child, i ne father 
factor. Positive Touch, indicated "rough and tumble" play behaviors. Three distinct child factors 
emerged for child with mother, (a) Emotionally-Regulated, (b) Cognitive-Playful, and (c) 
Socially Responsive. Two of these factors emerged for child with father: (a) Cognitive-Playful, 
and (b) Emotionally-Regulated. A third factor, unique to child with father was Positive Touch. 

Finally, the associations between, mother, father, and child factors were examined. Mothers 
Intrusive-Achievement factor negatively related to Emotionally-Regulated child factor (r = -.38, 
p < .05). Responsive-Didactic mother factor positively related to the Socially Responsive child 
factor (r = .53, p < .01). The Responsive-Didactic father factor positively related to all three child 
factors (rs range .36 to .44, p < .05). Fathers high on the Positive Touch factor positively related 
to Positive Touch child factor (r = .46, p < .01) and negatively related to Cognitive-Playful child 
factor (r = -.34, p < .05). 

These findings shed light on the similarities and differences in the ways mothers and fathers 
interact with their 24-month-old children. Results suggest the need to further examine mother- 
and father-child interaction patterns at a multidimensional level. Furthermore, while this study 
is an initial step to exploring how child behaviors relate to parent behaviors during a dyadic play 
interaction, further research may begin to examine more closely how mother and father behav- 
iors uniquely relate to other outcomes in children (e.g., Bayley, MacAithur). 

Reference 

Tamis LeMonda, C. S, Ahuja, P, Hannibal, B., Shannon, J. D., & Spellmann, M. (2001) Child- 
Caregiver Affect, Responsiveness, Engagement Scale (C-CARES). Unpublished manuscript. 



ERIC 




834 



Language Development/Early Literacy 



Head Start on Science and Communication 

Penny Hammrich, Evelyn Klein, Anika Ragins 

PRESENTERS: Penny Hammrich, Anika Ragins 

The Head Start on Science and Communication Project is designed as a 5-year intervention 
targeting science curricula at the 3-5 grade levels. The overall goal is to develop a model for the 
professional development of teachers to use a learner-centered and teacher-facilitated approach 
to provide integrated, interdisciplinary links to science knowledge and communication skills 
development. To achieve reform in science curricula, the program aims to improve three vital 
areas of science education: (a) curriculum enhancement, (b) resource development, and 
(c) professional development of teachers. 

The framework of the program is closely aligned with the K-2 Head Start on Science and 
Communication program (Hammrich & Klein, 1999). The program is an inquiry-based, 
interdisciplinary approach to elementary science education. The curriculum is built on research 
questions that encourage student-facilitated exploration of the science topic. The program is 
divided into four modules covering life, earth, physical, and technological sciences. The students 
are introduced to each science concept through the use of a fictional story, imparting students 
with the necessary background information to solve the research questions posed in each of the 
four science areas. 

During the first year of prograni development, the primary objective for the program devel- 
opers was to establish a knowledge base on current practices in science education. The culmina- 
tion of the first year was a 3-day professional development program, with 16 teachers from four 
major U.S. cities. 

The teachers were surveyed to determine their commitment to science education, scientific 
knowledge base, and skills in implementing a science-rich environment. The professional 
development included sessions on science curriculum alignment with school standards, as well 
as promoting a constructivist approach to science learning in the elementary classroom. Partici- 
pants also took part in an all day seminar at the Franklin Institute Science Museum, where they 
were introduced to the museum as a classroom resource. Teachers were also asked for input on 
the first science unit. 

Teachers are in the process of piloting the first module. Results will be forthcoming by the end 
of the summer 2002. The first module is entitled Gidget's Journey: An Exploration of the Human Body. 
To begin the first module, teachers have students answer the preassessment questions about the 
story content. After students read the story, they then begin investigating various science questions 
related to the story. After the students have completed all their investigations, they reflect on their 
experience in their science journals, answering targeted questions. 

The module also includes background information for students and teachers, vocabulary 
associated with the story, and all the standards addressed by the module. At the conclusion of 





835 



POSTERS 



the module, the students take the postassessment. There will be four modules per grade level, 
for a total of 12 modules in the science areas of life, earth, physical, and technology. 

Rcf0T0TlCC 

Hammrich, P. L, & Klein, E. R. (1999). Head start on science and communication: An inquiry- 
based program. Spotlight on Student Success, No. 403: An occasional series of articles from the 
Laboratory for Student Success. Temple University Center for Research in Human Development 
and Education. 



Literacy Learning Through Play in a Primary Classroom 

Linda K. Pickett 

PRESENTER: Linda K. Pickett 

Literacy has always been a concern for educators, but it has now become a hot political topic. 
While everyone agrees that literacy is essential, the means by which one becomes literate are a 
subject of ongoing debate (IRA & NAEYC, 1997). Although play has long been acknowledged as 
a vital component for learning and development by early childhood professionals (Bredekamp, 
1997; Stone, 1995), early childhood teachers face increasing pressure to implement standard- 
ized curricula designed to address specific skills. This pressure appears to create a conflict 
between academic learning and the need for play in children's lives. 

This paper reports findings of a study exploring ways that play enhances learning in the 
researcher's first grade classroom. Children's uses of literacy during play were documented and 
analyzed in the context of a curriculum in which a formal literacy program and a commitment 
to play were interwoven. During a 2-hour literacy block, children engaged in a formal program. 
Components of the program included mini-lessons, read-aloud, shared reading, guided reading, 
independent reading, shared writing, guided writing, games for skills development, dramatic 
representations, and other extension activities. 

An equally important daily practice was "self-selection" or play time. Self-selection was 
scheduled for a period of 45 minutes each day. During that time, children participated in 
activities chosen from the various centers in the classroom. The children who chose dramatic 
play were the focus of this study. 

To document children's use of literacy during dramatic play data were gathered over 4 
months. Data was triangulated through field notes, interviews, videotape, and artifacts. Analysis 
was done using steps described by Glaser and Strauss (1967) in the constant comparative 
method. Units of analysis were defined (Lincoln & Cuba, 1985) as an activity engaged in by at 
least one person and involving the use of graphic media for some purpose and viewed by the 
child as a reading or writing activity" (Dyson, 1993). Units were categorized, themes emerged, 
and hypotheses were tested through a process of searching for instances of negative patterns and 

alternative explanations. j • j 

Observations revealed numerous opportunities for children to learn about reading and 
writing. The results indicate that one function of play was to enable children to develop identi- 
ties as literate individuals. Children used literacy for their own purposes as they negotiated 
relationships and social interactions. As they read and wrote collaboratively, they provided 
assistance to one another; they were able to operate in a "zone of proximal development" 
(Vygotsky, 1978). 

Interaction between the formal and informal curriculum was revealed as children pracUced 
skills and applied concepts that had been introduced in the formal literacy block. Children 




836 



841 



LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT/EARLY LITERACY 



explored various forms and funaions of print (Halliday, 1975) in ways that held no risk of 
failure, but instead provided opportunities to refine understandings and skills. Finally play 
afforded many opportunities to enjoy and value literacy as personally meaningful. 

References 

Bredekamp, S. (1997). Developmentally appropriate practices. Washington, DC: National Associa- 
tion for the Education of Young Children. 

Dyson, A. H. (1993). The social worlds of children learning to write in an urban primary school. New 
York: Teachers College Press. 

Glaser, B. & Strauss, A. (1967). Discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for (Qualitative research. 
Chicago. 

Halliday, M. A. K. (1975). Learning how to mean: Explorations in the development of language. 
London: Edward Arnold. 

International Reading Association (IRA) & National Association for the Education of Young 
Children (NAEYC). (1998). Learning to read & write: Developmentally appropriate practices 
for young children. The Reading Teacher, 52(2), 193-216. 

Lincoln, Y. S. & Cuba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 

Stone, S. (1995). Wanted: Advocates for play in the primary grades. Young Children, 50(6), 45-54. 
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: the development of higher psychological processes. S^dimhhdge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 



Touching the Lives of Children: WINGS Learning System, 
A Proven School Readiness Program 

Paul Melmed, David Hoidzkom, Margaret Hayden, Maria Boyd 

PRESENTERS: Paul Melmed, David Hoidzkom, Margaret Hayden, Maria Boyd 



The WINGS Learning System is a researched, proven, accountable, standards-based literacy, 
language, and numeracy skills school readiness program designed for 3- to 6-year-old children. 
For the 8 years, this learning system has worked throughout North Carolina, where many 
children enter public schools unprepared to be academically successful. It is a measurable, 
scientific-based curriculum for pre-reading, cognitive, and language development that has 
shown consistent annual growth of over 200% for children in project sites across the state. Over 
20,000 children averaged 2 years of cognitive/language progress for each year of program partici- 
pation. The program expanded to Tennessee 3 years ago and has demonstrated similar results. 

Over the past 3 years, WINGS has expanded in a significant way to offer low-income and 
Head Start preschoolers and teachers easy-to-use, developmentally appropriate, curricular 
offerings to prepare children for entrance into kindergarten. The WINGS training component 
helps community volunteers, day-care staff, and Head Start teachers understand and give the gift 
of early learning. 

The WINGS curriculum was made available in a multimedia GD-ROM and web-enabled 
version during the 2001-2002 school year. Ghildren engage with up to 60 games, sequenced for 
each child, based upon their pre-test measures of cognitive/language development. The games 
consist of acdvities to enhance comprehension, memory, problem solving, decision making and 
creative thinking, leading to improved literacy and numeracy skills. This version of the WINGS 
curriculum is especially important for Head Start programs with less skilled teachers, or adult to 
child ratios that make a labor-intensive, individualized curriculum difficult to manage. 

Early research demonstrates that WINGS' new computer-based learning system significantly 



O 

ERIC 



842 



837 



POSTERS 



enhances pre-reading, numeracy, cognitive and language gains before children enter school. The 
addition of the computer component can especially augment the gains in those Head Start sites 
where teachers can be trained with WINGS to provide a personalized program to meet the needs 
of each child. 

During the 2002-2003 school year, the computer interactive version of the WINGS program 
will be placed in two centers in each of 20 sites in 10 target states: North Garolina, South 
Garolina, Georgia, Florida, Tennessee, Mississippi, Louisiana, Arkansas, Texas, and Galifomia. 



Reading Between the Lines: Linking Book Reading 
and School Readiness in Preschoolers 

Barbara Havlik, Catherine Haden 

PRESENTER: Barbara Havlik 

In this study, an experimental methodology was adapted to examine linkages between mother- 
child conversational interactions during book reading, and preschoolers' developing language 
and literacy-related skills. The aim of the project was to see if children s language and literacy- 
related skills could be enhanced by training mothers to use language to focus children's atten- 
tion and increase understanding during book reading interactions. 

A sample of 24 middle-income 3-year-old children, and their mothers, participated in 
pretesting, training, and 7-week, 3-month, and 6-month posttraining assessments. Median age 
of the sample at the start of the study was 40.3 months, and the sample included 13 females. 
During pretesting, children were administered the TERA-2 (Reid, Hresko, & Hammill, 1989), 
PLS-3 (Zimmerman, Steiner, & Pond, 1992) and Story Gomprehension and Story Production 
assessments. 

Mothers engaged in a shared book reading session with their child, which was audiotaped, 
transcribed, and coded. During this same visit, mothers of children in both groups were asked to 
read a total of 12 books to their children over a period of 6 weeks. After the completion of the 5- 
week reading phase, the posttest assessments were readministered: (a) at the beginning of the 
7th week, (b) 3 months, and (c) 6 months after the intervention was concluded. 

The actual manipulation in this study involved two components. The first component was a 
training session with the mothers, focusing on three key reading techniques: (a) open-ended 
questions, (b) predictions and inferences, and (c) associations. In the second component, 
mothers in the training group received a set of prepared comments to include in their reading of 
each book, reflecting the three strategies that were the focus in the training session. 

Three main questions were addressed: Gan we train mothers to engage in elaborative discus- 
sions with their children during book reading interactions? How might maternal style differ- 
ences link to children's developing literacy skills? Do high-level maternal comments, beyond the 
information in the pictures or the text, enhance literacy development? 

Repeated measures analyses illustrated that mothers in the training group showed significant 
increases in their use of all the target comments across the three follow-up assessments, as 
compared with mothers in the control group. Ghildren in both groups improved their language 
and literacy scores over the course of the study, and no significant differences emerged between 
the children of trained and untrained mothers. However, there is some suggestion that differ- 
ences might emerge after a longer delay. 

The third question of interest was to assess intra-individual variability across time through 
multilevel modeling, to describe how maternal commentary and group assignment influenced 
children's language and literacy skills. Results from the modeling analyses revealed that study 



O 

ERIC 



838 



843 



LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT/EARLY LITERACY 



ttoe and mothers' use of predicUon and inference comments significantly predicted children's 
^ressive vocabu ary. In fact, study ume accounted for 11% of the variance in children's 
expressive vocabulary growth, and predictions and inferences accounted for 7% 

^ ‘ s expressive vocabulary growth was predicted not only by'the amount of 

ume in the study, but also by mothers' use of predicUons and inferences Thl Ju^esrrar 

M ‘"“'“'"8 Wsh-demand, high-level commenta^ can ^aw posSv 

results for children's vocabulary growth. ^ posiuve 

References 

PrL"Tbluh«; * Austin, IX: 

Sr, hdi,,™. Ch,cago: 



Early Literacy Experiences of Latino Children: 
A Look at Context and Intervention 

Lisa Boyce, Mark Innocenti, James Akers, Lori Roggman 

PRESENTERS: Lisa Boyce, Mark Innocenti 



fonmla^pp^pjlf^ of literacy intervention programs is helping parents understand that early 

qua^tit^rfSld mre‘r^ T, “ 'panSh, the total 

need support to be responsive to children and interact with them in ways that promote 

and^?r hteracy, one specific goal of BELLS is to facilitate frequem interacuve 

and pleasurable shared reading experiences through weekly home visits. 

hom°in"S^7f the comparability of the two groups in the study, only mothers who were not 
bom in the United States were included (BELLS site n = 37- comparison site n = t" • 

and chid influences on the home literacy environment, we interviewed and assessed mothers 
and children in their homes in their primary language, using a variety of mLsuS iSdTnT 
sociodemo^aphics, language skills, and home literacy practices. Child assessments at 36 ^ 

Sded in thTa^al^r" ^6 months, were 

Maternal variables of income, years of education, and language skills in both Enelish and 
Spanish were related ,o rarings ofliteracy pracrices in the ho™,L. no, lo h^w r^u®“r^e 



POSTERS 



mothers spent reading to their children, or how much they enjoyed reading to their children. 
These results are promising, suggesting an effective intervention for enhancing the home literacy 
environment for a group of children at risk for failure, and will be used to inform future 
intervention efforts aimed at the growing Latino community in the United States. 



Text Talk: Developing Young Children's Language Ability 
Through Read-Aloud Experiences 

Margaret McKeown, Isabel Beck 

PRESENTER: Margaret McKeown 

Concern about young children's language development recently has centered on individual 
differences in vocabulary and comprehension among children as they begin school (Hart & 
Risley, 1995; Biemiller, 1999). The goal of Text Talk is to enhance young children's language 
abilities through listening to and talking about stories read to them. Findings about effective 
read-aloud strategies are quite consistent (Dickinson & Smith, 1994; Freppon, 1991; Morrow, 
1992; Teale & Martinez, 1996). The most effective features include the teacher and children 
talking about major story ideas, addressing ideas as they are encountered rather than after the 
story has been read, and involving children in discussion. 

However, the most effective read-aloud strategies are far from the most common. Creating a 
focus on story ideas is not a simple task for teachers of young children. Young children tend to 
use what is easily accessible to them (Neuman, 1990). Specifically, children respond to ques- 
tions based on the pictures and background knowledge. This reduces opportunities for children 
to construct meaning from decontextualized language, which is essential for building mature 
literacy skills. 

Text Talk interactions are based on questions posed during reading; asking children to 
consider the ideas in the story and to talk about and connect them as the story moves along. 
Beyond building meaning of a specific story. Text Talk attends to children's language develop- 
ment through questions that elicit greater language production. It also provides vocabulary 
activities for several words from each story. 

Text Talk was implemented in two kindergarten and two first-grade classrooms, and research- 
ers worked closely with the teachers to support their interactions with children during read- 
alouds. All Text Talk lessons were recorded, along with a baseline lesson of each teacher reading 
a story to her class before the implementation of Text Talk. To gauge the effects of Text Talk on 
classroom discourse, we compared teachers' baseline read-aloud discussions with Text Talk 
lessons, examining the length of student responses and the nature of questions and student 
responses. Students' responses to questions changed from a mean length of two words to five 
words in kindergarten, and about nine words in first grade. 

Teachers' questions changed from mostly closed at 80%, to mostly open, at 65%. Open 
questions leave both the form and content of response open to the child while closed questions 
are answerable in one or two words, often directly retrievable from the text. Children's responses 
were also scored as open and constructed by the child, or closed, directly retrieved from text. 
Children's responses were 80% closed in baseline lessons and about 65% open in Text Talk 
lessons. Children from Text Talk classrooms also showed significant gains in vocabulary com- 
pared to children from non-Text Talk classrooms. 

Reading aloud and discussing what is read is an important avenue for enhancing young 
children's language capabilities. Read-aloud discussion formats such as Text Talk, which pro- 



er|c 



840 



845 



LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT/EARLY LITERACY 



mote building meaning based on open questions and discussion, can enhance young children's 
language production, comprehension, and vocabulary. 



Beimiller, A. (1999). Language and reading success: From reading research to practice (Vol. 5). 
Cambridge, MA: Brookline. 

Dickinson, D. K., & Smith, M. W. (1994). Long-term effects of preschool teachers' book readings 
on low-income children's vocabulary and story comprehension. Reading Research Quarterly, 
29(2), 104-122. 

Freppon, P. A. (1991). Children's concepts of the nature and purpose of reading and writing in 
different instructional settings. Journal of Reading Behavior: A Journal of Literacy, 23, 139-163. 

Hart, B., & Risley, T. (1995). Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of young American 
children. Baltimore: Brookes. 

Morrow, L. M. (1992). The impact of a literature-based program on literacy achievement, use of 
literature, and attitudes of children from minority backgrounds. Reading Research Quarterly, 
27(3), 250-275. 

Neuman, S. B. (1990). Assessing inferencing strategies. In J. Zutell & S. McCormick (Eds.), 

Literacy theory and research (pp. 267-274). Chicago: National Reading Conference Yearbook. 

Teale, W. H., & Martinez, M. G. (1996). Reading aloud to young children: Teachers' reading 
styles and kindergartners' text comprehension. In C. Pontecorvo, M. Orsolini, B. Burge, & L. 
B. Resnick (Eds.), Children's early text construction (pp. 321-344). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 



A New Classroom Quality Assessment Instrument: The Supports 
for Early Literacy Assessment (SELA) for Preschool Classrooms 

Sheila Smith, Sherry Davidson, Carolyn Jarvis, Sarah Katsaros 

PRESENTERS: Sheila Smith, Sherry Davidson, Carolyn Jarvis 

This poster presented preliminary findings concerning the potential utility of a new observation- 
based instrument that can be used to assess early childhood classroom quality. This instrument, 
the Supports for Early Literacy Assessment (SELA) provides a comprehensive profile of a 
classroom's supports for preschoolers' emergent literacy skills, knowledge, and interests. It is 
designed to help researchers and practitioners assess how well early childhood classrooms 
support preschoolers' (a) language development, (b) print awareness, (c) phonological sensitiv- 
ity, (d) letter recognition, and (e) motivation to engage in literacy-related activities (e.g., interest 
in books and prewriting activities). The SELA consists of 21 items, two of which are appropriate 
only for bilingual classrooms, that are rated on a 5-point scale following a 2 1/2 hour observa- 
tion and 20 minute teacher interview. Recent research-based sources of best practice guidelines 
for supporting young children's emergent literacy were used in developing the SELA (Neuman, 
Copple, & Bredekamp, 1999; Bums, Griffin, & Snow, 1999). The content of the SELA literacy 
items reflect four developmentally appropriate elements that are used to assess broader features 
of DAP, such as, use of age-appropriate materials and child-directed activities. We have been 
using the SELA as a training and research tool in an early childhood professional development 
project called Best Practices in Early Literacy. 

We assessed the reliability of different types of observers using the SELA. First, we assessed 
reliability of Best Practices trainers who have received training on the use of the SELA. These 
professionals were specialists with considerable knowledge about developmentally appropriate 
supports for early literacy in preschool classrooms. Across 31 observations conducted by a pair 



References 



ERIC 




846 



841 



POSTERS 



of Best Practices trainers, the average reliability was 95%, when calculated as a percent of agree- 
ment on ratings within one point, with a range from 78% to 100%. We also calculated reliability 
between Best Practices trainers and participants in our professional development project who 
were early childhood program directors or staff developers. These participants were trained on the 
SEIA in a 3-hour group training session that included practice ratings using brief vignettes. Actoss 
40 observations involving Best Practices trainers paired with a participant, the average reliability 
(percent of agreement within one point) was 94 %, with a range from 47 % to 100 %. 

A preliminary analysis of differences in rater reliability across items did not indicate marked 
variation. For example, it appears to be as easy to reliably assess use of print in the environment 
with the SELA (94% average agreement within one point) as it is to assess how teachers encour- 
age children to use and extend their oral language (96% average agreement within one point). 
Discernable changes (mostly modest improvements) were evident using the SELA. This was 
following a period of training in which program directors and staff developers (trained and 
supported by Best Practices specialists) worked with teachers in classrooms during four training 
visits that targeted areas identified as weak in the initial SELA assessment. 

A pretraining interview with classroom teachers asked them to rate the extent to which they 
needed training in different areas assessed by the SELA (e.g., improving the classroom s literate 
environment, supporting children's language development). There was little or no relationship 
found between teachers' ratings of their need for assistance and SELA ratings, indicating the 
value of an objective, observation-based assessment of classroom quality. For example, although 
SELA ratings and trainers' observations suggested that most classrooms needed considerable 
help in improving supports for children's language development, 38 % of teachers said they 
need little or no help in this area and only 10% reported needing "a lot" of help. Following 
participation in Best Practices activities, 98 % of participants rated the SELA as "very useful," or 
"useful" in helping them identify strengths and weaknesses in the classroom. 

References 

Neuman, S. B., C. Copple, & S. Bredekamp. 1999. Learning to read and write: Developmentally 
appropriate practices for young children. Washington, DC: NAEYC. 

Burns, S. M., P. Griffin, & C. E. Snow. 1999. Starting out right: A guide to promoting children's 
reading success. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 



Validity of the MacArthur CDI for Use with Early Head Start Families 

Barbara Alexander Pan, Meredith Rowe 

PRESENTER: Barbara Alexander Pan 

One of the outcomes that Early Head Start (EHS) was designed to impact is children's language 
development. Rate of vocabulary acquisition in ihe earliest months of language learning varies 
widely (Goldfield & Reznick, 1990; Fenson et al., 1994) and is often difficult to measure. The 
MacArthur Communicative Developmental Inventory (CDI; Fenson, Bates, et al., 2000) is a 
parent report measure that is commonly used in research to measure children's early vocabulary. 

Some have questioned the validity of parental report, particularly in low-income families. 

The few studies that have focused on socioeconomic differences in children's language using the 
CDI have shown conflicting results. Feldman et al. (2000) and Fenson et al. (1994) found 
higher CDI scores for children whose mothers had less education. This finding is counter- 
intuitive and was explained by the suggestion that less educated mothers (who also often have 



O 

ERIC 



842 



847 



LANGUAGE D EVELO PM ENT/ EARLY LITERACY 



lower incomes) tend to over-report their children's emerging language skills (Fenson, Pethick, et 
al., 2000). 

However, Arriaga, Fenson, Cronan, and Pethick (1998), studying younger siblings of Head 
Start children, found that income and GDI scores were positively related. In addition, over 75% 
of the children in their sample scored below the median. These results suggest that either low- 
income parents tend to underreport children's language skills, or that low-income children on 
average acquire language at a slower pace. 

The current study was designed to compare maternal reporting on the GDI to observed child 
language production, to determine whether the GDI is valid for use with low-income. White 
families. The 126 participants in the study were drawn from a larger sample of predominantly 
White, native English-speaking families in rural New England who were participating in the 
national evaluation of EHS. 

All mother-child dyads who agreed to be videotaped at home during a 10-minute semi- 
structured play session were included. Videotaped interactions were transcribed using the Ghild 
Language Data Exchange System (MacWhinney, 2000), yielding the number of word types 
(different words) used by the child. The association between observed child word type produc- 
tion and maternal report was then estimated. 

Significant positive bivariate correlations were observed between maternal report of child 
vocabulary production and children's observed vocabulary production at 14 months (r = .36, 
p < .0001) and 24 months (r = .63, p < .0001). Multiple regression analyses indicated that parent 
report and child gender accounted for 20% of the variation in word types at 14 months. At 24 
months, parent report and birth-order together accounted for 41% of variation in child word 
types. Maternal education was not a significant predictor at either age. 

Furthermore, EHS program effects were observable using both parental report and observed 
measures. These results are important for both researchers and practitioners working with low- 
income families. The GDI is easy to administer and poses only modest literacy and time de- 
mands for parents. The GDI can be used by home visitors as a language assessment tool and as 
an opportunity to engage parents in conversation about their children's early language abilities. 
Our results suggest that maternal report is a valid measure of young children's language skills. 

References 

Arriaga, R., Fenson, L., Gronan, T, & Pethick, S. (1998). Scores on the MacArthur Gommunica- 
tive Development Inventories of children from low and middle income levels. Applied 
Psycholinguistics, 19, 209-223. 

Feldman, H., Dollaghan, G., Gampbell, T, Kurs-Lasky, M., Janosky, ]., & Paradise, J. (2000). 
Measurement properties of the MacArthur Gommunicative Development Inventories at ages 
one and two years. Child Development, 71, 310-322. 

Fenson, L., Bates, E., Dale, P, Goodman, J., Reznick, S., &Thal, D. (2000). Measuring variability 
in early child language: Don't shoot the messenger. Child Development, 71, 323-328. 

Fenson, L., Dale, P, Reznick, S., Bates, E., Thai, D., & Pethick, S. (1994). Variability in early 
communicative development. Monographs for the Society for Research in Child Development, 59 
(Serial No. 242). 

Fenson, L, Pethick, S., Renda, G., Gox, J., Dale, P, & Reznick, S. (2000). Short-form versions of the 
MacArthur Gommunicative Development Inventories. Applied Psycholinguistics, 21, 95-115. 
Goldfield, B., & Reznick, S. (1990). Early lexical acquisition: rate, content, and the vocabulary 
spurt. Journal of Child Language, 17, 171-183. 

MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 





843 



POSTERS 



The Role of Mothers' and Fathers' Language 
in Children's Semantic Diversity 

Tonia Natalie Cristofaro, Lisa Baumwell, Maria Yarolin, Eileen Rodriguez, Joanne Roberts, 
Elizabeth Spier 

PRESENTERS: Tonia Natalie Cristofaro, Eileen Rodriguez 

Studies illustrate the crucial roles of parents' language for toddlers' language competencies. 

Bloom (1998) highlights social interactions as important for children's language acquisition. 
Mothers who provide a linguistically rich environment have children who are linguistically more 
advanced (Tamis-LeMonda, Bomstein, & Baumwell, 2001). The assessment of toddler semantic 
categories taps into their understanding of grammatical and functional relationships (Tamis- 
LeMonda & Bomstein, 1994). Tamis-LeMonda and Bomstein found that 20-month semantic 
diversity was correlated with symbolic play. Like play, children's semantic categorization is a key 
index of their representational thinking. 

Few studies have investigated characteristics of low-income fathers' language. Ely and Berko 
Gleason (1995) explain how fathers' speech may have specific influences on children's language. 
As Tamis-LeMonda and Cabrera (1999) discuss, research on the multifaceted nature of father- 
hood and child outcomes in economically disadvantaged families is limited. Few studies have 
illustrated similarities and differences in the nature of mother and father language, and how 
these features contribute to children's use of semantic categories in language. Since children's 
early language experiences impact their linguistic and cognitive growth, research that enhances 
children's optimal development and that has public policy implications for literacy and school 
readiness is critical. 

The language of 50 ethnically diverse, low-income mothers and fathers and their toddlers was 
assessed from videotaped play interactions. The goals were to (a) explore the functional uses of 
mothers' and fathers' language during play with their toddlers, focusing on language quality; (b) 
describe children's increasing use of semantic categories in language; and (c) explore associa- 
tions between quality of maternal and paternal language and children's linguistic competencies. 

Mother-child and father-child interactions were videotaped separately in their children's 
homes. Dyads were videotaped for 10 minutes of semistructured free play with three function- 
ally similar, yet distinct, sets of age-appropriate toys. Both mother-child and father-child 
language was transcribed from the videotaped observations. Researchers coded parent and child 
language from the transcripts while viewing the videotapes, using a coding system adapted from 
Longobardi (1992). Mother and father utterances were coded into 31 language categories, 
including information-rich utterances, for example, labels. Children's utterances were coded into 
31 semantic categories in language, for example, possession. 

Factor analyses indicated the existence of a responsive/didactic factor and a control/intrusive- 
ness factor of maternal language. Mothers high on responsive language tended to provide rich 
information about ongoing events. Mothers high on the control factor tended to use many 
directives. Modest to strong relations were obtained between maternal speech and children's 
language. Various styles of fathers' language also emerged, including fathers who described 
objects and expanded on their toddlers' words, and fathers who asked open questions to 
encourage talk. Because existing literature suggests that individual differences in semantic 
diversity predict children's later cognitive development (Bates, Bretherton, & Snyder, 1988; 
Tamis-LeMonda & Bomstein, 1994), this study examines semantic diversity as one measure of 
toddler language. This study sheds light on the development of semantic categories in language 
in children from low-income families, in the context of their engagements with both mothers 
and fathers. 




844 



849 



LANGUAGE D EVE LO PM ENT/ EARLY LITERACY 



References 

\ Language accjuisition in its developmental context InD K'uHtijc^d c c* i 

Longobardi, E. (1992). Funzione comunicativa del comportamento matemo e svih.nnn 

oZrr“7beSr“^H'?h "''.scrando anno di vita |Communicativ^ functions 

second year of lifpl communicative-linguistic development of children in the 

T- • I di Psico/ogia, 19, 425-448 

"Tlad^nracros^ tt^ Bornstein, M. H (1994). Specificity in mother-toddler language-play 
relations across the second year. Developmental Psycholom, 30 283-292 « 8 P y 

“■ a pool). Maternal responsiveness and 

-er i„voi;I7e„:t^isearcb and 



Home and Preschool Connections: Meeting in the Contact Zone 

Leo Rigsby, Elizabeth DeMulder, Selma Caal, Laura Newton 

rasENTERS: Leo Rigsby, Elizabeth DeMulder, Selma Caal, Laura Newton 

not make an effort immigrant parents do 

work.parentvoicesherstr:i;::77c^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 

This research grows out of these contradictory perspectives We exnlore thp rp=,imr c r. 

ntem^at^ms 7rp‘^Sc«t7m,vr^rrv7*^ 

fam“de7lrdrffe7" m T ‘‘ where 

Sam 

PreI7rS “•“‘‘“S '^“"Pon 

In addition to informal cXcted 77e®'r’’* I," «‘<“«'io"Rl i«ues. 

literacy practices in more detail with a numbe7ofX'7o*ers about 

ATlinrL-lVSoSSVZ 




850 



845 



POSTERS 



lack of fluency in English. These consequences manifest themselves in power relations within 
families, in the mother's inability to provide support for the literacy development of her 
children, in employment opportunities for mothers, and in their inability to interact with the 
larger society. 

Many mothers have the practice of reading to their children as a result of either their own 
prior experience or from the practices that are promoted in the family support workshops. Their 
own literacy development may preclude reading in English, so a number of the Spanish- 
speaking mothers read to their children in Spanish. Mothers especially express the desire and 
intention to learn English. 

Reference 

Pratt, M. L. (1997). Arts of the Contact Zone. Profession 1997, 33-40. 



Phonological Awareness Versus Language Intervention 
with Children in Head Start Classrooms 

Eileen Gravani, Jacqueline Meyer, Michie Swartwood 

PRESENTERS: Eileen Gravani, Jacqueline Meyer, Michie Swartwood 

Fifteen years of converging research has identified specific skills needed to learn how to decode 
an alphabetic written language like English. The vast majority of studies identified phonological 
awareness (PA) as one of these skills (Catts, Fey, Zhang, &Tomblin, 2001). 

Snowling, et al. (1997) define PA as "the ability to reflect upon and manipulate components 
of spoken words." PA includes multiple skills, but exactly how many, their developmental order, 
and relationship to each other, have not been determined. Different tasks have been used and 
development frameworks proposed by a variety of researchers (Adams, 1990; Catts, 1993, 
Whitehurst & Lonigan, 1998). 

Existing research suggests, however, that some PA skills develop early (MacLean, Bryant, & 
Bradley, 1987; Lonigan, Burgess, Anthony, & Barker, 1998). Using six PA tasks, Gravani, Meyer, 
and Smartwood (2001) tested 56 students from six private preschools, ages 0-3 to 4-9 years. 
The six PA tasks included: rhyme detection, rhyme production, sentence segmentation into 
words, word segmentation into syllables, alliteration detection, and alliteration production. The 
Preschool Language Scale-3 (PLS-3: Zimmerman, Steiner, & Pond, 1992) was used to verify the 
subjects' age-appropriate articulation, receptive, and expressive language development. 

Analysis using ANOVA and Tukey HSD indicated no developmental progression for sentence 
segmentation, since all subjects were able to do this task. Other abilities showed a developmen- 
tal trend. Detection preceded production for rhyme and alliteration (p < .001). Using regression 
analysis, the Auditory Comprehension score from PLS-3 was a predictor for rhyme detection 
(p < .002) and alliteration detection (p < .047). 

Two Capital Area Planning Council (CAPCO) Head Start classrooms in Cortland, New York, 
were selected for the following year for assessment and intervention. The PLS-3 and the PA tasks 
were administered. Mean standard scores for both sections of the PLS-3 were significantly lower 
than the non- Head Start group (p < .001). Children in Head Start also scored significantly lower 
on all six PA tasks (p < .001). There were not significant differences between the Head Start classes. 

Previous research indicated that PA intervention was successful in lower elementary grades 
(Ball & Blachman, 1991). The present study sought to determine whether these skills can be 
taught to preschool children. Children in one classroom received direct instruction in PA; 



O 

ERIC 



846 



851 



LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT/EARLY LITERACY 



children in the second class received language stimulation, focusing on narratives. Twenty-eight 
sessions were conducted twice weekly, for a total of 11.5 hours for each group. 

Activities for PA followed a developmental progression, beginning with segmenting sentences 
into words. Multiple modalities were used when teaching rhyme and alliteration. There was a 
significant intervention group and time interaction for alliteration detection (p < .027), with the 
PA group showing increased alliteration detection. Both groups improved in segmenting 
sentences (p < .053) and words into syllables (p < .044). 

The results indicate that at least one PA skill, alliteration detection, can be taught to 4-year- 
olds in a Head Start program. Many kindergarten teachers begin focusing on sounds in the 
beginning of words when teaching pre-reading skills. 

Both groups improved in narrative skills (p < .001). There was an intervention group and 
time interaction, with the language intervention group showing better narrative skills (p < .03). 

References ' 

Adams, M. J. (1990). Beginning to read: Thinking and learning about print. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 

Ball, E. W., & Blachman, B. (1991). Does phoneme awareness training in kindergarten make a 
difference in early word recognition and developmental spelling? Reading Research Quarterly, 
26, 49-66. 

Catts, H. W. (1993). The relationship between speech language impairments and reading 
disabilities. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 36, 948-958. 

Catts, H. W., Fey, M. E., Zhang, X., & Tomblin, J. B. (2001). Estimating the risk of future reading 
difficulties in kindergarten children: A research-based model and its clinical instrumenta- 
tiori. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 32, 38-50. 

Gravani, Et., Meyer, J., & Swartwood, M. (2001). Phonological awareness: Awareness in preschool 
children. Syracuse, NY: New York State Association for the Education of Young Children. 
Lonigan, C. J., Burgess, S. R., Anthony, J. L., & Barker, T. A. (1998). Development of phonologi- 
cal sensitivity in 2- to 5-year-old children. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90, 294-311. 
MacLean, M., Bryant, P, & Bradley, L. (1987). Rhymes, nursery rhymes, and reading in early 
childhood. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 33, 255-281. 

Snowling, M., et al. (1994). The effects of phoneme similarity and list length on children's 
sound categorization performance. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 58, 160-180. 
Whitehurst, G. J., & Lonigan, C. J. (1998). Child development and emergent literacy. Child 
Development, 69, 848-872. 



Training Head Start Teachers in Active Listening 

Mary Alice Bond, Annemarie Hindman, Barbara Wasik 

PRESENTERS: Annemarie Hindman, Barbara Wasik 



Language development is closely related to intellectual growth and lays a foundation for the 
expansion of early literacy skills in young children (Snow, Burns, & Griffin, 1998). Unfortu- 
nately, children raised in poverty often have less advanced language and vocabulary skills than 
their more advantaged peers (Hart & Risley, 1995). An important challenge faced by Head Start 
teachers is to provide opportunities and experiences that support the language and vocabulary 
development of their at-risk students, preparing them for success in school. 

Research has shown that teachers, in general, have difficulty providing children with opportu- 
nities to use language to express themselves (Cross, 1989). To support Head Start teachers in 



O 

ERIC 



852 



847 



POSTERS 



meeting this critically important need, the Johns Hopkins Language and Literacy Training 
Project, a five-module training program, provides specific strategies and activities that help to 
promote verbal interaction between adults and children in the classroom through a variety of 
early literacy activities. 

A case study of three Baltimore City Head Start teachers' training in, and implementation of. 
Active Listening (the first training component), provides important insights into several aspects 
of professional development in Head Start: (a) teachers' classroom and curricular training needs, 
(b) best practices for training delivery, and (c) systemic stmctures needed to support trainirig. 

The Active Listening component features explicit, child-friendly guidelines for conversations. 
Teachers are encouraged to help children master these routines and to thoughtfully plan many 
learning conversations into their lessons. Important concepts are introduced during training: 
such as the principle that active listeners do more than just "keep quiet"; they stay involved in 
the conversation, by giving their full attention and respect to the speaker and thinking of a 
question or comment. 

Researchers provided an interactive training manual and explained the specific techniques. 
They also provided supporting materials including a collection of books and a felt board with 
felt pieces and sentence strips to facilitate constmction and labeling of the face of an active 
listener. The researchers helped teachers plan lessons using the new strategies, observed these 
lessons, and offered feedback in individual conferences. 

Both quantitative and qualitative data were collected on the intensive training cycle provided 
by the Johns Hopkins Language and Literacy Project. An analysis of children's performance on 
the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-111 (PPVT-111; Dunn & Dunn, 1997) and the Expressive 
One-Word Picture Vocabulary Test (EOWPVT; Gardiner, 2000) indicated that children in the 
three intervention classrooms scored significantly higher than children in three comparison 
classes. Analysis of classrooms using the Early Language and Literacy Classroom Observatiori 
(Smith & Dickinson, 1998) revealed that teachers in the intervention earned higher scores than 



their comparison peers. 

With regard to the active listening component, qualitative classroom observations and 
teacher reports suggested that intervention teachers took ownership of active listening strategies 
and integrated them into their curricula, and that their students began to practice active listening 
with their peers and used the phrases from the felt board witii ilieir teachers and friends. 



References 

Cross, T. (1989). Teacher talk in preschool settings. Early Child Development and Care, 52, 
133-146. 

Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, Third Edition. Circle Pines, 
MN: American Guidance Service. 

Gardiner, M. F. (2000). Expressive One-Word Picture Vocabulary Test, Third Edition. Novato, CA: 
Academic Therapy Publications. 

Hart, B. & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful differences in everyday experiences of young American 
children. Baltimore: Brookes. 

Smith, M. W., & Dickinson, D. (1998). The Early Language and Literacy Classroom Observation. 
Newton, MA: Education Development Center. 

Snow, C. E., Burns, S. M., & Griffin, P. (Eds.). (1998). Preventing reading difficulties. Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press. 




848 



853 



LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT/EARLY LITERACY 



Language Functioning in Preschool Foster Children 

Brenda Jones Harden 

PRESENTER: Brenda Jones Harden 



Children in foster care are an increasingly large segment of the Head Start population and often 
receive priority enrollment status. The development of foster children is an understudied 
phenomenon, with few recent studies reporting on global developmental outcomes. Current 
evidence suggests that over half of young foster children screen positive for developmental 
problems (Berrick, Needel, Barth, & Jonson-Reid, 1998). ^ 

fosil^ rhnHrr^ concerning language development in preschool 

foster children Seventy-five foster children 4-6 years of age comprised the sample, with an 

^erage age of 62 months (SD = 9.8). About 51o/o were male, and 73o/o wereMrican American 

Sti^s tradmonal foster family homes (57o/o), as well as kinship foster family 

Measures of language included standardized tests, including the Peabody Picture Vocabulary 
Test-Revised (PP^-R; Dunn & Dunn, 1981) and the Kaufman Brief IntelligLce Test (K-BIT- 

tiLsThhlh^^'*^'"^"' Expressive Language subtest. Transcription of children's conversa- 
tions with foeir caregivers was conducted, based on videotaped parent-child interaction. In 

Brad r'i the Measurement of the Environment (HOME; Caldwell & 

Bradley, 1984) and a background questionnaire were completed. Data were collected during one 

recd^Tseveralto^ participation, and chilLn 

ranS^M ‘"f 2 °f foster children scored in the moderately low 

range (M - 82 7 SD = 15.9). Expressive language as assessed via standardized testing was in the 
normal range (M - 93.0, SD = 10.8). In contrast, the average Mean Length of Utterance for this 
populaUon was 3.3, which is in the below average range. Over half of the children (57 3%) 
scored below 85 on the PPVT-R, and 30.7o/o of the children scored below 85 on the K-BIT. No 
ifferences were found between children in traditional and kinship homes on any variable despite 
±e findings that traditional foster families had better quality home environment! and mom 
con jete resources than kinship families. The HOME environment was highly associated with 
children s lan^age outcomes on the PPVT-R (r = .33, p < .01) and the K-BLT (r = .43, p < 001) 

These findings confirm prior data that foster children exhibit developmental delays snedfi- 
cally in the language domain. They need particular support regarding their receptive!anguage 

n s smpro ucmg complex language in conversational speech. Universal developmental 

screenings and languapbased early intervention would benefit this population of chUdren 
As has been found m multiple studies, the HOME environment played a critical role in the 
development of the young Aildren in this study. The results of the current research suggest foat 
the enwonments of foster family homes may be more influential regarding language Stcomes 
foan whether chi dren are placed in traditional or foster family settings. In fois rSafd home 

r that focuses on language developmem and other devdopmen- 

a y sumulatmg activities has the potential to ameliorate developmental defidts that may 
emerge m children m kinship families, due to their lack of concrete resources. 

References 

Dunn, L & Dunn, P. (1981). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test - Revised. Cirde Pines, MN- Ameri- 
can LiUiaance Service. 

^^""Slfoance Brief Intelligence Test. Circle Pines, MN; American 



O 



849 



POSTERS 



Parenting in Context: Multiple Pathways to Early Reading 

Seung-Hee Claire Son, Frederick Morrison 

PRESENTERS: Seung-Hee Claire Son, Frederick Morrison 

Accumulated research has demonstrated that individual differences in reading and reading- 
related literacy skills emerge early (Hart & Risley, 1995) and are relatively stable over time 
(Cunningham & Stanovich, 1997). While parenting practices constitute a key source of variabil- 
ity in early reading (Teale, 1986), they operate in the context of other multiple influences. Many 
previous studies explaining 'multiple factors' had an isolated list of predictor variables, without 
focusing on dynamic interactions among them (Snow, Burns, & Griffin, 1998). The present 
paper explores a comprehensive model designed to link sociocultural, parenting, and child 
factors in predicting pathways to reading achievement. 

Participants in this study included 142 kindergartners from the Child Development Supple- 
ment of the Panel Study on Income Dynamics 1997. The letter- word identification score from 
Woodcock- Johnson was used as the dependent variable. Predictors included sociocultural 
factors, such as maternal education and adjusted family income; parenting-cognitive stimulation 
and emotional warmth/support as measured by the Home Observation for the Measurement of 
the Environment (HOME; Caldwell & Bradley, 1984); child variables-cognitive skills of digit- 
span memory from WISC-R; and socioemotional characteristics of attention and sociability 
adapted from Achenbach and Edelbrock (1983). Path analysis was conducted using Structural 
Equation Modeling (Bender & Wu, 1993). In this way, direct and indirect associations between 
sociocultural, parenting, child factors, and early reading could be examined simultaneously. 

Results of the path analysis indicated that sociocultural, parenting, and child factors pre- 
sented a strong model of early reading. Both sociocultural and parenting variables predicted 
early reading. Whereas the direct effect of family income was only marginally significant, 
parenting variables mediated the relation between sociocultural factors and reading. Mothers 
with more education were likely to provide greater cognitive stimulation, which in turn yields 
higher reading scores for those children. Similarly, families with higher income were more likely 
to have stimulating environments, and children from these families were more likely to have 
stronger reading skills. 

Child cognitive skills acted as a mediator of parenting. Emotional warmth/ sensitivity signifi- 
candy predicted children's cognitive skills, which exhibited a direct path to reading. These results 
suggest that emotional warmth and consistent sensitivity may support children's reading skills. 
One unexpected result was that cognitive stimulation did not predict child cognitive skills in the 
present model. It is possible that digit-span was not sensitive to variability in stimulation. 
Furthermore, children's attention and sociability did not significandy mediate parenting 
influence on reading, in contrast to previous studies (Morrison & Cooney, 2001), which might 
be due to outcome measure characteristics. A measure of higher order skills such as reading 
comprehension may have been directly predicted by children's social skills. 

Findings revealed that sources of influence combine in complex ways to yield multiple 
pathways to early reading. For example, maternal education influenced reading skills through 
cognitive stimulation, and simultaneously, through parental warmth, which was associated with 
child cognitive skills that direcdy predicted reading scores. Head Start professionals may utilize 
these multiple pathways to formulate effective parenting interventions. For example, parent 
education programs may want to emphasize to parents the importance of providing consistent 
emotional support to their child as well as cognitive stimulation. 

References 

Achenbach, T. M., & Edelbrock, C. S. (1983). Manual for the child behavior checklist and revised 
child behavior profile. Burlington, VT: University of Vermont, Department of Psychology. 




855 



850 



LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT/EARLY LITERACY 



Bender, P. M., & Wu, E. J. C. (1993). EQS/Windows user's guide: Version 4. Los Angeles: BMDP 
Statistical Software. 

Caldwell, B. M., & Bradley, R. H, (1984), Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment 
Litde Rock, AK: University of Arkansas. 

Cunningham, A. E., & Stanovich, K. E. (1997). Early reading acquisition and its relation to 
reading experience and ability 10 years later. Developmental Psychology, 33, 934-945. 

Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful differences in the everyday experiences of young American 
children. Baltimore: Brookes. 

Morrison, F. J., & Cooney, R. R. (2001). Parenting and academic achievement: Multiple paths to 
early literacy. In J. G. Borkowski, S. L. Ramey, & M. Bristol-Power (Eds.), Parenting and child's 
world: Influences on academic, intellectual, and socioemotional development (pp. 141-151). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Snow, C. E., Burns, M. S., & Griffin, P. (Eds.) (1998). Preventing reading difficulties in young 

children. Committee on the Prevention of Reading Difficulties in Young Children, Commis- 
sion on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, National Research Council, Washing- 
ton, DC: National Academy Press. 

Teale, W. H. (1986). Home background and young children's literacy development. In W. H. 
Teale, & E. Sulzby. (1986). Emergent literacy: Writing and reading. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 



The Impact of Literacy-Focused Prekindergarten Curricula 
and Teacher Mentoring Support on Classroom Outcomes 

David Brown, Deborah Hammond Atkins 

PRESENTERS: David Brown, Deborah Hammond Atkins 

Research has shown the importance of children developing reading and literacy skills early, 
before traditional formal education begins. In fact, how well children master key literacy skills 
(the ability to speak, read, and write) influences how successful they will be in other academic 
areas. Language and vocabulary accomplishment at 3 years of age have been shown to be 
predictive of language and reading performance at age 9 (Hart & Risley, 1995). Learning 
environments that are rich in print, reading materials, and resources will provide young children 
a solid foundation on which to build reading and literacy skills to positively influence all areas 
of academic achievement (Hunter, 2000). 

Site managers were informed of the project's goals during September 2000. Targeted teachers 
were provided with specialized training on creating print-rich environments, encouraging 
phonemic awareness, conducting read-alouds, and providing language and literacy activities for 
young children. The training was provided by mentor teachers who received training from 
CIRCLE, the coordinating agency for the Texas Educational Component Grant. 

Additionally, consultants from the curriculum model programs provided training to all 
teachers in the treatment group. The training was provided over a 9-month period. Some on-site 
training was provided; most training was provided during large groups in centralized locations. 
The mentor teachers provided ongoing curriculum support and technical assistance to each 
target teacher. The mentor teachers visited the target teachers' classrooms twice weekly to model 
strategies and activities, provide instructional materials, and monitor the implementation of the 
selected curriculum models. 

Fifteen Head Start teachers were randomly selected to participate in the present study. Eight 
teachers were randomly assigned to the treatment groups, and seven were randomly assigned to 
the control group. Ten children were then randomly selected from each of the groups. The 



ERIC 




851 



] I 



POSTERS 



treatment group contained 96 children, and the control group contained 69 children. During 
the fall of 2001 and spring of 2002, trained field data colleaors administered the Peabody 
Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT-llI; Dunn & Dunn, 1997), the Expressive Vocabulary Test (EVT; 
Williams, 1997), and the Developing Skills Checklist (DSC; CTB, 1990) to 165 Head Start 
students. Literacy evaluation areas included (a) phonological awareness, (b) letter knowledge, 

(c) print awareness, (d) auditory comprehension, and (e) math concepts and operations. 

Children's test scores were compared to norms for each child outcome measure (PPVT-III, 

EVT, and DSC). Independent t-tests and repeated measures analysis of variance were used to 
analyze data between treatment groups and the control group. Results of the study in year 1 
revealed that children in the LEAP treatment classrooms scored significantly higher than both 
the control classrooms and Success For Life classrooms on the PPVT, EVT, and the DSC. These 
results showed that children in LEAP classrooms significantly increased their vocabulary skills. 

Findings from analysis of the Developing Skills Checklist showed that children in the LEAP 
intervention classrooms scored near national norms on all subscales: (a) math concepts and 
operations, (b) memory/letter knowledge, (c) auditory/phonological awareness, (d) print, and ^ 
(e) total prereading. In fact, children scored significantly higher on letter knowledge in compari- 
son to national norms. Children in Success For Life and control classrooms scored significantly 
below national norms on all subscales. 

In LEAP classrooms, 8% of participants spoke Spanish as their dominant language, whereas 
Success For Life and control classrooms included 19.6% and 27.6% Spanish-dominant speakers, 
respectively. Language differences were not shown to be a primary factor in achievement 
outcomes. Other factors that may have influenced these differences are being investigated during 
year 2; mentoring style, cjuality of modeling effective classroom practices, curriculum implemen- 
tation, and family educational attainment. 

Interview data suggest that Head Start teachers are highly motivated to implement the 
literacy-focused curricula. They have experienced many successful interactions with mentor 
teachers. Reports from target teachers suggested that mentors provided instruction in the 
following areas that support literacy development: (a) read-alouds, (b) use of e^^ressive lan- 
guage, (c) reading strategies such as KWL charts, (d) phonological awareness activities, 

(e) writing centers, (f) numeracy activities, (g) letter recognition, (h) use of story props, 

(i) instmctional materials, (j) classroom arrangement, (k) literacy cliaits and graphs, and 
(1) increased use of reading and writing materials throughout the classroom. Mentoring was 
found to enhance the confidence of both target teachers and mentor teachers working with the 
teachers and program managers. 

Overall, findings from year 1 analysis are favorable and indicate that children showed 
developmental skills gains in the areas of letter recognition, print awareness, phonological 
awareness, and math concepts. However, children from Spanish-dominant classrooms generally 
attained significantly lower mean scores than English-dominant children on all measures. Many 
language-minority children have the same risk factors that also affect the performance of native- 
English-speaking children. These risk factors include limited parental education, single parent 
status, large family size, and poverty (Sameroff, Seifer, Barocas, Zax, & Greenspan, 1987). As 
mentioned, other factors are being investigated in year 2 that may provide greater insights into 
how the literacy-focused curricula and mentoring influence children's achievement outcomes. 

References 

CTB. (1990). Developing Skills Checklist. Monterey, CA: McGraw-Hill. 

Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, 3rd Edition. Gircle Pines, MN: 
American Guidance Service. 

Hart, B., & Riesley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of young American 
children. Baltimore, MD: Brookes. 



ERIC 



852 



857 



LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT/EARLY LITERACY 



Hunter, P. C. (2000). Personal communication. Professional staff development sessions. Texas 
Kindergarten Reading Academy. 

Sameroff, A. J., Seifer, R., Barocas, R., Zax, M., & Greenspan, S. (1987). Intelligence quotient 
scores of four-year-old children: Social environmental risk factors. Pediatrics 79, 343-350. 
Williams, K. T. (1997). Expressive Vocabulary Test. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 



The Role of Family Involvement in Literacy Activities in an Early 
Intervention to Enhance Literacy Skills Development in Native 
and Non-Native English Speakers 

Jessica Lynne Taisey, Brenda Franklin, Dawn M. Terrell 

PRESENTERS: Brenda Franklin, Dawn M. Terrell 
(Summary not available) 



Development of Emergent Literacy Skills Across the Head Start Year 

Christopher J. Lonigan, Rebecca Gerhardstein, Beth Phillips, Howard Goldstein, Julia Riehm 

PRESENTER: Christopher J. Lonigan 
(Summary not available) 




S58 



853 



Maternal Mental Health 



Early Childhood Predictors of At-Risk Boys' Relationship Quality 
With Mothers and Teachers After School Entry 

Mark A. Biernbaum, Daniel Shaw 

PRESENTER: Mark A. Biembaum 

Can maternal questionnaire measures completed when a child is a toddler be used to predict 
the quality of a child's relationship with both his mother and teacher in first grade? In this 
exploratory secondary analysis of data drawn from a larger, longitudinal investigation of 
approximately 300 low-income families and their sons, data from the toddler period did 
robustly predict relationship quality as reported by mothers and teachers in first grade. 

Families were recruited from a Women, Infant, and Children Nutritional Support Program in 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, when the target son was approaching 18 months, and were then 
assessed on an almost yearly basis. The present analysis contains data from the 18-, 24-, and 
72-month assessments. At the 18- and 24-month assessments, mothers completed the Infant 
Characteristics Questionnaire (ICQ; Bates, Freeland, & Lounsbury, 1979), the Parenting Daily 
Hassles (PDH; Crnic & Greenberg, 1990), the Beck Depression Inventory (BDl; Beck & 
Beamesderfer, 1974), and the Maternal Social Support Index (Pascoe & Earp, 1984). The 
Child Behavior Checklist for Ages 2-3 (CBCL; Achenbach, 1992) was completed at the 
24-month assessment. 

When the target child was in first grade, mothers and teachers both filled out a version of the 
Student-Teacher Relationship Scale (STRS; Pianta & Steinberg, 1991; the scale was modified for 
parental use). Scores from both informants were used to calculate two summary scores; 

(a) Conflicting Relations (10 items; teacher alpha = .92, mother alpha = .86) and (b) Positive 
Relations (7 items; teacher alpha = .81, mother alpha = .74). Based on these scores, three 
analysis groups were formed; (a) Conflict boys {n = 34) had Conflict scores in the top 40%, 
Positive scores in the bottom 40%, with at least one of these scores in the most extreme 20%; 

(b) Positive boys (n = 36) had Conflict scores in the lowest 40%, Positive scores in the highest 
40%, with at least one of these scores in the most extreme 20%; and (c) Middle boys (n = 64) 
had Conflict and Positive scores in the central 60%, with neither score in the extreme 20%. 

Results of a MANOVA (Wilks' Lamda; F = 4.46 (10), p < .001) indicated that Conflict boys 
were significantly differentiable from Positive boys on the PDH, the CBCL, the ICQ, and the 
BDl. Scores on these four measures were entered into a logistic regression to ascertain their 
ability to correctly classify Conflict and Positive boys. This combination of variables correctly 
predicted the group status of 85% of the boys, with equally good sensitivity and specificity. 
Maternal report of daily parenting stress (PDH) was particularly influential, B = 2.46, Wald = 
9.91, p = .002, Exp (B) = 11.73 [95% Cl for Exp (B) = 2.53 - 54.32]. These measures are easy to 
complete and could be useful as a screen for fhture risk. These data suggest that early interven- 
tion programs can help prevent negative relationship outcomes in first grade by targeting 
depressed mothers who perceive their toddler as temperamentally difficult and prominently 
externalizing, and who report high levels of stress associated with daily parenting tasks. 



854 



859 



MATERNAL MENTAL HEALTH 



References 

Achenbach, T. M. (1992). Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist IjB and 1992 Profile. Burlington: 
University of Vermont, Department of Psychiatry. 

Bates, J. E., Freeland, C. A., & Lounsbury, M. L. (1979). Measurement of infant difficultness. 

Child Development, 50, 794-803. 

Beck, A. T., & Beamesderfer, A. (1974). Assessment of depression: The Depression Inventory. In 
P. Pichot (Ed.), Psychological measurement in psychopharmacology: Modem problems in 
pharmacopsychiatry: Vol. 7. Basel, Switzerland: Karger. 

Crnic, K. A., & Greenberg, M. T. (1990). Minor parenting stresses with young children. Child 
Development, 61, 1628-1637. 

Pascoe, J. M., & Earp, J. A. (1984). The effect of mothers' social support and life changes on the 
stimulation of their children in the home. American Journal of Public Health, 74, 358-360. 

Pianta, R. C., & Steinberg, M. (1991, April). Relationship between children and kindergarten teachers: 
Associations with home and classroom behavior. Paper presented at the meeting for the Society 
for Research in Child Development, Seattle, WA. 



A Pilot Study of Stress and Coping in High-Risk Mothers: Difficult 
Life Circumstances, Psychiatric Mental Health Symptoms, 

Education, and Experiences in Their Families of Origin 

Elizabeth A. LeCuyer-Maus 

PRESENTER: Elizabeth A. LeCuyer-Maus 

A pilot study was conducted to test methods and measures used to assess factors related to 
stress and coping in high-risk mothers, and their impact on parenting. Twenty mothers with 
2-month-old toddlers were recruited from a Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) population; 
they came into an observational laboratory where they were interviewed about stressors in their 
lives, and symptoms of stress, and were videotaped interacting with their children. Maternal 
difficult life circumstances, psychiatric mental health symptoms, education, maternal experi- 
ences in their families of origin, and parenting stress explained 74% of the variance in maternal 
sensitive-responsiveness with their toddlers in the laboratory setting. 

The findings support the methods of the study and hopefully validate (a) the complex and 
challenging set of conditions faced by these mothers as they parent their children, and (b) that 
these conditions must be addressed by the professionals who choose to work with them. As 
Guralnick (1997) notes, we know that early intervention works, now our task is to learn which 
interventions work best for which populations and when. While this sample was small and 
these firidirigs must be replicated before generalization can occur, these findings underscore that 
along wiA interventions addressing maternal difficult life circumstances and parenting stress, 
interventions addressing family of origin issues and psychiatric mental health symptoms may 
also be important to consider when working with high-risk mothers. 

Resources for assessment and treatment of psychiatric mental health symptoms are indicated, 
and further research is needed to establish normative and criterion level information on family 
of origin screening assessments, that is, the meaning of individual scores and what scores may 
indicate cause for concern. In conjunction with further research, it is hoped that these findings 
will assist us to further tailor assessments and interventions to be increasingly relevant for the 
mothers they are intended to serve, which will ultimately serve their children as well. 

Reference 

Guralnick, M. J. (1997). Second generation research in the field of early intervention. In M. E. 
Guralnick (Ed.), The effectiveness of early intervention (pp. 3—20). Baltimore: Brookes. 



860 



855 



POSTERS 



Maternal Anxiety and Attention Regulation 
in Children From Head Start 

Barbara Burns, Florence Chang, Dena Dossett 

PRESENTERS: Barbara Burns, Florence Chang 

It is well understood that voluntary attention in children develops through social interactions 
with parents and other caregivers (Vygotsky, 1962; Wertsch, 1979). When a task is too difficult 
for a child, the parent may arrange the task to make it simpler or provide help so that the child 
can be successful on at least a part of the task. As the task becomes easier for the child due to age 
or practice, parents typically provide more opportunity for children to independently work on 
the task. One important factor influencing the way parents interact with their children is the 
parents* mental health. Mental health problems in the mother have been linked with less 
responsiveness toward the child and a more insecure attachment (Chorpita & Barlow, 1998, 
Whaley, Pinto, & Sigman, 1999). 

In the current study, we examined the impact of subclinical levels of maternal anxiety on the 
process of children's developing attention regulation. A total of 41 mother-child dyads partici- 
pated in a puzzle-solving task together. Children also completed a similar puzzle alone 1 week 
later. We designed our study to answer two questions: a) Do mothers who have elevated levels of 
anxiety instruct children differently in a parent-child puzzle matching task? and b) Do children 
of mothers who have elevated anxiety perform differently in a puzzle-matching task when they 
have to complete the puzzle alone? 

The participants in this study were 41 children and their mothers enrolled in a Head Start 
program. A standard assessment of anxiety in adults was employed (the Spielberger State-Trait 
Anxiety Scale; Spielberger, Gorsuch, & Lushene, 1970), and median splits defined a high and 
low anxiety group, although none of the participants exhibited clinical levels of anxiety. 

Results showed that the mothers with higher anxiety group (MHA) significantly differed from 
the mothers with lower anxiety group (MLA) in nonverbal behavior. The MHA group pointed 
more than the MLA group, but exhibited similar amounts of verbal behavior. In addition, the 
children of mothers with higher anxiety had a lower proportion of self-regulated gazes of 
attention (61% for MLA and 40% for MHA) as compared to the children of mothers with lower 
anxiety. That is, children of MLA had more independent gazes to the model puzzle than chil- 
dren of MHA. 

The manner in which children completed the puzzle-matching task when they were by 
themselves was also compared for the two groups. There were no significant differences in the 
proportion of self-regulated gazes by children with MHA or MLA. There were also no differences 
in the number of correct pieces inserted for the two groups. We conclude from this that children 
in the two groups had the same ability for completing the puzzles. 

In sum, maternal anxiety was shown to relate to differences in maternal nonverbal behavior 
in a puzzle-matching task. It appears that the children of mothers with higher anxiety were given 
more directives. Children of mothers with higher anxiety also demonstrated less independent 
attention regulation. Future research is needed to determine the causal connection between 
these two findings. 

References 

Chorpita, B. F., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). The development of anxiety: The role of control in the 
early environment. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 3-21. 

Spielberger, C. D., Gorsuch, R. L., & Lushene, R. (1970). Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. 
Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologist Press. 

Vasey, M. W. (1996). Anxiety-related attentional biases in childhood. Behaviours Change, 13, 
199-205. 




856 



MATERNAL MENTAL HEALTH 



Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA; Harvard University Press. 
Wertsch, J. B. (1979). From social interaction to higher psychological processes: A clarification 
and application of Vygotsky's theory. Human Development, 22, 1-22. 

Whaley, S. E., Pinto, A., & Sigman, M. (1999). Characterizing interactions between anxious 
mothers and their children. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 826-836. 



Environments of Physically and Emotionally Neglected Children 

M. Angela Casady, Robert E. Lee 

PRESENTER: M. Angela Casady 

Child neglect has been associated with factors such as poverty and parental substance abuse 
(Kropenske & Howard, 1994; Sedlak & Broadhurst, 1996). Yet, experience with child neglect 
suggests that a focus on individual variables is artificial (Belsky, 1993; Lee & Lynch, 1998). An 
evaluation of the entire system in which the child develops may uncover additional areas of 
concern and may assist in the understanding of child neglect (Yoshikawa & Hseuh, 2001). Thus, 
we tested an ecological model related to the provision of adequate physical care using previously 
collected data (Caudin, Polansky, Kilpatrick, & Shilton, 1996). 

Participants included 132 at-risk families with a high incidence of substantiated maltreat- 
ment reports: 38% for neglect only, 8% for physical abuse and neglect, and 1% for sexual abuse 
and neglect. Head Start provided services for 27% of these families; all families included in this 
analysis had at least one preschool child. The primary caregivers had a 56% rate of high school 
graduation; 69% of the families had income below the federal poverty level. 

Caseworkers familiar with each family were trained in the use of the Child Well-Being Scales 
(Magura & Moses, 1986) to assess physical and emotional neglect. In the original Child Well- 
Being Scales, high scores represented higher levels of neglect, while the derived factors of 
physical and emotional well-being used in this study are reverse-scored with higher scores 
representing higher levels of child well-being. Caseworkers also completed a checklist of adult 
problems (e.g., criminal offenses, substance abuse, poor physical health). Trained graduate 
students administered an oral interview to obtain information about (a) social support, using a 
modified version of the Social Network Map (Tracy & Whittaker, 1990); (b) depression, using 
the Ceneralized Contentment Scale (Hudson & Proctor, 1977); and (c) demographics. 

Rather than compare groups based on the presence of substantiated reports of maltreatment, 
this study examined continuous variables of the quality of physical and emotional caregiving as 
the criteria. Two multiple regression analyses tested our ecological model of child neglect. The 
first model examined correlates of the physical neglect factor from the Child Well-Being Scales, 

F (5, 108) = 10.99, p < .001; the second model examined correlates of the emotional neglect 
factor, F (5, 108) = 7.27, p < .001. Social support of the caregiver and stressful life events were 
related to child emotional well-being; adult problems, stressful life events, and ethnicity were 
related to child physical well-being. 

Many studies define neglectful families as those who have a documented and legally substan- 
tiated report of child neglect; however, neglect — or, from an asset-oriented perspective, child 
well-being — is a continuum ranging from neglect to simply adequate care to child well-being. 
This study views children's environments as a continuum of adequacy of care in the home, 
rather than basing conclusions on the presence or absence of substantiated reports. An overview 
of the ecosystem of these low-income families suggests that families who have fewer problems at 
the microsystem level are able to provide more adequate care. 



ERIC 




9 



857 



POSTERS 



References 

Belsky, J. (1993). Etiology of child maltreatment: A developmental ecological analysis. Psycho- 
logical Bulletin, 114, 413-434. 

Gaudin, J. M., Polansky, N. A., Kilpatrick, A. C., & Shilton, P. (1996). Family functioning in 
neglectful families. Child Abuse and Neglect, 20, 363-377. 

Hudson, W. W., & Proctor, E. K. (1977). Assessment of depressive affect in clinical practice. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 45, 1206-1207. 

Kropenske, V., & Howard, J. (1994). Protecting children in substance-abusing families. Washington, 
DC: US Department of Health and Human Services. 

Lee, R. E., & Lynch, M. T. (1998). Combating foster care drift: An ecosystemic treatment model 
for neglect cases. Contemporary Family Therapy, 20, 351-370. 

Magura, S., & Moses, B. S. (1986). Outcome measures for child welfare services: Theory and applica- 
tions. Washington, DC: Child Welfare League of America. 

Sedlak, A. ]., & Broadhurst, D. D. (1996) Third national incidence study of child abuse and neglect: 
Final report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 

Tracy, E. M., & Whittaker, J. K. (1990). The social network map: Assessing social support in 
clinical practice. Families in Society, 71, 461-470. 

Yoshikawa, H., & Hsueh, L (2001). Child development and public policy: Toward a dynamic 
systems perspective. Child Development, 72, 1887-1903. 



Maternal Psychopathology and Infant Social-Emotional Problems: 
Common and Unique Associations 

Amanda E. Schweder, Laura Stout Sosinsky, Stephanie M. Jones, Margaret J. Briggs-Gowan, 
Alice S. Carter 

PRESENTERS: Amanda E. Schweder, Laura Stout Sosinsky 

Although representative studies show a prevalence of significant emotional and behavioral 
problems in 2- to 3-year-olds ranging from 7-24% (Briggs-Gowan, Carter, Skuban, & Horwitz, 
2001; Roberts, Attkisson, & Rosenblatt, 1998), there is relatively little empirical information 
about the nature and correlates of infant-toddler social-emotional problems. Social-emotional 
problems may interfere with infant-toddler functioning and prohibit the achievement of 
mental-age appropriate social-emotional competencies (Aber & lones, 1997). Empirical 
information on social— emotional development is critical to best serve families in programs 
promoting young children's social-emotional competence (e.g., Early Head Start). 

A well-documented family-level risk factor for infant-toddler social-emotional problems is 
maternal psychopathology. Children of depressed mothers are at increased risk for emotion 
regulation difficulties and problem behaviors (Radke-Yarrow, 1998). Similarly, mothers with 
depression and anxiety have shown less optimal play interactions with their infants than 
mothers with only depression or mothers without psychopathology (Carter, Garrity-Rokous, 
Chazan-Cohen, Little, & Briggs-Gowan, 2001). 

Data from a large-scale longitudinal study of infant-toddler social-emotional development 
were examined in this study for the differentiation of common and unigue associations (i.e., 
multi and equifmality; Cicchetti & Rogosch, 1996) between maternal depression and anxiety, 
and infant internalizing (e.g., depression, social withdrawal, anxiety) and dysregulation (e.g., 
sleeping, negative emotionality) problems. Two main questions were addressed: (a) What are 
the common and unique concurrent associations between maternal depression and anxiety and 



O 

ERIC 



858 



863 



MATERNAL MENTAL HEALTH 



infant internalizing and dysregulation when infants and toddlers are 1 and 2 years of age? 

(b) Do the associations and patterns replicate when these children are 1 year older? 

The Year 1 sample included 1,278 parents and their toddlers who participated in the Com- 
munity Birth Cohort Survey of the Connecticut Early Development Project (Briggs-Gowan et al., 
2001). Year 2 included 1,219 parents and their toddlers. At first data collection, children were 
24 months on average; 50% were boys. The sample is socioeconomically representative of the 
Greater New Haven, Connecticut population. 

Internalizing and dysregulation were assessed with the Infant-Toddler Social and Emotional 
Assessment (ITSEA), an adult-report questionnaire measuring social-emotional problems and 
competencies in 12- to 36-month-olds (Briggs-Gowan & Carter, 1998; Carter & Briggs-Gowan, 
2000). Maternal symptoms of depression and anxiety were assessed with standardized self- 
report measures (Radloff, 1977; Beck & Steer, 1991). 

Confirmatory factor analyses demonstrated adequate representations of the relationships 
among the measured variables and excellent goodness-of-fit indices in both Years 1 and 2. 
Latent regression analyses demonstrated common and unique associations in Years 1 and 2 
from maternal to infant constructs in the predicted directions. Specifically, standardized param- 
eter estimates were greater from Maternal Depression to Infant Internalizing and Dysregulation 
than they were from Maternal Anxiety. Maternal Depression and Anxiety accounted for 16% of 
the variance in Internalizing and 19% in Dysregulation in Year 1, and 25% in Internalizing and 
22% in Dysregulation in Year 2. 

These findings support theoretical hypotheses of common and unique associations between 
maternal psychopathology and infant social-emotional problems when children are 1-2 years 
old, and when 1 year older. Given elevated rates of affective symptoms among disadvantaged 
mothers, implications for Head Start programs that promote young children's social-emotional 
competence were discussed. 

References 

Aber, J. L., & Jones, S. M. (1997). Indicators of positive development in early childhood: 
Improving concepts and measures. In R. M. Hauser, B. V. Brown, & W. R. Prosser (Eds.), 
Indicators of children's well-being (pp. 395-408). New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 

Beck, A. T, & Steer, R. A. (1991). Relationship between the Beck Anxiety Inventory and the 

Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale with anxious outpatients. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 5, 213- 
223. 

Briggs-Gowan, M. J., & Carter, A. S. (1998). Preliminary acceptability and psychometrics of the 
Infant-Toddler Social and Emotional Assessment (ITSEA): A new adult-report questionnaire. 
Infant Mental Health Journal, 19, 422-445. 

Briggs-Gowan, M. J., Carter, A. S., Skuban, E. M., & Horwitz, S. M. (2001). Prevalence of social- 
emotional and behavioral problems in a community sample of 1- and 2-year-old children. 
Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 40, 811-819. 

Carter, A. S., & Briggs-Gowan, M. J. (2000). Infant Toddler Social and Emotional Assessment 
(ITSEA) manual: Version 1.0 (pp. 1-69). 

Carter, A. S., Garrity-Rokous, F. E., Chazan-Cohen, R., Little, C., & Briggs-Gowan, M. J. (2001). 
Maternal depression and comorbidity: Predirting early parenting, attachment security, and 
toddler social-emotional problems and competencies. Journal of the American Academy of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 40, 18-26. 

Cicchetti, D., & Rogosch, F. A. (1996). Equifinality and multifinality in developmental psycho- 
pathology. Development & Psychopathology, 8, 597-600. 

Radke- Yarrow, M. (1998). Children of depressed mothers: From early childhood to maturity. New 
York: Cambridge University Press. 

Radloff, L. S. (1977). The CES-D Scale: A self-report depression scale for research in the general 
population. Applied Psychological Measurement, 1, 385-401. 

Roberts, R. E., Attlasson, C. C., & Rosenblatt, A. (1998). Prevalence of psychopathology among 
children and adolescents. American Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 715-725. 



POSTERS 



Early Head Start Participation: Mobilization of Maternal Parenting 
Competencies as a Way to Influence Children's 30 -Month 
SocioBehavioral Development. 

Michaela L. Farber, Elizabeth M. Timberlake, Shavaun M. Wall, Nancy Taylor. 

PRESENTERS: Michaela L. Farber, Shavaun M. Wall 



Mothers in disadvantaged families face multiple challenges in securing resources for meeting 
family needs and mastering adult and parenting competencies required for childrearing (Super 
& Harkness, 1997). Sociodemographics, resilience, and resources comprise risks and supports 
available for mothers' general competence (Wolin & Wolin, 1993). General cornpetence, 
reflected in specific beliefs and emotional orientation, underpins parenting beliefs (Walsh, 
1998). In turn, parenting, reflected through maternal competence in coping with personal life 
stresses and children's needs, view of self in a parenting role, and disciplinary actions, becomes 
tbe proximal part of the childrearing context surrounding children's sociobehavioral develop- 



ment (Friedman & Wachs, 1999). • j • j 

Through a collaborative partnership between the Catholic University of America and United 
Cerebral Palsy Early Head Start (EHS), researchers investigated whether the interaction among 
such maternal challenges creates an environmental influence for children's 30-month 
sociobehavioral development. This local research is nested within a national longitudinal 
evaluation of EHS. Half of the 149 applicants were randomly assigned to EHS child care and 
family development services, and half sought available community services. Research-trained 
staff collected baseline, 24-month, and 30-month child-age-related outcome data through 
structured interviews. All applicant mothers provided information for baseline; 70%, for 
24-month, and 75%, for 30-month data. Baseline measures included (a) maternal resilience 
attitudes (Biscoe & Harris, 1994), (b) resource adequacy (Dunst & Leet, 1987), (c) social 
support (Dunst, Trivette, & Deal, 1988), and (d) demographics (Head Start Information System 
Protocol). Outcome measures included (a) 24-month mothers' perceptions of general and 
parenting competencies including a view of self in a parenting role (Abidin, 1995), (b) mother s 
use of spanking (EHS 24-Month Parent Intervnew Protocol), and (c) 30-roonth children's 
sociobehavioral development (Achenbach, 1991). 

Multivariate analyses suggest that EHS mothers viewed their baseline resilience and adequacy 
of family needs and resources significantly lower than mothers in the comparison group. 
Mothers' resilience, needs and resources, and instrumental social support predicted 33% of the 
variance in their 24-month general competence. EHS mothers viewed their 24-month parenting 
role slightly but significantly more positively than comparison mothers. Although mothers with 
lowered general competence were slightly but significantly more likely to spank their children at 
24 months, their use of disciplinary spanking was unrelated to parenting competence or 
children's 30-month sociobehavioral development. Mothers' participation in EHS, birth status 
(U.S.-born, immigrant), and 24-month parenting competence including view of self in a 
parenting role, however, significantly influenced 17% of the variance in their children s 
sociobehavioral development. While children in both groups scored within the normative range 
for sociobehavioral development at 30 months, EHS children were perceived as manifesting 
more externalizing behaviors. Children's gender did not exert any influence. Among the alter- 
nate explanations, it is possible that this small sample of EHS mothers was more sensitized to ^ 
report children's externalizing behaviors as part of'their increased attunement to their children's 
needs through EHS family development services or that EHS children differed temperamentally 



at baseline. . r • • < 

The findings suggest utilizing family-based interventions for strengthening families general 
and parenting competencies as one way to enhance children's sociobehavioral development. 
Using EHS services offers one way to mobilize family resources. 



O 

ERIC 



860 



865 



MATERNAL MENTAL HEALTH 



References 

Abidin, R. R. (1995). Professional manual for the Parenting Stress Index ed.) Odessa FI • 
Psychological Assessment Resources. ' 

Biscoe, B., & Harris, B. (1994). Resiliency Attitudes Scale manual. Oklahoma City, Oklahoma- 
Eagle Ridge Institute. ^ 

’^'‘childrpn adequacy of resources in households with young 

children. Child. Care, Health, and Development, 13, 111-125. 

^ (1988). Enabling and empowering families: Principles and 

guidelines for practice. Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books. ^ 

Friedman, S. L, & Wachs, T. D. (1999). Measuring environment across the life span. Washington 
DC. Amencan Psychological Association. ® ' 

Super, C. M. & Harness S. (1997). The cultural structuring of child development. In J. W. 
eny, . Dasen, & T. S. Saraswathi (Eds.), Handbook of cross-cultural psychology: Vol 2- Basic 

(PP- 1-39). Needham Heights, MA; Allyn & Bacon.' 

Walsh, F. (1998). Strengthening family resilience. NY: The Guilford Press. 

Wolm, S., & Wolin, S. (1993). The resilient self NY: Villard Books. 



The Triple Coping Challenges for Immigrant Mothers: 

The Early Head Start Experience 

Elizabeth M. Timberlake, Michaela L. Farber, Shavaun M. Wall, Nancy Taylor 
PRESENTERS: Michaela L. Farber, Shavaun M. Wall 



a immigration challenges of managing 

cultural change, and resetdement challenges associated with 
SaH With the^^^ mobilizadon, service access, and formulation of fiiture 

whh of children, immigrant women, however, find themselves having to cope 

^th a t^ird challenge-the demands of motherhood (Hulewat, 1996). Immigrant mo^ersTd 
themselves having to mobilize their personal adult competence in general, and parendng 
competence m particular, in order to meet childrearing demands for adequate parnm-Aild 

balancing, and parental self- 

Conceptually, the interaction among these three maternal coping challenges creates an 
nvironmental pathway with risks, supports, and consequences for child socfobehavioral 
Ca^hn?-r\? (Fnedman & Wachs, 1999). Through a collaboradve partnership between The 

1 niversity of America and United Cerebral Palsy Early Head Start (EHS) researchers 

ijeshgated whether the interactions between these maternal challenges create an environmen- 
tal path with implications for toddlers' sociobehavioral development at 24 months This 
^ploratory study of 56 immigrant mothers grew out of a 5-year local research projec7rILted 
FH9 ^ cross site study of EHS services and outcomes. The immigrant mothers met the 

s^ff coZmd bTr ' A' ' r**"*’*" community services. Research-trained bilin^ al 

R r 24-month child-age-related outcome data through structured 

intemews. Baseline measures include mothers' perception of immigration l^ses experienced 
and connectedness with culture of origin (adapted from Coehlo, Yuan, & Ahmed, 1980) 




866 



861 



POSTERS 



resilience attitudes (Biscoe & Harris, 1994), resource adequacy (Dunst & Leet, 1987), social 
support (Dunst, Trivette, & Deal, 1988), income, language adequacy, social problems in daily 
living, service use patterns, and future goals (Head Start Information System Protocol). Twenty- 
four-month measures are comprised of mothers’ perception of general and parenting competen- 
cies including a view of self in a parenting role (Abidin, 1995) and the toddlers' sociobehavioral 
functioning (Achenbach, 1991). 

The results suggest that, for this small sample, the baseline measures and 24-month out- 
comes reported in this study did not vary by mothers' program use. At baseline, immigrant 
mothers' perception of social support, loss at immigration, resilience, and connectedness to 
culture of origin explain 52% of the variance in the adequacy of family mobilization of needs 
and resources. Immigrant mothers' resilience and instmmental social support predicted 34% of 
their 24-month general competence. In turn, general competence and their 24-month parenting 
role perception predicted 63% of their 24-month parenting competence. Last, mothers 
parenting role perception and resilience influenced 47% of their toddlers sociobehavioral 
development at 24 months. The findings suggest promoting family-based interventions de- 
signed to strengthen (a) immigrant family psychosocial competence through natural helpirig 
networks that enable cultural connectedness, offer social support, and promote best parenting 
practices, and (b) their toddler's psychosocial competence through mobilizing maternal resil- 
ience in coping with adversity and mediating their child's exposure to stress. 

References 

Abidin, R. A. (1995). Professional manual for the Parenting Stress Index (3"‘‘ ed.). Odessa, FL: 
Psychological Assessment Resources. 

Achenbach, T. (1991). Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist. Burlington: University of Vermont, 
Department of Psychiatry. 

Biscoe, B., & Harris, B. (1994). Adolescent Resiliency Attitudes Scale manual. Oklahoma City, OK: 
Eagle Ridge Institute. 

Coehlo, G., Yuan, Y, & Ahmed, P. (1980). Contemporary uprooting and collaborative coping: 
Behavioral and societal responses. In G. Coehlo & P. Ahmed (Eds.), Uprooting and develop- 
ment (pp. 5-18). New York: Plenum Press. 

Dunst, C., & Leet, H. (1987). Measuring the adequacy of resources in households widi young 
children. Child: Care, Health, and Development, 13, 111-125. 

Dunst, C., Trivette, C., & Deal, A. (1988). Enabling and empowering families: Principles and 
guidelines for practice. Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books. 

Friedman, S., & Wachs, T. (1999). Measuring environment across the life span. Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association. 

Goodnow, J. (1996). From household practices to parents' ideas about work and interpersonal 
relationships. In S. Harkness & C. Super (Eds.), Parents' cultural belief systems: Their origins, 
expressions, and consequences (pp. 313-344). New York: Guilford press. 

Hulewat, P. (1996). Resettlement: A cultural and psychological crisis. Social Work, 41, 129-135. 



Exploring Life Stress, Social Support, and 
Self-Efficacy Among Maltreating Mothers 

Nina Olsen, Ellen Haigh O'Donnell, Sandra T. Azar 

PRESENTERS: Nina Olsen, Ellen Haigh O'Donnell, Sandra T. Azar 
(Summary not available) 




862 



867 



Mental Health: Interventions and Services 



Project CALM CARE: Developing Frameworks for Serving 
Children and Families From Traumatic Environments 

Mary Ann Fenske, Carol Westby 
PRESENTERS: Mary Ann Fenske, Carol Westby 

Project CALM CARE (Care-Giving Affects Long-term Mental Health: Creating A Responsive 
En^ronment) was an ethnographic investigation conducted to enhance Early Head Start's (EHS) 
understanding of (a) childrearing frameworks of families from traumadc environments, (b) the 
rrarnework of EHS organizational culture and its influence on services to families from trau- 
matic environments, and (c) vocal/verbal and tactile behaviors used by EHS staff, foster moth- 
ers, and birth mothers in response to infants^ cues. 

Data were gathered through interviews of birth parents, foster parents, and EHS staff and 

of adult-child interactions, and review of EHS documents. QSRN5 
(Richards & Richards, 2000), a qualitative data analysis program, was used to discover the 
categories of knowledge that formed the cultural frames for each group interviewed. Videotaped 
observations were analyzed using the Computerized Language Analysis (CLAN; MacWhinney, 
2000) program to identify the patterns of adult-child interactions. 

parente focused on meeting basic needs and connecting to community resources, 
hildreanng, development, and discipline were secondary concerns that they expected family 
educators and EHS to help them learn in classes and on visits. Foster parents focused on reading 
^ responding to cues, protecting the child, and learning about caregiving for an at-risk child. 

Often birth and foster parents disagreed about child care, requiring family educators to mediate 
between them. 

EHS administrators focused on collaborating with community agencies to determine and 

service iieeds for families in traumatic environments and training for personnel working 
with these families. The administrators emphasized a family-centered and strengths-based 
philosophy toward intervention. They employed a reflective supervision approach with staff, 
atternpung to support them in directly dealing with the families and in handling their own 
emotions arising from the difficult situations they encountered. 

EHS family educators were most concerned with service provision for families that they 
described as multineed and multistressed. They spoke about modeling behaviors for families 
and providing them with information and activities to improve parenting skills. Their interviews 
revealed the same approaches espoused by administrators; however, they felt that they were 
msis onented, and that while responding to immediate concerns and meeting basic needs of 
families, they might be neglecting long-term goals and objectives. They were focused on meeting 
basic needs of families and connecting them to resources. 

Birth and foster parents engaged in a variety of physical interactions, functional and pretend 
play, and reading with their children; however, they stmggled with providing age appropriate 
stimulation. They frequently underestimated or overestimated their children's developmental 





863 



POSTERS 



levels. EHS staff found it difficult to address the needs of parents and simultaneously read the 
children's cues. 

EHS administrators and family educators verbalized a family-centered, strengths-based 
philosophy including the idea of developing self-regulatory skills within families (e.g., teach 
them to fish rather than feed them"). There were problems in implementing this philosophy, 
however. The severe crises that many of the families were in constantly, resulted in EHS doing 
crisis management, so that minimal time was available for teaching the skills that would enable 
the families to learn how to fish through development of self-regulation. 

References 

MacWhinney, B. (2000). The Childes Project: Tools for analyzing talk. Mahwah, Nl: Erlbaum. 

Richards, L., & Richards, T. (2000). QSRN5. Melbourne, Australia: QSR International. 



Early Childhood Mental Health Services: 

A Multicomponent Prevention and Early Intervention Model 

Judy Grossman 

PRESENTER: Judy Grossman 



There is a growing need to provide prevention and early intervention mental health services in 
Head Start programs to promote school readiness and family resilience, reduce referrals to 
special education, and increase staff competence. Children with emotional and behavioral 
problems are under identified (Donahue, Falk, & Provet, 2000), or not eligible for special 
education services (Grossman & Pollari, 2000). Also, Head Start families at risk due to the 
cumulative effect of extra- and intrafamilial stressors may not seek treatment. Since traditional 



mental health services do not reflect best practices in Head Start, a more proactive approach is to 
deliver on-site staff consultation and direct services to children and families that are embedded 
in routine program activities (Yoshikawa & Knitzer, 1997; Knitzer, 2000). 

Mental health services were piloted as part of a New York University-Head Start Partnership 
Grant in two Head Start programs from 1999-2001 (Spellmann, Tamis-LeMonda, & Grossman, 
1998). The interventions are based on three premises: (a) a multicomponent consultation and 
direct service model is necessary to meet the mental health needs of children, families, and staff; 
(b) a mental health consultant must demonstrate a broad range of competencies and spend 
sufficient time on site to become part of the program culture; and (c) family^entered services 
must address the mental health needs of mothers in order to promote adaptive parenting skills 



and child competence. 

The consultation component of the model integrated case and program consultation for 
family workers to become more competent and to promote their mental health. Teacher 
consultation services focused on child and classroom-based interventions to help teachers 
identify children with developmental delay, manage challenging behavior, and monitor inclu- 
sion practices for children with special needs. Consultation with administrative staff was 
implemented for systemic change and quality improvement practices. 

The direct service component was a weekly parent group that addressed the mental health 
needs and parenting practices of mothers (Grossman & Shigaki, 1994; Luthar & Suchman, 1999, 
Webster-Stratton, 1994). Based on a stress-support-coping paradigm and theories of adult 
female development, the Role Competence curriculum integrated education, support, psycho- 
therapy, and activity-based approaches over 20 weeks. Since positive experience and achieve- 
ment generate resilience (Rutter, 2000), personal goal setting was an important objective. 



er|c 



864 



869 



MENTAL HEALTH: INTERVENTIONS AND SERVICES 



Baseline data on the Head Start sample (n = 102) indicated significant child, parent, family, 
and community risk factors. One third of the children were at risk for school readiness due to 
cognitive and language delays, and one third demonstrated behavior problems. Familial risk 
factors included maternal depression (21%), Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD; 36%), 
community violence (11%), domestic violence (10%), poverty/Medicaid (55%), and unemploy- 
ment (48%). 

Program evaluation activities were restricted to direct parent services at one site. Qualitative 
data were collected through surveys [n = 18), focus groups (n = 15 participants), key informant 
interviews (n = 4), and case study. The fifteen participants were primarily Latino (90%). Areas of 
role strain were equally distributed among partner, homemaker, worker, and parent. Thematic 
analysis of the data yielded the following themes: (a) friendship and women's issues, (b) 
information and mutual support, and (c) personal growth. 

The lessons learned warrant the replication and evaluation of services. Constiltation services 
seem to be an effective way to promote mental health, but research is needed to examine the 
intensity of services and the training needs of consultants. Direct services must address multiple 
role demands and the psychological needs of mothers. Based on this preliminary work, the 
model has been refined. 

References 

Donahue, P. J., Falk, B., & Provet, A. G. (2000). Mental health consultation in early childhood. Baltimore: 
Brookes. 

Grossman, J., & Pollari, P. (2000, November). Inclusion in Head Start: New York State guidelines for 
special education services for preschool students with disabilities. Paper presented at the Region II Head 
Start Training Conference, Rye, NY. 

Grossman, J., & Shigaki, I. (1994). Investigation of school and home risk factors for Hispanic Head 
Start children. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 64, 456-467. 

Knitzer, J. (2000). Early childhood mental health services: A policy and systems development 
perspective. In J. P. Shonkoff & S. J. Meisels (Eds.), Handbook of early childhood intervention (pp. 
416-438). New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Luthar, S. S., & Suchman, N. E. (1999). Developmentally informed parenting interventions: The 
relational psychotherapy mother's group. In: S. L. Toth & D. Cicchetti (Eds.), Developmental 
approaches to prevention and intervention. Rochester Symposium on Developmental Psychopathology (pp. 
2711-309). Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press. 

Rutter, M. (2000). Resilience reconsidered: Conceptual considerations, empirical findings, and policy 
implications. In J. P. Shonkoff & S. J. Meisels (Eds.), Handbook of early childhood intervention (pp. 
651-682). New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Spellmann, M., Tamis-LeMonda, C., & Grossman, J. (1998). A partnership between New York University 
and Lower East Side Head Starts to study the pathways of outcomes for children and families. Washing- 
ton, DC: Administration for Children, Youth and Families, Head Start Bureau. 

Webster-Stratton, C. (1994). Advanced videotape parent training: A comparison study. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62, 583-593. 

Yoshikawa, H., & Knitzer, J. (1977). Lessons from the field: Head Start mental health strategies to meet 
changing needs. New York: National Center for Children in Poverty. 



870 



865 



POSTERS 



Organizational Influences on Children's Mental Health: 

The Importance of Shared Vision 

Beth L. Green, Jennifer Simpson, Maria Garda-Gettman, Maria Everhart, Elizabeth Vale 
PRESENTER: Beth L. Green 

Head Start programs have long acknowledged the importance of children s social— emotional 
development, and engage in multiple strategies to support and promote this aspect of school 
readiness. Head Start performance standards now emphasize and mandate mental health 
consultation as one key strategy. Structuring the best mental health services within Head Start 
programs requires attention not only to how individual professionals assess and treat children 
and families, but also to organizational characteristics. A program's structure, its vision and 
philosophy of mental health, and how mental health is conceptualized in relationship to other 
program components are features that influence individual staff behavior and skills. Little 
research has focused on understanding the influence of organizational variables on the effective- 
ness of children's mental health services; the few studies that do, suggest that these are crucial 
variables in understanding child outcomes (Bryant & Peisner-Feinberg, 2000; Buysse, Wesley, 
Bryant, & Gardner, 1999; Lara, McCabe, & Brooks-Gunn, 2000; Zelman, Friedman, & 
Pasquariella, 1996). 

Three contrasting Head Start programs were selected for initial qualitative study. Programs 
were selected to represent mral and urban regions, culturally diverse populations, and contrast- 
ing approaches to mental health program design. Semistructured, face-to-face interviews were 
conducted with a total of 73 persons representing a range of Head Start staff. Interview ques- 
tions addressed the extent to which mental health services were holistic and integrated, inclu- 
sive, prevention oriented, family centered, culturally competent, developmentally appropriate, 
and strengths based (Jivanjee & Simpson, 2001; Knitzer, 1996). Interviews were summarized and 
entered into NUD*IST (1998) qualitative data analysis software. Interviews were coded to 
determine the extent to which participants' responses reflected the principles outlined above. 

Analyses were conducted to delineate different organizational philosophies and characteris- 
tics among the programs, and whether these were related to staff understanding and discussion 
of key best practices in children's mental health. 

Results suggest that the progranis differed in the expected ways in terms of the number Ox 
staff who perceived that there was an articulated program philosophy related to children's 
mental health: Two sites, which we identified a priori as having less well developed approaches 
to children's mental health, had more staff who indicated that there was no philosophy (45 /o 
and 35%), compared to the third site ( 1 7%). Being able to articulate this philosophy was related 
to how staff defined children's mental health: Those who had a clear understanding of the 
prograrri philosophy saw mental health more holistically, as more integrated into o^er program 
components, and talked about the program's approach more in terms of quality of interactions 
between staff, families, and children, and less in terms of specific curricula or assessments. Staff 
who understood the program philosophy also had more positive relationships with the mental 
health consultant and saw more value to mental health consultation. Overall, results suggested 
that having a well developed, articulated philosophy and vision related to children s mental 
health was associated wi^ increased evidence of the use of best practices. 




Rcfcv^ttc^s 

Bryant, D., & Peisner-Feinberg, E. (2000, June 28-July 1, 2000). Head Start quality: Processes and 
predictors Paper presented at the Head Start Research Conference, Washington, DC. 

Buysse, V., Wesley, P. W., Bryant, D., & Gardner, D. (1999). Quality of early childhood programs in 
inclusive and noninclusive settings. Exceptional Children, 65, 301-314. 

Jivanjee, P, & Simpson, J. (2001). Respite care for children with serious emotional disorders and their 
families: A way to enrich family life. Focal Point, 15(2), 26-30. 

Knitzer, J. (1996). The role of education in systems care. In B. A. Stroul (Ed.), Children's mental health: 
Creating systems of care in a changing society (pp. 197-213). Baltimore: Brookes. 

Lara, S. L., McCabe, L. A., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (2000). From horizontal to vertical management styles: 



866 



8-71 



MENTAL HEALTH: INTERVENTIONS AND SERVICES 



A qualitative look at Head Start staff strategies for addressing behavior problems. Early Education 
& Development, 11, 283-306. 

NUD*IST (Non-numerical Unstmctured Data Indexing Searching and Theorizing) qualitative data 
analysis program, Version 4.0. (1998). (Computer software]. Melbourne, Australia: QSR Interna- 
tional Pty Ltd. 

Zelman, A. B., Friedman, M. ]., & Pasquariella, B. (1996). Use of a questionnaire to compare daycare 
staff and mental health staff attitudes: An aid to mental health consultation to daycare. Early 
intervention with high-risk children: Freeing prisoners of circumstance (pp. 281-292). Northvale, NJ: 
Jason Aronson. 



The Head Start PATHS Program: A Universal Curriculum 
to Improve Children's Social and Emotional Competence 

Celene Domitrovich, Rebecca Cortes, Mark Greenberg 

PRESENTER: Celene Domitrovich 

According to the Head Start Program Performance Standards, a primary objective of Head Start is to 
promote the social competence of the children it serves by facilitating their emotional, behavioral, 
and cognitive development. Effective sociahemotional skills are related to social adjustment in the 
preschool and early school years, and have the potential to serve as protective factors against 
negative outcomes such as mental health problems by reducing the impact that risk factors have 
on the child and family (Rutter, 1985). Recently, there has been increased interest in the develop- 
ment of universal prevention programs focused on the promotion of social competence in school- 
age children. These programs have shown significant effects on social-cognitive skills and 
children's overall social adjustment. Researchers are now developing similar programs for pre- 
school-age children (see Bryant, Vizzard, Willoughby, & Kupersmidt, 1999 for a review). 

The purpose of this presentation is to share the findings from a randomized clinical trial 
evaluating a universal preventive intervention that was implemented by teachers in two Head Start 
Programs in Pennsylvania during the 2000-2001 school year. A University-Head Start Partnership 
Grant was awarded to the first two authors to fund the project. The program was based on a well- 
known, empirically validated social-emotional curriculum called Promoting Alternative Thinking 
Strategies (PATHS; Kusche & Greenberg, 1994). The preschool version of PATHS consisted of 33 
lessons that were delivered by teachers during circle time once to twice a week. In addition to the 
lessons, teachers were encouraged to generalize the skills being taught by using extension activities 
throughout the day that were designed to integrate with the centers and activities that are well 
established in Head Start. Materials were sent home to encourage parent involvement. 

The goal of the PATHS Preschool program was to improve the mental health functioning (i.e., 
social competence, behavior) of Head Start children by improving children's emotion knowl- 
edge, emotion communication, social competence, and cognitive skills (i.e., attention, problem 
solving). The final sample for this project included 248 children from 20 Head Start classrooms. 
Trained research assistants interviewed children individually in the Head Start center at the 
beginning and the end of the school year. In addition, both parent and teacher ratings of child 
behavior were gathered at these time points. 

Findings indicated that with appropriate support. Head Start teachers could effectively 
implement Preschool PATHS with fidelity and alter children's outcomes in a 1-year period. 
According to both teachers and parents, children who participated in PATHS were more socially 
competent than children in control classrooms at the end of the year. These changes were also 
evident on direct child measures. While the program did not impact externalizing behavior after 
1 year, teachers reported that internalizing symptoms decreased for children who began the 
school year with problems in this area. The findings suggest that Preschool PATHS is a promis- 
ing intervention for use by Head Start programs. The authors recognize the need for additional 
evaluation of the curriculum and are considering a more intensive model that will be more 
likely to impact negative behaviors. 




867 



POSTERS 



References . ^ 

Bryant, D„ Vizzard, L. H„ Willoughby, M„ & Kupersmidt, J. (1999). A review of interventions tor 
preschoolers with aggressive and disruptive behavior. Early Education and Development, 10, 47-68 
Kusche, C. A., & Greenberg, M. T. (1994). The PATHS curriculum; Promoting alternative thinking 

strategies. Boston: Channing-Bete. u • 

Rutter, M. (1985). Resilience in the face of adversity: Protective factors and resistance to psychiatnc 

disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 598-611. 



Relationship for Growth Project: Preliminary Evaluation of a 
Relationship-based, Systemic Mental Health Model in Head Start 

Ellen Halpern, Faith Lamb-Parker, Ronni Fisher, Veronica Klujsza, Lenore Peay, 

Rebecca Shahmoon Shanok 

PRESENTERS: Lenore Peay, Veronica Klujsza, Faith Lamb-Parker 

Preliminary results of an evaluation of Relationships for Growth (RfG), a relationship-based 
mental health intervention was presented. Focus was on outcomes for children who participated 
in peer play groups to enhance their social and emotional, language and literacy, and motor 
development, and reduce problem behaviors. The intervention aimed to increase protective 
factors such as attachment, self-control, positive play behaviors and peer play interaction, 
initiative, and motivation to leam. 

The RfG model is based on ecological (Bronfenbrenner, 1979), psychodynamic (Mahler et 
al., 1975) and family systems (Minuchin & Montalvo, 1967) theories of human growth and 
development, and on progressive early childhood education practice. (National ResearA 
Council, 2001). Furthermore, a cornerstone of growth lies in the one-to-one relationship 
between two people or within small ^oups of people, one of whom is a supportive adult 
(Shahmoon-Shanoketal., 1989). 

The study focused on the impact of peer play group participation on children's interpersonal 
relationships and behaviors as compared with their nonpeer play group counterparts. Through 
classroom observation and discussion with staff and parents, the children with the greatest 
challenges are selected for playgroups. 

Ninety-two children participated in 25 playgroups. Assessments of individual strengths and 
problem behaviors were collected in fall 2000 (baseline) and spring (2001). 

Prelimary results suggest that children in playgroups benefited solidly and across many 
important dimensions related to school success from the experience. At the end of the school 
year, these at-risk or diagnosable children ended up closer on average to their peers, on the 
emotional/social indicators of school readiness, after participation in a peer playgroup. The data 
suggest that although playgroup children appear to begin to catch up to their nongroup age- 
mates, given their age-mates own continued growth, they need more time to close the g^p. 




References 

Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of attachment: A psychological 

Study of the strange situation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Mahler, M. S., Pine, E, & Bergman, A. (1975). The psychological birth of the human infant. New York, NY: 
Basic Books. 

Minuchin, S., & Montalvo, B. (1967). Techniques for working with disorganized low socioeconomic 

families. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 37{5): 880-887. ^ • 

National Research Gouncil (2001). Eager to leam: Educating our preschoolers. Washington, DG: National 

Shahmoon Shanok, R., Welton, S. J., & Lapidus, G. (1989). Group therapy for preschool children: A 
transdisdplinary school-based program. Child Adolescent Social Work, 1, 72-95. 

Zero-to-Three (1992). Heart Start: The emotional foundations of school readiness, Arlington, VA: Zero-to- 
Three: The National Genter for Infants, Toddlers and Families (1.800.544.0155). 

868 



R7Q 



Methods/ Measures/ 
Instrument Development 



Head Start Enrollment Study 

Douglas Klayman, Ruth Hubbell McKey, Richard Wertheimer 

PRESENTERS: Douglas Klayman, Ruth Hubbell McKey 

The Head Start Enrollment Study, also known as the "Descriptive Study of Children Eligible for 
Head Start," was designed to provide estimates of the numbers of children eligible for Head Start 
and the extent to which Head Start agencies are meeting the demands of the evolving demo- 
graphic composition of Head Start communities. The dynamic sociodemographic characteristics 
of Head Start communities and the constant influx of immigrants with limited wage earning 
potential gave impetus to the study. Xtria and our subcontractor. Child Trends, conducted a 
comprehensive secondary analysis of existing data sets to determine the number of Head Start 
eligible families by state and county. The analysis employed descriptive-inferential statistics, data 
modeling procedures, and geocoded national, regional, and county-based maps. The estimates 
provide county-level information on populations served, unserved, and underserved. 

The study also included telephone interviews with staff from the 50 Head Start agencies 
whose communities experienced the largest changes in demographic composition. The tele- 
phone interviews discerned the impact of demographic changes on Head Start agencies and 
focused on (a) program and staff experiences serving various ethnic groups, (b) outreach and 
recmitment strategies, (c) the impact of demographic changes on the Head Start population and 
the community at-large, and (e) their impact on program policy and practice. The study was 
completed in June 2000. 



Using the Developmental Indicators for the Assessment of Learning 
(DIAL-3) Spanish Version to Evaluate a Bilingual Curriculum Program 
for Limited English Proficient Latino Preschoolers in Head Start 

Roman Garda de Alba, Salvador Hector Ochoa, Eleazar Ramirez, Nell Carvell 

PRESENTERS: Roman Garcia de Alba, Salvador Hector Ochoa, Eleazar Ramirez, Nell Carvell, 
Liston Mike Rice, Ann Minnis. 

The purpose of this presentation was to discuss the development and evaluation of a culturally 
and linguistically appropriate curriculum for 79 preschoolers in a Head Start Center located in 
the Southwest. A description and samples of the curriculum are presented. The 79 preschoolers 
were assigned to one out of the following three language proficiency groups: (a) English 
Dominant, (b) Spanish Dominant, or (c) Limited English Proficient based on their performance 



POSTERS 



on the Pre-IDEA Proficiency Test (Pre-IPT; Williams & Dalton, 1988) in both English and 
Spanish. The Developmental Indicators for the Assessment of Learning-Third Edition (DIAL-3; 
Mardell-Czudnowski & Goldenberg, 1998) in Spanish was used to assess students' progress m 
the following domains; (a) motor, (b) concepts, (c) language, and (d) total scores. 

Results indicate that the children who were identified as English Dominant made staustically 
significant growth in all domains of the DIAL-3. The preschoolers who were classified as 
Spanish Dominant made statistically significant gains in the concept and motor domains as well 
as in the total DIAL-3 score. The pupils designated as LEP made statistically significant improve- 
ment in the concept domain and in the total DIAL-3 score. Effect sizes were calculated for each 
of the DIAL-3 domains within each of the different language proficiency groups. 

References 

Mardell-Czudnowski, C., & Goldenberg, D. S. (1998). Developmental Indicators of Learning 
(DIAL-3)-Third Edition. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 

Williams, C. O., & Dalton, E. F. (1988). The Pre-IDEA Oral Language Proficiency Test. Brea, CA: 

Ballard and Tighe. 



Defining Sociometric Status for Head Start Children 

Sue Vartuli, Dong Hwa Choi, Carol Bolz 

PRESENTER; Sue Vartuli 

The primary objective of this research was to determine if three methods of assigning sociometric 
categories contribute similar information. Theory and research on sociometric measures and social 
competence provide the foundation for this study (Moreno, 1934; Gronlund, 1959; Peery, 1979). 

The participants for this investigation consisted of 72 Head Start children from three class- 
rooms who had complete data sets and their classroom teachers. Tlie diildren, whose average 
age was 4 years, 8 months (SD 6.01); included 33 girls (46%); and 100% of the children were 
African American. Researchers met individually with children from each classroom to adminis- 
ter the sociometric interviews. After rating each child in their class, children also nominated 
three children they would like to play with (positive nominations) and three children they 
would not want to play with (negative nominations). The three classroom teachers were asked 
to complete a modified form of the Teacher's Social Skills Rating Form (Mize, 1984). 

Peer ratings (five categories) were positively related to children s nominations (five catego- 
ries) (r = .92, p < .01). Teacher's social skills ratings (total score) were positively related to age 

= .38, p < .01) but not peer ratings nor children's sociometric nominations. The proportion of 
children allocated to social status groups by each sociometric classification procedure revealed 
that the rejected category had the most uniform percentage across all three methods (17-18%). 
The neglected and controversial categories had more variability and less substantial overlap 
within methods. When the social status category agreement was calculated, the concordance of 
status classifications between the nomination and rating methods was high. Kappa = .75, 
p <. 001). Fifteen of the children's social status categories were compared over a 9-month 
interval to explore stability of categories. There was no significant relationship between the 
social status categories over time for either method, rating categories r = -.005, p < .98, and 
nomination categories, r = .13, p < .69. 

The results of this study demonstrate that social status categories based on peer ratings and 
nominations are highly related. The weighted peer rating system was not as exacting, because of 
the use of only three categories. The weighted peer rating system was also the most conservative. 





870 



METHODS/MEASURES/INSTRUMENT DEVELOPMENT 



The rejected category appeared to be the most uniform percentage across all three methods. 
There was no stability of categories over time for either rating or nomination categories. Peer 
social status categories were not significandy related to teacher's reported ratings. 

The results of this research indicate that social status categories based on peer ratings and 
nominations could be used interchangeability. All three methods — peer ratings, nominations, 
and weighted peer ratings — were equally effective in identifying rejected children, and the 
rejected children are the ones most in need for social skills intervention. Since the objective of 
this research was to determine which measure was the best method for selecting children in 
need of social skills training interventions, it is recommended that when children are selected 
for social skills training intervention the child's perspective be a part of the assessment. 

References 

Gronlund, N. E. (1959). Sociometry in the classroom. New York: Harper. 

Mize, J. (1984). Enhancing children's peer relations: A cognitive-social learning procedure for social skill 
training with preschool children. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Purdue University. 

Moreno, J. L. (1934). Who shall survive? Washington, DC: Nervous and Mental Disease. 

Peery, J. C. (1979). Popular, amiable, isolated, rejected: A reconceptualization of sociometric 
status in preschool children. Child Development, 50, 1231-1234. 



Identifying Needs of Single Caregivers With Young Children 
Attending Early Intervention and At-Risk Prevention Programs: 

The Parenting Stress Index (Short Form) and Family Centered Practice 

Elizabeth Park, Donald Unger, C. Wayne Jones, Lisa Fading 

PRESENTERS; Elizabeth Park, Donald Unger 

The validity and reliability of the Parenting Stress Index-Short Form (PSl-SF; Abibin, 1995) with 
single caregiver families whose children were receiving early intervention and prevention 
services were evaluated. It was expected that the PSl-SF would be related to factors that contrib- 
ute to and/or result from parenting stress, as well as factors that buffer parenting stress such as 
(a) severity of the child's developmental delay, (b) childrearing attitudes including parent 
satisfaction with parenting role and with one's family and home environment, and (c) parent- 
child interaction. It was also expected that the measure may, although it was not designed to, 
reflect other dimensions contributing to or buffering parenting stress among low-income 
minority families such as (a) social resources (social support), (b) emotional well being (mental 
health and self-efficacy), (c) level of education, and (d) economic/financial resources (Martin & 
Martn, 1978; Scott & Black, 1989; Taylor, 1986). 

The sample included 218 low-income nonmarried caregivers with a young child recently 
enrolled in one of 21 different early childhood programs (early intervention programs. Head 
Start Centers, and at-risk preschools). The sample was comprised of mainly African American 
(88%) women, with the majority being between 20 and 34 years of age (7% teenage parents) 
and not employed outside of the home (85%). Fifty-nine percent of the children were male, and 
ages ranged from 1 to 5 years (median 2.4 years). According to an overall delay index created for 
this study, 30% of the children were severely impaired, 16% were moderately impaired, and 
25% were mildly impaired. 

The internal consistency reliability of the PSI-SF for the present study (alpha = .66-.89) was 
adequate and resembled those reported in the PSI-SF manual (alpha = .80-. 91.) and alpha 




876 



871 



POSTERS 



coefficients reported in studies with low-income caregivers with young children in the United 
States (,74-.96; Musil, 2000; Nitz, Ketterlinus, & Brandt, 1995; Ritchie & Holden, 1998). The 
subscales of the PSI-SF were found to be intercorrelated (r = .45 to r = .56, p < .001). In addition, 
the three subscales and the Total Stress Score were related to many of the same measures used to 
establish construct validity (r = .19 to r = .53, p < .05 to p < .001) . Results of this study suggest 
that for a low-income, single parent population, scores from the PSI-SF represent a global 
measure of parenting stress rather than stress related specifically to the child, parent, or parent- 
child dyad as proposed in the manual. Also, the Total Stress Score appears to be a more valid 
measure of parenting stress, than any individual subscale for this population. 

Lastly, the available norms for the PSI-SF did not seem appropriate for this population. The 
PSI manual indicated a parent's raw score of > 90 (90th percentile) meant professional 
parenting intervention was likely needed (Abidin, 1995). In the present study, 62% of the 
sample scored > 90 at Time 1, and 66% scored > 90 at Time 2. Using the suggested cut off, two 
thirds of the present sample would be viewed as needing professional parenting intervention. 
However, the results from the observational measure of parent-child interaction (Parent/ 
Caregiver Involvement Scale; Farran, Kasari, Comfort, & Jay, 1986) did not indicate such great 
dysfunction. When compared to other studies with low-income African American samples, the 
mean total stress scores for the present sample appear to be less extreme (Bhavna^, 1999; Davis 
& Spur, 1998; Musil, 2000; Nitz et al., 1995). Until revised norms are available, it is suggested that 
the measure be used in combination with measures assessing family strengths, needs, and child's 
functional status. 

References 

Abidin, R. (1995). Parenting Stress Index. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources. 
Bhavnagri, N. (1999). Low income African-American mothers' parenting stress and instructional 
strategies to promote peer relationships in preschool children. Early Education and Develop- 
ment, 10(4), 551-571. 

Davis, H., & Spur, P. (1998). Parent counseling: An evaluation of a community child mental 
health service. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 39(3), 365-376. 

Farran, D., Kasari, C., Comfort, M., & Jay, S. (1986). The Parent/Caregiver Involvement Scale. The 
University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Child Development and Family Relations, 
School of Human Environmental Sciences. 

Martin, E., & Martin, J. (1978). The Black extended family. University of Chicago Press. 

Musil, C. (2000). Health of grandmothers as caregivers: A ten month follow-up. Journal of 
Women and Aging, 12{l/2), 129-145. 

Nitz, K., Ketterlinus, R., & Brandt, L. (1995). The role of stress social support, and family environ- 
ment in adolescent mothers' parenting. Journal of Adolescent Research, 10(3), 358-382. 

Ritchie, K., & Holden, G. (1998). Parenting stress in low-income battered and community 
\Yomen: Effects on parenting behavior. Early Education and Development, 9(1), 98—112. 

Scott, I, & Black, A. (1989). Deep structures of African-American family life: Female and male 
kin networks. The Western Journal of Black Studies, 13, 17-23. 

Taylor, R. J. (1986). Receipt of support from family among Black Americans: Demographic and 
familial differences. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 48, 66-77. 




872 



877 



METHODS/MEASURES/INSTRUMENT DEVELOPMENT 



Implementing a Home-Based and Center-Based 
Early Head Start: A Case Study 

Diane M. Horm-Wingerd, David A. Caruso, Julianna C. Golas 

PRESENTERS: Diane M. Horm-Wingerd, David A. Caruso, Julianna C. Golas 

Less than 7 years ago the Advisory Committee on Services for Families with Infants and Toddlers 
and the Advisory Committee on Head Start Quality and Expansion recommended the imple- 
mentation of an Early Head Start program to service the needs of at-risk families with infants 
and toddlers. Since that time over 600 Early Head Start programs have begun serving this target 
population, and 17 of these programs are participating in an extensive national evaluation (U. S. 
Department of Health & Human Services, 2001). 

Preliminary results from the 17 experimental Early Head Start sites have yielded some 
optimistic results regarding the efficacy of the program (U. S. Department of Health & Human 
Services, 2001). However, research examining program efficacy oftentimes neglects or superfi- 
cially attends to the formative evaluation of program implementation. This is true despite the 
fact that formative evaluations have the potential to provide insight to other grantees initiating a 
program. The purpose of this poster was to highlight the importance of the formative evaluation 
in the early stages of program implementation and to explore how two Early Head Start centers 
implemented different program delivery models: home-based and center-based approaches. 

The two Early Head Start programs were both grantees serving mostly suburban and urban 
families. Most of the families consisted of single. White mothers with a high school diploma or 
GED. The one demographic variable the two centers differed on was employment status. Those 
families attending the center-based program worked part or full time, versus the home-based 
population, which was unemployed. 

An integral question of the formative evaluation was whether families were receiving the full 
intensity of services. Much of the literature suggests that program outcomes and effects are only 
achieved after at least 1 year of services (Haskins, 1989; Olds, et al., 1998; Striefel & Robinson, 
1998). The center-based program was much more successful in maintaining family enrollment, 
with over 90% of the families continuing in the program for more than 1 year. Approximately 
50% of home-based families failed to meet the minimum 1-year benchmark, and those families 
who did remain in the program received on average three out of four home visits per month. 
Both center-based and home-based families who remained in the program for over a year 
showed gains in their scores on the Dunst and Trivette Family Support Scale (Dunst, Jenkins, & 
Trivette, 1994). 

Both programs struggled with the parent involvement component of Early Head Start. 
Although the programs offered numerous opportunities for parents to participate, parents 
reported a lack of flexibility in their work schedules prevented them from participating. Atten- 
dance for family day in the home-based program was very low, with less than one third of the 
families attending. Staff suggested that the mental health of the home-based parent was a major 
contributor to the lack of attendance. 

Continuous funding of Early Head Start relies heavily upon the positive outcome evaluations 
of the pioneef programs. However, policy makers must recognize the ever-burdening struggles 
that each grantee must endure and overcome to achieve program maturation and effectively 
deliver a comprehensive and high quality program for children and parents. 

References 

Dunst, C, Jenkins, V., & Trivette, C. M. (1994). Family Support Scale (FSS). In C. Dunst, C. M. 

Trivette, & A. G. Deal (Eds.), Supporting and strengthening families. Cambridge, MA: Brookline. 
Haskins, R. (1989). Beyond metaphor: The efficacy of early Aildhood education. American 
Psychologist, 44(2), 274^282. 




878 



873 



POSTERS 



Olds, D„ Henderson, C. R., Jr., Kitzman, H., Eckenrode, ]., Cole, R„ &Tatelbaum, R. (1998). The 
promise of home visitation; Results of two randomized trials. Journal of Community Psychol- 
ogy, 26(1), 5-21. 

Striefel, S., & Robinson, M. A. (1998). Lessons learned at the Community- Family Partnership 

Program: A Head Start comprehensive child development program. Logan: Utah State University, 
Center for Persons with Disabilities. 

U. S. Department of Health & Human Services. (2001). Building their futures: How Early Head 
Start programs are enhancing the lives of infants and toddlers in low income families. Summary 
report. Washington, DC: Author. 



PrGschool LGarning B©haviors and Th©ir Relationship to School 
Readiness Competencies for Urban Head Start Children 

Mario A. Perry, John Fantuzzo, Paul McDermott 

PRESENTER; Marlo A. Perry 



School readiness includes a multifaceted set of competencies that help young children make 
successful adjustments to school demands and expectations (Lewit & Baker, 1995). The National 
Education Goals Panel (NEGP; Kagan, Moore, & Bredekamp, 1995) delineates five important 
components of school readiness: (a) Physical Well-Being and Motor Development, (b) Social 
and Emotional Development, (c) Approaches Toward Learning, (d) Language Development, and 
(e) Cognition and General Knowledge. According to NEGP, approaches toward learning com-. 
prise the least understood, the least researched, and perhaps the most important dimerision. 
Because approaches to learning frame the child's entire being and are at the core of social- 
emotional and cognitive interactions, the dimension warrants more attention" (p. 21). Learning 



behaviors, therefore, are a strategic focus for early intervention. 

The Preschool Learning Behaviors Scale (PLBS; McDermott, Green, Francis, & Stott, 2000) 
was developed to assess the learning behaviors of preschool age children. Three dimensions 
were found in the original validation study. Competence Motivation refers to a child s curiosity 
about learning activities, as well as his/her motivation to understand and succeed in those 
activities. A child's ability to attend to relevant stimuli and persevere with difficult tasks de- 
scribes the Attention/Persistence dimension. The Attitude Toward Learning dimension is 
characterized by a child's general demeanor in learning activities and the way in which he/she 
interacts with others in those learning activities (McDermott, Leigh, & Perry, 2002). 

The purpose of the present study was to address the need for further investigation of the 
validity of PLBS learning behavior constructs for use with low-income, urban preschool chil- 
dren. This investigation employed multivariate statistical methods and used stringent, multiple 
criteria to address three questions. First, does this measure yield psychometrically robust 
dimensions of approaches to learning for a sample of urban Head Start children? Second, is the 
factor structure based on the Head Start sample congruent with the factor structure found by 
McDermott et al. (2002). Third, do these dimensions relate to other develop mentally salient 



constructs of school readiness competencies? 

Participants of this study included the teachers and caregivers of 642 children recruited from 
41 Head Start classrooms in a large, northeastern city. Racial demographics of this sample 
indicated that the majority of the families (85%) were African American. Factor analyses 
revealed three robust dimensions, congruent with the Gompetence Motivation, Attention/ 
Persistence, and Attitude Toward Learning dimensions found by McDermott et al. (2002). 
Ganonical variance analyses were conducted to explore possible multivariate relationships 



O 

ERIC 



874 



879 



METHODS/MEASURES/INSTRUMENT DEVELOPMENT 



between learning behaviors and other child competencies, as measured by teachers, parents, 
independent observers, and through direct assessment. Canonical variance analyses indicated 
significant multivariate relationships between ratings of children's learning behaviors and both 
teacher and parent ratings of children's play behaviors. Additionally, significant multivariate 
relationships between ratings of children's learning behaviors and independent observer ratings 
of children s self-regulation were found. Finally, bivariate correlations between the PLBS dimen- 
sions and children s expressive and receptive vocabulary scores revealed some significant 
relationships between learning behaviors and emergent literacy skills. Implications of these 
findings for early childhood research and practice were outlined in this presentation. 

References 

Kagan, S. L, Moore, E., & Bredekamp, S. (Eds.). (1995). Reconsidering children's early learning and 
development: Toward shared beliefs and vocabulary. Washington DC: National Education Goals 
Panel. 

Lewit, E. M., & Baker, L. S. (1995). School readiness. The Future of Children, 5(2), 128-139. 
McDermott, P. A., Green, L. E, Francis, J. M., & Stott, D. H. (2000). Preschool Learning Behaviors 
Scale. Philadelphia: Edumetric and Clinical Science. 

McDermott, P. A., Leigh, N. M., & Perry, M. A. (2002). Development and validation of the 
Preschool Learning Behaviors Scale. Psychology in the Schools, 39, 353-365. 



Using Systematic Observations to Study Process 
in Head Start and Other Group Settings 

Jeanne Montie, Jill Claxton, Patricia P. Olmsted 

PRESENTERS: Jeanne Montie, Jill Claxton 

Measures of process, a child s actual experience in a setting, can be used to obtain an index of 
quality in early childhood settings that goes beyond quality assessment based on structural 
characteristics alone. This study presents findings from systematic observations used to study 
process in a carefully drawn U.S. sample. The data are part of the International Association for 
the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (lEA) Preprimary Project. The observation systems 
used in the study were developed by an international team of early childhood experts specifi- 
cally for the lEA Preprimary study. 

Five types of settings were included in the U.S. data collection: (a) Head Start programs, 

(b) public preschools, (c) other organized group settings (preschools and child-care centers), 

(d) family day-care homes, and (e) children's own homes. Data collection took place at six sites 
around the U.S. that varied in geographic location and degree of urbanization, and together the 
six sites included families from all major cultural/ethnic and sociodemographic groups. The 
final sample consisted of 559 children: 109 children enrolled in 31 Head Start programs, 107 
children attending 24 public preschool programs, 193 children in 45 t 3 q>es of organized pro- 
grams, 71 children in 32 family day-care homes, and 79 children cared for in their own homes. 
The mean age of the children at the time of data collection was 4.5 years (SD = .29). 

Findings are presented from the combined observation system used to gather information 
about adults' management of time, children's activities, and adults' behaviors. The child activi- 
ties observation system (CA) was used to record the activities in which the target child was 

and amount of time spent in different activities. The adult behavior observation system 
(AB) was used to record the behaviors of the primary adult and the nature of the adult's involve- 
ment with the children. The management of time system (MOT) was used to keep a running 




880 



875 



POSTERS 



record of how the adult organized children's time— the activities proposed by the adult, the time 
of each proposed change of activity, and the proposed group structure. 

The following are examples of basic findings presented for each of the observation systems. 
MOT data show the percentage of time specific activities were proposed and how group structure 
varied by tj^JC of activity. Data from CA show the percentage of time children were engaged in 
specific activities and whether the child was interacting. AB data show the percentage of time 
spent in various activities such as teaching, child management, and nurturing. The CA and AB 
observations were completed concurrendy with the MOT; thus, it is also possible to create a 
matrix that shows child and adult behaviors during specific proposed activities. The observation 
systems provide a proven and objective means of gathering process information in early child- 
hood settings. This information can be useful in examining issues related to quality and show- 
ing where teaching practices result in desired outcomes and where changes should be considered. 



Myers-Briggs Type Inventory (MBTI) and 
Teacher Retention in Head Start 

Johnnie Cain 

PRESENTER: Johnnie Cain 

"Time is money, and there are few things more costly to programs than the time and expense 
associated with employee turnover." (Half, 1986). Studies within the past decade show that 50% 
of new hires last only 6 months in their new jobs. It is important that you get an idea of what 
tasks the individual likes or dislikes doing, not only because people are invariably better at the 
things they like to do, but because people who do not like what they do rarely last on the job. 

Data from a 6-year study (1994-2000) utilizing the Myers-Briggs Type Inventory (MBTI), 
Form G (Self-Scoring) (Myers & Briggs, 1977) in the Head Start environment support a thesis 
from earlier research that certain temperament types are retained longer in early diildhood 
teaching positions. In this study, 67 (84%) of the Region X Head Start programs yielded 1,538 
MBTIs. 797 of these inventories were from teachers. Findings indicate that 75% of teachers 
(approximately 8 out of 10) are of the Sensing/Judging (SJ) and Intuition/Feeling (NF) tempera- 
ment types. 

Early findings from David Keirsey and Marilyn Bates studies from the 1970-80s with 
California Schools Systems indicated that 8 out 10 teachers who remained the longest in early 
childhood education came from primarily SJ and NF temperament tjqjes (Keirsey & Bates, 

1984). SJ tjqjes in the Keirsey-Bates study accounted for 56% of those who had a long stay in 
teaching, while 45% of these were SJs in the 6-year study. SJ types generally exhibit a love for 
structure in developing responsibility and utility in their students. As for NF types, they repre- 
sented 32% of those who had a long stay in teaching in the Keirsey-Bates study and 30% in the 
6-year study. NFs tjqjically have a love for developing identity and integrity in their students. 

Head Start generates annual Program Information Reports (PIRs) based on PIR reporting 
required of all grantee programs throughout the United States. In years 1990-1994, The PIR 
reports indicate that the national turnover rate of Head Start teachers was consistently 12.5% 
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1994-2000). In the 1999-2000 PIR, the 
turnover rate was 9.3% nationally and 10.89% regionally. This decline can be attributed to the 
inception of performance standards by Head Start in 1994 (U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services, 1996). The nature and stmcture of the "standards" are particularly suited for 
SJs and NFs and thereby provide the tjqje of guidance that particularly suits these temperaments. 




876 



881 



METHODS/MEASURES/INSTRUMENT DEVELOPMENT 



Although there are many other variables, one striking conclusion is that type is related to 
retention of selected individuals as well as to those who tend to remain the longest in the 
teacher positions. Therefore, the author suggests that the MBTI could be successfully utilized as a 
predictive first-step assessment/preselection tool where retention and cost are important to the 
survival of an early childhood educational organization. In addition, further study should be 
done comparing the job performance of SJs and NFs to other types over time to evaluate 
"quality of tenure. " 

References 

Half, R. (1986). Robert Half on Hiring. New York: Penguin Books USA Inc. 

Keirsey, D. & Bates, M. (1984). Please Understand Me: Character & Temperament Types (5th Ed.). 

Del Mar, CA: Prometheus Nemesis Book Company. 

Myers, I.B. & Briggs, K.C. (1977). Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, Form G. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press, Inc. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children, Youth and 
Families, Administration for Children and Families, Head Start Bureau. (October 1994- 
October 2000). Head Start National Program Information Report (PIR). Available from Head 
Start Bureau Web site, http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/hsb/programs/pir/index.htm 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children, Youth and 
Families, Administration for Children and Families, Head Start Program Performance 
Standards, Fed. Reg. 61,215 (Nov. 5, 1996) (to be codified at 45 C.F.R. pt. 1304). 



Parental Reports of Preschool Children's Social Behavior: Relations 
Among Peer Play, Language Competence, and Problem Behavior 

Julia L. Mendez, Livy M. Fogle 

PRESENTERS: Julia L. Mendez, Livy M. Fogle 

Head Start has maintained children's social and emotional adjustment as a primary program 
goal. Successful peer interactions are critical for both immediate and long-term emotional 
adjustment. Play is a salient context for the acquisition of social competence and has important 
connections with school readiness (Coolahan, Fantuzzo, Mendez, & McDermott, 2000; Mendez, 
McDermott, & Fantuzzo, 2002). In addition, play may be an important context in which 
language skills, such as expressing emotions and providing comfort to others, are refined (Dunn 
& Brown, 1991; Sawyer, 1997). 

Raver and Zigler (1997) note the importance of validating developmentally and culturally 
appropriate measures of social competence. To address this need, researchers developed the 
Pehn Interactive Peer Play Scale (PIPPS; Fantuzzo et al., 1995). While multiple validation studies 
have been completed with the teacher form of the PIPPS (Coolahan et al., 2000; Fantuzzo et al., 
1995; Fantuzzo, Coolahan, Mendez, McDermott, & Sutton-Smith, 1998a), additional evidence 
is needed to substantiate the assessment capabilities of the parent version of this measure. The 
primary purpose of this study was to further examine the validity of the parent version of the 
PIPPS. A secondary objective was to study relations among constmcts of play, behavior prob- 
lems, and language competence for African American preschoolers using a brief longitudinal 
research design. 

Parents and teachers provided information on 113 preschool children enrolled in a Head 
Start program. A subset of these children (n = 34) who participated in a 1st year of this early 





877 



POSTERS 



intervention preschool program was assessed at 8-month follow-up. Canonical correlational 
analysis confirmed relations between parent ratings of play performance, parent ratings of 
problem behavior, and teacher ratings of play performance at time 1. Canonical analyses 
comparing the PIPPS (Fantuzzo, Mendez, & Tighe, 1998b) and the Conners Parent Rating Scale 
(Conners, 1997) revealed two significant variates. The first variate pair, called Problem Behavior, 
was characterized by strong positive relationships between the Play Disruption and Play Discon- 
nection scales of the PIPPS and each of the four Conners problem behavior scales. Additionally, 
Play Interaction loaded negatively on this variate pair. The second variate pair, called Inattentive/ 
Disconnected, was defined by a strong positive relationship between the Play Disconnection 
scale of the PIPPS and the Inattention scale of the Conners. 

Parent ratings of play were also related to assessments of children s language competence at 
the beginning of the following school year, while parent ratings of problem behatnor were not 
related to subsequent language competence. Specifically, parent ratings of disruptive play and 
disconnected play had significant, negative relations with children s expressive and receptive 
language skills 8 months later. Parent ratings of interactive peer play had significant positive 
relations with receptive language ability. 

These findings provide additional validity for a parent measure of preschool children s peer 
play and support the need for greater inclusion of parental assessment of young children's social 
behavior during early childhood. Results emphasize the need to use multiple measures, such as 
the PIPPS, which capture the social competencies of the child while also providing diagnostic 
information about problem behaviors. 

¥(.€f€V€YtC€S 

Coolahan, K. C., Fantuzzo, J., Mendez, J., & McDermott, P. A. (2000). Preschool peer interac- 
tions and readiness to learn: Relationships between classroom peer play and learning 
behaviors and conduct. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(2), 367-376. 

Conners, C. K. (1997). Conners' Rating Scales manual. Toronto, Canada: Multi-Health Systems. 
Dunn, J., & Brown, J. (1991). Relationships, talk about feelings, and the development of affect 
regulation in early childhood. In J. Garber & K. A. Dodge (Eds.), The development of emotion 
regulation and dysregulation: Cambridge studies in social and emotional development (pp. 89- 
108). New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Fantuzzo, J. W., Sutton-Smith, B., Coolahan, K. C., Manz, P., Canning, S., & Debnam, D., 
(1995). Assessment of play interaction behaviors in young low-income children: Penn Interac- 
tive Peer Play Scale. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 10, 105-120. 

Fantuzzo, J., Coolahan, K. C., Mendez, J. L., McDermott, P. A., & Sutton-Smith, B. (1998a). 
Contextually-relevant validation of constructs of peer play with African American Head Start 
children: Penn Interactive Peer Play Scale. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 13(3), 411-431. 
Fantuzzo, J., Mendez, J., & Tighe, E. (1998b). Parental assessment of peer play: Developmental 
and validation of the parent version of the Penn Interactive Peer Play Scale. Early Childhood 

Research Quarterly, 13(4), 655-672. . • i 

Mendez, J. L., McDermott, P. A., & Fantuzzo, J. W. (2002). Identifying and promoting social 
competence with African American preschool children: Developmental and contextual 
considerations. Psychology in the Schools, 39, 111-123. 

Raver, C. C., & Zigler, E. F. (1997). Social competence: An untapped dimension in evaluating 
Head Start's success. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 12, 363-385. 

Sawyer, R. K. (1997). Pretend play as improvisation: Conversation in the preschool classroom. 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 




878 



833 



METHODS/MEASURES/INSTRUMENT DEVELOPMENT 



The Social Skills Rating System for 
Urban Low-Income Kindergarten Children 

Yumiko Sekino, Heather L. Cohen, Virginia Hampton, John W. Fantuzzo 

PRESENTERS: Yumiko Sekino, Heather L. Cohen, Virginia Hampton 

Research has long shown that social competency is a critical component of school success (Ladd 
& Coleman, 1997; Wentzel, 1999). Quality assessments of this important competency should 
include consideration of both home and school contexts (Fagan & Fantuzzo, 1999). Parents and 
teachers need a shared understanding of children's strengAs and needs, so that they can plan 
appropriate activities and interventions in both home and school settings and follow children's 
progress through the transition from preschool to kindergarten. 

The Social Skills Rating System (SSRS; Gresham & Elliott, 1990) was developed in response to 
the need for multicontextual, multiinformant assessment measures, and has both parent and 
teacher versions. Items for this system were a priori delineated into two scales: Social Skills and 
Problem Behaviors. 

While national standardization studies suggest the general utility of the Social Skills Rating 
System with elementary school children, results from a study examining the use of the preschool 
SSRS in urban, low-income areas found different factor structures than the original (Fantuzzo, 
Manz, & McDermott, 1998; Manz, Fantuzzo, & McDermott, 1999). Therefore, the purpose of 
this study was to examine the constmct validity of both the teacher and parent versions of the 
SSRS with a sample of urban low-income Kindergarten children. Specifically, this study investi- 
gated (a) whether the teacher and parent versions of the elementary SSRS yield the same 
constmcts for an urban, ethnic minority kindergarten population as published in the SSRS 
manual, and (b) whether there is empirical support for independent Social Skills and Problem 
Behavior domains. 

The participants in this study were 493 kindergarten children (predominantly African 
American) from low-income areas in a large urban school district. Responses from both parents 
and teachers in this study were subject to independent exploratory factor analyses to evaluate 
underlying constmcts across items of the social skills and problem behavior scales, respectively. 
Results yielded a three-factor solution for both scales of the teacher SSRS, replicating the original 
stmcture in the manual. However, for the parent version, analyses resulted in a three-factor 
solution for the social skills scale as opposed to the original four-factor solution in the manual. 
In addition, factor analysis of the problem behavior scale yielded a three-factor solution as in 
the manual, although the factor items loaded differently. 

Higher order factor analyses were examined as an empirical test of Gresham and Elliott's (1990) 
theoretical proposition of two unique constmcts of social competence. Preliminary analyses for 
the teacher version suggest that there are two overall constmcts measured, although they are not 
distincdy representing social skills and problem behaviors, whereas resulting constmcts for the 
parent version support the original constmcts of social skills and problem behaviors. 

Differences in the exploratory and higher order factor stmctures between the parent and 
teacher SSRS raise important issues for researchers and policy makers in early childhood 
education. Particularly for low-income children, the assessment of social competency is an issue 
that requires thoughtful evaluation of children's functioning across contexts. In addition, this 
study highlights differences between key informants' ratings of children's social competence. 

References 

Fagan, & Fantuzzo, J. W. (1999). Multirater congmence on the Social Skills Rating System; 

Mother, father, and teacher assessments of urban Head Start children's social competencies. 

Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 14(2), 229-242. 



O 

ERIC 



884 



879 



POSTERS 



Fantuzzo, ]., Manz, P. H„ & McDermott, P. (1998). Preschool version of the Social Skills Rating 
System: An empirical analysis of its use with low-income children. Journal of School Psychol- 
ogy, 36(2), 199-214. 

Gresham, F. M., & Elliott, S. N. (1990). The Social Skills Rating System. Circle Pines, MN; Amen- 
can Guidance Service. 

Ladd, G. W., & Coleman, C. C. (1997). Children's classroom peer relationships and early 
school attitudes: Concurrent and longitudinal associations. Early Education & Development, 8(1), 

51-66. ^ , 

Manz, P. H., Fantuzzo, J. W., & McDermott, P. A. (1999). The parent version of the preschool 
Social Skills Rating Scale: An analysis of its use with low-income, ethnic-minority children. 
School Psychology Review, 28(3), 493-504. 

Wentzel, K. R. (1999). Social-motivational processes and interpersonal relationships: Implica- 
tions for understanding motivation in school. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91(1), 76-97. 



Forging the Link Between Children's Teachable 
Learning Behaviors and the Head Start Curriculum 

Paul A. McDermott, Michelle R. Menaker, Carrie M. Steinberg, Lauren E. Angelo 

PRESENTERS: Carrie M. Steinberg, Michelle R. Menaker 



The purpose of this study was to develop behavioral performance objectives that would serve as 
the foundation for a curriculum to teach learning behaviors to children in Head Start. Learning 
behaviors refer to the characteristic and observable behavioral patterns that children display as 
they approach and undertake learning tasks. Examples include task persistence, competence 
motivation, flexibility, and attentiveness. Learning behavior, as distinct from cognitive ability or 
intelligence because it is uniguely teachable, accounts for substantial aspects of school perfor- 
mance that are untapped by ability measures, and reduces the risk of school failure and social 
maladjustment substantially more than ability. 

The Preschool Learning Behaviors Scale (PLBS; McDermott, Green, Francis, & Stott, 2000), a 
nationally standardized rating instrument, was completed for 2,329 Head Start children in 
Philadelphia during the 2000-2001 school year. From the teacher responses provided, two 
empirical procedures were applied to identify within PLBS dimensions, the basic building 
blocks or behavioral areas that comprised the dimensions of early learning behaviors. 

Consistent with development of behavioral sets for children in kindergarten through pade 
12 (McDermott & Watkins, 1987; Stott, McDermott, Green, & Francis, 1988), two empirical 
procedures were used: (a) exploratory factor analysis and (b) cluster analysis. The goal of eaA 
procedure was to establish a maximally robust, stable, and educationally meaningful collection 
of behavioral sets, where each set was composed of PLBS items that reflected the same pheno- 
typic skills. Both procedures were used because, depending on the amount of common and 
unique variance among PLBS items for Head Start, one or the other procedure was likely to form 
more useful behavioral areas. After careful review of the resulting groupings of items, it was 
determined that the results of the factor analysis made more sense based on their content 
meaning, and thus were used as the final nine behavioral areas. Each of the nine areas was then 
named for its component items. 

Behavioral performance objectives were written for each of the empirically derived behavioral 
areas, with input from two Philadelphia Head Start educational coordinators. These profession- 
als helped to identify the most relevant and teachable of the behavioral sets and to develop a 



O 

ERIC 



880 



885 



METHODS/MEASURES/INSTRUMENT DEVELOPMENT 



hierarchy of instructional objectives that would apply to the 3- to 5-year-old age range found in 
Head Start. The resulting instructional objectives were put into a survey format that presented 
3-point likert anchors indicating 'Most Achievable' to 'Not Achievable.' Six Head Start teachers 
from the Philadelphia schools regional clusters were identified and asked to rate each objective 
in terms of relevancy for Head Start and teachability within the Head Start context. A follow-up 
discussion meeting was held with the participating teachers and educational coordinators to 
discuss the objectives and their ratings. 

The survey results were shared with the educational coordinators and teachers at large to 
stimulate discussion. The information generated from these discussions, along with the resulting 
behavioral objectives from the study, can now be used to provide a foundation for the develop- 
ment of a Head Start Learning Behaviors Curriculum. 

References 

McDermott, P. A., Green, L. F., Francis, J. M., & Stott, D. H. (2000). Preschool Learning Behaviors 
Scale. Philadelphia: Edumetric and Clinical Science. 

McDermott, P. A., & Watkins, M. W. (1987). Microcomputer systems manual for McDermott Multidi- 
mensional Assessment of Children (IBM version). San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corpora- 
tion. 

Stott, D. H., McDemott, P. A., Green, L .F, & Francis, J. M. (1988). Learning Behaviors Scale and 
study of children's learning behaviors research edition manual. San Antonio, TX: The Psychologi- 
cal Corporation. 



Early Head Start Program Evaluation: 

Manualized Assessment of Progress 

Susan Dickstein, Ronald Seifer, Maria Eguia, Regina Kuersten-Hogan 

PRESENTER: Susan Dickstein 



The Early Head Start Manualized Assessment of Progress (EHS MAP; Dickstein, Kuersten-Hogan, 
Eguia, & Seifer, 1999) was designed as a program evaluation tool to be integrated within the 
fabric of EHS, and utilized by all EHS staff with input from families. It serves to document 
ongoing progress of children and families while enrolled in the program, as well as the fidelity 
of services provided. EHS MAP was developed to flexibly monitor progress of children and 
families in home-based and center-based programs and to yield systematic information about 
child and family goal progress in areas including (a) Parent Self-Sufficiency; (b) Child Develop- 
mental Readiness; (c) Parent Promotion of Child's Development; (d) Health, Nutrition, and 
Mental Health; and (e) Program-Community Integration. Child and family goals were chosen, 
rated on a scale ranging from "non-optimal functioning" to "developmental strength," and 
tracked over time (Dickstein, Seifer, Eguia, Kuersten-Hogan, & Magee, 2002). 

We present data collected during 1 quarter in a local EHS program with a total enrollment of 
108 children. Results are based on chart review of 65 center-based children (who participated in 
the program for at least 7 weeks during the quarter). We found that: 

1. All (100%) children had individual developmental goals identified by their teachers, 
complying with program performance standards. 

2. Most (69%) children had health, nutrition, and/or mental health goals reflecting impor- 
tant needs in these areas. 

3. On average, substantial progress was made on all child developmental goals. 



886 



881 



POSTERS 



4. Parent Self Reliance goals were selected by 46% of families. 

5. Parent Promotion of Child Development goals were selected by 29% of families. 

6. On average, some progress was made in both family goal domains. 

The EHS MAP was designed to document continuous improvement and growth in the 
context of ongoing social, developmental, and/or familial challenges. Anecdotal information 
suggests that implementation of this system heightened staff awareness of normative develop- 
mental processes and improved quality of service provision by (a) enhancing cooperation 
among the EHS team; (b) facilitating staff-family partnerships; (c) challenging EHS staff to 
flexibly address child, family, and community needs; and (d) shifting the focus of work with 
families to a proactive strength-based case management approach. 

Program evaluation within a system of service delivery requires specification of methods for 
assessing and tracking child/family outcomes, as well as for training evaluators. Some challenges 
include the need to (a) establish agreement among staff regarding rating system components 
and (b) monitor potential biases associated with staff simultaneously being evaluators and 
service providers. A benefit includes highlighting the interplay of normative and maladaptive 
processes in developmental context, consistent with "developmentally appropriate practices" for 
early childhood professionals (Bredekamp & Copple, 1997). Another benefit includes the ability 
to link assessment (or program evaluation) with service provision in a manner well articulated 
by Meisels (2001). That is, program evaluation (a) is an ongoing and dynamic process based on 
multiple experiences with the child/family and on varied sources of information, (b) generates 
hypothesis-testing functions to better elucidate child/family strengths and needs, and (c) is 
linked with implementation of individualized child/family programming. The EHS MAP is a 
promising tool that requires further validation. 

References 

Bredekamp, S., & Copple, C. ( 1 99 7) . Developmentally appropriate practice in early childhood 
programs-Revised. Washington, DC: National Association for the Education of Young Chil- 
dren. 

Dickstein, S., Kuersten-Hogan, R., Eguia, M., & Seifer, R. (1999). Early Head Start MAP: 

Manualized Assessment of Progress. Washington, DC; Administration for Children and Fami- 
lies, Head Start Child Outcomes Research Support Consortium. 

Dickstein, S., Seifer, R., Eguia, M., Kuersten-Hogan, R., & Magee, K. D. (2002). Early Head Start 
MAP: Manualized Assessment of Progress. Infant Mental Health Journal, 23, 231-249. ^ 
Meisels, S. (2001). Fusing assessment and intervention; Changing parents' and providers' views 
of young children. Zero to Three, 21, 4-10. 



Assessment of Emergent Numeracy in Head Start 

Virginia R. Hampton, Douglas A. Frye, Romilla Prabhu 

PRESENTERS; Douglas A. Frye, Virginia R. Hampton 

Helping children enter school ready to learn is a primary objective of Head Start. To attain this 
goal, early childhood programs need to nurture the development of competencies in several 
areas, including numeracy (Kagan, Moore, & Bredekamp, 1995). Emergent numeracy is particu- 
larly important because the ability to learn math and science in later years is based on children s 
understanding of early math skills. As programs such as Head Start help children to develop 
emergent numeracy skills, appropriate methods are needed to identify children's success in 
mathematics. A useful assessment measure is the Test of Early Mathematics Ability (TEMA-2; 



ERIC 



882 



887 



METHODS/MEASURES/INSTRUMENT DEVELOPMENT 






Ginsburg & Baroody, 1990), which provides a broad assessment of early math for children ages 
3 through 8. The TEMA-2 evaluates both informal and formal mathematics. Moreover, this 
instmment can help to identify topic areas in math that children find difficult, and can reveal 
informal strengths among children who are performing at low levels. 

Although the TEMA-2 has many useful features, our work with Head Start children has found 
that it can be time consuming to administer, leading to difficulties with maintaining children's 
attention and with assessing large numbers of children. Given these concerns, the purpose of 
this research was to develop and validate a shortened version of the TEMA-2. 

The participants included ethnic minority Head Start children in a large urban school district. 
Exploratory factor analyses were conducted to determine the latent structure of the TEMA-2. The 
reliable three-factor solution included the constmcts of Basic Math Skills, Intermediate Math 
Skills, and Advanced Math Skills. Subsequendy, a short form consisdng of 14 items was devel- 
oped. The short form yielded the same three factors, and demonstrated reliability. Biyariate 
correlations were calculated to examine the reladonship between the scores on the short and 
long forms of the TEMA-2 for a sample of Head Start children. The results yielded positive 
correlations that were strong and stadsdcally significant. The short form scores of children in 
Head Start and the long form scores of children in kindergarten also correlated positively and 
produced strong, stadsdcally significant correladons. 

The results of these studies indicate that the short form provides an assessment of children's 
early math skills across levels of skill development, in keeping with the full version. Moreover, 
the short version demonstrates a strong, significant relationship with the full form. Further 
analyses continue to explore the validity of this instrument. These results indicate that the short 
version is a promising screening instmment for Head Start children. The use of a shortened 
math assessment can help to idendfy large numbers of children who need assistance with math 
and can be used to evaluate the results of interventions aimed at improving children's math 
skills. Both of these uses would benefit Head Start children by helping to improve emergent 
numeracy skills as part of a strategy for enhancing school readiness. 

References 

Ginsburg, H. P., & Baroody, A. J. (1990). Test of Early Mathematics Ability. Austin, TX: PRO-ED. 
Kagan, S. L, Moore, E., & Bredekamp, S. (Eds.). (1995). Reconsidering children's early development 
and learning: Toward common views and vocabulary. Washington, DC; Nadonal Educadon 
Goals Panel. 





883 



Native American 



Vision Problems Among Native American Head Start Children 

Kathleen M. Mohan, Joseph M. Miller, Erin M. Harvey, Velma Dobson 

PRESENTER: Kathleen M. Mohan 



Research has demonstrated a higher prevalence of astigmatism among members of several Native 
American tribes than has been reported in other populations (Abraham & Volovic, 1972; Boniuk, 
1973; Coleman, 1970; Hamilton, 1976; Kershner & Brick, 1984; LevySViTall, 1969; Maples, 
Atchley, & Hughes, 1996; Miller, Dobson, Harvey, & Sherrill, 2000; Woodruff, 1986). Without 
eyeglass correction, individuals with astigmatism have poor near and distance vision. In addition, 
research has indicated that if the astigmatism is not corrected while children are young (prior to 
age 7), they can develop refractive amblyopia (Mitchell, Freeman, Millodot, & Haegerstrom, 
1973). This condition is defined by poor visual acuity in the absence of ocular abnormalities 
even while wearing appropriate eyeglass correction, and treatment success is limited after age 7. 
Thus, uncorrected astigmatism may interfere with performance in preschool due to poor visual 
acuity, and may have permanent effects on vision and school performance as the children grow 
older. The goal of the current study was to determine the prevalence of eye problems including 
astigmatism, and other amblyogenic risk factors in Tohono O'odham preschoolers. 

Participants were children at least 3 and less than 5 years old, enrolled in the Tohono 
O'odham Head Start Program between 1997 and 2000, who were not identified by the Head 
Start Program as having special needs. Each child received a complete eye examination. Eye- 
glasses were provided to 3-year-olds who had 2.00 D of astigmatism in either eye, and to 4-year- 
olds who had 1.50 D of astigmatism in either eye. 

Of the 667 children tested, 612 met the inclusion criteria, 4 (0.6%) were too old, 21 (3.1%) 
were too young, and 30 (4.5%) were identified as having special needs. Of the remaining 
children, only 8 (1.2%) had eye abnormalities (e.g., nystagmus, strabismus), 48% had astigma- 
tism 1.00 D in the right eye, and 48% had astigmatism 1.00 D in the left eye. Eyeglasses for 
correction of astigmatism were prescribed for 32% of the children. Only 1 of the included children 
(0.2%) was identified as having high refractive error in the absence of high astigmatism. 

The results indicate that almost one third of Tohono O'odham preschool children require 
correction of astigmatism, while other amblyogenic risk factors (c.g., strabismus) are rare. These 
results highlight the importance of identifying risk factors specific to the population of interest 
when implementing screening protocols aimed at identification of factors that may affect visual 
performance. The screening methods most often used in preschools focus on the detection of 
strabismus and high refractive error. In this sample of Native American children there is almost 
no strabismus, whereas there is a high prevalence of astigmatism. For these children, and 
perhaps for children of some other Native American tribes, the most effective vision screening 
would focus on the detection of astigmatism. Early correction of refractive errors and 
amblyogenic risk factors are likely to make significant contributions to academic performance 
and to healthy visual development. 



O 

ERIC 



884 



8S9 



native AMERICAN 



References 

Abraham, J. E., & Volovic, J. B. (1972). Preliminary Navajo Optometric Study. Journal of the 
American Optometry Association, 43,1257-1260. 

Boniuk, V. (1973). Refractive problems in Native peoples (the Sioux Lookout Project). Canadian 
Journal of Ophthalmology, 8, 229-233. 

Coleman, H. M. (1970). An analysis of the visual status of an entire school population. Journal 
of the American Optometry Association, 41, 341-347. 

Hamilton, J. E. (1976). Vision anomalies of Indian school children: The Lame Deer study. 

Journal of the American Optometry Association, 47, 479-487. 

Kershner, R. M., & Brick, D. C. (1984). Prevalence of high corneal stigmatism in Papago school 
children. Investigative Ophthalmology &t Visual Science, 25 (Suppl), 217. 

Levy, W. J., & Wall, F. J. (1969). A study of the refractive state of a group of American Pueblo 
Indians. Rocky Mountain Medical Journal, 40-42. 

Maples, W. C., Atchley, J. W., & Hughes, J. (1996). Refractive profile of Navajo children. Journal of 
Behavioral Optometry, 7, 59-64. 

Miller, J. M., Dobson, V, Harvey, E. M., & Sherrill, D. L. (2000). Astigmatism and amblyopia 
among Native American children (AANAC): Design and methods. Ophthalmic Epidemiology, 

7, 187-207. 

Mitchell, D. E., Freeman, R. D., Millodot, M., & Haegerstrom, G. (1973). Meridional amblyopia: 
Evidence for modification of the human visual system by early visual experience. Vision 
Research, 13, 535-558. 

Woodmff, M. E. (1986). Vision and refractive status among grade I children of the Province of 
New Bmnswick. American Journal of Optometry <§ Physiological Optics, 63, 545-552. 



Culture, Context, and Child Development 
in One American Indian Tribe 

Paul Spicer, Michelle Christensen, Amy Dethlefsen, Cecelia Big Crow, -Christina Mitchell 
PRESENTERS: Cecelia Big Crow, Michelle Christensen 

Our goal was to explore culturally appropriate ways of assessing cognitive and social-emotional 
development in American Indian toddlers. We also examined some of the more robust corre- 
lates of development in these areas. All participating families in this study were recmited from 
families eligible for Early Head Start services on one Northern Plains American Indian reserva- 
tion as part of a study funded by the Head Start Bureau. Data on a total of 98 families are 
presented here. 

Children were assessed at 24-30 months of age in an effort to better understand the unique 
challenges of toddlerhood for families in this community, especially the difficulties that can 
arise with emerging autonomy in the child. 

Children's cognitive development was assessed using the Mental Development Index (MDI) 
of the second edition of the Bayley Scales of Infant Development (Bayley, 1993), language 
development was assessed using the MacArthur Communicative Development Inventory (CDI; 
Fenson, et al., 1993), and social-emotional development was assessed using five subscales of 
the Infant and Toddler Social and Emotional Assessment (ITSEA; Carter & Briggs-Gowan, 1999). 
Exploratory factor analyses of these seven individual measures revealed three main factors, 
which are used in the analyses presented here: (a) children's cognitive— language development 
(composed of the Bayley MDI and the MacArthur CDI), (b) children's social— emotional 



ERIC 




885 



D 



POSTERS 



competencies (composed of two subscales of the ITSEA), and children's social-emotional 
problems (composed of three subscales of the ITSEA). 

Correlates of child development were drawn from interviews with the child s mother and 
observations during a home visit using the Home Observation for Measurement of the Environ- 
ment (HOME; Caldwell & Bradley, 1984). The correlates included in these analyses are 
(a) mother's alcohol use at the time of the interview, (b) mother's spirituality (using a scale 
validated in a large study of psychiatric epidemiology in American Indian communities), and 
(c) the responsivity and variety scales of the HOME. These correlates emerged consistently from 
a somewhat broader set of correlates used in preliminary analyses. 

Mother's alcohol use was correlated with social and emotional problems in the child, mother s 
spirituality was correlated with social and emotional competencies in the child, and child s 
cognitive-language development was correlated with responsivity and variety on the HOME. 

Each of these findings is consistent with ongoing ethnographic work in the community, and 
provides support for program emphases, especially those that involve working on parent s 
substance abuse and strengthening parents' knowledge of traditions. Our results in the area of 
cognitive-language development also emphasize the value of traditional parenting practices in 
this community, which emphasize noninterference by parents and patterns of caregiving 
distributed broadly through the extended family. 

References 

Bayley, N. (1993). Bayley Scales of Infant Development (2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX: The Psycho- 
logical Corporation. 

Carter, A., & Briggs-Gowan, M. (1999). Infant Toddler Social Emotional Assessment (ITSEA) manual. 

Unpublished manuscript, Yale University, New Haven, CT. 

Caldwell, B. M., & Bradley, R. H. (1984). Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment 
(manual). University of Arkansas at Little Rock. 

Fenson, L, Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Thai, D., Bates, E., Hartung, J. P, et al. (1993). MacArthur 
Communicative Development Inventories: User's guide and technical manual. San Diego, CA. 
Singular Publishing. 



Maternal Reports of the Daily Routines of Toddlers From 
American Indian Families Living on a Northern Plains Reservation 

Lorraine F. Kubicek, Michelle Christensen, Amy Dethlefsen 
PRESENTERS; Michelle Christensen, Lorraine F. Kubicek 

Family routines are patterned interactions that occur with predictable regularity in the course of 
everyday living. Routines help to organize family life, reinforce family identity (Wol in & 

Bennett, 1984), contribute to family stability and continuity (Fiese, Hooker, Kotary, & 

Schwagler, 1993; Boyce, Jensen, James, & Peacock, 1983), and provide the context for much of 
early childhood socialization (Reiss, 1981; Rogoff, Mistry, Goncu, & Mosier, 1993). 

Routines are generally considered a universal attribute of family life that cuts across ethnic 
and cultural background and socioeconomic status (Bossard & Boll, 1950; Boyce et al., 1983). 
Nevertheless, few details are known about the actual day-to-day practices of families with young 
children living in contemporary American society, particularly those with low incomes. Two 
studies involving low-income Head Start preschoolers point to the beneficial effects of family 



O 

ERIC 



886 



891 



NATIVE AMERICAN 



routines on child outcomes (Churchill & Stoneman, 1997; Keltner, 1990). These results suggest 
a promising area in need of more systematic research. 

Subjects were 15 American Indian mothers selected from a sample of 105 participants living 
on a Northern Plains reservation. Fifty-three percent of the target children were enrolled in an 
Early Head Start program. 

During a home visit when their toddler was between 24 and 30 months of age, mothers were 
videotaped taking part in the Caretaking Routines Interview (Kubicek & Emde, 1998) in which 
they were asked to describe their daily routines for aaivities such as getting their child dressed, 
playtime, dinner, and bedtime. There were also questions about the best and the worst times of 
day for the family and why mother perceives these times that way and how discipline is 
handled. Each interview was coded according to a global rating system that was specifically 
designed to evaluate responses to this interview. 

Results from these 15 illustrative cases indicate that routines are a regular part of the 
day-to-day lives of all of these families. Every family had a predictable pattern for at least three 
of the four targeted routines. For many families, routines provided opportunities for social and 
emotional engagement and for child autonomy. With respect to child autonomy, mothers in this 
sample seemed apt to follow their child^s lead, for example, "I let him/her.'' This may reflect a 
cultural value of respect for the autonomy and free will of the child. Most mothers spent time 
with their child in some type of child-centered activity on a daily basis, and all stated 
that routines were somewhat- to very important in keeping their families strong. 

Given the reported benefits associated with the practice of family routines, these results are 
encouraging for those concerned with improving outcomes for children and families. Future 
reports will focus on the relation between different demographic variables, such as maternal 
education and participation in Early Head Start, and the practice of family routines. Of particu- 
lar interest is how variation in this practice may relate to child outcomes. 

References 

Bossard, J. H. S., & Boll, E. S. (1950). Ritual in family living. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. 
Boyce, W. T, Jensen, E. W., James, S. A., & Peacock, J. L. (1983). The family routines inventory: 
Theoretical origins. Social Science Medicine, 17, 193-200. 

Churchill, S. L, & Stoneman, Z. (April, 1997). Family routines and temperament as a predictor of 
child outcomes: Differences by sex of child. Poster presented at the biennial meeting of the 
Society for Research in Child Development, Washington, DC. 

Fiese, B. H., Hooker, K. A., Kotary, L., & Schwagler, J. (1993). Family rituals in the early stages of 
parenthood. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 55, 633-642. 

Keltner, B. (1990). Family characteristics of preschool social competence among Black children 
in a Head Start program. Child Psychiatry and Fiuman Development, 21 (2), 95-108. 

Kubicek, L. F, & Emde, R. N. (1998). Caretaking routines interview. Unpublished manuscript. 
University of Colorado Health Sciences Center. 

Reiss, D. (1981). The family's construction of reality. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 

Rogoff, B., Mistry, J., Goncu, A., & Mosier, C. (1993). Guided participation in cultural activity by 
toddlers and caregivers. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 58 (8, 

Serial No. 236). 

Wolin, S. J., & Bennett, L. A. (1984). Family rituals. Family Process, 23, 401-420. 




892 



887 



POSTERS 



Impact Evaluation in the Canadian 
Aboriginal Head Start Program (AHS) 

Lynne Robertson, Richard Budgell 

PRESENTERS: Lynne Robertson, Carol Rowan 

This presentation describes the Aboriginal Head Start Program(AHS) Impact Evaluation chal- 
lenges, instruments, and methodology. Health Canada^s Aboriginal Head Start Program, 
launched ini 995, now serves more than 3,500 children in 114 sites. AHS addresses the needs 
of preschool First Nations, Inuit, and Metis children living in urban and northern communities. 
A similar federal program for First Nations children living on Indian reserves operates separately. 
AHS is designed to meet participating children's spiritual, emotional, intellectual, and physical 
needs in community-based early childhood programs where parents and guardians play a key 
role in the planning, development, operation, and evaluation. The six AHS program compo- 
nents are (a) Aboriginal Culture and Language, (b) Education and School Readiness, 

(c) Parental Involvement, (d) Health Promotion, (e) Nutrition, and (f) Social Support. 

Evaluation approaches and indicators of program success were developed through Aboriginal 
community consultations with academics, participating families and other community mem- 
bers, and Health Canada staff. The impact evaluation demonsUates the effects of AHS on 
participating children, families, and communities, and will evaluate change in each of the six 
program component areas. 

There are three phases to the AHS Impact Evaluation: Development, Piloting, and Evaluation. 
A major challenge to the impact evaluation design was identifying standardized instruments 
that were suitable for all AHS sites. To ensure scientific rigor and community relevance, a group 
of specialists in child development, evaluation, and working in Aboriginal communities 
recommended and/or developed a set of culturally sensitive instruments and a methodology for 
impact evaluation. The instmments and methodology were piloted in the 2001-02 school year, 
and the evaluation study will begin in the fall of 2002. The instruments are (a) Work Sampling 
System (WSS; Four domains for child observation are used to demonstrate child progress and 
school readiness), (b) Enviroview (This instrument was developed as a descriptive environmen- 
tal rating scale to describe the cultural context for participating sites), and (c) Aboriginal 
Vocabulary Acquisition Test (This innovative instrument based on pictures, dolls, and colored 
balls was developed to test the child's vocabulary acquisition of Aboriginal words taught in his/ 
her program. The pictures and format are designed for use in diverse cultural settings). 

A set of instmments (questionnaires) was developed to measure change indirectly by collect- 
ing Perceptions of Change of informants. Individual interviews or focus groups were conducted 
by community evaluators with (a) parents/caregivers (entrance and exit annually); (b) AHS staff; 
(c) elders and traditional teachers, community professionals, and others (including former 
parents/caregivers); (d) kindergarten teachers; (e) social workers; and (f) health professionals. 
The methodology focuses on a participatory approach that builds community capacity and 
allows for adaptations to cultural differences. Sites selected for piloting and evaluation incorpo- 
rate the linguistic, cultural, and geographic diversity within the program. Local AHS staff are 
trained in WSS, and communities recommend local evaluators for training and to carry out the 
community evaluation. As the Aboriginal communities play an increasing role in development 
and evaluation of their programs, they ensure their children are participating in high quality 
programs that are in harmony with their cultural values. Participants are recognizing the 
importance of evidence-based results for accountability, to demonstrate outcomes to funders, 
and for program improvement. 



O 



888 





Normal Child Development 



The Young Child in Relationships: A Descriptive 
Study of Patterns of Variation in Cognitive Skill, 

Social Perspective-Taking, and Emotional Expression. 

Catherine Ayoub, Kathleen Guinee, Claire Russell 

PRESENTERS: Catherine Ayoub, Kathleen Guinee, Claire Russell 

This study explored cognitive skills and the emotional expression of young children. Children 
between 2 and 3 years of age demonstrate a variety of skills along the representational con- 
tinuum from sensorimotor expression to representational mappings. There are socially con- 
stmcted interactions that facilitate or deter the child's pattern of responses (Fischer & Ayoub, 
1994). Differences ultimately impact not only the child's style of interaction, but also, her 
ability to learn. 

Our sample consisted of 123 children eligible for Early Head Start in rural Vermont. The Nice 
Mean Scales (Fischer, Hencke, Hand, Ayoub, & Rusself 2001) were administered to the children 
at 24 and 36 months. These scales assess the development of children's representations of mean 
and nice social interactions and coping strategies. Mothers provided reports of the child's 
vocabulary production at 24 and 36 months. In addition, risk and resilience measures — 
parenting stress and harsh parenting practices— were obtained from mothers during the child's 
H'year of life. These data were assessed using the MacArthur Communication Development 
Inventory (Fenson, Pethick, & Cox, 1994b), the Parenting Stress Index (Abidin, 1983, 1995), 
and the Child Abuse Potential Inventory (Milner, 1986). 

We predicted differences in patterns of cognitive skill levels and coping strategies associated 
with entry-level maternal risk factors and vocabulary and expressive style — controlling for 
gender, age, and income. Children differ in their abilities to represent the self as separate and 
engage in telling simple stories about one's self in interaction. At 24 months, children are often 
not fully representational (M = .36; SD = .66). Only 5% of the sample children were able to 
reach skill level 1 (identifying a person in one action fitting a social-interaction category of 
mean or nice). By 36 months, children are solidly performing at the single representational level 
(M = 1.34; SD = .99). Ten percent of the sample children remained unable to represent a person 
as a separate agent, and half were actively able to represent a person performing two actions 
fitting an interaction category of mean or nice. Five percent of the children were able to shift 
behavioral categories. 

Age was the most powerful predictor of skill level (t = -6.53, p = .001) and of cognitive 
complexity in storytelling (t = -5.35, p = .001). There were no other influences on skill level 
passed and complexity of storytelling, demonstrating that cognitive skill was not dependent 
upon gender, vocabulary production, or parents' income. 

Children engage in a variety of coping strategies to diminish uncomfortable stories. The use 
of coping strategies, specifically distraction/refusal and spontaneous storytelling, are negatively 
associated with higher skill levels (r = -.58, p = .0001). A small group of children focused on the 



POSTERS 



expression of negatively charged social constructions and used the largest number of coping 
strategies (33%) to avoid anxiety. These children were more likely boys than girls (t = -2 24, 
p = .05). Older children used more elaboration and shifdng, coping strategies more positively 
associated with higher skill levels (t = -3.04, p = .01; t = -2.85, p = .01). Three-year-olds had a 
more positive style of emotional expression (t = -4.67; p = .001) than did 2-year-olds. 

Children's ability to successfully pass cognitive skill tasks was influenced by maternal 
parenting stress during the child's 1st year of life = .30). Younger children's performance on 
cognitive tasks was impacted by an increase in material stress; maternal stress did not impact on 
the complexity of children's stories. 

These findings suggest that it is not the child's core cognitive ability that is impacted by 
maternal stress, but the child's ability to attend to task and respond to social requests of another. 

References 

Abidin, R. (1983, 1995). Parenting Stress Index professional manual (3rd ed.). Odessa, FL: Psycho- 
logical Assessment Resources. 

Fenson, L, Pethick, S., & Cox, J. (1994b). The MacArthur Communicative Development Inventories: 
Short form versions. CA: San Diego State University. 

Fischer, K. W., & Ayoub, C. (1994). Affective splitting and dissociation in normal and maltreated 
children; Developmental pathways for self in relationships. In D. Cicchetti & S. Toth (Eds.), 
Rochester Symposium on Developmental Psychopathology Vol. 5: The self and its disorders 
(pp. 149-222). Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press. 

Fischer, K. W., Hencke, R., Hand, H., Ayoub, C., & Russell, C. (2001). Mean and Nice Interaction 
Scale: Adult/Child - Expanded. Cognitive Development Laboratory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University. 

Milner, J. (1986). The Child Abuse Potential Inventory: Manual. Webster, NC: Psytec. 



False-Belief Understanding in a Head Start Population 

Rachel A. Peters 

PRESENTER: Rachel A. Peters 

While there is a wealth of information concerning false-belief understanding in normative 
preschool samples, litde is known about false-belief and its correlates in children living in less 
optimal conditions, such as poverty. The purpose of this study is to examine the validity and 
applicability of the false-belief construct to children in Head Start. Specifically, the following 
three issues surrounding false-belief in Head Start were examined: (a) the coherence of the false- 
belief construct across three standard false-belief tasks, (b) the relation between false-belief and 
verbal ability, and (c) the relation between false-belief and teacher-reported social competence. 

Participants included 53 children (26 males and 27 females; average age = 4 years, 6 months) 
who were part of a Pennsylvania State University-Head Start collaboration. Verbal ability, 
specifically receptive vocabulary, was assessed using the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT- 
III; Dunn & Dunn, 1997). Children completed a battery of three false-belief tasks, which 
included the prototypical box task (Hughes, 1998), and two subtasks of the peep-through book 
task (Gopnik & Astington, 1988; Hughes, Dunn, & White, 1998). These tasks assessed both 
children's understanding of their own false belief as well as their understanding of another's 
false belief Teachers reported on children's social competence using the Preschool and Kinder- 
garten Behavior Scales (PKBS; Merrell, 1994). 



O 

ERIC 



890 



895 



NORMAL CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



Although children's success rate varied across tasks, there was moderate support for a relation 
among false-belief tasks. Results support a positive significant relation between performance on 
the box and "own" book tasks (0 = .31; p < .05). Thus, if children passed the box task, they were 
more likely to correcdy identify their own initial false belief on the book task than children who 
failed the box task. Results also suggest that performance on the "own" and "other" questions of 
the book task were related (0 = .28; p < .05). Thus, children who correctly identified their own 
initial false belief were more likely to successfully identify the false belief of another than 
children who failed the "own" questions. 

Additional analyses examined relations between false-belief and its proposed correlates. The 
relation between false-belief and verbal reached significance for females x(23) = .41; p < .05. A 
similar pattern emerged with respect to the relation between false-belief and social competence. 
Specifically, the relations between false-belief and social skills x(23) = .35; p < .05 and between 
false-belief and problem behavior x(23) = .39; p < .05 reached significance for females. 

Overall, results suggest that false-belief is applicable to Head Start children. Results suggest 
moderate consistency in children's performance on various tasks used to assess false-belief 
understanding and support was found for relations between false-belief understanding and both 
verbal ability and social competence, but only for females. One explanation for the gender effect 
is that adults may use different criteria when judging social competence in boys versus girls. 
Findings from the temperament literature support this notion (Eisenberg et al., 1993). An 
alternative explanation for the gender effect extends from the differences in family type and 
sibling status (Perner, Ruffman, & Leekam, 1994) between males and females in this sample. 

References 

Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test: Third Edition. Circle Pines, 
MN: American Guidance Service. 

Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Bemzweig, Karbon, M., Poulin, R., & Hanish, L. (1993). The 

relations of emotionality and regulation to preschoolers' social skills and sociometric status. 
Child Development, 64, 1418-1438. 

Gopnik, A., & Astington, J. W. (1988). Children's understanding of representational change and 
its relation to the understanding of false-belief and the appearance-reality distinction. Child 
Development, 59, 26-37. 

Hughes, C. (1998). Executive function in preschoolers: Links with theory of mind and verbal 
ability. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 16, 233-253. 

Hughes, C., Dunn, J., & White, A. (1998). Trick or treat?: Uneven understanding of mind and 
emotion and executive dysfunction in "hard-to-manage" preschoolers. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry, 39, 981-994. 

Merrell, K. W. (1994). Fh^eschool and Kindergarten Behavior Scales. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed. 

Perner, J., Ruffman, T, & Leekam, S. R. (1994). Theory of mind is contagious: You catch it from 
yoursibs. Child Development, 65, 1228-1238. 





891 



POSTERS 



Visual Acuity and Testability With the Lea Acuity Chart 
In Children From 2 to 7 Years of Age 

Sharyn R. Gillett-Shapiro, Deborah A. Orel-Bixler 

PRESENTERS: Sharyn R. Gillett-Shapiro, Deborah A. Orel-Bixler 

The early detection of amblyopia ("lazy-eye") is dependent upon accurate measures of visual 
acuity and comparison to norms. The Lea symbols acuity chart with apple, house, circle, and 
square shapes has been used clinically in the pediatric population; however, there are no 
published reports of normative acuity values in children across age using this chart. The 
purpose of this study was to measure visual acuity and evaluate testability with the Lea chart in 
young children. 

A review of records from comprehensive vision examinations in 353 children with nonsig- 
nificant refractive error and normal ocular health ranging in age from 2 to 7 years was com- 
pleted. The visual acuity test was included in the battery of tests performed during each child's 
comprehensive eye examination. Lea chart visual acuity was measured for each eye at a 3-meter 
viewing distance using a descending method of limits. Children received cereal rewards for 
correct answers. Children verbally identified the shapes or pointed to a matching shape on a 
key card. 

Seventy-six percent of the children (270) completed the monocular Lea acuity tasks to 
threshold. Testability increased with age: from 8% of the 2- to < 2.5-year-olds, 31% of the 2.5 to 
< 3 over 4 years. Visual acuity improved on average from 20/31 to 20/22 from 2 to 7 years of age. 

The Lea symbols acuity chart uses symbols that are recognizable by even young children. In 
the clinical setting, testability with the Lea symbol acuity chart is age-dependent, and visual 
acuity improves slightly from 2 to 7 years. Monocular acuity measures can be obtained with the 
Lea chart in more than 75% of children from 3.5 years of age and older despite the time 
constraints often found in clinical practice. The Lea acuity chart provides a means for quantify- 
ing visual impairment and amblyopia in young children. The national prevalence of amblyopia 
is 2-5% and an additional 75,000-200,000 three-year-olds develop amblyopia each year (Flynn, 
1991). Although amblyopia develops in the first 6 years of life, it has lifelong consequences and is 
estimated to be responsible for loss of vision in more people aged less than 45 years tlian all 
other ocular disease and trauma combined (Dell, 1991). The earlier the detection of amblyopia, 
thus facilitating early intervention, the greater probability of a favorable treatment outcome. 

In the pediatric eye care community, preliterate optotype charts are the recommended means 
for measuring visual acuity in children. The Lea symbols chart has several advantages over other 
picture and symbol charts by including shapes readily recognizable by preschoolers. The Lea 
chart meets the recommended standard procedures for measurement and specification of visual 
acuity (National Research Council, 1980). Furthermore, testability even in very young children 
is high, and threshold acuities reach about 20/23 on average in children starting school. 

References 

National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council, Committee on Vision Working Group 
39. (1980). Recommended standard procedures for the clinical measurement and specifica- 
tion of visual acuity. Advances in Ophthalmology, 41,103-148. 

Flynn, J. (1991). Amblyopia revisited. Journal of Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus 28, 
183-201. 

Dell, W. (1991). The epidemiology of amblyopia. Problems in Optometry, 3, 195-207. 




892 



897 



NORMAL CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



Attentional Strategies in a Memory Task and 
Prereading Ability in Children From Head Start 

Florence Chang, Barbara Burns 

PRESENTERS: Florence Chang, Barbara Burns 



Phonemic awareness refers to the ability to detect individual sounds in words and is shown to 
be the single strongest predictor of reading ability (Stanovich, 1986; Wagner, Torgesen, & 
Rashotte, 1994). Preschool children from low-income households have been shown to score 
lower on tests of phonemic awareness than children from middle class households (Marcon, 
2000). Similar gaps across SES groups have been shown in kindergarten and first-grade 
children's performance (Warren-Leubecker & Carter, 1988). Researchers suggest that the cycle of 
poverty may begin with lower reading ability, and consequently, lead to lower academic achieve- 
ment (O'Sullivan & Howe, 2000). Thus, it is important to examine the underlying mechanisms 
involved with phonemic awareness development within the context of poverty. 

Previous research has shown that attention and mernory skills are essential to the develop- 
ment of reading. Attention and memory have been shown to differentiate good and poor 
readers (Brannan & Williams, 1987; McDougall, Hulme, Ellis, & Monk, 1994). The current 
study examined attention and memory as underlying mechanisms in early deficits in prereading 
skills demonstrated by 36 children from Head Start. Phonemic awareness was assessed using 
Adams' Phonemic Awareness Task (Adams, Foorman, Lundberg, & Beeler, 1998). Attentional 
strategies were assessed using Miller's Same-Different Task (Miller & Aloise-Young 1995- Miller 
& Harris, 1988). 

In the Same-Different Task, children's attentional strategies were inferred by their pattern of 
door openings. In the task, children must open the doors to decide whether two rows of objects 
have a vertical one-to-one correspondence such that twins have put their toys away "the twin 
way" or "not the twin way." The memory component of the task consists of the child remember- 
ing at the end of each session whether the toys were "the twin way" or "not the twin way." 
Previous research has shown a developmental progression in attentional strategy use from a 
horizontal strategy with poor memory to a more mature vertical strategy with good memory 
performance. In between, children have been shown to progress towards a more mature vertical 
strategy with no benefit for memory performance. This lack of correspondence between a good 
strategy and benefit is referred to as a strategy utilization deficiency (SUD). It was hypothesized 
children who demonstrated more mature attentional strategy use and better memory were 
expected to perform well on the phonemic awareness task. In particular, children who exhibited 
a SUD were expected to have lower phonemic awareness ability than children who produced a 
mature strategy and benefited from it. 

i^alyses support the importance of both attention and memory in children's prereading 
ability. An ANCOVA (with age and IQ as covariates) indicated that children who showed 
utilization deficiency had lower Phonemic Total Scores than children who did not show a 
utilization deficiency. Better memory was related to a higher score on the Phonemic Awareness 
Task, after controlling for IQ and age. The current study suggests that both attentional skills and 
memory skills are important in understanding children's development of phonemic awareness. 

References 

Adams, M. )., Foorman, B. R., Lundberg, I., & Beeler, T. (1998). A classroom curriculum - Phonemic 

awareness in young children. Baltimore: Brookes. 

Brannan, J. R., & Williams, M. C. (1987). Allocation of visual attention in good and poor 

readers. Perception <S Psychophysics, 41(1), 23-28. 

Marcon, R. A. (2000). Educational transition in early childhood, middle childhood, and early adoles- 



898 



893 



POSTERS 



cence: Head Start vs. public school Pre-K graduates. Poster session presented at the Fifth Na- 
tional Head Start Research Conference, Washington, DC. 

McDougall, S„ Hulme, C„ Ellis, A., & Monk, A. (1994). Learning to read: The role of short-term 
memory and phonological skills, journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 58 (1), 112-133. 

Miller, P. H., & Aloise-Young, P. A. (1995). Preschoolers' strategic behavior and performance on 
a same-different task, journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 60, 284-303. 

Miller, P. H., & Harris, Y. R. (1988). Preschoolers' strategies of attention on a same-different task. 
Developmental Psychology, 24, 628-633. 

O'Sullivan, J. T, & Howe, M. L. (2000). Overcoming poverty: Promoting literacy in children from 
low-income families. Poster session presented at the National Head Start Conference, Washing- 
ton, DC. 

Stanovich, K. E. (1986). Matthew effects in reading: Some consequences of individual differ- 
ences in the acquisition of literacy. Reading Research Quarterly, 21, 360-406. 

Wagner, R., Torgesen, J. K., & Rashotte, C. A. (1994). Development of reading-related phonologi- 
cal processing abilities: New evidence of bi-directional causality from a latent variable 
longitudinal study. Deve/opmentfl/ Psychology, 30, 73-87. 

Warren- Leubecker, A., & Carter, B. W. (1988) Reading and growth in metalinguistic awareness. 
Relations to socioeconomic status and reading readiness skills. Child Development, 59 (3), 
728-742. 



Rate of Physical Growth and Its Affect on 

Head Start Children's Motor and Cognitive Development 

Rebecca A. Marcon 

PRESENTER: Rebecca A. Marcon 

Anthropometric research links growth retardation with cognitive development in postnatally 
undernourished children. Height for age shows the strongest anthropometric relationship with 
young children's cognitive development (e.g., Karp, Martin, Sewell, Manni, & Heller, 1992). 
Weight for height is associated with cognitive performance and attention in older children 
(e.g., Paine, Dorea, Pasquali, & Monterior, 1992). Head circumference and midarm circumfer- 
ence are linked with children's neurodevelopment (e.g., Stoch, Smythe, Moodie, & Bradshaw, 
1982). In the United States, growth retardation is higher among low-income children, with 
adverse cognitive effects of undernutrition more prevalent when combined with poverty 
(e.g., Pollitt, Gorman, Engle, Matorell, & Rivera, 1993). Few studies have been conducted in the 
United States, where under nutrition among children is mild-to-moderate and rarely reaches the 
severe levels of deprivation seen in developing nations. 

The present study examined anthropometric indicators of physical development and their 
relationship to motor and cognitive development in Head Start children. Unlike previous 
studies that used global measures of development, research on brain development guided 
selection of cognitive and motor measures. Between ages 3-5 dominance shifts from the right to 
left hemisphere, and rapid myelination of the hippocampus and fiber tracts connecting the 
cerebellum and premotor cortex occurs (e.g.. Case, 1992; Fischer & Rose, 1997; Thatcher, 1994). 
Therefore, motor integration and sequential and simultaneous memory were examined in 
relationship to rate of physical growth. The sample of 34 rural Head Start children (M — 49.03 
months) was 59% female, 82% White, and 18% African American, with 26% classified as low- 
birth-weight (LBW; < 5.5 lb). Anthropometric data (height, weight, body mass index [BMl], 
midarm and head circumference) were collected monthly. Motor and cognitive measures were 




894 



899 



NORMAL CHILD DEVELOPMENT 



administered four times at 10-week intervals. Motor development was assessed by six items from 
the DIAL-R (Mardell-Czudnowski & Goldenberg, 1990). Visual and auditory memory were 
measured by the Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children (K-ABC; Kaufman & Kaufman, 

1983). Development of the premotor cortex was assessed by the Berry-Buktenica Developmental 
Test of Visual Motor Integration (VMI; Berry & Buktenica, 1997). 

Growth norms indicated 2 of 34 children were stunted (ht < 5th %tile), and one of these 
children was classified as wasted (wt < 5th %tile) at the beginning of school. Although both 
grew, they remained stunted at the end of the year. Mean anthropometric changes across the 9- 
month period were graphed. After controlling for age, analyses indicated significant increases in 
height, BMI, and head circumference across the year. Boys and girls were similar on all anthro- 
pometric measures except boys' head circumference was greater (p = .005). Although LBW 
children were similar to peers in height, they weighed less (p = .06), had lower BMIs (p = .08), 
and smaller arm circumference (p = .05). Analyses indicated improvement across the school year 
in three motor and four cognitive measures: (a) VMI (p = .007), (b) Hopping-right foot 
(p = .04), (c) Finger Gontrol (p = .07), (d) Magic Window (p = .07), (e) Word Order (p = .000), 

(f) Matrices (p = .008), and (g) Spatial (p = .075). No cognitive differences were found between 
boys and girls, and motor differences were limited to girls' greater skill at hopping, skipping, and 
finger control. Relationships between rate of physical growth and memory and motor develop- 
ment were explored further. 

References 

Berry, K. E., & Buktenica, N. A. (1997). The Berry-Buktenica Developmental Test of Visual-Motor 
Integration. Parsippany, NJ: Modern Gurriculum Press. 

Gase, R. (1992). The role of the frontal lobes in the regulation of cognitive development. Brain 
and Cognition, 20, 51-73. 

Fischer, K. W., & Rose, S. P. (1997). Dynamic growth cycles of brain and cognitive development. 
In R. W. Thatcher, G. R. Lyon, J. Fumsey, & N. Krasnegor (Eds.), Developmental neuroimaging: 
Mapping the development of brain and behavior (pp. 263-279). San Diego, GA: Academic Press. 
Karp, R., Martin, R., Sewell, T, Manni, J., & Heller, A. (1992). Growth and academic achieve- 
ment in inner-city kindergarten children. Clinical Pediatrics, 31, 336-340. 

Kaufman, A. S., & Kaufman, N. L. (1983). Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children. Gircle Pines, 
MN: American Guidance Service. 

Mardell-Gzudnowski, G., & Goldenberg, D. S. (1990). Developmental Indicators for the Assessment 
of Learning-Revised. Gircle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 

Paine, P, Dorea, J. G., Pasquali, J., & Monterior, A. M. (1992). Growth and cognition in Brazil- 
ian school children: A spontaneously occurring intervention study. International loumal of 
Behavioral Development, 15, 169-183. 

Pollitt, E., Gorman, K. S., Engle, P, Matorell, R., & Rivera, J. (1993). Early supplementary feeding 
and cognition: Effects over two decades. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child 
Development, 58(7, Serial No. 238). 

Stoch, M. B., Smythe, P. M., Moodie, A. D., & Bradshaw, D. (1982). Psychosocial outcome and 
CT findings after gross undernourishment during infancy: A 20-year developmental study. 
Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology, 24, 419-436. 

Thatcher, R. W. (1994). Gyclic cortical reorganization: Origins of human cognitive development. 
In G. Dawson & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Human behavior and the developing brain (pp. 232-266). 
New York: Guilford. 





895 



POSTERS 



The Development and Influence of 
Motivational Beliefs In Head Start Graduates 

Susan M. Hegland 

PRESENTER: Susan M. Hegland 



According to a developmental contextual model of person-context interaction (Lerner, 1991)/ 
control beliefs are influenced by the child's own cognitive abilities and interactions with parents 
and teachers. In turn, these motivational beliefs influence subsequent performances. Skinner 
(1995) argued that adults influence these beliefs through four types of behaviors: through 
(a) guiding children to moderately challenging but achievable tasks, (b) giving high expecta- 
tions for children, (c) providing only the minimal help required for the child to be successful, 
and (d) giving feedback to the child that successful outcomes were related to the child's efforts. 
Skinner argued that perceived control can be assessed in elementary school children across 
subject areas and specific tasks, by assessing the child s belief in general control of success in 
schoolwork, beliefs in the effectiveness of each of five strategies (e.g., ability, effort, unknown 
causes, luck, and powerful others), as well as her beliefs in her own capacity to successfully 
employ each strategy. To assess these beliefs, Skinner developed two scales, one measuring 
control beliefs likely to promote effort and one measuring control beliefs likely to undermine 



effort. ~ , 

The purpose of the present student was to identify predictors and correlates of children s 
motivational beliefs. In a substudy of a Head Start Transition Study, Head Start graduates from 
lower income families (N = 61) were followed from kindergarten through third grade in a small 
Midwestern city. Individual measures of children's reading and mathematics performance 
(Woodcock & Johnson, 1990) and a measure of their receptive vocabulary (Dunn & Dunn, 

1981) were used. In addition, parents were interviewed about their "nurturant responsiveness, 
related to Skinner's forms of parent encouragement (Slater & Power, 1987), in kindergarten, 
first, and third grade. Teachers rated children's social skills in the classroom (Gresham & Elliott, 
1990) at the end of each grade. Finally, in third grade, Skinner's measure of children s beliefs 

ofTXrt iinlrnown Inck- JinH liOWCTflll OthCFS WCFC US6(1 tO 

pFoduce pFomoting contFol and undeFmining beliefs scoFes. 

AfteF contFolling foF family backgFound and childFen's language skills upon enteFing kindeF- 
gaFten, paFental nuFtUFant Fesponsiveness accounted foF 23% of the vatiance in thiFd gFadeFS 
undeFmining contFol beliefs. In tUFn, analysis of paFtial coFFelations showed that childFen s 
undeFmining contFol beliefs weFe significantly coFFelated with childFen s thiFd gFade achieve- 
ment in mathematics, Feading, and social skills, afteF contFolling foF the same skills measuFed in 
second gFade. 

Head StaFt gFaduates with higheF levels of undeFmining contFol beliefs in thiFd gFade had 
enteFed kindeFgaFten with loweF levels of language skills than otheF Head StaFt childFen. TheiF 
paFents FepoFted pFOviding these childFen loweF levels of nuFtUFant Fesponsiveness thFOUgh the 
eaFly elementaFy gFades. FurtheFmoFe, childFen with higheF levels of undeFmining contFol beliefs 
showed loweF gains from second to thiFd gFade in measuFes of mathematics, Feading, and social 
skills. The high levels of effoFt FepoFted by the childFen thFOUghout the pFimaty gFades, coupled 
with the steadily decFeasing assessment of success in schoolwoFk, suggests that some of these 
childFen may be at Fisk foF leaFned helplessness. 



References 

Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1981). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised. CiFcle Pines, MN: 
AmeFican Guidance Service. 

Gresham, F. M., & Elliott, S. N. (1990). The Social Skills Rating System. Circle Pines, MN: Ameri- 
can Guidance Service. 




896 



901 



normal child development 



Lerner, R. M. (1991). Changing organism-context relations as the basic process of development: 
A developmental contextual perspective. Developmental Psychology, 27, 27-32. 

Skinner, E. A. (1995). Perceived control, motivation, and coping. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Slater, M. A., & Power, T. G. (1987). Multidimensional assessment of parenting in single-parent 
families. In J. P. Vincent (Ed.), Advances in family intervention, assessment and theory (Vol. 4, 
pp. 197-228). Greenwich, CT: JAI. 

Woodcock, R. W., & Johnson, M. B. (1990). Woodcock- Johnson Psycho-educational Battery-Revised. 
Allen, TX: DLM Teaching Resources. 



Characteristics of Effective Peer Models 
in an Integrated Preschool Setting 

Monica Gordon Pershey, Anita M. Visoky 

PRESENTER: Monica Gordon Pershey 

IDEA legislation encourages provision of early childhood special education services in settings 
that integrate children who have disabilities with peers who are developing typically. Yet, there is 
little information on the traits that nondisabled children need to manifest to be considered 
competent peer models. There is no published protocol for identifying a capable peer model. 
Given so little data, might educators and policy makers be left to assume that any child who is 
nondisabled will be a capable peer model? This may be a less than adequate determination. 

To attempt to answer the question of how to identify a capable peer model, an integrated 
preschool program reviewed the behaviors of peer models. Visoky and Poe (2000) provided an 
observation of models' interactional behaviors. To expand upon these data, the present study used: 

1. Observations of 20 models' behaviors in class during 30-minute cycles over 7 months 
using 2-minute interval continuous sampling. Notes on behaviors (language, play, 
prosocial, modeling) were charted on a 50-item coding sheet. 

2. Two informal sociometric measures, completed by each child, intended to reveal their peer 
preferences. 

3. Teacher questionnaires. 

Over 10,000 minutes of observations of play, social, and language behaviors documented 
what peer models did on a daily basis. Models played parallel with special needs peers, but also 
sought these peers as associative playmates, organized play routines that involved special needs 
peers, and engaged in conversation with them about topics in the here-and-now and related to 
imaginative play. When play was cooperative, the t3q)ically developing children sought one 
another out. The most frequently occurring behaviors were solo play, seeking an adult, listening 
to adult input, responding to an adult, conversation leader, merriment (silly songs, joking), 
seeking a peer to play or talk with, organizing play, waiting, and playing collaboratively. Models 
did little coaching of special needs peers; they assisted them with dressing, hand washing, and 
manipulating objects at teachers' requests. 

Models provided excellent language models during group activities. The special needs 
children were keenly observing and shadowing their regular education peers. They seemed to 
sense that they could take language and behavioral cues from these children more than they 
could from their special needs peers. If these able peers were not present, the special needs 
children would have fewer models to observe. 

Sociometric measures revealed that when the peer models self-nominated three children with 
whom they play the most, 31/60 nominations were for special needs children. When peer 



ERIC 




897 



POSTERS 



models self-nominated three children they like best, 27/60 nominations were for children with 
special needs. The two measures were in agreement 92.5% of the time (same children named 
twice). Teachers named children who peer models play with and their nominations agreed with 
children's nominations 60% of the time. When teachers were asked, "Whom does the peer help 
the most?" 39/40 nominations were for special needs children. When children were asked, 
"Who needs help?" 16/20 nominated special needs children. When children were asked, "Who 
is a good helper?" 16/20 nominated a peer model. 

Reference 

Visoky, A. M., & Poe, B. D. (2000, November-December). Can preschoolers be effective peer 
models? Teaching Exceptional Children, 33(2), 68-73. 





Parent Involvement in 
Children's Education 



Supporting Immigrant Families Through University-Community 
Partnership: A Model Parent Involvement Initiative 
for Early Childhood Education Settings 

Elizabeth DeMulder, Leo Rigsby, Selma Caal, Laura Newton 

PRESENTERS: Elizabeth DeMulder, Leo Rigsby, Selma Caal, Laura Newton 

This study describes and assesses a model university-community partnership initiative to 
support low-income, immigrant families — particularly to support parents' active involvement in 
their preschool children's learning. Studies have demonstrated effects of parent involvement on 
school readiness for at-risk children (Denton, 2001; Marcon, 1999), including links to children's 
literacy development (Bryant, Peisner-Feinberg, & Miller-Johnson, 2000). While studies suggest 
that parents' early intellectual support is linked to their children's academic success, parent 
involvement in preschool activities also appears to influence a child's liking of school 
(Hutsinger, Krieg, & Jose, 1998). In fact. Head Start's comprehensive service plan for 
preschoolers suggests that parent involvement and family support are key strategies for program 
success (Mallory & Goldsmith, 1991). 

This parental involvement initiative developed in the context of an ongoing university- 
community partnership that established a high-quality preschool program in the low-income, 
immigrant Columbia Heights West community of South Arlington, Virginia. The partnership 
model encourages the involvement of members of the community in the development, moni- 
toring, and evaluation of programs serving the community (Denner, Cooper, Lopez, & Dunbar, 
1999). The research study explores the strengths and needs of recently-immigrant parents, and 
the roles that schools, communities, and universities can play to support families and children's 
healthy development in this social-cultural context. The goal of this research is to develop a 
model for facilitating parent-teacher communication and parental involvement in early child- 
hood education settings. 

The preschool's family support and parent involvement initiatives included (a) weekly parent 
workshops focused on supporting children's early development, nutrition, safety, and so forth; 
(b) a Family Literacy program that met twice a week; (c) a Parent Assistant program that allowed 
parents to work in the preschool; and (d) a Family Support Coordinator. 

Data were drawn from focus group sessions and interviews with parents conducted over 
1 year during the family's preschool involvement (conducted in Spanish or in both Spanish and 
English, documented with audiotape or extensive written notes, translated and transcribed). 
Teachers, researchers, and the Family Support Coordinator took observational notes of interac- 
tions among parents, teachers, and children in the preschool classroom and of interactions with 
parents throughout the year. 

Evidence suggests that many parents were eager and willing to take advantage of opportuni- 
ties to be involved with the preschool, to make use of resources, and to participate in the parent 
education initiatives. Parents reported that their involvement helped them to gain knowledge 




899 



ERIC 



POSTERS 



and to develop skills that contributed to their growing confidence and competence to support 
their children's social, emotional, physical, and cognitive development. This developing confi- 
dence and competence led to a sense of agency and voice in the community, to enhariced 
communication and collaboration, and to greater support of their preschool children's learning 
and development. 

Evidence suggests that trusting, ongoing relationships are key to constructing a family-centered 
program and that supporting these developing relationships and encouraging a sense of owner- 
ship among the participants are continuing challenges. Ongoing activities must be constantly 
reassessed to keep pace with changing circumstances and needs, requiring continual feedback 
from parents, so that the activities are relevant, meaningful, and engaging for those involved. 

References 

Bryant, D., Peisner-Feinberg, E., & Miller-Johnson, S. (2000). Head Start parents' roles in the 
educational lives of their children. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED446835) 
Denner, )., Cooper, C. R., Lopez, E. M., & Dunbar, N. (1999). Beyond "giving science away": 

How university-community partnerships inform youth programs, research, and policy. SRCD 
Social Policy Report, 13(^1), 1-17 . 

Denton, D. (2001). Improving children's readiness for school: Preschool programs make a difference, 
but quality counts! (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED458998) 

Hutsinger, C., Krieg, D., & lose, P. (1998). Parent involvement in children's schooling: Different 
meanings in different cultures. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED422423) 

Mallory, N., & Goldsmith, N. (1991). The Head Start experience. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED327313) 

Marcon, R. (1999). Impact of parent involvement on children's development and academic perfor- 
mance: A three cohort study. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED427880) 



The Quality of the Mother-Father Relationship and Its Influences 
on Father Involvement in Low-Income, Inner City Families 

Tracy Poon, Bonnie Hannibal, Joanne Joseph 

PRESENTER: Tracy Poon 

Forty quantitative interviews were conducted to examine the quality of mother-father relation- 
ships and its influence on father involvement with their 14- to 18-month-old children. Mothers 
and fathers were asked how much "practical" and "emotional" support they received and how 
much "conflict" they experienced. Father involvement was measured based on Lamb s (1997) 
taxonomy; (a) accessibility— a father's presence and availability to the child (e.g,. how often did 
you look after your child in the past week?); (b) responsibility — a fathers understanding and 
meeting the child's needs (e.g., how often do you stay home when your child is sick?); (c) 
engagement— a father's experience of direct contact and shared interaction (e.g., how often do 
you sing nursery songs with your child?). In addition, twenty qualitative interviews were also 
analyzed for themes relating to the quality of mother-father relationship. 

Participants were recruited from community agencies in a large urban city. Fathers were 
between 17-35 years old (M = 22.97, SD = 4.97) and mothers were between 16-32 years old 
(M = 22.5, SD = 4.56). Fathers and mothers were ethnically diverse. Most of the families were 
eligible for public assistance. 

T-tests were performed to examine the quality of mother-father relationships. The majority 
of fathers and mothers reported being in supportive relationships with each other (father: 




900 



905 



PARENT INVOLVEMENT IN CHILDREN'S EDUCATION 



tA = 2.57, SD = 3.93; mother: M = 2.37, SD = 3.64). However, mothers reported having more 
conflict with fathers than fathers reported having with mothers (mother: M = 2.97, SD = .97; 
fathers: M = 2.47, SD = 1.28). 

Pearson Correlation tests were performed to examine the association between the amount of 
support and guidance that fathers received and the level of involvement with their children. 
Fathers reported receiving high practical, emotional support, advice, and guidance from their 
partners; they also reported having a great amount of influence in making decisions related to 
their child's health care, child care, and religion {rs range = .48 to .49, ps < .05). Surprisingly, 
fathers that reported experiencing high conflict with their partners were more likely to have 
lunch with their children and reported taking their children to public places (rs range = .34 
to .43, ps > .05). 

For mothers' perception of father involvement, fathers who reported receiving high practical, 
emotional support, advice, and guidance were perceived by their partners as more likely to 
take their children to visit relatives and engage in educational, play aaivities and caregiving tasks 
(rs range = .33 to .43, ps < .05). In contrast, fathers who reported experiencing high conflict with 
their partners were perceived by their partners as less likely to engage in singing nursery rhymes 
with their children (rs = -.36, ps < .05). 

Twenty qualitative interviews were examined for themes relating to the quality of mother- 
father relationships. Each partner was classified as positive, negative, or positive/negative across 
three domains: (a) amount of support, (b) amount of conflicts, and (c) overall attitudes and 
feelings toward the relationship. Five relationship categories were found. 

This study adds to the existing literature of low-income samples regarding the quality of 
mother-father relationships and its influences on father involvement. It is also a first step 
toward a more in-depth understanding of mother-father relationships from both parents' 
perspectives. 

Reference 

Lamb, M. E. (1997). (ED.) The role of the father in child development. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 



Association of Client Characteristics With Parenting 
Outcomes Among Early Head Start Participants 

Sukhdeep Gill, Sarah Sylvia, Mark Greenberg, Jim Tatterson 

PRESENTERS: Sukhdeep Gill, Sarah Sylvia, Mark Greenberg, Jim Tatterson 

Recent findings from large-scale evaluations of family-based interventions have shown mixed 
results (Reichman & McLanahan, 2001). Absence of across-the-board program effects has 
infused interest in looking at what is happening inside the program; researchers are focusing 
attention on program theory, program implementation, and characteristics of program partici- 
pants to answer some critical questions related to pathways to program effects and active 
ingredients leading to program outcomes (Chen, 1990; Reynolds, 2002). In any case, clients 
served by prevention programs are at the core of intervention effects. In the present investigation 
of an Early Head Start (EHS) program, we addressed the following questions: (a) Are program 
effects the same for all program participants? (b) Was the intervention more effective for some 
clients than others? (c) Do clients' characteristics predict differences in program outcomes? 

A primary goal of EHS is to support the overall development of children from birth to 3 years 
of age by promoting responsive parenting. While it is assumed that parents want to foster 



POSTERS 



healthy development of their children, sometimes their efforts are thwarted by a wide variety of 
risk factors such as economic hardship and education. The program under investigation began 
providing services in 1997 to an ethnically diverse population in a semi-urban community. 
Services include weekly home visitation and center-based activities to promote peer interactions 
for children, opportunities for positive parent-child interaction, networking and social support 
for parents, and one-on-one support to parents in their life course development. 

Of the 230 EHS program participants, a subsample of 43 mothers who had baseline and 14- 
month assessment data were included in the present analyses. Client characteristics at enroll- 
ment indicated approximately 63% of the participants were Latino, 27% were White, and 10% 
were Black. A majority of the clients were unemployed (72%), single (78%), and had not 
completed high school or obtained a GED (66%). Many lived at or near poverty; their average 
yearly gross income was $9,624. Spanish was the primary language spoken in 33% of the 
homes. Thirty-seven percent of clients were teenage mothers, with a mean age of 23 years. The 
average age of the focus child at enrollment was 5 months. 

Preliminary analyses suggested that the only significant predictor of Pearlin Mastery (Pearlin, 
Lieberman, Menaghan, & Mullan., 1981) scores at intake was the level of mother's education (P 
= 3.14, p < .05). Although initially, income also significantly predicted Pearlin Mastery scores, 
once education was added to the model, the effect of income was no longer significant. Mastery 
at intake also significantly predicted parent outcomes at 14 months above and beyond the 
sociodemographic covariates. Mothers with higher scores on mastery at intake reported lower 
levels of parenting stress when their child was 14 months old (P = -.75, p < .05), lower levels of 
depression (P = -20.59, p < .01), and were more likely to have higher levels of efficacy (P = .95, 
p < .05). These results indicate that a sense of empowerment and control over one's life are 
important indicators of parent outcomes. 

References 

Chen, H. T. (1990). Theory-driven evaluations. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 

Pearlin, L. I., Lieberman, M. A., Menaghan, E. G., & Mullan, J. T. (1981). The stress process. 

Journal of Health and Social Behavior 22, 337-356. 

Reichman, N. E., & McLanahan, S. S. (2001). Self-sufficiency programs and parenting interven- 
tions: Lessons from New Chance and the Teenage Parent JJemonstration. Social I'oiicy Repoit, 
45(2). 

Reynolds, A. J. (2002). Early childhood interventions: Knowledge, practice and policy. Focus, 22, 
112-117. 



Parent Involvement in Head Start: Parents' and Teachers' Perceptions 

Dina C. Castro, Donna M. Bryant, Ellen S. Peisner-Feinberg 

PRESENTER: Donna M. Bryant 

The study purposes were to (a) describe parent-teacher interactions during parents classroom 
volunteering, (b) identify parent volunteers' perceptions about their experience in Head Start, 

(c) identify teachers' perceptions about parents' involvement in their classrooms, (d) determine 
the relations between parent characteristics and their participation in Head Start, and (e) 
determine the relations between teacher and classroom characteristics and parents' participation 
in Head Start. 

Parents and teachers from five Head Start programs participated. Volunteer logs were used to 
collect data on number of times parents volunteered and length each time (n = 1,204). A sample 



O 

ERIC 



902 



907 



PARENT INVOLVEMENT IN CHILDREN'S EDUCATION 



of parents was interviewed at the end of the school year (n = 127; U.S.DHHS, 1998; Epstein & 
Salinas, 1993). Teachers responded to a questionnaire on parent involvement (n = 59; Epstein & 
Salinas). Parent-teacher interactions were observed using a checklist developed by the research- 
ers (n = 85). Classrooms were observed to obtain an index of classroom quality (n = 43; ECERS- 
R; Harms, Clifford, & Cryer, 1998). 

Parent-teacher interaction observations indicate that mostly, teachers were pleasant to the 
parents (99%) and planned with them what they would do during their volunteer time (74%). 
About half of the time (53%) teachers explained the class mles to parents or showed parents 
where to find classroom resources (52%). Only 31% of the time teachers gave reinforcement to 
parents more than once. Generally, teachers expressed their appreciation to parents at the end of 
their visit (76%) and encouraged them to come again (78%). 

Parents reported work schedule as the major barrier to their participation in Head Start 
(50%); other barriers were not knowing other parents at Head Start (25%), lack of opportunities 
for participation (22%), need for child care (19%), transportation (15%), need of support firom 
spouse (11%); and the school/training schedule (9%). 

According to teachers' reports, 86% of parents attended parent-teacher conferences, 63% 
helped from home, 58% volunteered at least 1 hour, and 52% attended parent meetings. 
Regarding parent involvement strategies, teachers reported home visits (61%), reports of child 
progress (60%), and parent— teacher conferences (59%) as very effective. 

MANOVA results showed a multivariate effect of parent employment on number of hours 
parents volunteered and parents' self-reports of their involvement, F4, 188 = 5.33; p < .001. 
Parents' satisfaction with Head Start, barriers to participation, and activities with their children 
at home were related to parents' reports of their involvement, F(7, 102) = 5. 12; p < .0001, but 
were not related to number of hours volunteered. Regarding teacher and classroom characteris- 
tics, the MANOVA showed a multivariate effect of classroom quality on number of volunteers 
per classroom and total hours volunteered, F(2, 30) = 3.41; p < .05. This is attributable to the 
re ation between classroom quality and number of volunteers. There were no associations 
between teacher and classroom characteristics and total hours of volunteer time. 

These findings reflect the increase in low-income parents' participation in the workforce in 
recent years arid its effect on parent involvement. The finding that classroom quality was the 
strongest predictor of parent involvement among a set of teacher and classroom characteristics 
indicates that high quality classrooms may have the conditions that encourage parent involve- 
ment. Also, the presence of many volunteers in the classroom may contribute to the classrooms' 
higher quality. 

References 

Epstein, J. L, & Salinas, K. C. (1993). School and family partnerships: Surveys of teachers and parents 
in the elementary and middle grades. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University. 

Harms, T, Clifford, R. M., & Cryer, D. (1998). Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale-Revised 
Edition. New York: Teacher College Press. 

U. Department of Health and Human Services. (1998). Head Start Family and Child Experiences 
Survey - (FACES). Head Start Program Performance Measures. Second Progress Report. 
Washington, DC; Head Start Bureau, Administration on Children, Youth and Families. 



90R 



903 



POSTERS 



Understanding the Family-School Connection: Neighborhood, 

Teacher, and Parent Determinants of Parent Involvement in Head Start 

Christine Waanders, Megan Beidler, Robyn Waizenhofer 

PRESENTER: Christine Waanders 



Studying parent involvement is extremely important for understanding children s development. 
Among preschoolers/ parent involvement is associated with enhanced academic achievement 
and motivation, verbal and motor skills, and adaptive skills (Marcon, 1999; Parker, et al., 1997). 
Eccles and Harold ( 1 996) have developed an ecological model of the determinants of parent 
involvement. They assert that parent involvement is determined by parents' beliefs and teachers' 
beliefs/practices, which are affected, in turn, by parent, child, teacher, school, and neighborhood 
characteristics. Additional research is needed to test this model of parent involvement. 

The current study addresses two specific questions: (a) How does a set of personal/contextual 
variables relate to parent involvement at school and at home? (b) Are parents more involved 
when their children's teachers hold more positive attitudes toward parent involvement? The 
participants were 154 caregivers of children enrolled in two Head Start centers and 21 teachers. 

The About Being a Parent Scale (Wentzel, 1993) was used to assess parents' beliefs about 
their ability to influence their children's educational outcomes (Cronbach's alpha = .86). 

A 7-item scale developed by Conger et al. (1992) was used to assess parents' level of financial 
strain (Cronbach's alpha = .89). The Neighborhood Characteristics Questionnaire (NCQ) was 
used to assess parents' perceptions of their neighborhoods (Barnes McGuire, 1997). Three NCQ 
scales were used in this study: (a) Street Crime and Neighborhood Quality, (b) Local Social 
Networks, and (c) Disorder (alpha coefficients ranged from .72 to .85). Teachers' attitudes 
toward parent involvement were assessed using the Teacher Attitudes about Family and Cotrimu- 
nity Involvement Scale, taken from the School and Family Partnership Survey (Epstein & Salmas, 
1993; Cronbach's alpha = .72). Parent ratings were obtained using the Family Involvement 
Questionnaire (Fantuzzo, Tighe, & Childs, 2000), which yields three scales: (a) School-Based 
Involvement, (b) Home-Based Involvement, and (c) Home— School Conferencing (alpha 
coefficients > .80). Teacher ratings of parent involvement were obtained using a Q-sort tech- 
nique. Teachers sorted parents into four categories based on their level of personal connection 
wi A the parents. 

Canonical correlation showed a significant relationship between a set of personal/contextual 
variables and a set of parent involvement variables (F = 1.67, p < .05). After removing the first 
variate, subsequent f-tests were not significant. The significant variate showed that lower levels 
of parent involvement at school and at home were associated with lower parenting efficacy, 
higher economic stress, and lower levels of neighborhood social disorder. A one-way, between- 
subjects Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) found no significant relationship between teachers' 
attitudes and level of parent involvement. 

The results of canonical correlation analysis support an ecological model of parent involve- 
ment. Lack of parent involvement was significandy related to lower levels of parenting efficacy 
and higher economic stress. Contrary to expectation, lower ratings of neighborhood social 
disorder were related to lower levels of involvement. No significant relationship was found 
between teacher attitudes toward parent involvement and parent ratings of their own involve- 
ment. This finding is unexpected, and may result from social desirability bias. Instead of 
assessing attitudes, it may be more fruitful to measure teacher behaviors related to parent 
involvement. 



ERIC 



904 



909 



PARENT INVOLVEMENT IN CHILDREN'S EDUCATION 



References 

Barnes McGuire, J. (1997). The reliability and validity of a questionnaire describing neighbor- 
hood characteristics relevant to families and young children living in urban areas. Journal of 
Community Psychology, 25, 551-566. 

Conger, R. D., Conger, K. J., Elder, G. H., Lorenz, E O., Simons, R. L., & Whitbeck, L. B. (1992). A 
family process model of economic hardship and adjustment of early adolescent boys. Child 
Development, 63, 526-541. 

Eccles, J. S., & Harold, R. D. (1996). Family involvement in schooling. In A. Booth & J. F. Dunn 
(Eds.), Family-school links: How do they affect educational outcomes? (pp. 3-34). Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 

Epstein, J. L., & Salinas, K. C. (1993). School and family partnerships: Questionnaires for teachers and 
parents in elementary and middle grades. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University, Center on 
School, Family, and Community Parmerships. 

Fantuzzo, J., Tighe, E., & Childs, S. (2000). Family Involvement Questionnaire: A multivariate 
assessment of family participation in early childhood education. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 92, 330-337. 

Marcon, R. (1999). Positive relationships between parent school involvement and public school 
inner-city preschoolers' development and academic performance. School Psychology Review, 

28, 395-412. 

Parker, F. L, Piotrowski, C. S., Kesslar-Sklar, S., Baker, A. J. L., Peay, L., & Clark, B. (1997). Parent 
involvement in Head Start (executive summary). New York: National Council of Jewish Women 
Center for the Child. 

Wentzel, K. (1993). About being a parent. College Park: University of Maryland, Department of 
Human Development. 



Staff Conceptions of Relationships in Early Head Start 

James Flicker, Brenda Seery, Kelley Sketchley, Lynette Magana 

PRESENTERS: James Flicker, Kelley Sketchley, Lynette Magana, Brenda Seery 

The literature pertaining to infant-toddler programs has recently suggested a focus on support- 
ive staff-family relationships. Child development and infant mental health theorists have been 
converging on a "relational perspective" to describe healthy and atypical processes in develop- 
ment (Elicker, 1997; Elicker & Fortner-Wood, 1995; Lyons-Ruth & Zeanah, 1993; Raikes, 1996; 
Sroufe, 1983). Birth-to-three practitioners have come to view staff-family relationships as a 
pivotal aspect of successful early intervention and child care programs (e.g., Bertacchi, 1996; 
Lally et al., 1995). However, there has been little systematic research examining the nature of 
staff-family relationships in the context of infant-toddler programs, including Early Head Start 
(EHS). We investigated the perspectives of EHS staff about their relationships with Aildren and 
parents. Nineteen staff (8 home visitors and 11 center-based caregivers) from three Midwestern 
EHS programs took part in semistructured, in-depth interviews. Analyses focused on (a) how 
staff conceptualize relationships with children and parents, (b) how staff work with relation- 
ships, and (c) challenges encountered in relationships with children and parents. Analyses were 
completed using grounded theory and content analysis procedures recommended by Strauss & 
Corbin (1998) and Patton (1990). 

Home visitors and center caregivers described similar aspects in their relationships with 
children including trust, security, comfort, consistency, having fun, and supporting children's 
development. Home visitors mentioned the importance of the child's "eagerness" when they 




910 



905 



n 



POSTERS 



arrived for weekly visits. Center caregivers emphasized loving children, meeting basic needs, and 
teaching. Center staff described themselves as ’substitute parents or grandparents. Most 
mentioned the importance of playing, having fun, talking, and listening with children, and 
getting to know them as individuals. Home visitors talked about approaching interactions with 
children carefully, not forcing themselves on children. Center caregivers emphasized physical 
care and affection (’’loving them”), finding time for pleasant one-to-one interactions, and 
"being there" for children consistendy to meet their needs. 

EHS staff described their relationships with parents in terms of developing trust, providing 
support and encouragement, being a friend or being friendly, being a role model, ^nd providing 
material and information resources. Center caregivers emphasized "working together" with the 
parent to develop trust about the care of the child. Building relationships with parents entails 
informal talking and listening, getting to know each other, and building trust and openness. 
Both center and home staff emphasized showing interest and concern for the parent as an 
individual. Center caregivers talked about the importance of individualizing care for the child 
according to the parents' wishes, and being consistent and reliable in their everyday dealings. 
Home visitors try to give parents more power or control in the relationship, and not boss or 
"judge" the parent. 

EHS relationships are sometimes challenging. Staff discussed the ambivalence they feel about 
closeness in relationships, especially with parents. They perceive professional limits that 
should be maintained; however, these limits are not always clear. They struggle with not being 
judgmental about values and choices parents make for themselves and their children. Specific 
challenges for center caregivers include not feeling as though they know the parents very well, 
because of limited contact with parents. Home visitors sometimes feel they do not know 
children as well as parents, due to the adult focus and infrequency of home visits. 



References 

Bertacchi, J. (1996). Relationship-based organizations. Bulletin of ZERO TO THREE: National 
Center for Infants, Toddlers, and Families, 17(2), 1-7. 

Elicker, J. (1997). Developing a relationship perspective in early childhood program research. 
Early Education & Development, 8{l), 5-10. 

Elicker, J., & Fortner-Wood, C. (1995). Research in review: Adult-child relationships in early 
childhood settings. Young Children, 51(1), 69-78. 

Lally, J.R., Griffin, A., Fenichel, E., Segal, M., Szanton, E., & Weissbourd, B. (1995). Caring for 
infants and toddlers in groups: Developmentally appropriate practice. Washington, DC: Zero to 
Three/The National Center. 

Lyons-Ruth, K., & Zeanah, C. H. (1993). The family context of infant mental health: Infant 
development in the primary caregiving relationship. In C. H. Zeanah (Ed.), Handbook of 
infant mental health (pp. 14-37). New York: Guilford. 

Patton, M. Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods (2nd ed.). Newbury Park, CA: 
Sage. 

Raikes, H. (1996). A secure base for babies: Applying attachment concepts to the infant care 
setting. Young Children, 51(5), 59-67. 

Sroufe, L. A. (1983). Infant-caregiver attachment and patterns of adaptation and competence. In 
M. Perlmutter (Ed.), Minnesota Symposium in Child Psychology (Vol. 16, pp. 41-81). Hillsdale, 
NJ: Erlbaum. 

Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for develop- 
ing grounded theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 





906 



Parenting Styles/Values/ 
Attitudes/Behaviors 



Sex Role Expectations and Gender-Related Childrearing Goals 
of Urban, Low-Income, Single African American Mothers 

Jean Ispa, Kathy Thornburg, Mark Allen Fine, Elizabeth Sharp, Sheila Brookes 

PRESENTERS: Jean Ispa, Elizabeth Sharp, Kathy Thornburg, Mark Allen Fine 

Nine young, low-income, urban, single African American mothers participated in a 5-year case 
study project. Four were mothers of daughters, two were mothers of sons, and three had chil- 
dren of both sexes. Constant comparative analysis of responses to semistructured interviews 
revealed a number of patterns regarding sex role expectations and related childrearing goals. 

Though all of the mothers believed that men and women should contribute equally to 
household labor, should be reliable, and should "be there" for their children, their personal 
experiences with men differed sharply from these ideals. All commented that one cannot 
depend on a man, that men lie, are disrespectful, and "come and go." These perceptions shaped 
their childrearing goals for both sons and daughters. 

Mothers with sons tended to couch their childrearing aspirations in terms of counter 
examples — they wanted their sons to be different from most of the men they knew. Most 
expressed great concern that in adolescence, their sons would be swayed to join delinquent peer 
groups. Further, they hoped their sons would not treat women the way they (the mothers) had 
been treated by men. Reflecting these issues, all mothers of sons told us that they wanted their 
sons to bypass illegal activities, to "be his own person" (including having the strength to avoid 
negative peer groups), to be honest and responsible, to be good to others, and to "be respectful 
of women. All also mentioned valuing education. In response to probes regarding the division 
of household labor, mothers indicated beliefs that boys should learn how to cook and clean and 
should participate in these chores as much as girls. However, two added that these skills were 
important for boys because they might not get married. All but one noted that, while they 
would do what they could to insure these outcomes, ultimately they could not entirely control 
what would happen. "Boys are gonna be boys." 

Mothers with daughters also included respectfulness, caring, responsibility, and educational 
achievement among their top childrearing goals. Their other goals, however, differed from those 
for boys. All six who had begun childbearing in adolescence worried that their daughters would 
do the same. One of their childrearing goals was therefore to shield their daughters from early 
sexual activity — though most acknowledged the difficulty of attaining this goal. Another strong 
theme involved all these mothers' intent to raise daughters to be independent, self-sufficient, 
and strong. Four also mentioned wanting their daughters to grow up to be assertive and to "be 
somebody"; three said it was important for them to value themselves. Mothers explained that 
girls should understand that they are likely to have to take care of themselves; they should not 
expect to have a man on whom they can depend. 

Mothers' childrearing goals thus reflected fears based on their own experiences. Mothers 
wanted their boys to develop into dependable, respectful young men; they wanted their daugh- 



ERIC 



912 



907 



POSTERS 



ters to develop into independent, self-sufficient young women. However, they voiced doubts 
that their efforts can overcome the negative influences of their surroundings. 



Maternal Teaching in the Twenty-First Century 

Daniela Montalto, Nancy Busch-Rossnagel 

PRESENTER: Daniela Montalto 

As we move steadily into the 21st Century, empirical interest in identifying the determinants of 
positive parental teaching styles continues to flourish (Zigler & Hall, 2000). This pilot investiga- 
tion was designed to identify the psychological process that accounts for the effects of maternal 
education on teaching style and, thus, its indirect effects on child development. The research (a) 
examines whether flexible/abstract thinking and perceived social support are related to levels of 
maternal education, and (b) tests how these variables correlate with maternal behavior and 
whether they mediate the effects of maternal education. 

Participants consisted of 20 mother-child dyads participating in Head Start programs located 
in the Bronx, New York. Mothers were over the age of 18 (mean age = 32) and had children of 
preschool age (2-4 years old; mean age = 3.6 years). The sample was multiracial: Fifty percent 
were Latino, 30% were African American, and 10% were White. Maternal education varied: 
Twenty percent graduated high school, 20% had 3 years or less of college (no degree), 40% held 
a college degree (Associates or Bachelors), and 20% were either currently enrolled in graduate 
school or held a master's degree. Thirty percent of the mothers described themselves as married, 
while 70% were without partner. Mothers completed the Perceived Social Support from Family 
and Friends (PSS-FA/ PSS-FR) questionnaires (Procidano & Heller, 1983) and reported sociobio- 
logical information. Mother-child dyads were videotaped interacting with tinker toys on the 
Maternal Teaching Observation Task (MTOT; Laosa, 1980). Mothers were also administered the 
Tower of Hanoi, a disk-transfer task used to operationalize flexibility/ abstract thinking (TOH; 
Simon, 1975). 

Mean rate-per-minute scores revealed that the three teaching behaviors used most frequently 
by the mothers during the teaching task were inquiry, directives, and visual cues. Teaching 
behaviors did not differ significantly based on child's gender. Marital status did not influence 
maternal social support (ffiends/family) . Mothers' of daughters, though, had greater family 
support (p = .035) than those of sons (p = .606). Pearson-Product Moment Correlations revealed 
that planning efficiency, an indicator of abstract/flexible thinking, was positively correlated with 
the use of Modeling and Visual cues. Mothers with high levels of planning efficiency also used 
praise (r = .223) and inquiry (r = .385) more frequently during the teaching tasks. Efficient 
planners used less verbal disapproval (r = -.36) and directives (r = -.43) during the interactions. 
Subsequent analyses revealed that mothers who scored high on planning efficiency and level of 
maternal education used praise and inquiry more frequently among their teaching behaviors. 
Similar patterns for perceived social support were not found. 

Pilot data is limited due to the size and demographics of the sample studied. Despite these 
limitations, results indicate that abstract/flexible thinking may mediate the relationship between 
maternal education and maternal teaching behaviors. Results of a larger study would assist in 
directing future interventions aimed at promoting positive parenting among inner-city mothers. 
More substantive findings indicating that flexibility in thinking is related to maternal teaching 
behaviors would support incorporating more cognitive-behavioral techniques for problem 
solving as part of parenting education. 




908 



913 



PARENTING STYLES/VALUES/ATTITUDES/BEHAVIORS 



References 

Laosa, L M. (1980). Measures for the study of maternal teaching strategies. Applied Psychological 
Measurement, 4, 355-366. 

Procidano, M. E., & Heller, K. (1983). Measures of perceived social support from friends and 

from family; Three validation studies. American /oumfl/ of Community Psycho/o^, 11 ( 1 ), 1-24. 

Simon, H. A. (1975). The functional equivalence of problem solving skills. Cognitive Psychology, 
7, 268-288. & r &r> 

Zigler, E. E, & Hall, N. W. (2000). Child development and social policy: Theory and applications. 
Boston; McGraw Hill. 



Parental Corporal Punishment as a Predictor of Child Maladjustment: 
Race and Parental Responsiveness as Potential Moderators 

Mary Ann Malta 
PRESENTER: Mary Ann Matta 

A blending of three theories of moral development in children provides a theoretical foundation 
relating to children s misbehavior, parents' resulting actions, and children's moral and behav- 
ioral well-being. According to Social Learning Theory (Bandura, 1986), Cognitive Developmen- 
tal Theory (Kohlberg, 1969), and Hoffrnan's (1983) Theory of Moral Internalization, the affective 
environments created by parents can facilitate or undermine children's moral development. 

Corporal punishment (CP) is defined as "the use of physical force with the intention of 
causing a child to experience pain, but not injury, for the purpose of correction or control of the 
child's behavior" (Straus & Donnelly, 1994, p. 4). CP is a widely practiced, socially accepted 
method through which parents attempt to discipline children. Proponents of CP cite a few 
studies indicating that, in retrospect, children perceive CP as fair and that CP may be effective in 
lowering rates of child misbehavior within certain demographic groups. Yet, the majority of 
research on CP indicates an inverse relation between CP and child well-being. Specifically, CP 
has been linked with childhood anxiety-depression, antisocial behavior, and difficulties in peer 
relationships. 

Although a few studies hint that CP may be less harmful, or even beneficial, to African 
>^erican children (e.g., Deater-Deckard, Dodge, Bates, & Pettit, 1996), most research indicates 
that CP IS detrimental to children regardless of race (e.g., Michels, Pianta, & Reeve, 1993; 

McCabe, Clark, & Barnett, 1999). It has also been suggested that levels of parental responsive- 
ness may attenuate the harmful consequences to children stemming from experiences with CP 
(McCord, 1991). Therefore, race and/or parental responsiveness may moderate associations 
between CP and child outcomes. 

The purpose of the current study was to investigate whether CP is associated with childhood 
anxiety-depression, antisocial behavior, and difficulties in peer relationships in a sample of 
African ^erican and European American children, and to test whether race and/or parental 
responsiveness moderate associations between CP and the above listed child outcomes. 

The study utilized 838 participants from data collection year 1990 of the National Longitudi- 
nal Survey of Youth (NLSY; U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1999). Partici- 
pants were African American and European American children ages 3-8 and their mothers, 
representing a diverse range of socioeconomic strata and family structures. Correlation and 
regression analyses were computed to determine whether associations exist between parental use 
of CP (as measured by the frequency of parents' use) and child outcomes (as measured by the 




914 



909 



POSTERS 



Behavior Problems Index; Peterson & Zill, 1986). Parenting style was assessed through identifi- 
cation and factor analysis of parenting variables in the Home Observation for Measurement of 
the Environment (HOME) Inventory (Caldwell & Bradley, 1984). 

Findings indicated that parental use of CP was associated with childhood anxiety-depression, 
antisocial behavior, and difficulties in peer relationships among both African American and 
European American children. Further, children whose parents used CP and were responsive 
towards them experienced higher levels of anxiety-depression. Thus, the study has importarit 
implications for maximizing children’s positive gains within families and the larger social 
context. 

References 

Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 

Caldwell, B. M., & Bradley, R. H. (1984). Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment. 

University of Arkansas at Little Rock, Center for Child Development and Education. 
Deater-Deckard, K., Dodge, K. A., Bates, J. E., & Pettit, G. S. (1996). Physical discipline among 
African American and European American mothers: Links to children's externalizing behav- 
iors. Developmental Psychology, 32, 1065-1072. 

Hoffman, M. L. (1983). Affective and cognitive processes in moral internalization. In E. T. 

Higgins, D. N. Ruble, & W. W. Hartup (Eds.), Social cognition and social development (pp. 236- 
274). England; Cambridge University Press. 

Kohlberg, L. (1969). Stage and sequence. The cognitive-developmental approach to socializa- 
tion. In D. A. Goslin (Ed.), Handbook of socialization theory and research (pp. 325-480). New 
York: Rand McNally. 

McCabe, K. M., Clark, R., & Barnett, D. (1999). Family protective factors among urban African 
American youth. Journal of Child Clinical Psychology, 28(2), 137-150. 

McCord, J. (1991). Questioning the value of punishment. Social Problems, 38(2), 167-179. 
Michels, S., Pianta, R. C., & Reeve, R. E. (1993). Parent self-reports of discipline practices and 
child acting-out behaviors in kindergarten. Early Education and Development, 4(2), 139-144. 
Peterson, J. L., & Zill, N. (1986). Marital disruption, parent-child relationships, and behavioral 
problems in children. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 48(2), 295-307 . 

Straus, M. A., & Donnelly, D. A. (1994). Beating the devil out of them: Corporal punishment in 
American families. New York: Lexington Books. 

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. (1999). National Longitudinal Surveys 
(NLSY79) users guide: A guide to the 1979-1998 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth data. 
Washington, DC; Author. 



O 

ERIC 



910 



915 



PARENTING STYLE S /VA LU E S/ATTITU D ES/ B E H AVI O RS 



Expectations of Head Start Parents Regarding Curriculum for 
Children and Services for Families: A Comparison of 
European American and Puerto Rican Parents 

Beena Achhpal, Jane A.Goldman 

PRESENTERS: Beena Achhpal, Jane A. Goldman 



Head Start and other successful intervention models emphasize the importance of understand- 
ing cultural differences in parents' beliefs about child rearing and the education of children. 
However, within the United States, data on the educational beliefs of ethnic minority parents 
whose children are involved in early intervention programs is limited. This poster focuses on 
similarities and differences between European American and Puerto Rican parents concerning 
their beliefs about (a) the educational and behavioral competencies they want their children to 
learn in Head Start, and (b) the importance of the different services for children and families 
offered by Head Start programs. 

Participants were 60 parents (30 European American, 30 Puerto Rican) of Head Start children 
in northeast Connecticut. The two groups were similar in demographic characteristics. To assess 
parents' beliefs about the skills and behaviors they wanted their children to learn at Head Start, 
each parent completed a 16-item inventory rating the importance of skills/behaviors in eight 
developmental domains: (a) Social Skills with Adults, (b) Social Skills with Children, 

(c) Emotional-Affective Skills, (d) Pre-Academic Skills, (e) Autonomy, (f) Self-Help Skills, 

(g) Physical Skills, and (h) Creative Skills (Achhpal, 2000). Both groups of parents considered 
skills in all eight developmental domains to be important. However, even with this overall 
agreement, there also were significant differences in the ratings of the two groups. The European 
American parents placed more emphasis on wanting Head Start to reinforce skills that teach 
children Autonomy. In contrast, the Puerto Rican parents put more emphasis on formal instmc- 
tion in Pre-Academic Skills and on helping children learn Social Skills with Adults. (Discrimi- 
nant function analysis identified that ratings in these three areas significantly separated the two 
sets of parents, p < .01). For the other five competency areas, the parents were similar in the 
relative importance they placed on the skills. Both groups rated Emotional-Affective Skills and 
Social Skills with Children as very important, Self-Help Skills in the mid-range, and Creative 
Skills and Physical Skills as least important. 

To assess parents' beliefs about the importance of different services for children and parents 
offered through Head Start, each parent completed a 10-item inventory listing services related to 
health care, nutrition, parent education, social services, and transportation (Achhpal, 2000). 
Parents rated how important each service was to them. Both groups considered all of these 
services of the Head Start program to be important. The only significant difference between the 
two groups was that providing meals and snacks to children was more important to the Puerto 
Rican parents. Both groups of parents consistently rated services for children as more important 
than services for parents. 

These findings suggest that even when there is overall agreement between groups concerning 
the educational goals they have for their children, subtle differences also may exist. To maximize 
the effects of early childhood programs, it is important that educators and policy-makers 
recognize such subtle differences. These findings also suggest a need for more work to help 
parents recognize the importance of the parent/family components of the Head Start program, 
and to optimize their use of these services. 

Reference 

Achhpal, B. (2000). A comparison of European American and Pueito Rican parents' beliefs and 

expectations concerning early intervention programs for preschool children. Unpublished doctoral 

dissertation. University of Connecticut, Storrs. 





911 



POSTERS 



Parenting in Context, Parenting as Context: Patterns of Parenting 
and Child Outcomes Among Low-Income Families 

Christy Brady-Smith, Rebecca C. Fauth, Rebecca M. Ryan, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn 

PRESENTERS: Chhsty Brady-Smith, Rebecca M. Ryan 



The present study examined patterns of parenting among low-income Black, White, and Latina 
mothers and their infant children, and differences in these patterns across ethnicity. Associations 
between parenting patterns and child, maternal, and family characteristics were also investigated. 
Finally, the relationship between parenting patterns and child outcomes at age 2 was examined. 

Participants in the study (N = 1,399) were part of the Early Head Start (EHS) Research and 
Evaluation Project, a randomized, longitudinal, 17-site study of low-income families eligible for 
EHS (Love et al., 2002). Families were interviewed at baseline and when their children were ages 
14 months and 24 months. EHS and control families were combined, with EHS status con- 
trolled in all analyses. 

Sample characteristics at baseline were as follows: Forty-four percent were White, 33% Black, 
and 23% Latina; 45% of mothers had less than a high school degree; 33% were teenage (< 19) 
at their child's birth; 38% lived in deep poverty (< 50% of poverty line); 52% of the children 
stemmed from single-parent families; and 41% of the Latina mothers had minimal English skills. 

Parenting measures at 14 months were assessed from a 10-minute child-parent videotaped 
free play interaction. Parent supportiveness {M = 3.9), intrusiveness (M = 2.5), neptive regard 
(Al = 1.5), and detachment (Al = 1.6) were coded on a 7-point scale. Child cognitive and verbal 
development were assessed at age 2 using the Bayley Scales of Infant Development (BSID, 

Bayley, 1993; Al = 89.2; range = 49-134) and the MacArthur Communicative Development 
Inventory (GDI; Fenson et al., 2000), a parent-report measure (Al = 54.7; range = 0-100). 

In the Black and White samples, four patterns of parenting emerged at 14 months, using 
Ward's method and K-means cluster analysis: Sensitive, Firm, Uninvolved, and Harsh. Three 
patterns emerged in the Latina sample: Sensitive, Firm, and Uninvolved. Across ethnic groups. 
Sensitive mothers scored highest on supportiveness; Firm mothers scored moderately on 
supportiveness and intmsiveness; Uninvolved mothers scored highest on detachment; Harsh 
mothers scored highest on intrusiveness and negative regard. Within dusters, mean scores on 
measures of parenting differed by race, with White mothers scoring higher on supportiveness 
and lower on intrusiveness and negative regard compared to Black and Latina niothers. Sensitive 
mothers were the most advantaged in terms of maternal and family characteristics, while Harsh 
and Uninvolved clusters were the least advantaged. Compared to Sensitive parenting, Harsh and 
Uninvolyed parenting was related to lower child cognitive and verbal scores at age 2, the effect 

of Firm parenting varied across ethnic groups. 

Overall patterns of parenting were similar across ethnicity, although mean parenting scores 
within cluster differed. For all three ethnic groups, Sensitive parenting had a positive effect on 
child cognitive and verbal outcomes at age 2. By examining parenting within context, this study 
identified common patterns of parenting that benefit children's cognitive outcomes while 
acknowledging that different levels of behavior across ethnicity may define those patterns. 

RcfCTCTlCCS 

Bayley, N. (1993). Bayley Scales of Infant Development: Manual (2nd ed.). New York: The Psycho- 
logical Corporation. 

Fenson, L, Bates, E., Dale, R, Goodman, L, Reznick, J. S., &Thal, D. (2000). Measuring variabil- 
ity in early child language: Don't shoot the messenger. Child Development, 71, 323-328. 

Love, J. M., Kisker, E. E., Ross, C. M., Brooks-Gunn, J., Raikes, H., Chazan-Cohen, R., et al., 
(2002) . Impacts of Early Head Start, a federal program for low-income families with infants and 
toddlers. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 




912 



917 



PARENTING STYLES/ VALUES/ ATTITUDES/ BEHAVIORS 



Urban Head Start Parents' Attitudes Toward Early Math 

Kimberly Hope Glassman 

PRESENTER: Kimberly Hope Glassman 

Parental attitudes and beliefs about early math learning have been shown to influence the 
attitudes and achievements of young children (Carr, Jessup, & Fuller, 1999). Further, studies 
based on predominately White, middle-class samples have shown the effect of parents' gender- 
biased beliefs about math on girls' learning (Parsons, Adler, & Kaczala, 1982). 

This study was designed to explore the relationship between achievement, gender, and 
parental beliefs about Head Start children's early math skills. The parents and guardians of 177 
predominately African American children, who attended five Head Start centers in low-income 
neighborhoods, participated. Using a 4-point likert scale, parents recorded (a) their agreement 
or disagreement on a survey of beliefs about early math and (b) the frequency of math activities 
in the home on a survey of behavior. The first 28-item survey was designed to assess such 
domains as the importance of effort in children's learning of math, parents' expectations of the 
math skills necessary for kindergarten, and beliefs about how children learn early numeracy and 
math. The second 13-item survey assessed frequency of math activities carried out at home and 
communication with Head Start teachers. In addition, 75 children were administered a short- 
ened version of the Test of Early Mathematical Ability: Second Edition (TEMA; Ginsburg & 
Baroody, 1990), designed to assess preschool math skills. 

The surveys revealed that a large majority of parents did not agree with traditional beliefs 
about math learning. Most parents reported working on math skills with their children often. 
Additionally, very few had regular communication with Head Start teachers about their child's 
progress in math. T-tests revealed few significant differences between Head Start parents' 
responses about early math for daughters compared with sons. These results differed from many 
prior studies showing gender-biased responses to the same items by White, middle-class 
samples. Finally, a relationship existed between several survey items and children's TEMA 
performance. Specifically, the highest-scoring children had parents who believed more advanced 
math skills were necessary for kindergarten and who communicated more often with teachers. 
This study indicates that Head Start parents' beliefs about early math correspond with the child- 
centered philosophy of Head Start. Also, while the direction of the relationship is not clear, the 
significant relationships between parental attitudes and Head Start children's actual math 
achievement justifies further exploration. Finally, Head Start parents do not appear to hold the 
gender-biased attitudes toward early math found in studies on middle-class parents. 

This survey, which requires further reliability testing, could benefit Head Start teachers and 
administration in understanding the influence of parental beliefs and the involvement of Head 
Start parents in early math learning. 

References 

Carr, J., Jessup, D. L, & Fuller, D. (1999). Gender differences in first-grade mathematics strategy 
use: Parent and teacher contributions. Journal of Research on Mathematics Education, 30(1), 
20-46. 

Ginsburg, H. R, & Baroody, A. J. (1990). Test of Early Mathematical Ability. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed. 
Parsons, J. E., Adler, T. F, & Kaczala. (1982). Socialization of achievement attitudes and beliefs: 
Parental influences. Child Development, 53, 310-321. 




913 



POSTERS 



Socialization Values of Mexican American Head Start Parents: 
Associations With Acculturation and Child Gender 

Roshni Menon, Angela Taylor, Ana Lucero, Donna Christensen 

PRESENTERS; Roshni Menon, Angela R. Taylor, Ana Lucero 



Although ethnic-group differences in parenting practices have been well documented, only 
recently have child development researchers recognized the need to identify and describe the 
culturally-based value systems that may underlie these differences. Much of this more recent 
work has focused on the value dimension of individualism (independence and autonomy) 
versus collectivism (interdependence and social connectedness) as a framework for understand- 
ing differences between European American and ethnic minority cultural patterns (Greenfield, 
1994; Harwood, 1992; Harwood, Miller, & Irizarry, 1995). However, there is considerable 
variability in the extent to which individuals within a given ethnic group hold values tradition- 
ally associated with their culture. One key source of such variation is level of acculturation 
(Delgado-Gaitan, 1994). It is also reasonable to believe that the child's gender might impact on 
parents' socialization values and goals such that independence might be valued more for males 
and interdependence for females (Whiting & Edwards, 1988). Accordingly, the aims of the 
present study were to (a) describe the culturally-based parenting values and goals of low- 
income, Mexican American mothers and fathers and (b) examine the interplay between accul- 
turation and child gender in shaping parenting values and goals. 

As part of a larger investigation on parental socialization of emotional competence, data were 
collected from 42 Mexican American two-parent families with a 3- to 4-year-old child (55%; 
mean age = 46 mos.) enrolled in the home-based Head Start program. The majority of parents 
was Spanish-speaking (83% of mothers; 81% of fathers) and was born in Mexico (81% of 
mothers and fathers). 

In an individual interview, parents responded to two questions concerning desirable child 
characteristics: (a) "What are the qualities of your child that you are most proud of?" and 
(b) "What are the words that you would like someone to use to describe your child at this stage 
of his/her life?" and two questions pertaining to long-term socialization goals and values: 

(a) "How would you like someone to describe your child when he/'she is an adult?" and 

(b) "What type of person do you want your child to become?" Level of acculturation was 
measured using a 12-item acculturation scale developed by Marin, Sabogal, Marin, Otero- 



Sabogal, & Perez-Stable, (1987). 

Parents' interview responses were reliably coded into 9 broad content categories adapted 
from Harwood et al. (1995). Gontent analyses of the responses documented the diversity of 
values held by Mexican American parents, and revealed that individualistic, self-maximizing 
values (i.e., self-development, intellectual and career attainment), were endorsed to a similar or 
greater degree (34% of fathers' responses, 27% of mothers responses) as collectivist values of 
interpersonal competence (18% fathers, 29% mothers), obedience/respect (21% fathers, 13% 
mothers) and good citizenship (6% fathers, 12% mothers). Analyses also yielded new and 
somewhat unexpected findings regarding the interplay among acculturation, gender, and 
culturally based parenting values. Gontrary to expectation, no significant relationship was found 
between parent acculturation level and parenting values. Also unexpected was the finding that 
parents, especially fathers, endorsed intellectual attainment more for daughters (M = .17) than 
for sons (M = .12, p < .05); whereas obedience/respect was emphasized more for sons (M = .26) 
than daughters (M = .18, p < .05). The basis for these differences in values requires further 
exploration in research with larger samples of families. 




914 



919 



PARENTING STYLE S / VALU E S / ATTITU D ES / B E H AV I O RS 



References 

Delgado-Gaitan, C. (1994). Socializing young children in Mexican American families: An 

intergenerational perspective. In P. M. Greenfield & R. R. Gocking (Eds.), Cross-cultural roots of 
minority child development (pp. 55-86). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Greenfield, P. M. (1994). Independence and interdependence as developmental scripts: Implica- 
tions for theory, research, and practice. In P. M. Greenfield & R. R. Gocking (Eds.), Cross- 
cultural roots of minority child development (pp. 1-37). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Harwood, R. L. (1992). The influence of culturally derived values on Anglo and Puerto Rican 
mothers' perceptions of attachment behavior. Child Development, 63, 822-839. 

Harwood, R. L., Miller, J. G., & Irizarry, N. L. (1995). Culture and attachment of the child in context. 
New York: The Guilford Press. 

Marin, G., Sabogal, E, Marin, B. V., Otero-Sabogal, R., & Perez-Stable, E. J. (1987). Development 
of a short acculturation scale for Hispanics. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 9, 183- 
205. 

Whiting, B. B., & Edwards, G. (1988). Children of different worlds. Gambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 



Investigation of the Relationships Among Parenting Styles, Parent 
and Child Characteristics, and Head Start Children's School Readiness 

Christy McWayne, John Fantuzzo 

PRESENTERS: Christy McWayne, John Fantuzzo 

Recent national statistics indicate that certain demographic factors put a substantial number of 
young children at risk for poor performance on school readiness measures (U.S. Department of 
Education, 2000). For young children, successful resolution of developmen tally salient chal- 
lenges, such as the transition to school, is greatly influenced by the nature of the parent-child 
relationship (Atilli, 1989). Parenting behaviors that occur within this relationship can either 
enhance or hinder a child's negotiation of developmental tasks. Accordingly, effective early 
intervention efforts aimed at promoting children's readiness for school must focus on support- 
ing positive parent-child relationships (U. S. DHHS, 1996). 

More and more, research is emerging that discusses how sociocultural issues might affect 
parenting (McLoyd, 1990; Zayas & Solari, 1994). Poverty and residence in highly stressed urban 
areas pose significant risks to the job of parenting young children (Duncan, Brooks-Gunn, & 
Klebanov, 1994; Garbarino & Kostelny, 1993). This raises the question of how different social 
and cultural contexts affect the nature of adaptive child rearing and whether or not parenting 
styles are universal or distinctive to specific ethnic and cultural groups. Baumrind's (1971) 
typology of parenting has been widely used by family researchers to characterize distinct types of 
childrearing behaviors across diverse populations, leaving minority groups vulnerable to labels 
of deviance (i.e., parenting styles viewed as deficient; Spencer, 1990). 

In response to the need for more information on intragroup variability, recent research with a 
sample of Head Start parents found three reliable dimensions of parenting style: (a) Active- 
Responsive, (b) Active-Restrictive, and (c) Passive-Permissive (Goolahan, McWayne, Fantuzzo, & 
Grim, 2002). The Active-Responsive and Active-Restrictive parenting dimensions corresponded 
with Baumrind's Authoritative and Authoritarian styles, respectively. The Passive-Permissive 
parenting dimension was conceptually similar to Baumrind's Neglecting parenting style, 
characterized by low warmth and low limit setting. These constructs were employed in the 
present study to examine within-group variations in parenting styles, determinants of parenting 




920 



915 



POSTERS 



styles, and relationships between parenting styles and child outcomes with African American 
Head Start children. 

The present study included 209 sets of African American Head Start parents and children 
recruited from twelve Head Start classrooms in a large metropolitan city in the Northeast. Boys 
and girls were equally represented within the sample, and ranged in age from 42-65 months. 
The relationships between parenting, determinant, and school readiness variables (i.e., peer pl^y 
interactions, classroom behavior, approaches to learning, and communication skills) were 
investigated. Results indicated that family and environmental stress was positively related to 
passive-permissive parenting. Feelings of social isolation were positively associated with both 
the Active-Restrictive and Passive- Permissive parenting styles. Single parents with less than a 
high school education were significantly more likely to engage in Passive- Permissive parenting, 
and single parents were more likely to employ an Active-Restrictive style, regardless of educa- 
tional level. However, no significant relationships were found between parenting dimensions 
and child characteristics or outcomes. These findings raise questions regarding (a) the relation- 
ship between parenting style and school readiness constructs in general, as well as, more 
specifically, (b) to what degree, if any, these parenting constructs measure the most important 
parenting dimensions that contribute to children s school readiness competencies. 

References 

Atilli, G. (1989). Social competence versus emotional security: The link. In G. Atilli, J. Nadel, & 
R. P. Weissberg (Eds.), Social competence in developmental perspective (pp. 293-311). Boston. 
Kluwer Academic. 

Baumrind, D. (1971). Gurrent patterns of parental authority. Developmental Psychology Mono- 
graph, 4, 1-103. 

Goolahan, K. G., McWayne, G. M., Fantuzzo, J. W., & Grim, S. (2002). Validation of a multidi- 
mensional assessment of parenting styles for low-income African-American families with 
preschool children. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 17, 356-373. 

Duncan, G. J., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Klebanov, P. K. (1994). Economic deprivation and early 
childhood development. Child Development, 65, 296-318. 

Garbarino, J., & Kostelny, K. (1993). Neighborhood and community influences on parenting. In 
T. Luster & L. Okagaki (Eds.), Parenting: An ecological perspective (pp. 203-226). Hillsdale, Nl: 
Erlbaum. 

McLoyd, V. G. (1990). The impact of economic hardship on Black families and children: 

Psychological distress, parenting, and socio-emotional development. Child Development, 61, 
31-346. 

Spencer, M. B. (1990). Development of minority children: An introduction. Child Development, 
61,267-269. 

U.S. Department of Education (2000). America's kindergartners (NGES 2000-070). Washington, 
DG: Author. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1996). Final rule: Head Start Performance 
Standards (45 GFR Part 1304, Federal Register, 61, 57186-57227). Washington, DG: U.S. 
Government Printing Office. 

Zayas, L. H., & Solari, F. (1994). Early childhood socialization in Hispanic families: Gontext, 
culture, and style implications. Professional Psychology: Research and Style, 25, 200-206. 




916 



921 



PARENTING STYLES /V ALU ES /ATTITU D ES / B E H AVI O RS 



Response Patterns of Mexican American Mothers on Measures 
of Childrearing Beliefs and Developmental Expectations 

Thubi H. A. Kolobe, Everett Smith 

PRESENTER: Thubi H. A. Kolobe 

An assumption in early intervention is that parent education influences parenting practices and 
enhances child outcome. Early intervention studies suggest that this is inconsistently true. 
Differential child outcomes have been observed, particularly between children from majority 
and minority families (Brooks-Gunn, Berlin, & Fuligni, 2000). The question of what parental 
childrearing behaviors and practices contribute to optimal outcome, or environmental risk, in 
minority children remains unclear. Even less understood is how the nuances of culture influence 
parenting beliefs and behaviors in minority families. Cultural and intragroup variations are 
crucial for understanding different parenting behaviors and child outcomes among ethnic 
minorities (Garcia-Coll & Magnuson, 1999). 

This presentation reports on the results of the response patterns of Mexican American 
mothers on a measure of childrearing expectations and behaviors. Semistructured interviews 
with 62 Mexican American mothers of 9- to 12-month-old infants were conducted by a bilin- 
gual interviewer using the Parenting Behavior Checklist (PBC; Fox, 1994). The PBC consists of 
three subscales that measure parents' developmental expectations (PBC-E), discipline strategies 
(PBC-D), and nurturing behaviors (PBC-N). 

Rasch psychometric models (Wright & Masters, 1982) were used to examine response 
patterns of the mothers. Rasch models produce item calibrations that may be applied across 
diverse groups by specifying the dimensionality of responses. Several analyses were also con- 
ducted to test the stability of the item hierarchy and person measures across SES, levels of 
education (LED), and acculturation. These evaluations are important, as the degree to which 
item bias and person measures are stable, sets limits on the generalizability and utility of an 
assessment across cultures or groups (Andrich, 1988). 

Rasch analysis of the response patterns of the entire group on the PBC-N subscale revealed 
that the mothers were less likely to endorse behaviors related to seeking advice about their 
children and parenting from books or friends, and more likely to support behaviors associated 
with engaging in play activities. Within-group differences revealed that mothers with high LED 
were likely to support engaging in make-believe type of activities and structured routines around 
bedtime compared to those with low LED. The PBC-E sub scale revealed that mothers were more 
likely to expect their infants to show proper demeanor and less likely to expect expressive 
language. Response patterns on the PBC-D subscale showed less endorsement of physical 
punishment and more support for use of verbal means of disciplining. Differences were also 
observed in the rank order of the item endorsement across SES, LED, and acculturation (the 
Latino and Bicultural subgroups), but no item location differed by more than what could be 
accounted for by measurement error. 

The results of this study expose the limitation of aggregate scores such as group means when 
interpreting parenting beliefs and behaviors of culturally diverse families. Differences in their 
scores may be at several levels — cultural, conceptual, or socioeconomic (Hui & Triandis, 1983; 
McLoyd, 1999). The next step is to compare the response patterns of Mexican American mothers 
with that of non-Latino mothers on whom the PBC is standardized, and to examine the rela- 
tionship between the PBC and child outcome. 

References 

Andrich, D. (1988). Rasch models for measurement. Newbury Park: Sage. 

Brooks-Gunn, J. Berlin, L. J, & Fuligni, A. S. (2000). Early childhood intervention programs: 



917 



ERIC 




POSTERS 



What about the family? In J. P. Shonkoff & S. J. Meisels (Eds.), Handbook of early childhood 
intervention (pp. 549-577). New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Fox, R. A. (1994). Parent Behavior Checklist. Brandon, VT: Clinical Psychology. 

Garcia-Coll, G., & Magnuson, K. (1999). Cultural influences on child development: Are we 
ready for a paradigm shift? In Masten A. S. (Ed.), Cultural processes in child development— The 
Minnesota Symposia on Child Psychology (pp.1-24). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Hui, C. H., STriandis, H. C. (1983). Multistrategy approach to cross-cultural research: The case 
of locus of control. Journal of Cross-cultural Psychology, 14, 65-83. 

McLoyd, V. C. (1999). Cultural influences in a multicultural society: Conceptual and method- 
ological issues. In A. S. Masten (Ed.), Cultural processes in child development— The Minnesota 
Symposia on Child Psychology (pp. 123-135). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Wright, B. D., & Masters, G. N. (1982). Rating Scale Analysis. Chicago: Mesa Press. 



Caregiver Interaction Style and Preschoolers' Development 

Melinda Massoff, Tracy Poon, Mark Spellmann 

PRESENTERS: Melinda Massoff, Tracy Poon, Mark Spellmann 

This investigation explores the association between caregiver interaction style and preschooler 
development in four urban Head Start programs. Responsive mothers tend to adapt their 
reactions to the changing competencies of their developing children (Beckwith, Rodning, & 
Cohen, 1992; Bornstein & Tamis-LeMonda, 1997; Tamis-LeMonda, Bomsteiri, Baumwell, & 
Damast, 1996). On the other hand, mothers who adapt little to their toddler's changing 
competencies and needs to follow their own intentions, negatively affect children's emerging 
feelings of autonomy (Smith, Landry, Miller-Loncar, & Swank, 1997). 

Participants were 73 ethnically diverse, inner city Caregiver-child dyads. Caregivers were 
predominantly mothers. Dyads were videotaped for 10 minutes of unstructured free play with 
age-appropriate toys. Caregiver-child interactions were coded from the videotapes using a 41- 
item Caregiver-Child Interaction Scale. Caregivers were coded on 23 dimensions: (a) positive 
affect, (b) negative affect, (c) positive touch, (d) negative touch, (e) positive verbal reinforce- 
ment, (f) negative verbal reinforcement, (g) responsiveness to verbal nondistress, (h) responsive- 
ness to nonverbal nondistress, (i) responsiveness to distress, (j) emotional attunement, 

(k) flexibility, (1) intrusiveness, (m) teasing, (n) participation with child, (o) activity level, 

(р) stmcturing, (q) consistency, (r) language use, (s) verbal style, (t) use of teaching loop, 

(u) achievement orientation, (v) inventiveness with toys, and (w) caregiver s sophistication 
of play. 

These same dimensions were used to code the child with the following exceptions. 

(a) positive/negative reinforcement, (b) responsiveness to distress, (c) intmsiveness, (d) flexibil- 
ity, (e) stmcturing, (f) use of teaching loop, and (g) achievement orientation. Additional codes 
used only for the child include (a) emotional regulation, (b) involvement with toys, and 

(с) persistence. r • 

Factor Analysis of the Caregiver variables revealed a four-factor solution. The four Caregiver 

factors were (a) Responsive, (b) Intmsive, (c) Didactic, and (d) Negative. More specifically. 
Responsive caregivers were generally responsive to their children, expressed positive affect, used 
more and richer language, had a high activity level, were emotionally attuned to their children, 
displayed more pretend play and stmctured the interaction more than their non- Responsive 
counterparts. Intmsive caregivers were intmsive, inflexible, and also, stmctured the interaction. 
Didactic caregivers were achievement oriented, used teaching loops and positive reinforcement. 




923 



918 



PARENTING STYL E S / VALU ES / ATTITU D ES /B E H AVI O RS 



but lacked warmth. Negative caregivers teased and used negative verbal reinforcement and 
negative touch. , 

Correlations between the Caregiver factors and the child behavior variables revealed many 
interesting findings. The Responsive factor was positively correlated with child's language use 
and communication ability, child's participation with caregiver, child's responsiveness, positive 
affect, child's emotional attunement, child's activity level, child's persistence, and child's 
sophistication of play. The Didactic factor correlated positively with child's responsiveness, 
participation with caregiver, child's activity level, emotional attunement, and positive affect. The 
Intrusive caregiver factor correlated with child's positive affect only. There were no significant 
correlations between the Negative caregiver factor and any of the child variables. 

This is an interesting pattern of findings. Most striking are the differences found between the 
correlations with the Didactic factor versus the Responsive factor and the child variables. 
Although both the Didactic factor and the Responsive factor yielded positive correlations with 
, child participation, child responsiveness, activity level, and positive affect, only the Responsive 
factor yielded positive correlations with child persistence, language use, communication abilities 
and sophistication of play. Responsive caregiving, which respects children's bids for autonomy, 
fosters communication. Teaching without warmth is perhaps experienced as intrusive and 
forecloses rich communication. Refining the relations between responsive parenting and 
preschoolers' cognitive development will be cmcial for better refining Head Start parent programs. 

References 

Beckwith, L., Rodning, C., & Cohen, S. (1992). Preterm children at early adolescence and 
continuity and discontinuity in maternal responsiveness from infancy. Child Development, 

63, 1198-1208. 

Bornstein, M. H, & Tamis-LeMonda, C. S. (1997). Maternal responsiveness and infant mental 
abilities: Specific predictive relations. Infant Behavior and Development, 20, 283-296. 

Smith, K. E., Landry, S. H., Miller-Loncar, C. L., & Swank, P. R. (1997). Characteristics that help 
maintain their infant's focus of attention. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 18, 
587-601. 

Tamis-LeMonda, C. S., Bornstein, M. H., Baumwell, L., & Damast, A. M. (1996). Early Develop- 
ment and Parenting, 5, 173-183. 



Partnerships 



School Based Mentoring: Generating Involvement and 
Dismantling Isolation In Urban Elementary Schools 

Suellen Butler 

PRESENTER: Suellen Butler 

How do school-based mentoring programs dismantle a climate that puts urban elementary 
school children at risk of isolation? Which mentoring practices are most effective in shifting 
from a climate of isolation to a climate of involvement? Data gathered from five elementary 
school-based mentoring programs are used to address these questions. Study analysis is based 
on best practice as recognized and described by teachers and principals and by program observa- 
tion conducted through site visit. 

Three panels are used to organize and present research: (a) a panel of introduction, (b) a 
school climate panel, and (c) a report of study findings. The Introductory Panel enlists three 
questions to frame presentation: (a) What is school-based mentoring? (b) How is it distin- 
guished from other types of mentoring programs? and (c) What are the core activities shared by 
school-based programs? Information presented in this panel draws distinction between school- 
based and other types of mentoring programs (Herra, Sipe, & McClanahan, 2000; Herra, Vong, 

& Gale, 2002). In addition, mentoring activities shared by the five school-based programs are 
listed and described. 

Questions framing presentation on the School Climate Panel include (a) What factors 
generate a climate of isolation in urban elementary schools? (b) What are the building blocks 
for generating a school climate of involvement? and (c) How are shifts in levels of involvement 
facilitated? Panel information contrasts two different school climate models: (a) a climate of 
isolation linked to school size, teacher inexperience, and student class size; contrasted with (b) a 
climate of involvement based on MandelTs model (1984) describing negotiations conducted by 
children as they move from hidden meaning to publicly shared understandings. The four levels 
of model involvement (a) self-involvement, (b) involvement from afar, (c) coinvolvement, and 
(d) reciprocal involvement are presented in an overview figure as sets of traits. 

The third panel reports Study Findings. Using the trait composites drawn from the involve- 
ment model permits a ranking of best mentoring practice described by teachers and principals. 
Three questions frame information on this panel: (a) Which mentoring activities yield the 
greatest levels of involvement? (b) How do teachers and principals compare in selection of 
mentoring activities that generate involvement? and (c) How effective is the allocation of 
mentoring program resources in achieving a climate of involvement? Information organized on 
this panel lists best practice reported by teachers and principals and their ranking on the basis of 
the involvement they generate. A comparison of the involvement potential for each best practice 
and its reported resource allocation as measured by staffing and scheduling assignments 
indicates the largest share of program resources (75%) are devoted to practices yielding 
coinvolvement. Mentoring practices generating reciprocal involvement receive far fewer re- 



O 

ERIC 



920 



925 



PARTNERSHIPS 



sources (25%) yet claim greater effectiveness in dismantling a climate of isolation. 

Study findings suggest a more equitable balance be strudc between support for activities 
benefiting individual children and those benefiting groups of children. Support for the later 
generates reciprocal relationships that dismantle isolation and seed an involvement initiative 
that transforms school climate. 

References 

Herra, C., Sipe, C. L., & McClanahan, W. S. 2000. Relationship development in community-based and 
school-based programs. Philadelphia: Public and Private Ventures. 

Herra/ C., Vong, Z., & Gale, L., 2002. Group mentoring: A study of mentoring groups in three pro- 
grams. Philadelphia: Public and Private Ventures. 

Mandell, N. 1984. Children's negotiation of meaning. Symbolic Interaction, 7 (Fall), 191 -211. 



Health Promoting Early Childhood Centers in Australia: 

Building Capacity in the State of Queensland 

Carla Patterson, Julie Appleton 

PRESENTERS: Carla Patterson, Julie Appleton 

In the last decade in Queensland, Australia there has been a continuous progression from 
working to meet the food, and nutrition and health needs, of young people in schools to 
addressing nutrition, and then broader health issues, in early childhood settings. 

In 1995, the National Nutrition Education in Schools Project produced a curriculum deveh 
opment resource. Food and Nutrition in Action, (National Nutrition Education in Schools Project, 
1996a) to assist teachers to undertake a holistic approach to nutrition education. This met a 
recognized need for school students to better understand personal nutrition. The curriculum 
aimed to develop health promoting attitudes and behavior in each student and recognized the 
importance of the whole school in helping achieve this. Its companion resource. Health Promot- 
ing Schools in Action (National Nutrition Education in Schools Project, 1996b), provided case 
studies to introduce schools to the concept of Health Promotion in schools. 

The focus then turned to early intervention with the development of the early childhood 
resources. There's more to food than eating (Appleton, McCrea, & Patterson, 1999), and. What is 
better food? (Queensland Department of Health, 2001). Surveys of food practices in early 
childhood services in Queensland indicated that there was a health promoting approach to food 
provision and food learning in early childhood services; however, some areas could be im- 
proved, for example, communication with, and involvement of, families. Surveys of food 
provision in child care centers indicated that some children were not receiving all the daily 
nutrients required. Child-care staff were often required to provide nutrition information to 
families, and it was found they did not always have access to accurate, up to date information, 
especially in the area of infant nutrition. 

In 2000, the Queensland University of Technology and Queensland Health piloted a Health 
Promotion in Early Childhood Settings project (Queensland University of Technology, 2002) 
that aimed to explore the application of a health promoting process in early childhood settings. 
Child-care centers used a consultative approach to identify health issues relevant to their 
situation. They then addressed these issues through the three areas of (a) curriculum, teaching, 
and learning; (b) organization, ethos, and environment; and (c) partnerships and services. 
Health issues addressed in this way included (a) staff stress, (b) food provision, (c) oral health. 



ERIC 



926 



921 



POSTERS 



(d) behavior management, (e) parenting issues, and (f) communication with families. 

There is continued work in this area with interest from government and nongovernment 
agencies and ^health issue^ organizations — for example, the antisun cancer foundation. Mental 
health agencies that have traditionally worked with adolescents are now responding to literature 
that describes the importance of early intervention and supporting broad health promotion 
initiatives in early childhood. 

References 

Appleton, J., McCrea, N., & Patterson, C. (1999). There's more to food than eating. Food foundations 
for children birth to eight years. Sydney, Australia: Pademelon Press. 

National Nutrition Education in Schools Project. (1996a). Food and Nutrition in Action. 

Melbourne, Australia: Curriculum Corporation, Commonwealth of Australia. 

National Nutrition Education in Schools Project. (1996b). Health Promoting Schools in Action. 

Melbourne, Australia: Curriculum Corporation, Commonwealth of Australia. 

Queensland Department of Health. (2001). What is better food? Brisbane, Australia: Author. 
Queensland University of Technology. (2002). Health promoting early childhood settings. Unpub- 
lished project report. Author. 



Successful Partnerships: A Collaborative Treatment Outcome Study 
for Hard to Manage Head Start Preschoolers 

Terri L. Shelton, Geneva Woodruff, Glenda Welch 

PRESENTERS: Terri L. Shelton, Geneva Woodruff, Glenda Welch 
(Summary not available) 



Learning to Live With Each Other: A Qualitative Analysis 
of 27 Head Start-Child-Care Partnerships in Three States 

David Fernie, Ruslan Slutsky, Rebecca Kantor, Dennis Sykes 

PRESENTERS: David Femie, Ruslan Slutsky, Rebecca Kantor, Dennis Sykes 
(Summary not available) 




922 



927 



Physical Health and Development 



The Relationship Between Fine Motor Play and Fine Motor Skill 

Deborah Marr 

PRESENTER: Deborah Marr 

relationship between free play choices and fine 
motor skill in children attending Head Start. To this end, the following research question was 
jammed: Do 4-year-old children in Head Start with good and poor fme motor Ills differ in 
* thTh"*" ^7 participate in fine motor activities during indoor free play sessions? 

Held W study compared 15 pairs of 4-year-old (prekindergarten) children in seven 

and scored on ThT?"""' included based on teacher rating of fine motor skills 

c i 7 Peabody Developmental Motor Scale-2 (PDMS-2- 

dassroom, gender, and age with children receiving below average ratings and 
cores. Following the testing, the matched children were observed during indoor free plT 
sessions on two different days. ” ^ 

Dial" arJitL", “’’'“I'''®'’' the level of fine motor challenge inherent in an indoor free 

p y activity, a panel of occupational therapy experts analyzed 67 specific indoor free play 

lorrir ^igh, (c) idium 

, (d) low, and (e) none A fine motor challenge score was calculated for each diild by 

the number of mmutes engaged in each challenge level with an incremental weight 
factor. The weighted totals were then added together to form a fine motor challenge score A 

cant both groups was not statistically signifi- 

The findings do not reveal a significant difference in time spent in fine motor challenge 

4 / Ttt T'". both groups spint only 

4 /o of their free play time in high fine motor challenge activities. This may not be a hindrance 

for children with good skills because they are ftinctioning at age approprilte levels in fine motor 

velopment, indicating a readiness for ftiture kindergarten challenges; however, children with 

Ld ^ not engaging in activities during free play that could help them practice 

and develop the skills needed for kindergarten. mem practice 

activities may be a limitation in the present study. Occupa- 
may categS experts for categorizing the free play activities. Head Start teachers 

Shf. H r ^ ^ ^ P^-oducing somewhat different results. Early 

childhood educators may view play experiences differently, as they have the opportunity to see 
wider variations m the way children engage in free play activities. PPonunity to see 

Reference 

Folio, R., & Fewel, R. (2000). Peabody Developmental Motor Scales-2. Austin TX: 

Psychological Corporation. 



923 



928 



POSTERS 



Child Nutrition: How Does an Urban Head Start Program Measure Up? 

Harriet S. Worobey, John Worobey, Audrey Adler, Sherry Cohen 

PRESENTERS: Harriet S. Worobey, John Worobey 

Head Start Performance Standards state, "foods served must be high in nutrients and low in fat, 
sugar and salt" (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1996). A child's food intake is 
also comprised of meals and snacks eaten at home, but for children in full-day Head Start 
programs, one half to two thirds of their daily nutritional needs must be met at the center. The 
purpose of this study was to determine whether the children attending a Head Start Program 
would meet the Recommended Daily Allowances (RDA) or Daily Values (DV) as appropriate, 
and to suggest modifications if recommended values were not in line. 

Parents/caregivers of children enrolled in full-day classes in an urban Head Start center were 
asked permission for their children to participate in a study on diet and health. The child's food 
intake was recorded over 2 days at the center and also at home by the parent. A research staff 
member recorded foods eaten at Head Start, while the parent recorded what the children ate 
while at home. Complete data were obtained for 18 children. 

The daily nutrient intake for these children was generally acceptable, with overall energy 
intake generally at the recommended level. However, their diets, both at Head Start and at 
home, were problematic in two areas, namely sugar and sodium intake. 

Calories from simple sugars should contribute no more than 10% of energy intake in the 
daily diet (Whitney & Rolfes, 1999). However, in this sample, simple sugars contributed 24% of 
their daily caloric intake. Indeed, 43% of the children's carbohydrate calories were from simple 
sugars, rather than from complex carbohydrates such as starch and fiber. Fifty-three percent of 
simple sugar intake was traced to meals or snacks at home. While the recommended DV for 
sodium is 2,400 mg, the children were far in excess at 5,536 mg. Lunch at the center was the 
primary culprit, accounting for 65% of the day s total. Menu items leading the way were hot 
dogs and canned baked beans. 

Based on our results, we made recommendations to the center's food service staff to incorpo- 
rate more fresh fmits, vegetables, and whole grains into the meals served at Head Start, while 
reducing canned fruits and vegetables, processed meats, and white bread. Recommendations for 
the parents at home included serving fresh fruits as snacks, instead of excess sweets. 

Results with a new cohort of 24 children from the same Head Start classes 1 year later suggest 
that our recommendations were adopted by the food service personnel, as sodium intake was 
reduced by over 2,000 mg per day, down to 3,134 mg. However, simple sugars actually increased 
to 30% of total energy intake, but again, were due to excess sugared foods consumed at home. 
While the center staff succeeded in significantly reducing the sodium level of the meals that they 
serve, more opportunities need to be made to help Head Start centers serve more fresh produce 
and whole grain products. In addition, more provisions must be made for nutrition education 
of the home caregivers of Head Start children. 

References 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (1996, November 5). Head Start Program 
Performance Standards, Fed. Reg. 61, 215 (to be codified at45C.F.R. pt. 1304. 

Whitney, E. N„ & Rolfes, S. R. (1999). Understanding nutrition. St. Paul, MN; West. 




924 



929 



PHYSICAL HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT 



Low Lead Exposure and Attention Regulation 
in Children From Head Start 

Deborah W. Davis, Florence Chang, Barbara Burns, Dena Dossett 
PRESENTERS: Barbara Burns, Florence Chang 

Over 12 million children under the age of 7 years are reported to possess potentially harmful 
levels of lead (Boivin & Giordani, 1995). For many years, lead was not considered harmful to 
the central nervous system (CNS) until the child e^ibited symptoms of lead toxicity (Boivin & 
Giordani). More recently, public policy in the United States has deemed 10 (g/dl blood lead 
levels as safe, while others argue that there is no threshold below which lead does not have an 
effect on the GNS (Finkelstein, Markowitz, & Rosen, 1998; Schwartz, 1994). 

The current study examined the effect of low lead exposure on attention regulation in 50 
children attending Head Start. Attention regulation was examined using a parent-child interac- 
tion task previously used by Wertsch (Wertsch, McNamee, McLane, & Budwig, 1980; Wertsch & 
Hickman, 1987). Following Vygotsky (1978), Wertsch and his colleagues contended that before 
a child becomes an independent (self-regulated) problem solver, the parent serves as the 
planner, regulator, and monitor of the task. The study was designed to test the hypothesis that 
exposure to lead alters the way in which children develop the ability to self-regulate attention. 
Ghildren completed a puzzle-matching task with their parents and a second puzzle 1 week later 
without assistance. 

Ghildren with low lead levels (LLL; greater than 10 (g/dl blood lead level) were compared 
with a control group of children (less than 6 (g/dl blood lead level). The puzzle-matching task 
was coded for several events, including both verbal and nonverbal parental assistance and the 
child's gazes to the model, copy, and puzzle pieces. Furthermore, sessions were divided into 
episodes, with each episode representing the movement of one puzzle piece. 

Analyses controlling for age and IQ have yielded several significant findings concerning low 
lead exposure. Ghildren with LLL differed from children in the control group on puzzle- 
matching performance during both the parent-child and the child-alone session. Ghildren with 
LLL inserted significantly fewer correct pieces in both sessions, especially in the child-alone 
session. Secondly, differences were found in the attentional processes employed by children in 
the LLL and the control groups. Ghildren with LLL demonstrated more variable gaze patterns 
from episode to episode. In other words, children with LLL exhibited less consistency in their 
attentional strategy than the control group. Finally, differences were found in how much a 
mature attentional strategy (looking at the model) benefited puzzle performance in terms of 
accuracy. While the proportion of gazes to the model was related to overall accuracy in puzzle 
matching for the control group, it was not related in the LLL group, suggesting that LLL children 
did not benefit from using an efficient strategy. Taken together, children in the LLL group were 
less regulated in their attention skills than children in the control group. 

Overall, these findings are compelling, given that these children had relatively low levels of 
lead exposure. The results of this research demonstrate that even children with low amounts of 
lead exposure are at risk for attentional problems. 

References 

Boivin, M. J., & Giordani, B. (1995). A risk evaluation of the neuropsychological effects of 
childhood lead toxicity. Developmental Neuropsychology, 11, 157-180. 

Finkelstein, Y., Markowitz, M. E., & Rosen, J. F. (1998). Low-lead level-induced neurotoxicity in 
children; An update on central nervous system effects. Brain Research Reviews, 27, 168-176. 
Schwartz, J. (1994). Low-lead exposure and children's IQ: A meta-analysis and search for a 
threshold. Environmental Research, 65, 42-55. 



O 

ERIC 



930 



925 



POSTERS 



Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 

Wertsch, J. V, & Hickman, M. (1987). Problem solving in social interaction: A microgenetic 
analysis. In. M. Hickman (Ed.), Social and functional approaches to language and thought (pp. 
251-266). Orlando, FL: Academic Press. 

Wertsch, J. V., McNamee, G. D., McLane, J. B., & Budwig, N. A. (1980). The adult-child as a 
problem-solving system. Child Development, 51, 1215-1221. 



Obesity Begins Early: The Latino Migrant Child 

Diane L. Markowitz, Sheila Cosminsky 

PRESENTER: Diane L. Markowitz 

Childhood obesity increases the likelihood that adolescents and young adults will develop Type 
2 diabetes (Caprio & Tamborlane, 1999; Fagot-Campagna, 2000). To assess the prevalence of 
obesity and its cultural correlates, we weighed and measured 524 children between the ages of 
2 and 17; of these, 216 were < 6 years of age, and most were enrolled in Head Start programs. 

All were the children of Mexican or Guatemalan migrant agricultural laborers in the southern 
New Jersey region who spoke little or no English. We hypothesized that acquisition of some 
American habits would be correlated with physical variables, including height and body mass 
index (BMI). Questionnaires on personal history, diet, physical activity, and living conditions 
were administered to parents of 55 children in 33 homes by Spanish-speaking interviewers. The 
results were correlated with the anthropometric data. 

Percentile means of BMI for age, and height for age, did not differ significantly between the 
aggregate sample and the Head Start subsample, but did differ from NCHS percentile means of 
50 (aggregate sample BMP for age percentile mean = 72.6; Head Start moiety = 70.7). The height 
for age percentile means for the entire sample (38.3) and for the Head Start children (38.6) were 
significantly different from the NCHS mean of 50 (p < .0001 and < .004, respectively). 

There was no significant difference between the total sample and the Head Start children in 
stunting (< 5th percentile of height for age), overweight (85th percentile of BMI for age), or 
obesity (95th percentile of BMI for age); all conditions were seen more frequently in both the 
aggregate and Head Start samples than in the NCHS sample (CDC growth charts, 2002). 

Healthy, well-nourished populations do not differ significantly in mean height (Johnston & 
Markowitz, 1993). Thus, the short stature of the total sample may represent some mild to 
moderate malnutrition. Among the 55 children for whom both interview and anthropometric 
data are complete, stunting is associated with eating more of the daily meals at home (rather 
than in school, prob. > = 0.0193) and with being home alone when parents are absent 

(prob. > = 0 0004). 

Those children who were cared for in the parents' absence by either an aunt or a grand- 
mother, whose families had a private (rather than shared) kitchen or who regularly ate at 
American-style fast food restaurants were significantly more likely to be obese (prob. >yf = 
0.0032, 0.0306, and 0.0049, respectively). Children whose mothers had more years of schooling 

were less likely to be obese (prob. > X^ = 0.0380). 

Our samples' prevalence of obesity equals that of settled Mexican Americans (Himmelgreen, 
Perez- Escamilla, Peng, Martinez, & Wright, 2001), exceeds that of Mexicans (Burke, Williams, 
Haffner, Stern, & Villalpando, 2001) and is approximately double that seen in the general 
United States population (Rocchini, 2002). Most disturbingly, early presence of obesity in this 
sample may presage an increasing number of obese adults of this population in the future. Early 



ERIC 



926 



931 



PHYSICAL HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT 



intervention — possibly through Head Start — to inhibit or reverse obesity (Rolland-Cachera, 

1999) therefore offers the best opportunity to prevent Type 2 diabetes. 

References 

Burke, ]., Williams, K„ Haffner, S„ Stern, M„ & Villalpando, C. (2001). Elevated incidence of 
type 2 diabetes in San Antonio, Texas, compared with that of Mexico City, Mexico. Diabetes 
Care, 24, 1573-1579. 

Caprio, S., & Tamborlane, W. V. (1999). Metabolic impact of obesity in childhood. Endocrinology 
and Metabolism Clinics of North America, 28, 731-747. 

CDC Growth Charts; United States. Percentile Data Files with LMS Values. Reviewed June 7, 

2002 from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/about/major/nhanes/growthcharts/datafiles.htm 

Fagot-Campagna, A. (2000). Emergence of type 2 diabetes mellitus in children: Epidemiological 
evidence. Journal of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, 13, Suppl. 6, 1395-1402. 

Himmelgreen, D., Perez-Escamilla, R., Peng, Y., Martinez, D., & Wright, A. (2001). Length of 
time in the U.S., acculturation status, and overweight and obesity among Latinos in two 
urban settings. Abstract. American Journal of Physical Anthropology, Suppl. 32, 81. 

Johnston, F. E., & Markowitz, D. L. (1993). Do poverty and malnutrition affect children's growth 
and development: Are the data there? In Robert Karp (Ed.), Malnourished children in the 
United States: Caught in the cycle of poverty (pp. 3-12). New York: Springer. 

Rocchini, A. P. (2002, March 14). Childhood obesity and a diabetes epidemic [letter to the 
editor]. New England Journal of Medicine 346(11), 854-855. 

Rolland-Cachera, M. F. (1999). Obesity among adolescents; Evidence for the importance of early 
nutrition. In; F. E. Johnston, B. Zemel, & P. B. Eveleth (Eds.), Human growth in context (pp. 
245-258). London: Smith-Cordon. 



Mother's Prenatal Care, Children's Health Status, and Source of 
Health Care Among Infants and Toddlers in Early Head Start: 

Findings From the National Evaluation 

Carole Logan Kuhns, Rachel F. Schiffman 

PRESENTERS: Carole Logan Kuhns, Rachel F. Schiffman 

Meeting the health care needs of Early Head Start (EHS) families is a challenge. Children in low- 
income families are at greater health risk than children in higher income families (Hofferth, 
1998). This study used data from the national evaluation of EHS for a descriptive analysis of the 
health status and health care of pregnant women and the children participating in EHS. Re- 
search questions were (a) What was the prenatal status and pregnancy outcome of women who 
entered EHS while pregnant? (b) What are the health status and most frequendy reported health 
problems of children while participating in EHS? (c) Do EHS children receive well-child care? 
(d) Where do they receive their health care? 

The sample included 1,527 children, with 375 mothers pregnant at the dme they enrolled in 
one of the 17 sites participating in the national evaluation. Demographic and prenatal informa- 
tion were collected from the Head Start Family Information System (HSFIS) completed at the 
time of enrollment. Parent Service Interviews (PSI) were conducted 6, 15, and 26 months after 
enrollment. Parents reported on their children's health status and health care at each PSI. 

Of the 359 pregnant women for whom there are data, 51 .1% were enrolled after 24 weeks of 
pregnancy, with 96.3% being in prenatal care and only 1.4% with third trimester entry into care. 




932 



POSTERS 



At the time of enrollment 12.4% reported at least one complication of pregnancy ranging from 
fatigue to hypertension. At the 15-month PSI, 208 women reported on birth outcomes. The 
average birth weight was 7.2 lbs (SD = 1.2; range 2.9-10.9) with 6.8% low birth wei^t (< 5.5 
lbs). Nineteen infants spent between 1 and 31 days in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). 

There was no significant change in parents' report of their children's overall health status. At 
each of the three PSls, more than two thirds of the children were reported by their parents to be 
in excellent or very good health. The most frequently reported health problems were recurrent 
ear infections (19.2%, 20.4%, and 15.5% at 6, 15, and 26 months respectively) and respiratory 
problems including asthma (10.7%, 10.9%, and 11.2% at the 6, 15, and 26 month PSls). 

Most (94% to 97% at each PSI) children were reported to have a regular health care provider. 
About two thirds of the parents reported obtaining health care for their children at a clinic, 
community health center, or through the health department, and about one third reported using 
an HMO or private physician. At each PSI, 43% to 52% of the children had been seen by a 
health care provider for an acute or chronic illness, and 5% to 7% had one or more emergency 
room visits for an accident/injury. 

Women in the study who were pregnant reported receiving prenatal care, which has been 
associated with decreased fetal morbidity (McCormick & Seigel, 2001) and the proportion of 
low birth weight infants was lower than that reported nationally (CDC, 2002). Although 
children were reported to be healthy, some of them were affected by problems that could impact 
their growth and development. 



Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. (2002). 
Birthweight and gestation data. Retrieved June 12, 2002, from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/ 
fastats/birthwt.htm 

Hofferth, S. (1998). Healthy environments healthy children: Children in families. A report on the 
1997 Panel Study of Income Dynamics Child Development Supplement. Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan. 

McCormick, M. C., & Siegel, J. E. (2001). Recent evidence of the effectiveness of prenatal care. 
Ambulatory Pediatrics, 1, 321-325. 



Tobacco Smoking Habits of Low-Income Women 
Raising Young Children 

Cynthia L. Gibbons, Rachel F. Schiffman, Lorraine M. McKelvey, Mary C. DeLuca 
PRESENTERS: Rachel F. Schiffman, Lorraine M. McKelvey 



Tobacco smoking is detrimental to the health of adults and children and imposes serious 
demands on local health care facilities and national health care expenditures. Adults, for 
example, who smoke over a lifetime are more likely to experience chronic disabilities and 
premature deaths, and young children early on are more likely to experience respiratory compli- 
cations and sudden infant deaths (Brown, 2001; Gaffney, 2001; Scheibmeir & O Connell, 1997). 
Many women who are smokers choose to quit during their pregnancy, but relapse soon after the 
birth of their infant. While smoking cessation programs minimize women and children's health 
risk, programs have failed to achieve substantial long-term abstinence (Bottorff, Johnson, Irwin, 
& Ratner, 2000; Ko & Schulken, 1998). 

In this study, patterns of young children's exposure to second-hand tobacco smoke in low- 
income households and its effect on infant and toddler outcomes were examined in 197 pairs of 



O 

ERIC 



928 



933 



PHYSICAL HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENT 



mothers and their children who were enrolled in one site participating in the Early Head Start 
Research and Evaluation Project— a 17-site national longitudinal study. Data were collected over 
multiple time periods by standardized questionnaires and observational tools in participants' 
homes. 

Results revealed that while about one fourth of the children were raised in smoke-free 
environments, the majority of the children were exposed to second-hand smoke by their 
mothers and others who resided in the same household during prenatal and/or posmatal 
periods. Further results showed that while the mother's smoking habits had no relationship to 
her affective states and interactive practices, nor to her child's cognitive and language develop- 
ment, there were some interesting trends when examining adult smoking patterns and child 
health-illness parameters. In some cases, children who were exposed to smoke had more 
respiratory illnesses and ear infections than those who were raised in smoke-free environments. 
Practitioners may want to ascertain 'family' patterns of smoking tobacco over time and track 
child illnpses— supporting mothers who raise their children in a smoke-free environment and 
determining the best ways to encourage mothers and others residing in the same household to 
maintain a smoke-free environment. 

References 

Bottorff, J., Johnson, J., Irwin, L., & Ratner, P. (2000). Narratives of smoking relapse: The stories 
of postpartum women. Research in Nursing and Health, 23, 126-134. 

Brown, M. (2001). The effects of environmental tobacco smoke on children: Information and 
implications for PNP's. Journal of Pediatric Health Care, 15, 280-286. 

Gaffney, K. (2001). Infant exposure to environmental tobacco smoke. Journal of Nursing Scholar- 
ship, 33, 343-347. 

Ko, M., & Schulken, E. (1998). Factors related to smoking cessation and relapse among pregnant 
smokers. American Journal of Health Behavior, 22, 83-89. 

Scheibmeir, M. & O Connell, K. (1997). In harm's way: Childbearing women and nicotine. 
Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic, and Neonatal Nursing, 26, 477-484. 



ERIC 



934 



929 



School Achievement/ Academic Success 



The Role of Emergent Literacy Domains in 
Reading Achievement of Former Head Start Children 

Stacey A. Storch 

PRESENTER: Stacey A. Storch 



Research has demonstrated positive correlations and longitudinal continuity between individual 
differences in emergent literacy and later differences in reading ability. These differences are 
strongly linked to family income. Social class differences in language, phonological awareness, 
and print knowledge have been reported in preschool children, and related differences in 
reading outcomes occur in these same children in early elementary school (e.g., Adams, 1990; 
Bowey, 1995; Lonigan, Burgess, Anthony, & Barker, 1998; Raz & Bryant, 1990). Importantly, the 
relation between the skills with which children enter school and their later academic perfor- 
mance is strikingly stable (c.g., Baydar, Brooks-Gunn, & Furstenberg, 1993, Tramontana, 

Hooper, & Selzer, 1988). Given that children who start school behind in beginning reading 
skills tend to stay behind in reading over their academic careers, increasing attention is war- 
ranted on the emergent literacy knowledge and skills that children bring to first grade from prior 
experiences in their homes, preschool centers, and kindergartens. 

This study employs structural equation, modeling to map the relationship between the 
emergent literacy skills, language ability, and reading skills of 626 children from low-income 
families who have been followed from the time they were in Head Start through the fourth 
grade. Emergent literacy abilities, including print concepts, phonological awareness, and oral 
language skills, were assessed in preschool and kindergarten. Reading accuracy, reading compre- 
hension, and oral language skills were examined in first through fourth grade. 

Results demonstrate that individual differences in emergent literacy are causally and power- 
fully connected to individual differences in reading achievement in elementary school. The 
emergent literacy model presented here highlights the continuity between a range of prereading 
behaviors and later reading ability. The developmental precursors of reading skills are already 
organized into oral language and code-related domains during the preschool period. Knowledge 
of print and phonological awareness are closely connected within the domain of code-related 
skills and show strong continuity over time, while oral language operates within a separately 
organized domain, which shows even stronger developmental continuity. Although the oral 
language and code-related domains are connected during the preschool years, by the time 
children are involved in formal reading instruction in first and second grade, the influence of 
the oral language domain has waned and become indirect. The strong, direct correlates of early 
reading success from the kindergarten period are code-related skills. Later in the sequence of 
learning to read, however, as the task of reading goes beyond the decoding of individual words 
to understanding the meaning of text, oral language abilities begin to play a direct role once 
again. Reading comprehension is influenced by both decoding abilities and knowledge of 
spoken language. 



er|c 



930 



935 



SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT/ACADEMIC SUCCESS 



References 

Adams, M. J. (1990). Learning to read: Thinking and learning about print. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

Baydar, N., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Furstenberg, F. F. (1993). Early warning signs of functional 
illiteracy: Predictors in childhood and adolescence. Child Development, 64, 815-829. 

Bowey, J. A. (1995). Socioeconomic status differences in preschool phonological sensitivity and 
first-grade reading achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87, 476-487. 

Lonigan, C. J., Burgess, S. R., Anthony, J. L., & Barker, T. A. (1998). Development of phonologi- 
cal sensitivity in two- to five-year-old children. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90, 294-311. 

Raz, I. S., & Bryant, P. (1990). Social background, phonological awareness and children's 
reading. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 8, 209-225. 

Tramontana, M. G., Hooper, S., & Selzer, S. C. (1988). Research on preschool prediction of later 
academic achievement: A review. Developmental Review, 8, 89-146. 



Children's Home Environments During the 
Transition To School: A Longitudinal Analysis 

Elizabeth Votruba-Drzal 

PRESENTER: Elizabeth Votruba-Drzal 

One of the primary determinants of school readiness is the quality of cognitive stimulation 
children receive in their home environments prior to school entry. Ghildren who come from 
rich and supportive home learning environments start school with a developmental advantage 
compared to their counterparts who lack these resources. Research has revealed that children's 
home environments are strong predictors of academic achievement in preschool and beyond 
(Dubow & Ippolito, 1994; Smith, Brooks-Gunn, & Klebanov, 1997; Linver, Brooks-Gunn, & 
Kohen, 1999; Ninio, 1990). Over the last 20 years a substantial literature has documented 
associations between both maternal education and income and cognitive stimulation in the 
home environment even after controlling for multiple child, family, and maternal characteristics 
(Garrett, Ng'andu, & Ferron, 1994; Miller & Davis, 1997; Bahamdin & Luster 1998). 

Despite the abundance of research linking income and maternal education to children's 
home learning environments, it is difficult to determine whether these relations are causal, since 
most of the existing literature relies on comparisons across individuals at a single point in time. 
Gomparisons such as these may be biased because of unmeasured variables that are correlated 
with the independent and dependent variables in the regression equation. The regressions may 
therefore overstate the relationship between household income and cognitive stimulation in the 
home environment. Understanding whether or not these associations are causal is important to 
policy makers and researchers interested in designing policies to reduce disparities in school 
readiness. If relations between these variables are, as many have suggested, causal then one 
effective policy lever for improving school readiness for low-income children may be to increase 
parental education and income. 

This analysis uses data from the 1986-1998 waves of the National Longitudinal Survey of 
Youth (NLSY; National Longitudinal Survey, All Gohorts, 2002) and the NLSY Ghild Supple- 
ment to provide a more rigorous test of causal relationships between income, maternal educa- 
tion, and cognitive stimulation in children's home environments. The influence of maternal 
education and income are examined in three sets of analyses, using five cohorts of children 
(« = 2,174) followed by the NLSY as they made the transition to school. Relations between 
income, maternal education, and scores on the cognitive stimulation subscale of the Home 
Observation for Measurement of the Environment Short Form (HOME-SF), a modification of 





931 



POSTERS 



the HOME inventory (Caldwell & Bradley, 1984), are examined cross-sectionally at ages 3-4 and 
7-8 and then longitudinally using a fixed effects model. Cognitive stimulation is measured 
using the cognitive subscale of the HOME-SF. 

Comparisons between the coefficients from the cross sectional and fixed effects models show 
that the influence of income and maternal education are robust under the longitudinal fixed 
effects model specification. Specifically/ increases in household income and maternal education 
are associated with improvements in diildren s home learning environments over time. Further- 
more/ the results suggest that the home environments of children in low-income households are 
particularly sensitive to income changes over time. 



RcfCTCTlCCS 

Baharudin, R., & Luster, T. (1998). Factors related to the quality of the home environment and 
children's achievement. Journal of Family Issues, 19, 375-403. 

Caldwell, B. M., & Bradley, R. H. (1984). Home observation for measurement of the environment: 
A revision of the preschool scale. American Journal of Mental Deficiency, 84(3), 235-244. 
Dubow, E. E, & Ippolito, M. E (1994). Effects of poverty and quality of the home environment 
on Ganges in the academic and behavioral adjustment of elementary school-age children. 
Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 23, 401-412. 

Garrett, R, Ng'andu, N., & Perron, J. (1994). Poverty experiences of young children and the 
quality of their home environments. Child Development, 65, 331-345. 

Linver, M. R., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Kohen, D. (1999) Parenting behavior and emotional health as 
mediators of family poverty effects upon young low-birth weight children s cognitive ability. 

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 896, 376-378. 

Miller, J. E., & Davis, D. (1997). Poverty history, marital history, and quality of children's home 
environments. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 59, 996-1007. 

National Longitudinal Survey, All Cohorts. (2002). [Data file; DNLS-11/02]. Available firom U.S. 

Departmentof Labor Web site; http://www.bls.gov 

Ninio, A. (1990). Early environment experiences and school achievement in the second grade: 
An Israeli study. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 13, 1-22. 

Smith, J. R., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Klebanov, P. K. (1997). Consequences of living in poverty for 
young children's cognitive and verbal ability and early school achievement. In G. J. Duncan 
& J. Brooks-Gunn, (Eds.), Consequences of growing up poor (pp. 132-189). New York: Russell 
Sage Foundation. 



Approaches Toward Learning and Academic Achievement 
in At-Risk Former Head Start Children 

J'Lene George, Daryl B. Greenfield 

PRESENTER: J'Lene George 

Approaches toward learning is the least researched domain of school readiness, the components 
of which include (a) inhibition, (b) reference for challenge, (c) persistence, (d) curiosity, 

(e) initiative, and (f) problem solving flexibility. It encompasses the ways children engage their 
environment and respond in challenging and novel situations and learning activities. 

Entering school is stressful, especially for children whose coping is already taxed by difficult 
circumstances. Disadvantaged children who succeed may thus be called resilient. Kraemer has 
suggested the classification of factors by whether they are malleable and whether risk changes 
when they are altered. Approaches toward learning may be a causal protective factor, which 



937 



O 



932 



SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT/ACADEMIC SUCCESS 



being domain general, may be particularly well suited for effective and efficient interventions to 
promote resilience in the transition to school. 

The National Education Goals Panel (NEGP; 1995) recommends a multimethod, multi- 
informant method of assessment be used to measure approaches toward learning with data 
collected at multiple times, from multiple sources, and utilizing multiple strategies. This has not 
yet been achieved. No child measures of this construct are currently available. This study used a 
structured task designed to measure problem solving flexibility to investigate the feasibility of 
developing a set of structured tasks for use in assessing approaches toward learning and explored 
its relationship with academic achievement. 

A sample of 158 predominately African American subjects from Ghapter I schools, two thirds 
of who were previously enrolled in Head Start, in the spring of kindergarten and first grade, were 
administered two subsets — one reading and one math — from (a) the Woodcock Johnson Tests 
of Achievement- Revised (WJR; Woodcock & Johnson, 1989; (b) the Peabody Picture Vocabulary 
Test- Revised (PPVT; Dunn & Dunn, 1981) measuring receptive vocabulary and used as an 
approximation of verbal IQ, an oddity task designed to measure problem solving flexibility; and 
(c) the prosocial items of the Social Skills Rating System (SSRS; Gresjam & Elliott, 1990) as an 
adult rating approaches toward learning. 

The results of this study offer strong evidence of the importance of approaches toward 
learning in children's resilience in the transition into school and the possibility of measuring 
this construct using structured tasks. The problem solving flexibility task was significantly 
correlated with the Social Skills Rating System prosocial scale. Furthermore, in a hierarchical 
regression, the first grade flexibility task significantly added to the prediction of achievement 
after controlling for prior achievement, the PPVT, and the SSRS. This highlights the importance 
of child measures in addition to adult ratings. 

Problem solving flexibility is only one of the components of approaches toward learning. 
Additional tasks may be developed to measure other aspects of this construct, improving 
predictive ability. The use of structured tasks may promote the ability to fulfill the mandate of 
the NEGP to measure approaches toward learning using a multimethod, multi-informant 
approach. It may also help tease apart the components of this construct, elucidating which are 
most critical in predicting achievement as well as which may be most affected by classroom and 
parenting practices, thus helping to guide intervention efforts. 

References 

Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1981). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test. Gircle Pines, Minnesota: 
American Guidance Service. 

Gresham, F. M., & Elliott, S. N. (1990). Social Skills Rating System manual. Gircle pines, MN: 
American Guidance Service. 

Huffman, L. G., Mehlinger, S. L, & Kerivan, A. S. (2000). Risk factors for academic and behavior 
problems at the beginning of school. In Off to a good start: Research on the risk factors for early 
school problems and selected federal policies affecting children's social and emotional development 
and their readiness for school. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, FPG Child Develop- 
ment Center. 

National Educational Goals Panel. (1995). Reconsidering children's early development and learning: 
Toward common views and vocabulary. Available from the National Educational Goals Panel 
early childhood reports via NEGP Web site: http://www.negp.gov/ 

Ramey, C. T, & Ramey, S. L. (1999). Beginning school for children at risk. In R. C. Pianta & M. 

Cox (Eds.), The transition to kindergarten (pp. 217-252). Baltimore: Brooks. 

Woodcock, R. W., & Johnson, M. B. (1989). Woodcock- Johnson Test of Achievement Standard Battery. 
Allen, Texas: DEM Teaching Resources. 




\ 



938 



933 



POSTERS 



Predicting Improvement After First Grade Reading Difficulties: 

The Effects of Early Language, Emergent Literacy, and Behavior Skills 

Elana G. Spira, Stacey A. Storch, Janet E. Fischel 

PRESENTERS: Elana G. Spira, Stacey A. Storch, Janet E. Fischel 

Although the majority of children develop basic reading skills without significant problems, an 
estimated one in three children experience considerable difficulties in learning to read (Adams, 
1990). Children from low-income families are at increased risk for early academic difficulties 
due to the relative paucity of their early experiences with literacy (Adams; Raz & Bryant, 1990). 
Children who have difficulty learning to read in the early elementary school years are at substan- 
tial risk for academic problems throughout their schooling, and are unlikely to catch up to their 

peers. c i u 

A number of studies have examined early predictors of academic success and failure by 

exploring the relationship between children s abilities in preschool and kindergarten and their 
later achievement in elementary school (e.g., Baydar, Brooks-Gunn, I., & Furstenberg, 1993; 
Tramontana, Hooper, & Selzer, 1988). Such studies yield a number of factors that are predictive 
of academic performance, such as phonological awareness, vocabulary skills, knowledge of 
conventions of print, verbal memory, and home variables (Scarborough, 1998). However, 
predictors of improvement or decline in relation to performance in first grade, a critical year 
when most children experience formal reading instruction for the first time, have not been 
studied. This study explores the relationship between behavioral, language, and literacy skills 
that are present in kindergarten and growth in children s reading scores from first grade to 
fourth grade. 

Participants were 165 children who attended Head Start preschool and public elementary 
school on Long Island, New York. These children were selected for examination from a larger 
longitudinal sample based on their low performance in reading achievement at the end of first 
grade compared to national averages. Participants were assessed in kindergarten on a variety of 
measures, including measures of receptive vocabulary (Dunn & Dunn, 1981) and expressive 
vocabulary (Gardner, 1990), hyperactivity and social competence (Conners, 1969; Feagans & 
Farran, 1982), and emergent literacy (CFB, 1990). They were fuither assessed each spring from 
first through fourth grade on measures of reading achievement, tapping both decoding and 
comprehension. Using correlational analysis and one-way ANOVAs, we evaluated the role of 
children's kindergarten abilities in predicting the amount of change between their first grade 
and fourth grade reading performance. 

Results indicated that of the 165 children who were failing in reading in first grade, 58% 
failed to improve by the end of fourth grade while 42% did improve by the end of fourth grade. 
In addition, children's reading ability in fourth grade seemed to be largely determined by their 
reading performance at the end of second grade. A variety of abilities measured in kindergarten 
correlated with growth from first to fourth grade, including oral language, emergent literacy 
skills; and behavioral skills. 

Our results imply that interventions targeted at enhancing oral language skills and specific 
emergent literacy skills, such as linguistic awareness, can augment children's resources for 
recovery from poor early academic standing. Furthermore,' children with strong asocial and 
hyperactive tendencies should receive additional support from an early age, as their capacity for 
academic improvement may be limited due to their maladaptive behavior patterns. 



References 

Adams, M. J. (1990). Learning to read: Thinking and learning about print. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Baydar, N., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Furstenberg, F. F. (1993). Early warning signs of functional 
illiteracy: Predictors in childhood and adolescence. Child Development, 64, 815-829. 




934 



939 



SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT/ACADEMIC SUCCESS 



Conners, C. K. (1969). A teacher rating scale for use in drug studies with children. The American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 126, 884-888. 

CTB. (1990). Developing Skills Checklist. Monterey, CA: CTB/McGraw Hill. 

Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1981). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised. Circle Pines, MN: 
American Guidance Service. 

Feagans, L, & Farran, D. (1982). The Adaptive Language Inventory. University Park, PA: Author. 
Gardner, M. F. (1990). Expressive One-Word Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised. Novato, CA: Academic 
Therapy Publications. 

Raz, I. S., & Bryant, P. (1990). Social background, phonological awareness, and children's 
reading. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 8, 209-225. 

Scarborough, H. S. (1998). Early identification of children at risk for reading disabilities: 

Phonological awareness and some other promising predictors. In Shapiro, B. K., Accardo, P. 
J., & Capute, A. J. (Eds.), Specific reading disability: A view of the spectrum (pp. 75-119). 
Timonium, MD: York Press. 

Tramontana, M. G., Hooper, S., & Selzer, S. C. (1988). Research in preschool prediction of later 
academic achievement: A review. Developmental Review, 8, 89-146. 



f 

Differential Effects of Early Risk and Early Intervention 
on Reading and Math Achievement 

Frances A. Campbell, Elizabeth P. Pungello 

PRESENTERS: Frances A. Campbell, Elizabeth P. Pungello 

Studies of family risk factors that predict children's success in school show that low SES and 
ethnic minority status are associated with poor progress (e.g., Pungello, Kupersmidt, Burchinal, 
& Patterson, 1996). Going beyond simply considering SES and ethnicity as predictors, the 
authors examined how, within a sample of children from poor, minority families, cumulative 
risk in early childhood and early educational intervention were related to long-term reading and 
math achievement. 

The data were derived from a controlled trial of early educational intervention, the 
Abecedarian Project (Ramey & Gampbell, 1991). The original study sample consisted of 111 
infants, 57 randomly assigned to the intervention group and 54 to the control group. Due to 
missing data for some of the participants, the present study was based on 93 children, 47 (25 
males, 22 females) who received the intensive early education, 46 (20 males, 26 females) from 
the comparison group. All families had low incomes; 99% were African American. Gumulative 
early environmental risk was based on prospective indications of mother's or father's absence 
from the home, frequent moves in early childhood, the primary caregiver having an unskilled 
job, and the caregiver having less than a high school education when children were 18, 30, 42, 
and 54 months old, summed across years. The early home environment was measured using the 
age- appropriate version of the Home Observation for Measurement of the Environment 
(HOME; Galdwell & Bradley, 1984) at 6, 18, 30, 42, 54, and 96 months of age. These scores 
were summed to create an index of the cognitive stimulus value of the early home environment. 
Academic achievement was measured by age-referenced standardized scores for Broad Reading 
and Broad Mathematics from the Woodcock-Johnson Psychoeducational Battery (Woodcock & 
Johnson, 1977) and the Woodcock-Johnson Psychoeducational Battery-Revised (1989) adminis- 
tered at ages 8, 12, 15, and 21 years of age. Mixed model HEM analyses tested how early risk 
(high and low risk groups) and early intervention (treated, control) predicted longitudinal 



935 



ERIC 




POSTERS 



achievement scores. HOME scores were then added to the models to test if the relationship 
between early environmental risk and achievement was mediated by the home environment. 

At each time point, individuals in the intervention group scored significantly higher on both 
reading and math. Reading scores remained stable over time relative to national norms, whereas 
math scores declined. Early environmental risk was also a significant predictor for both reading 
and math. For reading scores, this effect was modified by a significant treatment x risk interac- 
tion; low-risk individuals with early treatment significantly outscored high-risk individuals with 
treatment. For both reading and math scores, the quality of the early home environment 
mediated the effects of early risk; the effect for risk was reduced when HOME was added to the 
model. Thus, the results suggest that early risk affects academic achievement via its impact on 
the child's home environment. 

References 

Caldwell, B. M., & Bradley, R. H. (1984). Administration manual for the Home Observation for 
Measurement of the Environment, (Rev. ed.). University of Arkansas at Little Rock. 

Pungello, E. R, Kupersmidt, ). B., Burchinal, M. R., & Patterson, C. (1996). Environmental risk 
factors and children's achievement from middle childhood to early adolescence. Developmen- 
tal Psychology, 32, 755-767. 

Ramey, C. T, & Campbell, F. A. (1991). Poverty, early childhood education, and academic 

competence: The Abecedarian experiment. In A. Huston [Ed.) , Children reared in poverty (pp. 

1 90-221 ). New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Woodcock, R. W., & lohnson, M. B. (1977). Woodcock- Johnson Psychoeducational Battery. Boston: 
Teaching Resources Corporation. (Now Allen, TX: DLM.) 

Woodcock, R. ^V., & lohnson, M. B. (1989). ^A/oodcock- Johnson Psycho-Educational Battery- Revised. 

Allen, TX: DLM. 



Academic Resilience Among Children Born to Low-Income 
Teenage Mothers: A Quantitative and Qualitative Analysis 

M. Angela Casady, Tom Luster 

PRESENTER: M. Angela Casady 

This study focused on family influences on the academic success of first-grade children borri to 
low-income, adolescent mothers, a group identified by prior research as at risk for school failure 
(McLoyd, 1998). Ecological theory presumes that children's early learning is influenced by 
individual, cultural, and contextual variation (Belsky, 1984; National Educational Goals Panel, 
1995). Thus, we identified characteristics of children's environments that might influence their 
academic achievement as themes within children's life histories. 

The young mothers and their first-born children who participated in this study had been 
enrolled in a family support program for teenage mothers at birth. The teens were randomly 
assigned to one of two treatment groups with different levels of service; however, there were no 
differences in school achievement between these two groups. When the children were in first 
grade, their achievement levels were assessed with the Peabody Individual Achievement Test- 
Revised (Markwardt, 1989). Home visitors who had worked with the parents for 3 to 5 years 
were interviewed about their knowledge of families who had children in either the low-achiev- 
ing or high-achieving quartile (N = 27). Children whose scores were in the top quartile of the 
total group (N = 96) were considered to be academically resilient; children with scores in the 
bottom quartile were considered to be at risk. 



O 

ERIC 



936 



941 



SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT/ACADEMIC SUCCESS 



Themes, or protective factors, included maternal intelligence, maternal determination, the 
presence of a caring adult in the child's life, the lack of harsh physical punishment, child 
attractiveness, and an academically stimulating environment. 

Life histories from interviews of the family's assigned home visitor provided case studies of 
academically resilient children. In addition to information from case studies, interview tran- 
scripts were coded and verified by comparisons with Tom Luster's or Marcia Vandenbelt's 
individual summaries (Luster, Bates, Vandenbelt, & Casady, 2001); disagreements were resolved 
by discussion. To determine frequencies of the various categories, dichotomous independent 
variables were cross-tabulated with assignment to bottom or top quartiles of academic achieve- 
ment. This yielded frequencies that allowed us to perform odds ratios and significance tests, 
using Montanez's odds ratio program (2001). For analyses that contained a zero cell, a delta of 
0.5 was added to all cells. 

The data point to striking differences in the circumstances and experiences of the children 
who were the most and least successful students in first grade. Without exception, children who 
did not have a nurturing caregiver placed in the bottom quartile of academic achievement. All of 
the children who placed in the top quartile of academic achievement received adequate aca- 
demic stimulation. Children whose mothers were described as intelligent were 7 times more 
likely to be in the high-achieving group. Children described as engaging, endearing, and 
attractive were 11 times more likely to be in the high-achieving group. In sum, maternal, child, and 
contextual characteristics were significantly related to children's rank in academic achievement. 

Future directions for work with teen parents could include examining roles of the other 
adults in their lives, such as fathers or grandmothers. 

References 

American Guidance Services. (1989). Peabody Individual Achievement Test-Revised. Circle Pines, 
MN: American Guidance Service. 

Belsky, J. (1984). The determinants of parenting: A process model. Child Development, 55, 83-96. 
Luster, T, Bates, L., Vandenbelt, M., & Casady, A. (2001). Family influences on the early academic 
success of children bom to low-income teenage mothers: A qualitative study. Poster session pre- 
sented at the biennial meeting of SRCD, Minneapolis, MN. Manuscript submitted for 
publication. 

McLoyd, V. C. (1998). Socioeconomic disadvantage and child development. American Psycholo- 
gist, 53, 185-204. 

Montanez, M. (2001). Odds ratio program. [Computer program]. Retrieved from http:// 
www.msu.edu/user/montanel 

National Educational Goals Panel. (1995). Reconsidering children's early development and learning: 
Toward common views and vocabulary. Available from the National Educational Goals Panel 
early childhood reports via NEGP Web site: http://www.negp.gov/ 





937 



POSTERS 



The Longitudinal Effects of Multiage Programming 
on Children in First and Second Grade 

Gila 1. Wallach, Robert Schleser, Allison Cromey, Jolynne Andal, Joseph E. Wallach, 

Lorenzo Azzi 

PRESENTERS: Gila I. Wallach, Joseph E. Wallach 

Cromey (2000) compared kindergarten and first grade children in Multiage Programming MAP 
with those in traditional classrooms on a variety of cognitive and intellectual variables. Children 
in the MAP first grade classes were found to have higher levels of intellectual ability, as evi- 
denced by scores on the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test (Kaufman & Nadeen, 1990), and more 
advanced cognitive developmental levels, as evidenced by their performance on two Piagetian 
conservation tasks. 

The current study follows participants from the previously discussed study over a period of 3 
years to see if the differences found between the MAP and age-segregated classrooms endured. 
Additionally, we examined associated findings with MAP classes. 

Second year data analysis indicated that the intellectual advantages of MAP were stable over 
time, but were less robust as former MAP students were promoted into more traditional, age- 
segregated settings. The difference between the MAP and age-segregated classrooms concerning 
cognitive developmental level (CDL) showed that accelerated gains in CDL by MAP children 
evened out over time. That is, as the participants, including those in control classrooms, got 
older, they were more likely to evidence concrete operational thinking. This finding remained 
stable through the 2nd year of this study, indicating that MAP does promote attaining concrete 
operational thought more quickly. As expected, second grade children in the traditional class- 
rooms caught up to the children in the MAP classrooms by the final testing period. 

Prior to this study, research comparing MAP to age-segregated classrooms has focused on 
achievement success and specific subject differences. Few if any studies have looked at overarching 
measures of cognitive developmental maturity and intelligence. The findings of this study have 
implications on how multiage classes should be taught and suggest that curriculum changes 
should be made to take advantage of the earlier attainment of conaete operational thought. 

References 

Cromey, A. D. (2000). Impact of multiage programming on social competency in five- to seven- 
year-old children. (Doctoral dissertation, Illinois Institute of Technology, 2000). Dissertation 
Abstracts International, 60, 4271. 

Kaufman, A. S., & Nadeen, L. (1990). Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test. Circle Pines, MN: American 
Guidance Services. 




938 



943 



SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT/ACADEMIC SUCCESS 



Self-Regulation, Inhibition, and School Readiness: Risk and Resilience 
Among Young Children in Low-Income, Urban Communities 

Christine R Li-Grining, Laura D. Pittman, R Lindsay Chase-Lansdale 

PRESENTERS: Christine R Li-Grining, Laura D. Pittman 

Children in low-income communities may be at higher risk for being unprepared for formal 
schooling. However, not all are adversely affected by these risks. Rather, some demonstrate 
competence despite adversity, and child characteristics, such as temperament, may facilitate such 
resilience. Temperament consists of two systems, one reactive and the other active. Children may 
react to situations with inhibition or irritability, and they may actively suppress these responses 
via effortful control and attentional focusing, often called self-regulation (Rothbart & Bates, 
1998). Recently, scholars have inquired about the role of self-regulation and reactive tempera- 
ment in the adjustment to school (Henderson & Fox, 1998). However, little self-regulation 
research has been conducted among children from diverse backgrounds (Zeidner, Boekaerts, & 
Pintrich, 2000). Thus, the goal of this study is to examine the role of self- regulation and reactive 
temperament in the development of school readiness among ethnically diverse children in low- 
income, urban communities. 

Temperament research has found a modest link between reactive temperament and behavior 
problems, but the literature has several shortcomings (Rothbart & Bates, 1998). First, most 
studies have assessed temperament using parent reports rather than observational measures. 
Second, the literature has focused on negative behaviors rather than positive outcomes, such as 
social competence and cognitive achievement. Lastly, many studies have not controlled for 
family characteristics that may also be related to children's adjustment. 

In contrast to previous work, this study takes a multimethod approach in analyzing the effect 
of temperament on a range of child behaviors. The sample is a subset of preschool children 
(n = 510) from Welfare, Children, and Families: A Three City-Study, whose participants reside in 
low-income neighborhoods in Boston, Chicago, and San Antonio, Texas. Mothers reported on 
children's reactive temperament (Buss & Plomin, 1975), positive behaviors (Quint, Bos, & Polit, 
1997), and internalizing and externalizing symptomatology using the Child Behavior Checklist 
(Achenbach, 1991; 1992). In addition, children's cognitive achievement was assessed using two 
subtests of the Woodcock-Johnson Psycho-Educational Battery-Revised (Woodcock & Mather, 
1989, 1990). Finally, children's behaviors were videotaped and later coded during three self- 
regulation tasks (Kochanska, Murray, Jacques, Koenig, & Vandergeest, 1996) and an interaction 
with their mothers (Chase-Lansdale, Brooks-Gunn, &Zamsky, 1989). 

Using these multimethod assessments, regressions examined the impact of both self-regula- 
tion and reactive temperament on cognitive achievement and social behaviors while controlling 
for child and family characteristics such as family structure, maternal education, and race. 

Overall, there were modest associations between temperament and children's development. Self- 
regulation was a key factor in children's school readiness. More regulated children had higher 
scores of cognitive achievement, greater persistence, and lower levels of noncompliance. Further, 
aspects of reactive temperament were predictive of more positive behaviors and less behavior 
problems. In sum, for children of diverse ethnicities living in low-income neighborhoods, self- 
regulation and reactive temperament may play important protective roles in both cognitive and 
social aspects of school readiness. 

References 

Achenbach, T. M. (1991). Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist/4-18 and 1991 profile. 

Burlington: University of Vermont, Department of Psychiatry. 

Achenbach, T. M. (1992). Manual for the Child Behavior Checklist/2-3 and 1992 profile. Burlington: 

University of Vermont, Department of Psychiatry. 




944 



939 



POSTERS 



Buss, A. H„ & Plomin, R. (1975). A temperament theory of personality development. New York: Wiley. 

Chase-Lansdale, P. L., Brooks-Gunn, & Zamsky, E. (1989). Puzzle task coding manual. Parent- 
child interactions in young African-American multigenerational families. Unpublished manu- 
script, University of Chicago. 

Henderson, H. A., & Fox, N. A. (1998). Inhibited and uninhibited children: Challenges in 
school settings. School Psychology Review, 27, 492-505. 

Kochanska, G., Murray, K., Jacques, T. Y, Koenig, A. L., & Vandergeest, K. A. (1996). Inhibitory 
control in young children and its role in emerging internalization. Child Development, 67, 
490-507. 

Quint, J. C, Bos, J. M., & Polit, D. F. (1997). New Chance: Final report on a comprehensive program 
for young mothers in poverty and their children. New York: Manpower Demonstration Research 
Corporation. 

Rothbart, M. K., & Bates, J. E. (1998). Temperament. In N. Eisenberg (Ed.), W. Damon (Series 
Ed.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional and personality development (5th ed., 
pp. 105-176). New York: Wiley. 

Woodcock, R. W, & Mather, N. (1989, 1990). WJ-R Tests of Achievement: Examiner's manual. In 
R. W. Woodcock & M. B. Johnson, Woodcock- Johnson Psycho-Educational Battery-Revised. Itasca, 
IL: Riverside. 

Zeidner, M., Boekaerts, M., & Pintrich, P. R. (2000). Self-regulation: Directions and challenges 
for future research. In M. Boekaerts, P. R. Pintrich, & M. Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of self- 
regulation (pp. 749-768). New York: Academic Press. 



Unraveling SES: The Explanatory Role of Maternal Education 
on Children's Academic Achievement in Grades 1 to 3 

Lyscha A. Marcynyszyn, Paul Papierno, John J. Eckenrode 

PRESENTER: Lyscha A. Marcynyszyn 

Studies suggest that either directly or indirectly, household income influences children's devel- 
opment (Duncan, Brooks-Gunn, & Klebanov, 1994; Huston, 1999; Brooks-Gunn, Duncan, & 
Britto, 1999). However, the extent to which income matters in relation to other predictors of 
child functioning requires further investigation. This study examined whether maternal educa- 
tion explains part of the relationship between socioeconomic status (SES) and children s 
academic achievement during grades 1—3 among a sample of first-time mothers (N — 148) in 
economically disadvantaged families. 

Occupational status codes (Nam & Powers, 1983) were used to assess SES at baseline (i.e., 
childbirth). These codes represent the median income and education level associated with the 
job classification. Maternal education was defined by completed years of schooling when the 
study child was 4 years old. Education was coded as a categorical variable where 1 = elementary 
school; 2 = grades 7-8; 3 = grade 9; 4 = grades 10-11; 5 = grade 12; 6 = vocational training; 

7 = some college; 8 = bachelor's degree; 9 = some graduate work; and 10 = a professional degree. 
On average, the women in this sample completed grades 10-11 (M = 4.88, SD = 1.13). The 
outcome measure, academic achievement, was extracted from school records and was modeled 
as a latent variable comprised of average academic grades in English, math, and science during 
grades 1-3. Maternal age (M = 19.27, SD = 2.86) and IQ (M = 50.27, SD = 15.2) at baseline 
were used as covariates in our analyses. IQ was assessed with the revised version of the Peabody 
Picture Vocabulary Test (Dunn, Robertson, & Eisenberg, 1981). Minority status was not included 
as a covariate because it was unrelated to the other variables in the models. 




940 



945 



SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT/ACADEMIC SUCCESS 



To address the hypothesis, two structural equation models were fit to test for mediation. In 
the first model, the direct effect of SES on achievement was tested to confirm that the relation- 
ship was significant. The second model was used to determine whether SES significantly 
predicted maternal education and whether maternal education significantly predirted academic 
achievement. We expected the path between SES and achievement to decrease when maternal 
education, the hypothesized mediator, was included in the model (Baron & Kenny, 1986). 

As predicted, in the nonmediating model, the direct path from SES to academic achievement 
was statistically significant (B = .01, P = .24, p < .05). Figure 1 shows that when maternal 
education was introduced in the second model, SES was positively related to family maternal 
education (B = .03, P = .17, p < .10), and maternal education was positively related to academic 
achievement (B = .14, P = .30, p < .01). In support of the mediation hypothesis, the path 
between SES and academic achievement was reduced to nonsignificance (B = .01, P = .17, 
p = .11). Moreover, maternal education accounted for 29% of the total effect of SES on children's 
scholastic performance. These findings suggest that SES is linked to children's scholastic perfor- 
mance, at least in part, through its influence on maternal education. 




Figure 1. Path model depirting the role of maternal education in mediating the efferts of SES on 
children's academic achievement (N = 148). Unstandardized regression coefficients are shown and 
standardized coefficients are displayed in parentheses. The dashed line represents a path that is not 
significant atp < .10. Maternal age and IQ were statistically controlled. 

“p> .10. 

+p< .10. **p< .01. ♦**p< .001. 

There is a growing awareness that research examining the main effects of income on child 
functioning is of limited value if we do not consider the causal pathways through which income 
exerts its influence. Our results suggest that maternal education explained part of the relation- 
ship between SES at childbirth and children's academic achievement during early elementary 
school. Thus, improving maternal education may increase the likelihood of low-income 
children's academic success. 

References 

Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social 
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 51(6), 1173-1182. 

Brooks-Gunn, J., Duncan, G. J., & Britto, P. R. (1999). Are socioeconomic gradients for children 
similar to those for adults? Achievement and health of children in the United States. In D. P. 
Keating & C. Hertzman (Eds.), Developmental health and the wealth of nations: Social, biological. 



O 

ERIC 



946 



941 



POSTERS 



and educational dynamics (pp. 94-24). New York: The Guilford Press. 

Duncan, G. J., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Klebanov, P. K. (1994). Economic deprivation and early 
childhood development. Child Development, 65(2), 296-318. 

Dunn, L. M., Robertson, G. J., Eisenberg, J. L. (1981). Peahody Picture Vocabulary Test - Revised. 
Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 

Huston, A. C. (1999). Effects of poverty on children. In L. Balter, & C. Tamis-LeMonda (Eds.), 
Child psychology: A handbook of contemporary issues (pp. 391-411). Philadelphia: Psychology 
Press. 

Nam, C. B., & Powers, M. G. (1983). The sociometric approach to status measurement with a guide to 
occupational and socioeconomic status scores. Houston, TX: Cap and Gown Press. 



Predicting Kindergarten Success for Head Start Children 

Doris Mok, Ying Jiang, Jaime Mendoza 

PRESENTER: Doris Mok 

The current study utilizes data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Kindergarten Class 
of 1998-1999 (ECLS-K). Data from this study come from the Kindergarten-First Grade Public- 
Use dataset (ECLS, 2002). There are a total of 1,869 children from the ECLS-K sample verified to 
have attended a Head Start program prior to kindergarten. Racial and ethnic composition in this 
sample is representative of enrollment data provided by the Head Start Bureau (2001). English is 
the dominant home language (83.4%). However, 16.3% of the parent sample speaks only non- 
English language at home. Children are living mostly with biological parents (40.8%), although 
single-parent household with biological mother only is common (37.9%). For poverty status, 
54.2% of families are living below poverty, and 45.8% are living at or above poverty. 

This study compares six groups of children from the ECLS-K sample: (a) Head Start Children 
living below poverty level (HSP), (b) Head Start Children living at or above poverty (HS), 

(c) children living below poverty level who have never attended a Head Start or other center- 
based program (NCP), (d) children living at or above poverty who have never attended a Head 
Start or other center-based program (NC), (e) children living below poverty level who attended 
a non-Head Start center-based program (CP), and (f) children living at or above poverty level 
who attended a non-Head Start center-based program (C). 

Cognitive measures used include (a) IRT-based scores that are criterion-referenced, 

(b) t-scores that are norm-referenced, and (c) proficiency probability scores that are criterion- 
referenced measures of proficiency in specific skills. Results are consistent across all measures on 
reading, mathematics, and general knowledge: C>NC>HS>CP>NCP>HS. Longitudinal follow- 
up on cognitive measures during spring kindergarten, fall first grade, and spring first grade for 
the six groups found a similar pattern. Children attending other center-based programs have 
higher scores than children attending no program or Head Start, regardless of the poverty status. 
Children attending Head Start do not perform better than children who have never attended 
a program. 

A similar pattern is found on the five Social Rating Scales (SRS). On the teacher SRS, non- 
Head Start children at or above poverty level are similar on most scales whether they attend a 
center program or not; they have higher ratings than non-Head Start children at or above 
poverty level. For children below poverty level. Head Start children consistently have lower 
social skills ratings and higher internalizing and externalizing behavioral problems. Pattern of 
parent SRS is less consistent. Preliminary exploration of family variables found noted group 
differences in family characteristics such as neighborhood problems, family resources, and 
parental relationships. 




942 



947 



SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT/ACADEMIC SUCCESS 



The current study does not investigate Head Start program variables and, therefore, conclu- 
sions should not be made regarding Head Start program effectiveness. Cognitive measures at 
kindergarten and first grade indicate Head Start children do not perform better than children 
who attended other center programs or no program. Preliminary exploration indicates that there 
are differences in family characteristics; such variables are likely to have long-term impact in 
predicting children's academic success. 

References 

Early Child Longitudinal Study (2002). User's manual for the ECLS-K Longitudinal Kindergarten- 
First Grade Public-Use Data Files and Electronic Codebook, Retrieved from http://nces.ed.gov/ 
ecls/kindergarten/data.asp 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families, 

Head Start Bureau. (2001). 2001 Head Start Fact Street. Retrieved from http:// 
www2.acfdhhs.gov/programs/hsb/research/factsheets/01_hsfs.htm 



Academic Achievement in the Context of Poverty: 

Family Stressors and Children's Math and Reading 
Achievement Over the Elementary School Years 

Cynthia Esposito Lamy 

PRESENTER: Cynthia Esposito Lamy 

This paper examines the impact of family stressors in a context of poverty on children's math 
and reading achievement from kindergarten through sixth grade. Poverty can be thought of as a 
conglomerate of stressors that tend to combine and strengthen, creating a pervasive, tenacious 
situation of risk for children's development. This kind of entrenched, global risk has massive 
impact on children's outcomes (McLoyd, 1990b). 

A comprehensive set of family characteristics, including maternal age, education, physical 
health and depression, family structure, number of children, parenting style, family involvement 
in school, and mobility are used to address the impact of family risk in the context of poverty on 
children. 'The sample is comprised of 198 families whose children attended Head Start during 
the 1991/2 and 1992/3 school years in a small, northeastern city. 

Sameroff, Seifer, Baldwin, & Baldwin (1993) found that the number of stressors was a more 
important predictor of poor developmental outcomes than the type of stressor; however, many 
researchers have found that maternal education level or IQ alone account for a substantial 
portion of the variance in children s outcomes. 'Therefore, the current research examines the 
salience of the additive and cumulative models of family risk over the influence of single 
stressors. A family risk index is created by coding each family characteristic dichotomously (0 to 
indicate no risk or 1 to indicate risk) and then averaging across the ten risk status variables. 

"The literature provides evidence for and against the idea that family stressors affect children's 
achievement direcdy only during the first few years of elementary school (Bradley, Caldwell, & 
Rock, 1988; Reynolds, 1991; Teo, Carlson, Mathieu, Egeland, & Sroufe (1996). 'The current 
research examines the influence of family stressors measured during the kindergarten year on 
math and reading achievement from kindergarten through sixth grade, allowing 7 years to 
examine the strength of the relationship. 

Family stressors in a context of poverty have been shown to have an affect on both math and 
reading achievement to some extent; however, a perusal of the current literature (Case, 1993; 
Gelman, 2000; Gallistel & Gelman, 1992 for math; Neumann, & Dickinson, 2001 for reading) 





943 



POSTERS 



provides reason to suspect that family stressors may influence children's reading achievement 
more than children's math achievement because of the specificity of the domains, the difference 
in the amount of complexity between the development of early math and literacy skills, and the 
difference in the extent to which these skills are influenced by the family context. Therefore, the 
current research examines the influence of family stressors on math and reading separately. 

Preliminary regression analyses indicate that there are moderate relationships between some 
individual family stressors and children's reading and math achievement, but that the relation- 
ships are stronger and more consistent for reading than for math achievement. Additionally, the 
family risk index is a stronger influence on children's reading than math achievement over the 
elementary school years. The most robust finding indicates a strong impact of parental 
nurturance on both reading and math consistently over the elementary school years, but the 
relationship is stronger for reading than for math. 



References 

Bradley, R., Caldwell, B., & Rock, S. (1988). Home environment and school performance; A ten- 
year follow-up and examination of three models of environmental action. Child Develop- 
ment, 59, 852-867. 

Case, R. (1993). Theories of learning and theories of development. Educational Psychologist, 
28(3), 219-233. 

Galistell, C., & Gelman, R. (1992). Preverbal and verbal counting and computation. Cognition, 



44, 43-74. 

Gelman, R. (2000). The epigenesis of mathematical thinking. Journal of Applied Developmental 
Psychology, 21 {!), 27-37. 

McLoyd, V. (1990b). The impact of economic hardship on Black families and children: Psycho- 
logical distress, parenting and socioemotional development. Child Development, 61, 311-346. 
Neumann, S. B., & Dickinson, D. K. (Eds.). (2001). Handbook of early literacy research. New York: 



The Guilford Press. 

Reynolds, A. (1991). The middle schooling process; Influences on science and mathematics 
achievement from the longitudinal study of American youth. Adolescence, 26(101), 133-158. 

Samerofif, A., Seifer, R., Baldwin, A., & Baldwin, C. (1993). Stability of intelligence from preschool 
to adolescence: The influence of social and faiiiily risk factors. Child Development, 64, 80-97. 

Teo A., Carlson, E., Mathieu, P, Egeland, B., & Sroufe, L. A. (1996). A prospective longitudinal 
study of psychosocial predictors of achievement. Journal of School Psychology, 54(3), 285-306. 



Florida's Coordinated Efforts for Program Self-Evaluation: 

A Research Partnership Model for Assessing 
Head Start Children's School Readiness 

Daryl Greenfield, Carmen Nicholas 

PRESENTERS: Daryl Greenfield, Carmen Nicholas 

Community agencies increasingly understand the need for program evaluation and research 
aimed at improving program quality. Simultaneously, there has been an increased interest in the 
concept of a "research partnership" to address these concerns. This model calls for collaboration 
among community agencies and local university researchers in which a shared research agenda 
is generated and implemented. Both the Head Start Bureau and the National Head Start Associa- 
tion have been at the forefront of this initiative. 



O 

ERIC 



944 



949 



SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT/ACADEMIC SUCCESS 



Within this context, the Florida Head Start Research Committee was created as an official 
organization within the Florida Head Start Association representing Head Start programs that 
are current members of the Florida Head Start Association. The Research Committee was formed 
using the University-Community Partnership model endorsed by the Head Start Bureau and the 
National Head Start Association ((Lamb-Parker, Greenfield, Fantuzzo, Clark, & Coolihan, 2000). 

Head Start's recent reauthorization has confirmed the importance of school readiness and 
child outcomes as a major goal of the program (U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, 1996; 2000). In addition, the Florida government has also begun a statewide initiatives 
focused on school readiness and child outcomes. The Florida Research Committee annually 
revisits its mission statement and goals and revised them in 2001 to address this national and 
state focus. 

Some of the major accomplishments of the committee as it focused its resources on school 
readiness and child outcomes include (a) providing input to the state school readiness initiative 
(Greenfield & Nicholas, 2001), (b) developing a set of criteria to evaluate child assessment 
systems for use by Florida Head Start programs, (c) identifying an assessment system that might 
meet program needs — arranging statewide meetings to directly compare these assessment 
systems, (d) recommending a preferred system, (e) developing a training model to utilize in 
implementing the child assessment system, (f) evaluating implementation of assessment during 
the 2000-01 school year, and (g) obtaining regional and national funding to coordinate a 
statewide impact study to begin evaluating the role of Florida Head Start programs in readying 
children for school. 

Having made major progress on school readiness and child assessment issues, the Research 
Committee revised its mission and goals to reflect broader concerns of family and community 
(May 2002). The committee will now begin to operate under the following mission statement: 
To conduct, support, and disseminate research of high quality that informs policy and practice 
and promotes successful children, strong families, and healthy communities. 

Through a coordinated, statewide partnership research effort, the Florida Head Start Associa- 
tion has provided local Florida programs with resources and expertise on school readiness and 
child assessment issues. The Committee, through collaborative efforts, has impacted state 
initiatives, secured needed funding, and addressed issues of program quality using a large, 
statewide research dataset that draws from a common child assessment system. A hallmark of 
the committee's work has been a developing sense of trust among members, a common mission 
and set of goals, a working model in which decision making is shared among researchers and 
practitioners, and a forum in which every voice is respected and heard. 

References 

Greenfield, D. B., & Nicholas, C. (2001). Building statewide partnership capacity to assess school 
readiness for Florida Head Start children and families. Dialog 4(2), 197-209. 

Lamb-Parker, F, Greenfield, D. B., Fantuzzo, J. F, Clark, C., & Coolahan, K. (2000). Shared 
decision making in early childhood research: A foundation for successful community- 
university partnerships. Dialog, 3(2), 234-257. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1996). Head Start Program Performance 
Standards: Proposed mle making. Federal Register, 61(78), 17754-17792. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2000). Using child outcomes in program self- 
assessment. Information Memo ACYF-HS-IM-00-18. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, Head Start Bureau, ACF. 




950 



945 



POSTERS 



The Role of Cognitive Inhibition in 
Head Start Children's School Achievement 

Daryl B. Greenfield, David A. Charak 

PRESENTERS: Daryl B. Greenfield, David A. Charak 

Head Start programs assess children's progress in eight school readiness domains, including the 
poorly understood "approaches to learning" (Kagan, Moore, & Bredekamp, 1995). Factors 
typically associated with approaches to learning such as persistence, curiosity, flexibility, inhibi- 
tion, and inventiveness are important factors in learning, regardless of the domain or content 
area. Approaches to learning skills may be domain general as they are involved in all of the 
other seven readiness domains and appear to be malleable. Thus, improving Head Start 
children's approaches to learning has Ae potential to improve school readiness in all eight 
domains simultaneously. 

Researchers have searched for reliable and valid means for assessing approaches to learning. 
Currently, all such assessments rely on adult raters. Adult ratings have advantages, but also 
disadvantages (Hecht & Greenfield, 2001). Moreover, reliable assessment relies on multiple 
informants and multiple ways of assessing child competence (Greenfield, Wasserstein, Gold, & 
Jorden, 1997). 

The purpose of the present study was to evaluate a structured task to directly assess cognitive 
inhibition, one component of approaches to learning, and to determine its domain general role 
in predicting academic achievement. A sample of 431 Head Start children from a large, urban 
Head Start program was assessed each spring, from Head Start through third grade, on: The 
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised (PPVT; Dunn & Dunn, 1981) measuring a child s 
receptive vocabulary and an Associative-Interference task, developed to assess cognitive inhibi- 
tion. The Woodcock -Johnson Tests of Achievement-Revised (WJR; Woodcock & Johnson, 1989) 
was administered in the spring of third grade to assess reading (2 subtests) and math (2 
subtests) achievement. 

The PPVT and WJR use Item Response Theory (IRT), a statistical technique that converts raw 
scores into ability scores that are on an interval level of measurement (Wright & Stone, 1979). 
Ability scores have a major advantage for analyzing longitudinal data, since change in scale 
scores are directly comparable across the entire range of values. IRT analysis was applied to the 
cognitive inhibition data to create an interval level of measurement scale to directly compare the 
growth of cognitive inhibition and receptive vocabulary. Data from Head Start children followed 
longitudinally through third grade demonstrated differential growth in receptive vocabulary and 
cognitive inhibition over this age range. 

The data also hint at the domain general role of cognitive inhibition. Receptive vocabulary 
ability accounts for a large amount of variance in reading ability, but much less variance in 
mathematics (part of test is in a narrative format), suggesting its domain specific role. On the 
other hand, cognitive inhibition accounted for equal amounts of variance both in math and 
reading ability, suggesting its domain general role in school readiness. 

Data from this study strongly suggest the utility of developing stmctured tasks to assess other 
aspects of approaches to learning in addition to conducting further research on cognitive 
inhibition. Such research has the potential for determining the effectiveness of classroom 
interventions aimed at improving children's approaches to learning that could impact children s 
learning and development in all the school readiness domains. 

References 

Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1981). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test - Revised. Gircle Pines, 
Minnesota: American Guidance Service. 

Greenfield, D. B., Wasserstein, S. B., Gold, S., & Jorden, B. (1997). The Adaptive Social Behavior 




946 



SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT/ACADEMIC SUCCESS 



Inventory: Evaluation with high risk preschoolers. Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment, 1 5, 
322-333. 

Hecht, S. & Greenfield, D. B. (2001). Comparing the predictive validity of first grade teacher 
ratings and reading related tests on third grade levels of reading skills in young children 
exposed to poverty. School Psychology Review, 30(1), 50-69. 

Kagan, S. L., Moore, E., & Bredekamp, S. (Eds.). (1995, June). Reconsidering children's early 
development and learning: Toward common views and vocabulary. Goal 1 Technical Planning 
Group Report 95-03. Washington, DC: National Education Goals Panel. 

Woodco^, R. W., & Johnson, M. B. (1989). Woodcock- Johnson Test of Achievement Standard Battery. 
Allen, Texas: DEM Teaching Resources. 

Wright, B., & Stone, M. (1979). Best test design. Chicago: Mesa Press. 



A New Look at the Relative Effects of Proximal Risk Factors on 
Economically Disadvantaged Children's Academic Performance 

Lyscha Ann Marcynyszyn, John J. Eckenrode 

PRESENTER: Lyscha Ann Marcynyszyn 

Research has shown that SES, the home environment, family structure, maternal depression, and 
maternal age and education at childbirth are all key factors for children's development. How- 
ever, much less is known about the relative contribution of these factors on children's achieve- 
ment. This study assessed the amount of variance each factor explained in children's academic 
performance during elementary school. Based on previous studies (Smith, Brooks-Gunn, & 
Klebanov, 1997; Duncan, Brooks-Gunn, & Klebanov, 1994), we hypothesized that maternal 
education, household SES, and the quality of the home environment would be most predictive 
of children's scholastic achievement among a sample of economically disadvantaged families 
who were followed longitudinally. At baseline, these first-time mothers (N = 148) were ran- 
domly assigned to the comparison group of a nurse home visitation program. 

Maternal age, race, and marital status at baseline were used as covariates in our analyses. The 
quality of the home environment was assessed by the Home Observation of Measurement 
(HOME; Caldwell & Bradley, 1984) when the study children were 10 (M = 33.6, SD = 6.93), 

22 (M = 34.4, SD = 7.74), 34 (M = 38.6, SD = 7.27), and 48 (M = 39.14, SD = 6.03) months of 
age. The largest correlation between the HOME scores was below .7, and thus, these ratings are 
not collinear. The Center for Epidemiological Studies of Depression Scale (Radlofif, 1977) was 
used to measure maternal depression when the study children were 4 years old (M = 34.5, 

SD = 9.92). The outcome measure, children's academic achievement, was comprised of average 
academic grades in English, math, and science during grades 1-6. These data were derived from 
school records and measured on a 0-4-point scale. 

The effects of the proximal risk variables on children's grades are presented in Table 1. 

Between 25% and 27% of the variance in children's academic performance was explained by the 
entire set of risk factors. Contrary to our hypothesis, the effects of SES dropped out when 
maternal education was estimated in the same equation. Although a positive relationship was 
observed between maternal education and children's English (P = .21, SE = .04, p < .05) and 
science grades (P = .19, SE = .04, p < .10), when the complete model was estimated including the 
other risk factors, maternal education no longer significantly predicted children's grades. 
Consistent with our hypothesis, the quality of the early home environment (i.e., at 10 months) 
and near the time of kindergarten entry (i.e., at 48 months) was most predictive of children's 





947 



POSTERS 





953 



948 



SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT/ACADEMIC SUCCESS 



grades. Interestingly, the quality of home environment at 24 and 34 months was not related to 
children's achievement. 

Maternal depression was associated with declines in children s math (P = -.23, SE = .01, 
p < .05) and English (P = -.18, SE = .01, p < .10) grades even after statistically controlling for the 
other factors. No relationship was observed between family structure (e.g., mothers' marital 
status) and mothers' age on children's achievement. However, mothers' race was negatively 
associated with children's grades such that, in this sample, children of color received lower grades. 

These findings underscore the utility of assessing the differential effects of risk processes on 
children's development, such as the quality of the early home environment and maternal 
mental health in addition to studying the underlying mechanisms behind these relationships. 

References 

Caldwell, B. M., & Bradley, R. H. (1984). Home Observations for Measure of the Environment. 
Univeristy of Arkansas at Little Rock. 

Duncan, G. J., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Klebanov, R K. (1994). Economic deprivation and early 
childhood development. Child Development, 65(2), 296-318. 

Smith, J. R., Brooks-Gunn, J., & Klebanov, P. K. (1997). Consequences of living in poverty for 
young children's cognitive and verbal ability and early school achievement. In G. J. Duncan 
& J. Brooks-Gunn (Eds.), Consequences of growing up poor (pp. 132-189). New York: Russell 
Sage Foundation. 

Radloff, L. S. (1977). Center for Epidemiological Studies of Depression scale. In K. Corcoran & J. 
Fischer (Eds.). (2000). Measures for clinical practice: A sourcebook (3rd ed., 2 vols., pp. 154- 
155). New York: Free Press. 



Biological, Social, and Community Influences on the 
Elementary School Performance of Minority 
Head Start Children: Multilevel Approach 

Virginia Rauh, Faith Lannb-Parker, Robin Garfinkel, Judy Perry, Howard Andrews 
PRESENTER: Virginia Rauh 

Many American children live their lives burdened by biological and social conditions that 
severely limit their potential for successful school experiences. An extensive literature documents 
the impact of individual biological and socioeconomic risk factors on child school performance, 
and a growing literature addresses the academic effects of urban neighborhood conditions (e.g., 
Brooks-Gunn, Duncan, & Aber, 1997). At the individual level, the impact of biomedical and 
psychosocial influences on intellectual development may be cumulative (Dunst & Trivette, 

1994), accounting for a significant proportion of the variance in school outcomes. As many as 
20% of American children experience a major accumulation of risk, including poverty, single- 
parent households, and so forth (Gabarino, 2001). At the neighborhood level, socioeconomic 
conditions account for only 2-5% of the variation in educational outcomes, after adjustment for 
individual risk (e.g., Klebanov, Brooks-Gunn, Gordon, & Chase-Lansdale, 1997). 

The purpose of this study was to determine the impact of individual and community level 
risks on school outcomes of children who attend Head Start. We studied a sample of 3,693 
African American and Latino children who were born in New York City, participated in Head 
Start, and attended New York City public schools. The outcome was the third grade reading test 
score. Individual level risk factors were from birth certificates, and community level risks were 
from citywide U.S. Census data and other public-access data sets. 




954 



949 



POSTERS 



Multilevel regression analyses indicated that lower individual reading scores were signifi- 
cantly associated with (a) male gender, (b) low birth weight, (c) unmarried mother, (d) low 
maternal education, and (e) inadequate inter-pregnancy spacing. Controlling for individual- 
level risk, concentrated community poverty significantly lowered reading scores, and a high 
percentage of immigrants in the community significantly raised scores. There was also a signifi- 
cant cross-level effect: Boys benefited more than girls from the immigrant community effect. 
Results suggest that we can better identify children at future educational risk by exploring 
influences on school success at multiple levels, including the community. 

RcfCTCTlCCS 

Brooks-Gunn, Duncan, G. J., & Aber, J. L. (Eds.). (1997). Neighborhood poverty, Volume II: Policy 
implications in studying neighborhoods. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 

Dunst, C. J., &Trivette, C. M. (1994). Methodological considerations and strategies for studying 
the long-term effects of early intervention. In S. Friedman & G. Haywood (Eds.), Developmen- 
tal follow-up: Concepts, domains, and methods (pp. 277-313). San Diego, GA: Academic Press. 
Gabarino, J. (2001). An ecological perspective on the effects of violence on children. Journal of 
Community Psychology, 29{03), 361-378. 

Klebanov, P. K., Brooks-Gunn, J., Gordon, R., & Ghase-Lansdale, P. L. (1997). The intersection of 
the neighborhood and home environment and its influence on young children. In J. Brooks- 
Gunn, G. J. Duncan, & J. L. Aber (Eds.), Neighborhood poverty: Context and consequences for 
children (pp. 79-118). New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 



Stakeholder Beliefs Regarding the Definition, 

Assessment, and Development of School Readiness 

Sharon Seidman Milburn, Roberta Vitols 

PRESENTER: Roberta Vitols 

Popular press, legislators, parents, and educators considering children's development in the new 
millennium have focused on children's readiness for school and the impact of early care and 
education on readiness. In Galifornia, two statewide groups (a) the School Readiness Task Force 
and Advisory Gommittee and (b) the School Readiness Master Plan Work Group are dedicated 
to this issue. In addition, the Orange Gounty Ghildren and Families Gommission (GFG; 2000), a 
state body funded by the passage of State Proposition 10 dedicated to the well-being of children 
from the prenatal period through age 5 years, has created a School Readiness Initiative (SRI). 
These groups agree that an effective conception of school readiness must encompass the 
socioemotional, cognitive, and physical development of the child (e.g.. School Readiness Task 
Force, 2001). Research clearly demonstrates that both family and early-care environments 
contribute to children's development in these areas (e.g., NIGHD, 2001). 

Orange Gounty's SRI has three goals: (a) develop a definition of children's school readiness 
incorporating the views of parents, elementary, and early-care and education (EGE) profession- 
als, (b) identify methods to assess those child characteristics, and (c) specify early and primary 
education features that promote child development. To accomplish these goals, academicians, 
nonprofit agencies, and governmental committees collaborated on the Early Gare and Education 
Needs Assessment (EGENA; Milburn, Gardner, Glaeser, & Dreyer, 2002), an unprecedented 
review of community perceptions of school readiness and EGE quality. 

Data were collected through surveys, phone interviews, and focus groups with all stakehold- 
ers. All methods share some common items, assessing ideas about EGE quality, child assess- 




950 



955 



SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT/ACADEMIC SUCCESS 



ment, and school readiness (e.g., necessary skills and abilities at kindergarten entry). These 
shared scales are drawn from previous research, enabling not only comparison among the 
different groups within this study but also with data collected in other regions and years (e.g., 
Rimm-Kaufman, Pianta, & Cox, 2000). 

Past research has indicated that parents place greater priority on kindergarten children's 
academic skills and knowledge than teachers do (e.g.. West, Denton, & Germino-Hausken, 
2000). The ECENA data support this finding, particularly among less educated parents. How- 
ever, while parents value academic skills more than teachers, both groups see communication 
and social skills as the primary determinant of kindergarten success. Teachers report that they 
can teach curriculum, but have difficulty addressing social and attitudinal issues in classroom 
settings. 

This suggests that school readiness literature for parents and ECE professionals should 
emphasize development of social skills. In contrast. Orange County school districts' current 
materials specify necessary knowledge (e.g., ability to count to 20) and fine motor skills. In most 
districts, current kindergarten assessments also evaluate primarily academic skills, encouraging 
parents' perception that early acquisition of academic skills is important. Instead, district 
practices and literature should be changed to correspond to primary teachers' goals. As a result, 
parents would be educated about the value of social skill development and therefore choose 
appropriate ECE experiences for their children. 

Most child advocacy groups, like the National Association for the Education of Young 
Children (NAEYC), have cautioned against the use of standardized tests as an entrance require- 
ment for Idndergarten. Orange County ECE teachers almost unanimously agree with NAEYC's 
rejection of kindergarten screenings. However, the School Readiness Initiative is committed to 
the development of a school readiness assessment that evaluates intervention programs and 
identifies children at risk for school failure. Most primary teachers (70.9%) and parents (63.8%) 
support such exams to some degree, though there are significant differences among parents and 
teachers based on demographic groupings. These data indicate the importance of developing 
new strategies for evaluating social sldlls and attitudinal variables rather than reljnng on existing 
assessment measures, which emphasize academics. In addition, outreach to the ECE community 
is necessary to promote acceptance of assessment. 

Parents, ECE teachers, and primary teachers generally agree that quality early care plays a 
valuable role in promoting school readiness. Primary teachers asserted that kindergarten 
children with past ECE experience outperformed their peers in all respects. These teachers 
believed that publicly funded prekindergarten experiences for children who were "screened" 
from kindergarten on the basis of poor test performance should be one of the highest funding 
priorities. 

Because they emphasized social interaction, primary teachers endorsed a child-centered 
model of ECE. ECE professionals and college educated parents also endorsed this model, but 
less educated and immigrant parents preferred more adult direction. Parents with less education 
were also more likely to choose care arrangements primarily on the basis of the teachers' 
characteristics (e.g., demeanor, ethnicity) or the accessibility of the care setting. Unlike elemen- 
tary schools, ECE settings are supported by parents and, therefore, highly infiuenced by parent 
goals and expectations. Schools serving less educated parents may therefore refiect these parents' 
emphasis on adult directed instruction in basic academic skills. This implies that children most 
at risk for poor school performance are least likely to receive ECE experiences that will develop 
the social skills teachers identify as necessary for academic success. 

References 

Milburn, S. S., Gardner, S., Glaeser, B., & Dreyer, N. (2002). Early care and education needs 

assessment. Fullerton, CA: California State University, Center for Community Collaboration. 




956 



951 



POSTERS 



NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (2001). Summary of results of the NICHD study of early 
child care. Unpublished. 

Orange County Children and Families Commission (2000). Orange County Children and Families 
Commission strategic plan. Orange County, CA; Author. 

Rimm-Kaufman, S., Pianta, R., & Cox, M. (2000). Teachers' judgments of problems in the 
transition to kindergarten. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 15(2), 147-166. 

School Readiness Task Force (2001). School readiness 2001: A discussion paper. Retrieved April 1, 
2001 from: http://www.ccfc.ca.gov/PDF/SR5.pdf 

West, I., Denton, K., & Germino-Hausken, E. (2000). America's kindergarteners: Findings from 
the early childhood longitudinal study, kindergarten class of 1998-99. Washington, DC: 
Retrieved lanuary 26, 2001 from the National Center of Education Statistics Database, Item 
#NCES 2000-070: http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2000070 



A Collaborative Model For Head Start 
Community Assessment Development 

Roberta Vitols, Sharon Seidman Milburn 

PRESENTER: Roberta Vitols 

The Revised Head Start Performance Standards (U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, 1999) and the Head Start Reauthorization Act of 1998 (U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services, 1998) sought to increase curricular quality and agency accountability, allow for 
expansion of Head Start services, and promote parmerships with community orpnizations and 
research efforts. Consequently, Head Start organizations nationwide are examining every aspect 
of their programming and management systems, seeking ways to preserve core values while 
improving strategic planning and collaboration with other service delivery organizations (Lamb- 
Psrkcr, ct s!./ 2001). 

Simultaneously, major events occurring within the larger sociopolitical arena have influenced 
expectations and perceptions of early care and education (ECE) and family services. In particu- 
lar, Orange County Head Start (OCHS) families have been impacted by both welfare reform and 
statewide school readiness activities. Head Start's strategic self-review and planning process is 
designed to facilitate response to changing societal goals and client needs through four activities: 
(a) creation of a planning calendar, (b) specification of program goals, (c) development of a 
program services plan, and (d) a triannual community needs assessment (CA). The CA is 
intended to describe children's environments as defined by the family and the community 
(particularly educational institutions). The results of the CA are the foundation for the other Aree 
strategic planning activities. Historically, Orange County's CA survey of parents' satisfaction with 
child care, community perceptions, and family needs has fulfilled the governmental mandate 
and identified service problems, but has not demonstrably aided in shaping agency plans. 

Consequently, OCHS decided to revitalize the CA process through collaboration with 
academicians and researchers. The result was a methodologically robust survey, supplemented ^ 
by the inclusion data from multiple other sources, producing a richer understanding of parents 
perceptions and more specific information about how to address child and family needs. To 
allow OCHS to address the county's funding and legislative focus on school readiness, survey 
questions were added investigating perceptions of school readiness and child-care quality. The 
survey was designed using a collaborative model in which the content and format of the 
questions evolved through discussions among all interested groups. OCHS staff first worked 





(T 



952 



SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT/ACADEMIC SUCCESS 



with the Center for Collaboration for Children (CCC) and the Social Sciences Resource Center 
(SSRC) to design a preliminary survey. The SSRC then worked with the OCHS teachers, adminis- 
trators, and Parents' Policy Council to achieve a comprehensive approach to topic selection and 
item wording. The Policy Council also assisted the SSRC with translations into Spanish and 
Vietnamese. Finally, the SSRC trained OCHS center directors and family service workers at each 
site to administer the survey. 

The partnerships successfully built trust and commitment to the project among key stake- 
holders, a key element in successful research within Head Start (Lambert, Abbott-Shim, & 
Oxford-Wright, 2001). Consequently, the survey was uniquely successful in identifying action 
goals for the upcoming year and in serving as the foundation for community partnerships. 

References 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children, Youth and 
Families, Head Start Bureau. (1998). Coats Human Services Reauthorization Act of 1998 (PL 
105-285). Washington, DC: Author. 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration on Children, Youth and 
Families, Head Start Bureau. (1999, December). Head Start Bureau: Head Start program 
regulations and program guidance for Parts 1304 and 1308. Washington, DC: Author. 
Lamb-Parker, F, Piotrkowski, C. S., Baker, A. J. L, Kessler-Sklar, S., Clark, B., & Peay, L. (2001). 
Understanding barriers to parent involvement in Head Start: A research-community partner- 
ship. Early Childhood Research Quarterly 16, 35-51. 

Lambert, R. G., Abbott-Shim, M., & Oxford-Wright, C. (2001). Staff perceptions of research in 
the context of specific strategies for collaboration with Head Start programs. Early Childhood 
Research Quarterly 16, 19-34. 



Thirty-Month Evaluation of a Boys and Girls Club, School, 
and Parent Intervention Program for Second Graders 

Tena L St. Pierre, Melvin Mark, Dorothy Lynne Kaltreider, Bernadette Campbell 

PRESENTER: Tena L. St. Pierre 



(Summary not available) 



Social/Emotional Development 



Social-Emotional and Behavioral Correlates of 

African American Preschoolers' Classroom Emotion Regulation 

Maureen C. Smith 

PRESENTER: Maureen C. Smith 



Current research suggests that emotional regulation is related to children's peer acceptance and 
social competence. Peer acceptance has been linked to school participation, liking, and adjust- 
ment. Unfortunately, these processes have been understudied in ethnic minority populations. 
When assessing children s school adjustment it is important to be sensitive to cultural differ- 
ences in the meaning of constructs such as emotion expression, aggression, and peer. That is, 
what may be considered competent or optimal behavior is, in part, derived from cultural norms 
and expectations. 

This study examined three aspects of teacher-rated emotional regulation in a sample of 
African American preschoolers. It was hypothesized that children's emotional competence, peer 
acceptance, social-cognitive skills, and greater behavioral regulation would be consistendy 
associated with teacher-rated classroom emotion regulation. 



Study participants were 36 preschool-age African American children (A4 = 56.7 months, 
SD = 5.5; 56% female) from a range of low-income to middle-class families. Subjects were 
assessed multiple times at their preschool beginning mid-fall, interviewed by four familiar 



African American undergraduate assistants. 

Children participated in sociometric tasks that produce positive and negative nominations 
(like most/like least; Bukowski & Hoza, 1989), mean ratings of liking (Asher, Singleton, Tinsley, 
& Hymel, 1979), and nominations of aggressive classmates (Price & Dodge, 1989). Children 
completed the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, (PPVT-R; Dunn & Dunn, 1981), the Preschool 
Interpersonal Problem-Solving (PIPS; Shure & Spivak, 1974), and participated in four tasks: (a) 
emotion knowledge (Reichenbach & Masters, 1983), (b) emotion regulation (Josephs, 1994), 

(c) behavioral regulation (Kochanska, Murray, Jacques, Koenig, & Vandegeest, 1996), and (d) a 
projective measure of guilt and empathy (Zhan- Waxier, Kochanska, Krupnick, & McKnew, 

1990). Teachers rated three aspects of emotion regulation on the 24-item Emotion Regulation 
Checklist (Shields & Cicchetti, 1995): Modulation, Flexibility, and Organization. 

None of the demographic variables (age, gender, SES, or PPVT) were correlated with the three 
teacher-rated emotion regulation variables. Modulation, Flexibility, and Organization were 
analyzed separately in stepwise regression models. Results indicated that children who are less 
well accepted by their peers and who make fewer relationship-concern responses are perceived 
to be better able to modulate their emotional experiences in the classroom. Children with 
greater ability to delay gratification were perceived by their teachers to be less flexible. Children 
perceived by their teachers to have greater organization received fewer positive peer nominations 
and made fewer relationship concern responses. 




954 



959 



SOCIAL/EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT 



These analyses revealed some unexpected findings. Children perceived by their teachers to be 
better regulated emotionally, were less well accepted by their peers, engaged in less behavioral 
regulation, and were less likely to express concern over relationships. These findings suggest that 
behavior that is acceptable and competent from a teacher's perspective may not be behavior that 
leads to peer acceptance. These findings have implications for classroom management and 
practice because there is growing evidence that social-emotional competence in the classroom 
impacts classroom participation, which then predicts academic competence. 

References 

Asher, S. R., Singleton, L. C., Tinsley, B. R., & Hymel, S. (1979). A reliable sociometric measure 
for preschool children. Developmental Psychology, 15, 443-444. 

Bukowski, W. M., & Hoza, B. (1989). Popularity and friendship: Issues in theory, measurement, 
and outcome. In T. J. Berndt & G. W. Ladd (Eds.), Peer relationships in child development (pp. 
15-45). New York: Wiley. 

Dunn, L, & Dunn, L. (1981). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test - Revised. Circle Pines, MN: Ameri- 
can Guidance Service. 

Josephs, I. E. (1994). Display mle behavior and understanding in preschool children. Journal of 
Nonverbal Behavior, 18, 301-326. 

Kochanska, G., Murray, K., Jacques, T. Y, Koenig, A. L., & Vandegeest, K. (1996). Inhibitory 
control in young children and its role in emerging internalization. Child Development, 67, 
490-507. 

Price, J. M., & Dodge, K. A. (1989). Reactive and proactive aggression in childhood: Relations to 
peer status and social context dimensions. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 1 7 , 455-471. 
Reichenbach, L., & Masters, J. (1983). Children's use of expressive and contextual cues in 
judgments of emotion. Child Development, 54, 993-1004. 

Shields, A., & Cicchetti, D., (1995, March). The development of an emotion regulation assessment 
battery: Reliability and validity among at-risk grade-school children. Poster presented at the 
Society for Research in Child Development, Indianapolis, IN. 

Shure, M. B., & Spivak, G. (1974). Preschool Interpersonal Problem-Solving (PIPS) test: Manual (pp. 

169-182). Philadelphia: Hahnemann University, Department of Mental Health Sciences. 
Zahn-Waxler, C., Kochanska, G., Kmpnick, J., & McKnew, D. (1990). Patterns of guilt in children 
of depressed and well mothers. Developmental Psychology, 26, 51-59. 



Preschool Peer Play and Classroom Competencies 
and Needs in Urban Head Start Children 

Heather L. Cohen, Yumiko Sekino, John Fantuzzo 

PRESENTERS: Heather L. Cohen, Yumiko Sekino 

School readiness is an important national goal for early childhood education, particularly for 
children living in disadvantaged urban areas (U.S. Department of Education, 2000). An under- 
standing of child characteristics that relate to school success is necessary to promote key compe- 
tencies that prepare children for the transition to primary school. Prosocial peer play is one 
dimension of classroom competency that is related to school success (Birch & Ladd, 1996; 
Coolahan, Fantuzzo, Mendez, & McDermott, 2000; Fantuzzo & Hampton, 2000). Preschoolers' 
interactions with peers provide important socialization experiences that foster self-regulation 
such as taking turns, following directions, and working cooperatively, each of which plays a 
cmcial role in children's academic success (Wentzel & Berndt, 1999). 




960 



955 



POSTERS 



The primary purpose of this study was to examine the relationships between preschool play 
and other relevant school readiness competencies. With a sample of 242 Head Start preschool 
children, dimensions of interactive peer play were examined concurrently with emotion regula- 
tion, autonomy, and language. Analyses revealed significant relationships between these 
classroom competences and interactive peer play. Children exhibiting high levels of peer play 
interaction were found to demonstrate more competent emotional-regulatory skills in the 
classroom as well as initiative and self-determination. Children engaged in interactive peer play 
were found to show higher receptive vocabulary skills, whereas children disconnected in the 
classroom peer play demonstrated lower skills attainment. 

An additional sample of 746 Head Start children was used to determine how dimensions of 
interactive peer play assessed early in the preschool year were associated with end of the year 
classroom learning competencies and emotional and behavioral adjustment. Analyses indicated 
that early positive engagement in play was associated with lower levels of aggressive, shy, and 
withdrawn adjustment problems at the end of the year. Furthermore, children whp successfully 
negotiated relationships with peers early in the year were observed to evidence greater cognitive, 
social, and movement/coordination abilities at the end of year. Dismptive and disconnected 
peer play behaviors were associated with negative emotional and behavioral adjustment 
outcomes. Children not engaged in the classroom learning process are demonstrating difficulty 
developing self-regulatory behavior that could facilitate their adjustment to the needs of the 
classroom environment. 

The results of this study have implications for early intervention preschool programs and 
provide empirical evidence to support national mandates for quality early educational experi- 
ences for all children by emphasizing the importance of child-centered play in the development 
of early learning competencies. Findings also suggest that peer play is a valid context in which to 
observe and assess children's developmental capacities, and findings emphasize the importance 
of tfie play context in promoting productive peer-mediated learning experiences for vulnerable 
groups of young children. 

References 

Birch, S. H., & Ladd, G. W. (1996). Interpersonal relationships in the school environment and 
children's early school adjustm.ent: The role of teachers and peers. In I. Juvonen & K. Wentzel 
(Eds.), Social motivation: Understanding children's adjustment (pp. 199-225). New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Coolahan, K., Fantuzzo, J., Mendez, J., & McDermott, P. (2000). Preschool peer interactions and 
readiness to learn: Relationships between classroom peer play and learning behaviors and 
conduct. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(3), 458-465. 

Fantuzzo, J., & Hampton, V. R. (2000). Penn Interactive Peer Play Scale: A parent and teacher 
rating system for young children. In K. Gitlin-Weiner, A. Sandgrund, & C. Schaefer (Eds.), 
Play diagnosis and assessment (2nd ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons. 

U.S. Department of Education. (2000, September). Strategic Plan, 2001-2005. Washington, DC: 
Author. 

Wentzel, K. R., & Bemdt, T. J. (Eds.). (1999). Social influences on school adjustment: Families, peers, 
neighborhoods and culture. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 




956 



961 



SOCIAL/EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT 



Social-Emotional Development, Classroom Relationships, 
and School Readiness in Head Start Children 

Angela R. Taylor, Sandra Machida 

PRESENTERS: Angela R. Taylor, Sandra Machida 

The child who begins school with a cognitive advantage and who has a tractable temperament i 
more likely to experience satisfactory school outcomes. This personal advantage benefits 
children directly by way of improved performance on schoolwork and indirectly by promoting 
better classroom behavioral adjustment and creating more positive teacher perceptions and 
expectations (Entwisle & Alexander, 1993). Accordingly, the present study examined a concep- 
tual model positing that the child's cognitive ability at preschool entry has direct effects on 
subsequent school readiness as well as effects mediated via the impact of cognitive ability on 
behavioral adjustment. 

Difficult temperament, on the other hand, is assumed to influence school readiness only 
indirectly by way of its influence on both behavioral adjustment and social relationships with 
classroom teachers and peers. In addition to these mediating influences, the present study 
explored the possible moderating role of classroom relationships in predicting classroom 
adjustment and school readiness. 

Participants consisted of 150 children (55% male; 56% White, non-Latino; mean age = 53 
months) from 13 Head Start classrooms in a semirural community in northern California. The 
lead teacher (N = 13; 62% White, non-Latino) and coteacher (N = 13; 54% White, non-Latino) 
from each classroom also participated. 

During the fall, measures of children's cognitive-verbal ability (Peabody Picture Vocabulary 
Test- Revised; Dunn & Dunn, 1981), and temperament (Temperament Assessment Battery for 
Children, parent form; Martin, 1988) were administered. At midyear, lead teachers rated 
children's school behavioral competencies (Teachable Pupil Survey; Kornblau, 1982) and 
problem behaviors (Preschool Behavior Questionnaire; Behar, 1977); both lead and coteachers 
rated the quality of the teacher-child relationships (Student-Teacher Relationship Scale; Pianta 
& Steinberg, 1992); and children in each classroom completed a sociometric measure of peer 
preference. The Developmental Indicators for the Assessment of Learning-Revised (DIAL-R; 
Mardell-Czudnowski & Goldenberg, 1990) was administered in the spring, and the total 
standard score was used as an index of school readiness. 

Path analysis results supported six of the seven hypothesized paths in our conceptual model, 
and the total model accounted for 40% of the variance in school readiness. As expected, child 
cognitive ability was associated with school readiness both directly and indirectly, via its 
relationship with behavioral adjustment. In addition, as hypothesized, difficult temperament 
was linked to school readiness only indirectly by way of its association with behavioral adjust- 
ment. However, contrary to expectation, there was no significant link between classroom 
relationship quality and school readiness. 

Results of multiple regression analysis revealed a significant temperament x relationship 
interaction, F(l, 85) = 93.67, p < .001, indicating a moderating effect of classroom relationships. 
Difficult temperament was significantly related to behavioral adjustment for children low in 
relationship quality (Beta = -.37, p < .05), but was unrelated to behavioral adjustment for 
children high in relationship quality (Beta = -.02, ns). 

These findings highlight the important roles of early behavioral adjustment and classroom 
relationships with teachers and peers in the development of school readiness skills in low- 
income children. Our findings also provide evidence that supportive classroom relationships 
may offset the negative effects of difficult temperament on behavioral adjustment in preschool, 
and potentially alter the pathway to lowered school readiness. 



ERIC 




957 



POSTERS 



References 

Behar, L. (1977). The Preschool Behavior Questionnaire. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 5, 
265-275. 

Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1981). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Revised: Manual for forms L 
and M. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 

Entwisle, D. R., & Alexander, K. L. (1993). Entry to school; The beginning school transition and 
educational stratification in the United States. Annual Review of Sociology, 19, 401-423. 

Kornblau, B. (1982). The Teachable Pupil Survey; A technique for assessing teachers' perceptions 
of pupil attributes. Psychology in the Schools, 19, 170-174. 

Mardell-Czudnowski, C., & Goldenberg, D. S. (1990). Developmental Indicators for the Assessment 
of Learning-Revised: Manual. Circle Pines, MN; American Guidance Service. 

Martin, R. P. (1988). The Temperament Assessment Battery for Children. Brandon, VT; Clinical 
Psychology. 

Pianta, R., & Steinberg, M. (1992). Teacher-child relationships and the process of adjusting to 
school. In R. C. Pianta (Ed.), Beyond the parent: The role of other adults in children's lives (pp. 
61-80). San Francisco; Jossey-Bass. 



More Than Academics: Teacher Beliefs and 
Practices to Nurture Young Children 

Peggy Vaughan, Melissa King, Ellen Mayer, Holly Kreider, Rebecca Hencke 
PRESENTER: Peggy Vaughan 

Devoting time to nonacademic needs is particularly critical for teachers of disadvantaged 
children who may face persistent poverty, health, and safety concerns or family crises (Weiner, 
2000; McLoyd, 1998; Gomille, Boroto, Barnes, & Hall, 1996). Educational research focuses on 
strategies that promote academic achievement, but teachers must also understand children in 
their social-emotional contexts to successfully support academic pathways (Alexander & 
Entwistle, 1996). 

The School Transition Study (STS; Bronfenbrenner, 1979) examines the development of 390 
ethnically diverse, low-income children from kindergarten through grade five. Surveys from 94 
teachers and in-depth interviews with 28 case study teachers provide data on children s nonaca- 
demic needs, defined here as the social-emotional, behavioral, health, and family needs that 
manifest in the school environment. STS uses an ecological approach to understand low-income 
children's successful pathways, examining school, family, and community interrelationships that 
influence these pathways. 

Relying primarily on in-depth teacher interview data, this poster (a) describes teachers beliefs 
about low-income children's nonacademic needs, (b) categorizes teachers' conceptions of 
children's social-emotional needs in particular, and (c) illustrates teacher strategies to address 
nonacademic needs within teacher profiles. - 

The majority of teachers (70.8%), when surveyed about a variety of child, family, and school 
factors, believe that a child's home life can pose a moderate to serious problem in preparing 
their students to succeed academically. Teasers in urban schools, working with predominantly 
minority students, tend to believe that addressing students' nonacademic needs is a prerequisite 
to academic readiness and learning. Teachers in rural schools, however, tend to place equal 
emphasis on and intermesh academic and nonacademic needs, working with a conception of 
the whole child. However, class differences exist in rural schools, and some teachers describe a 
"help the disadvantaged" belief 



ERIC 



958 



963 



SOCIAL/EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT 



A substantial proportion of teachers (36.1%) reported providing parents with suggestions 
related to social-emotional needs. The in-depth interviews revealed some specific conceptions 
that teachers have about their students' social-emotional needs. While half of the 28 teachers 
described their students as emotionally stable or able to get along with everyone, social- 
emotional needs mentioned by at least 25 % of the teachers include (a) displaying poor social 
skills, (b) exhibiting low self-esteem, (c) switching off when angry or fmstrated, and (d) needing 
constant attention. 

Teachers exert their influence over children's social-emotional development via global, 
classroom, and individualized strategies. Teacher profiles particularly focus on social-emotional 
needs and illustrate teacher strategies such as (a) nurturing — providing individualized care, (b) 
communicating — with child and family during informal meetings or phone calls, (c) collaborat- 
ing — making referrals to school personnel, (d) drawing the line — setting limits in cases requir- 
ing substantial nurturing, and (e) promoting emotional competence — acknowledging strengths 
in the context of social-emotional concerns. Factors mediating teacher strategies include 
perceptions of family circumstance and teachers' relational styles. 

Teachers who address nonacademic needs have goals in mind such as promoting children's 
emotional safety and social competence, as well as children's learning and success. Teachers' 
front line roles and individualized practices in nurturing children deserve recognition, require 
further examination, and have implications for children's learning and success. 

References 

Alexander, K. A., & Entwisle, D. R. (1996). Schools and children at-risk. In A. Booth & J. Dunn 
(Eds.), Family-school links: How do they affect educational outcomes^. Mahwah, Nf: Erlbaum. 
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development: Experiments by nature and design. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 

Cornille, T. A., Boroto, D. R., Barnes, M. E, & Hall, P. K. (1996). Dealing with family distress in 
schools. Families in Society, 77(7), 435-444. 

McLoyd, V. C. (1998). Socioeconomic disadvantage and child development. The American 
Psychologist, 53(2), 185-204. 

Weiner, L. (2000). Research in the Nineties: Implications for urban teacher preparation. Review 
of Educational Research, 70(3) 369-406. 



Attachment as a Predictor of 
Kindergartners' Social-Emotional Success 

Michelle E. Schmidt, Elizabeth K. DeMulder, Susanne A. Denham 

PRESENTERS: Michelle E. Schmidt, Elizabeth K. DeMulder 

Forty-nine children {M age = 46.36 mths) participated in a study on the predictors of social- 
emotional competence in kindergarten. The study longitudinally examined relations among 
security of attachment with mother at age 3, stressful family conditions reported by mother at 
ages 3, 4, and 5, and social-emotional outcomes reported by mothers, kindergarten teachers, 
and peers at age 5. Security of attachment was measured using the Attachment Q-Set (Waters, 
1990), and family stress was determined using the Life Experiences Survey (Sarson, 1978). At 
kindergarten age, mothers completed the Child Behavior Checklist/4-18 (Achenbach, 1981), 
teachers completed the Preschool Socioaffective Profile (LaFreniere, Dumas, Capuano, & Dubeau, 
1992), and focal children's peers completed a sociometric task to determine peer popularity. 




964 



POSTERS 



Results suggest that children who experience more family stress in their preschool years are 
more angry/aggressive and anxious/withdrawn and less socially competent in the kindergarten 
classroom than their peers who experience less family stress in those same years, and children 
who are rated as higher on security of attachment with mother at age 3 are less aggressive in the 
kindergarten classroom. Teachers report that boys are more aggressive and anxious in the 
kindergarten classroom than their female counterparts. Implications for education are discussed, 
as well as suggestions for prevention and intervention. 

References 

Achenbach, T. (1981). Child Behavior Checklist. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
LaFreniere, P. J., Dumas, J. E., Capuano, E, & Dubeau, D. (1992). Development and validation 
of the Preschool Socioaffective Profile. Psychological Assessment, 4(4), 442-450. 

Sarson, I. G. (1978). Life Experiences Survey. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 46(5), 
932-946. 

Waters, E. (1990). Appendix A: The attachment q-set (version 3.0). Monographs of the Society for 
Research on Child Development, 60(2-3, Serial No. 244), 234-246. 



Family-School Relationships During the Transition to Kindergarten: 
The Contribution of a Relationship-Enhancing Intervention 

Sara E. Rimm-Kaufman, Marcia Kraft-Sayre, Tim Konald, Robert Pianata 

PRESENTER: Sara E. Rimm-Kaufman 

The National Center for Early Development and Learning (NCEDL) developed a relationship- 
building intervention targeting children from families with low incomes. This program was 
designed to enhance children's relationships during the transition to kindergarten by improving 
interactions between peers, preschool and kindergarten teachers, and families and schools (See 
Pianta, Kraft-Sayre, Rimm-Kaufman, Gercke, & Higgins, 2001). 

This poster describes communication between families and teachers in preschool and 
kindergarten in context of the NCEDL intervention. Four questions were addressed: (a) What are 
the patterns of family-school contact over time? (b) How do family-school contacts differ 
between two preschool programs (each serving different populations with'- different priorities)? 
(c) How do characteristics of family-school contacts differ by grade and program? (d) What are 
key predictors of frequency of family-school contact in preschool and kindergarten? 

Seventy-five child participants (31 female, 44 male; 20 White, 47 African American, 8 Other; 
64 eligible for free/reduced lunch) were included. Each child was assigned to one of eight family 
workers for preschool and kindergarten, attended one of two preschool programs (school-based 
or center-based), and one of 12 elementary schools (34 kindergarten classrooms). This longitu- 
dinal study drew on two data sources: (a) family— school contact logs recorded by preschool and 
kindergarten teachers and family workers, and b) interviews of the families conducted twice 
each year. 

Four findings emerged. First, preschool and kindergarten contact followed similar monthly 
patterns in the school-based preschool, but not the center-based preschool. Family-teacher 
contacts were most frequent in the fall in both grades. Second, contacts were more frequent in 
preschool than kindergarten, with more contacts in the school-based than center-based pre- 
school. Notably, there were no differences in kindergarten contact as a function of the preschool 
attended, suggesting that program effects prevailed only during the preschool year. Third, in 
both preschool and kindergarten, the majority of family-school contact involved the children's 
mothers. Schools, rather than families, initiated two thirds of the contacts. Short contacts were 



O 

ERIC 



960 



965 



SOCIAL/EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT 



more prevalent in preschool; long contacts were more prevalent in kindergarten. Fourth, 
analyses were conducted to identify predictors of family-teacher contact in preschool and 
kindergarten. The first analysis addressed the contribution of family risk, preschool attended, 
preschool family worker contacts, preschool preacademic activities, and families' view of 
preschool staff as supportive. In addition to program effects, families' use of preacademic 
activities at home was inversely associated with more family-school contact in preschool, 
suggesting that tlie preschool played a compensatory role for families. The second analysis tested 
concurrent predictors of kindergarten contact (including family risk, district, kindergarten family 
worker contacts, kindergarten preacademic activities, families' view of kindergarten staff as 
supportive, and barriers to kindergarten contact). These variables were not associated with 
kindergarten family-teacher contact. A third analysis tested preschool predictors of kindergarten 
contact (including risk, preschool attended, preschool family worker contacts, preschool family- 
teacher contacts, preschool preacademic activities, and view of the preschool staff as supportive). 
Surprisingly, these variables were not predictive of kindergarten family-teacher contact. Thus, 
kindergarten policies and priorities (not measured) were more important predictors of family- 
school contact than demographic risk, preschool, and home experience. 



Reference 

Pianta, R. C., Kraft-Sayre, M., Rimm-Kaufman, S. E., Gercke, N., & Higgins, T. (2001). Collabora- 
tion in building partnerships between families and schools: The National Center for Early 
Development and Learning's Kindergarten Transition Intervention. Early Childhood Research 
Quarterly, 16, 117-132. 



Intervention for Children and Television 

Lawrence Rosen koetter, Sharon Rosenkoetter, Rachel Ozretich 

PRESENTERS: Lawrence Rosenkoetter, Sharon Rosenkoetter, Rachel Ozretich 

Media researchers have convincingly demonstrated that one of the ways in which children leam 
to be aggressive is through their television viewing. Despite calls to reduce televised violence by 
our nation's preeminent health and education entities, television violence remains largely 
unabated. Given the nation's apparent inability to curtail the broadcast level of TV violence, it is 
especially important that we develop interventions that will help reduce the harmful effects of 
TV violence on children. Earlier classroom based interventions have been brief and yielded only 
modest results. The present study implemented an intervention consisting of 31 lessons (20 to 
30 minutes each) over the course of an entire academic year. Children in grades 1 to 3 were 
chosen because they are young enough that their TV viewing patterns have not been perma- 
nently established, and yet they are old enough to participate in a discussion of TV. The inter- 
vention sessions were highly varied and among other techniques incorporated music, rap, 
puppets, role-play, and stories. Cumulatively, the lessons emphasized that (a) TV violence is 
fantasy, (b) violence does not solve problems, (c) violent TV characters are inappropriate heroes, 
and (d) children should carefully choose what TV programs they view. 

Intervention participants (9 classrooms) as well as children from 4 control classrooms were 
interviewed at the beginning and end of the school year. As predicted, the children that received 
the intervention reported a reduction in their viewing of violent TV programs as well as their 
identification with violent TV characters. In addition, aggressive behaviors were assessed with 
the "guess who technique" in which participants nominated classmates who behaved in an 
aggressive manner. On the basis of before-after measures, intervention boys were judged by 
their classmates to behave in a less aggressive manner following the intervention. The impor- 

O 

ERIC 



966 



961 



POSTERS 



tance of this research effort is that it provides compelling evidence that TV literacy programs in 
the schools can reduce the harmful effects of violent TV on young viewers. Future research 
efforts should explore the durability of these gains and the possibility that "booster" sessions 
might extend and strengthen the impact of the intervention. 



Social-Emotional Learning: 

Teaching Conflict Resolution to Preschoolers 

Marilyn Anita Vestal, Nancy Aaron Jones 

PRESENTER: Marilyn Anita Vestal 

A growing body of literature on social and emotional learning points to the advantage of early 
exposure (Stevahn, Johnson, Johnson, Oberle, & Wahl, 2000; Brenner & Salovey, 1997); how- 
ever, empirical assessments of conflict resolution during preschool education are lacking (Leff, 
Power, Manz, Costigan, & Nabors, 2001; Vestal, 2001). Researchers have linked impaired 
problem solving in preschool children with a lack of social skills that undermine peer compe- 
tence (Rudolph & Heller, 1997). Alternatively, skills for solving problems and resolving conflict 
reduce the risk of adjustment difficulties in children, including children from low-income and 
troubled families (Goodman & Gravitt, 1995). 

This study focuses on a training intervention for Head Start teachers designed to build 
conflict resolution skills in the teachers and problem solving skills in the children in their 
classrooms. Self-transformation, environment-based changes, and a hands-on conflict resolu- 
tion model, if internalized by the teachers, are expected to lead to changes in conflict resolution 
skills in the children of trained teachers. The goal of the study is to assess whether the children 
of trained teachers are better able to solve interpersonal problems than their peers whose 
teachers have not been trained. 

Head Start teachers enrolled in a 40-hour college course on special topics in conflict resolu- 
tion. They were exposed to conflict resolution strategies and were given a curriculum model to 
use in the classroom to promote problem solving in young children. To assess the effect, we 
wanted to determine whether the children in the trained teachers' classrooms (a) report more 
alternatives to interpersonal conflict situations and (b) report more prosodal and less forceful 
responses to conflict situations involving peers than children in classrooms of nontrained teachers. 

Sixty-four children from 11 classrooms in Head Start Genters participated. Thirty-seven 
children were randomly selected from students in the classrooms of the sbc trained teachers, and 
27 were matched control cJiildren from the classrooms of five untrained teachers. Gender was 
equally distributed between groups. Parental consent was required for child participation. All 
children were from lower-income backgrounds and were homogeneous in academic skills. All 
children were between 3 to 5 years of age and were racially similar to the entire Head Start 
program children in this community. 

The main dependent variable for this study was the children's responses on the PIPS test 
(Shure, 1992). 'The PIPS test, which measures problem solving gains and childhood social 
competence, was designed to accompany the I Gan Problem Solve (IGPS) program (Shure, 

1990), which constituted the conflict resolution curriculum used by the teachers in their class- 
rooms to train children. Analysis of variance was used to determine if differences existed between 
the experimental and control group children in their problem-solving responses on the PIPS. 

Results confirmed earlier studies (Youngstrom et al., 2000) showing that children whose 
teachers were trained, and who exposed them to the conflict resolution curriculum, had a higher 
number of relevant solutions, suggesting they were able to think of more ways to solve the 





SOCIAL/EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT 



interpersonal conflicts than did the children whose teachers were not trained and were not 
exposed to the conflict resolution curiculum, F(l,62) = 4.08, p < .05. A repeated-measures 
ANOVA compared the relevance ratio to the force ratio for the experimental and control groups. 
Results showed that children in the conflict resolution intervention did demonstrate lower force 
ratio scores and higher relevancy scores than children in the control group, F(l,62) = 13.20, 
p < .05. These findings suggest that preschool aged children can be taught to use cognitive 
processes to think of alternatives to force when confronted with an interpersonal conflict. 

References 

Goodman, S., & Gravitt. (1995). Social problem solving: A moderator of the relation between 
negative life stress and depressive symptoms in children. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 
23. 473-485. 

Leff, S. S., Power, T. J., Manz, P. H., Gostigan, T. E., & Nabors, L. A. (2001). School-based aggres- 
sion prevention program for young children: Gurrent status and implications for violence 
prevention. School Psychology Review, 30(3), 344-351. 

Brenner, E., & Salovey, P. (1997). Emotion regulation during childhood: Developmental, 
interpersonal, and individual considerations. In P. Salovey & D. Sluyter (Eds.), Emotional 
development and emotional intelligence. New York: Harper Gollins. 

Rudolph, K., & Heller, T. (1997). Interpersonal problem solving, externalizing behavior, and 
social competence in preschoolers: A knowledge-performance discrepancy? Journal of Applied 
Developmental Psychology, 18, 107-118. 

Shure, M. B. (1990). The PIPS test manual. Philadelphia: Hahnemann University, Department of 
Mental Health Sciences. 

Shure, M. B. (1992). / can problem solve: An interpersonal cognitive problem solving program. 
Ghampaign, IL: Research Press. 

Stevahn, L., Johnson, D., Johnson, R., Oberle, K., & Wahl, L. (2000, May/June). Effects of 
conflict resolution training integrated into a kindergarten curriculum. Child Development, 
71(3), 772-784. 

Vestal, A. (2001). How teacher training in conflict resolution and peace education influences 
attitudes, interactions and relationships in Head Start centers. Dissertation Abstracts Interna- 
tional, 62(02), 454A. (AAT3003729) 

Youngstrom, E., Wolpaw, J., Kogos, J., Scoff, K., Acherman, B., & Izard, G. (2000). Interpersonal 
problem solving in preschool and first grade: Developmental change and ecological validity. 
Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 29(4), 589-602. 



"I Have Two First Teachers About Feelings": Preschoolers' Mothers 
and Teachers as Socializers of Emotional Competence 

Susanne Denham, Susanne Grant, Hideko Hamada 

PRESENTER: Susanne Denham 

One of preschoolers' key developmental tasks is to regulate emotions while interacting effec- 
tively with peers (Gottman & Mettetal, 1986). We consider that both emotional competence, as 
indexed here by emotion regulation, and social competence, indexed here by adults' ratings, are 
important contributors to preschoolers' well-being and school readiness, and serve as founda- 
tions for more long-term achievement and mental health (Denham, 1998). 

Important adults in children's lives — parents, teachers, care providers — assist youngsters in 
developing such competencies, via several socialization mechanisms. In modeling, adults' 




968 



963 



POSTERS 



emotional expressiveness is related to both emotion regulation and social competence; they 
demonstrate to children the types, intensity, and range of emotions common in differing 
situations, and children come to adopt aspects of these expressive styles. Adult emotion coaches 
also more specifically teach young children about emotions, via their conversations and other 
didactic methods. 

In this study, we assessed expressiveness patterns and coaching of both mothers and pre- 
school teachers/caregivers, as they predicted the emotion regulation behaviors and social 
competence of 246 middle-SES, 4-year-old children (approximately one half boys; 58 female 
teachers). We expected teacher and maternal aspects of socialization of emotion to predict 
children’s emotion regulation and social competence, with most of socialization of emotion 
techniques' contribution to variance being indirect, via emotion regulation. 

Because of our interest in the children's ultimate social success (or lack thereof), we focused 
in this study on not the temporal or intensive process of emotion regulation, but the behavioral 
and emotional coping strategies adopted by children when faced with emotionally challenging 
experiences. Mothers and teachers reported on children's constructive, venting, and passive/ 
avoidant emotion regulation strategies via questionnaire (Eisenberg, Fabes, Nyman, Bernzweig, 

& Pinuelas, 1994). Teachers and mothers reported on children's social competence (i.e.. Sensi- 
tive Cooperation, Anger/ Aggression, and Anxious Withdrawal) via LaFreniere and Dumas' SCBE- 
30 (1996). Regarding socialization of emotion, both mothers and teachers completed the 
Halberstadt Family Expressiveness Questionnaire to index modeling (Halberstadt, 1986; 
modified slightly to apply to classrooms), and Hyson and Lee's Emotion-Related Beliefs Ques- 
tionnaire (1996) to index coaching (i.e., willingness to address the world of emotions and use 
language to explore it with preschoolers). 

Findings showed that children's constructive emotion regulation strategies were marginally 
predicted by mothers' positive expressiveness; when mothers were more emotionally negative, 
children tended to use more venting strategies. Children's use of passive/avoidant strategies of 
emotion regulation was highly significantly predicted by a combination of both adults' devalu- 
ing of teaching about emotions, as well as maternal lack of negativity and teacher positivity. 
Finally, children's social competence was predicted by maternal positivity and teachers' teaching 
about emotion, as mediated by children's constructive, neither venting nor passive/ avoidant, 
emotion regulation strategies. Thus, findings were largely in accord with hypotheses. It is 
noteworthy that mothers and teachers seemed to have unique roles in socialization of emotion 
that fit their special functions in children's lives. This study suggests a number of useful parent 
and teacher practices. Further research will include the third (contingency) aspect of socializa- 
tion of emotion, as well as sociometric ratings of social competence, with more diverse samples. 

References 

Denham, S. A. (1998). Emotional development in young children. New York; Guilford Press. 
Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Nyman, M., Bernzweig, J., & Pinuelas, A. (1994). The relation of 
emotionality and regulation to preschoolers' anger-related reactions. Child Development, 65, 
1352-1366. 

Gottman, J. M., & Mettetal, G. (1986). Speculations about social and affective development of 
friendship and acquaintanceship through adolescence. In J. M. Gottman & J. Parker (Eds.), 
Conversations of friends: Speculations on affective development (pp. 192-237). New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Halberstadt, A. G. (1986). Family socialization of emotional expression and nonverbal commu- 
nication styles and skills. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 827-836. 

Hyson, M. C., & Lee, K-M. (1996). Assessing early childhood teachers' beliefs about emotions: 
Content, contexts, and implications for practice. Early Education and Development, 7, 59-78. 
LaFreniere, P. J., & Dumas, J. E. (1996). Social competence and behavior evaluation in children 
ages 3 to 6 years: The short form (SCBE-30). Psychological Assessment, 8, 369-377. 



ERIC 




964 



SOCIAL/EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT 



Reducing Young Children's Aggression Through Empathy Learning 

Tsu-Ming Chiang, Debra Preston, An^iy Stanley 

PRESENTER: Tsu-Ming Chiang 

In light of many school shootings and increasing violent behaviors in children and teenagers, it 
is important to examine the processes underlying these negative behaviors. One of the develop- 
mental deficits found in aggressive children is lack of emotional/social competence. Young 
children who fail to use proper emotional cues to detect negative emotions and communicate 
with others are more likely to experience interpersonal conflicts. Although conflict and aggres- 
sion occur ffequendy in classrooms and/or playgrounds in preschoolers, they are often over- 
looked by teachers and parents due to the age of young children (e.g., 3-4 years old). One main 
reason for researchers and educators to understand young children s emotional competence is to 
design prevention and intervention programs, and to teach conflict resolution strategies. 
However, research on how or whether preschoolers utilize the emotional understanding to 
resolve interpersonal conflict is limited. Therefore, the present study first examined preschoolers" 
emotional competence in their reactions to interpersonal conflict. It then served as a basis to 
formulate a developmentally appropriate intervention program to promote social and emo- 
tional competence in young children. 

Sixty-seven preschoolers (40 boys) ranging from 38 months to 62 months (Mean age = 49.3 
months, SD = 7.8 months) were recruited in a neighborhood day school. Data consisted of 
children s behavioral responses to conflict play situations and ratings from teachers' and parents' 
Social Competence Behavioral Check Evaluation (SCBE) designed by LaFreniere and Dumas 
(1995). A standard play paradigm was used in pretests and posttests. The second part of the 
study involved implementing an empathy-training program to the same group of children once 
a v/eek for 9 weeks (a week short of our original plan due to the schedule of school). In the 
program, four basic emotions (a) happy, (b) sad, (c) angry, and (d) afraid faces were introduced 
in various contexts through puppet shows, storytelling, arts, crafts, and songs. Following the 
empathy- training program, the standard paradigm was used again to measure their ability to 
identify emotions and apply social skills learned from empathy training in structured and free 
play sessions outlined earlier. The long-term effectiveness of the empathy program is further 
documented 9 months after the empathy training was implemented. 

MANOVAs showed that children in both age groups showed significant improvement for all 
types of emotional expressions. The follow-up data comparing children who went through 
empathy training with children who did not attend empathy training showed that the effective- 
ness of the training continued to help children to have a higher level of social competence 9 
months after the empathy program was introduced. The immediate effectiveness of the empathy 
program showed that young children as young as 41 months old benefited from the program. 
They showed significandy more helping and sharing behaviors both immediately and 10 
months following the empathy training. With increasing likelihood for children to be placed in 
nonfamily care, emotional and social training in a school context may become an important 
part to provide children with the necessary foundation for future interpersonal relationships. 

Reference 

LaFreniere, P. J., & Dumas, J. E. (1995). Social competence and behavior evaluation (preschool 

edition). Los Angeles: Western Psychological Services. 




970 



965 



Staff Beliefs/Attitudes and 
Professional Training & Development 



Family Service Delivery in Early Head Start: 

Perspectives of Professionals in Six States 

Chun Zhang, less Bennett 

PRESENTER: Chun Zhang 

Early Head Start (EHS), a federally funded program for low-income families with infants and 
toddlers with and without developmental delays and expectant women, complements its 
predecessor. Head Start. By design, EHS programs collaborate with community partners to 
provide comprehensive services to families and children. This study obtained an understanding 
of family service delivery from the perspective of EHS staff representing 40 programs (Waves 
I-fV) in six Midwestern states, utilizing a survey method and phone interviews. The study 
examined three main issues related to EHS service delivery for families, including: (a) the extent 
to which EHS staff believe in and implement family-centered practice, (b) EHS staff perspectives 
on Family Partnership Agreements (FPAs), and (c) EHS staff perspectives on Individualized 
Family Service Plans (IFSPs). 

In this study, 206 respondents from 40 EHS programs rated the extent to which they believed 
in and were able to implement family-centered practice. Overall, EHS staff highly rated all 18 
indicators representing the six aspects of family-centered practice (Dunst, 1990). In particular, 
staff had high ratings on the im.portance of fam-ily-professional relationships and parmerships 
and a family focus, and on the implementation of family-professional relationships and 
partnerships and an individualized and responsive approach. 

Staff shared their perspectives of and experiences with the development of FPAs and IFSPs. 
Overall, program-related challenges, needs, and suggestions regarding FPA development were in 
the areas of paperwork/format, time/scheduling, and program requirements/policy. Staff-related 
challenges, needs, strategies, and suggestions focused on relationship building and parmerships, 
information gathering and communication, and information sharing and preparing families for 
the FPA process. Family-related challenges and needs were family understanding of goal setting, 
family attitude, trust, and comfort level, and family life crises. Although common themes were 
found in staff responses to the IFSP process, some distinct issues emerged. Program-related 
challenges, needs, and suggestions were focused on paperwork/format and program support, 
whereas staff-related challenges, needs, strategies, and suggestions concentrated on collabora- 
tion, relationship building and partnership, and information sharing and preparing families for 
the IFSP process. Family-related challenges and needs were manifested in family understanding 
of the IFSP, family attitude, trust, and comfort level, and family involvement and follow up. 

Results of the study showed that EHS staff face challenges when collaborating with commu- 
nity parmers to provide comprehensive services to low-income expectant women, young 
children with and without developmental delays, and their families. EHS staff believed in the 
importance of family-centered practice while simultaneously voicing degrees of difficulty in 
implementation. The study results also indicated that FPA and IFSP processes have similarities as 





iiAhh B fcLlEhS/ A 1 1 ITU uts AND PROFESSIONAL TRAINING & DEVELOPMENT 



O 



well as differences. Common to both processes is the relationship-based model of service 
delivery in which staff establish relationships and partnerships with families and staff from 
other community agencies. Collaboration at three levels (e.g., between families and staff, among 
staff from different agencies, and between agencies) is the key to an effective family-centered 
IFSP process. 

Reference 

Dunst, C. J. (1990). Family support principles: Checklists for program builders and practitio- 
ners. Family Systems Intervention Monograph, Series 2, No. 5. Morganton, NC: Family, Infant 
and Preschool Program, Western Carolina Center. 



Asthma Management Practices of Baltimore City Head Start Programs 

Barbara J. Calabrese, Karen Huss, Shoshana Reshef, Arlene Butz, Marilyn Winkelstein, 

Adele Gilpin, Cynthia S. Rand 

PRESENTERS: Barbara Calabrese, Marilyn Winkelstein 

Asthma morbidity and mortality are disproportionately high among children aged 2-5 years 
representing minority racial and ethnic groups (Evans, Mullally, & Wilson, 1987; Halfon, 
Newacheck, Wood, & St. Peter, 1996), and results in lost school/work days, increased emergency 
room visits/hospitalizations, limited play, decreased quality of life for children/parents 
(Malveaus, Houlihan, & Diamond, 1993; Weiss & Wagener, 1990), and increased financial 
burdens. There is limited information on the impact of asthma education on these negative 
outcomes. The A+ Asthma Head Start randomized trial is a National Institutes of Health/ 
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NlH/NHLBl) funded collaborative study between 
Johns Hopkins University and Baltimore City Head Start (HS) designed to evaluate the efficacy 
of supplemental asthma training for a Family Services Coordinator (FSC), to enhance HS and 
family asthma management knowledge and skills. The purpose of this study was to identify the 
asthma management practices of HS before the A+ Asthma educational intervention. 

To focus the study, 268 staff from 8 of 15 HSs were surveyed; of these, 84 teachers, 113 
teacher's assistants (TAs), and 41 FSCs returned the completed survey direcdy to the researchers. 
To maintain confidentiality, participants were given unique ID numbers. Most staff (79%) 
worked in only one HS site. The participating staff were predominantly African American (79%), 
with 16% White, 4.5% Other, and 0.5% Unknown; ages ranged from 20 to 77 years, with a 
mean of 38 years, and 93.3% of respondents were female. Based on the survey findings, 14% of 
respondents had been employed by HS for more than 10 years, 21% for 6-10 years, 45% for 1-5 
years and 20% for less than 1 year. For highest educational preparation, 49% of responding staff 
had a high school diploma/GED or had participated in some high school, 49% had associate's 
degrees or higher, with 3% other. 

Of the respondents, 19% had asthma, and 55% reported that a family member had asthma. 
Thirty percent of respondents felt they had better than average/very good asthma knowledge/ 
skills, 31% felt their asthma knowledge/skills to be average, and 36% felt that they had some 
knowledge or none at all. Teachers were listed as the person responsible for giving asthma 
medications by 70% of the respondents, while 44% listed teacher's assistant (TA), 30% FSCs, 

8% directors, and 6% office staff/secretaries. The children's medication was mainly kept in the 
classroom (45%), the main office (30%), or by the child independendy (4%), with 11% not 
knowing, and 4% in some other place. 





967 



POSTERS 



In regard to individualized asthma action plans, 33% reported a plan of action for all 
children with asthma, 9% had a plan for some children, 6% reported none, and 48% didn t 
know. The teacher (42%) was the person most often caring for a child having an asthma 
episode, while 3% reported TA care, 4% FSC care, 2% director or office staff care, 6% didn't 
know, 4% identified another person, and 40% didn't respond. An asthma episode was most 
often documented and kept by the teacher, according to 65% of study participants. Only 24% of 
respondents reported a nebulizer at their site, with 9% listing the director responsible when the 
child uses a nebulizer, 72% teacher, 52% TA, 50% FSC, 9% office staff/secretary, and 2% listed 
child. Of the respondents, 33% gave oral/inhaled asthma medications, 28% supervised nebu- 
lizer treatments, 13% handled asthma emergencies, 8% taught children and 8% taught parents 
about asthma, 32% talked to families about asthma, and 11% had no activities. 

The study results imply a lack of a well-communicated policy for dealing with asthma and 
asthma emergencies. Study results indicate that communication about asthma is lacking 
between the child, parent, and HS staff, and also suggests that HS teachers, TAs, and FSCs need 
standard training in asthma management. Improvement of asthma management in HS should 
ideally impact asthma management in the community. 

References 

Evans, R., Mullally, D. I., & Wilson, R. W. (1987). National trends in the morbidity and mortal- 
ity of asthma in the U.S.: Prevalence, hospital and death from asthma over two decades. 
Chest, 91, 65S-74S. 

Halfon, N., Newacheck, P. W., Wood, D. L., & St. Peter, R. F. (1996). Routine emergency depart- 
ment use for sick care by children in the United States. Pediatric, 98(1), 28-34. 

Malveaux, F J., Houlihan, D., & Diamond, E. L. (1993). Characteristics of asthma mortality and 
morbidity in African-Americans. / Asthma, 30(6), 431-437. 

Weiss, K. B., & Wagener, D. K. (1990). Changing patterns of asthma mortality: Identifying target 
populations at high risk. JAMA, 264, 1683-1687. 



Teacher Education in Early Literacy: The HeadsUp! Reading Evaluation 

Susan B. Neuman, Claire Seung-hee Son 

PRESENTERS: Susan B. Neuman, Claire Seung-hee Son 

This project evaluation offers the first-year results of HeadsUp! Reading, a new national, 44-hour 
distance learning course for the early diildhood education community. HeadsUp! Reading is an 
innovative, interactive distance-learning college course designed to transform teachers' instruc- 
tional practices to reflect current research and improve literacy outcomes for young children. The 
study evaluated the effects of this program on teacher knowledge and practice in three states. 

The results provide some early evidence that teachers learned new information and, according to 
their own assessments, enhanced their classroom practice as a result of course participation. 
Most respondents reported that they enjoyed the program, and would be likely to participate in 
future distance learning programs. 

The primary purpose of the course was to strengthen the teachers' ability to improve 
children's literacy outcomes. The training was delivered via National Head Start Association s 
(NHSA) interactive satellite television network, augmented by learning and discussion support 
from a trained facilitator. Participants were drawn from early childhood program sites in 
Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Michigan, and included teachers, teacher assistants, child-care aides, 
consultant/trainers, and supervisors. Teacher knowledge was examined using both forced-choice 



er|c 



968 



973 



STAFF BELIEFS/ATTITUDES AND PROFESSIONAL TRAINING & DEVELOPMENT 



and performance-based items. Knowledge items were developed on the basis of the early literacy 
topics presented in the program. Participants' knowledge of children's book authors and titles 
was assessed using a checklist strategy developed by Stanovich and West (1989), while teacher 
praaice and skills were measured with a checklist assessing classroom environment, activities, 
and interactions with children. 

The data indicate that teachers' overall knowledge about early literacy development improved 
after the first seven sessions of HeadsUp! Reading. Teachers who reached this participatory mile- 
stone were more aware of the definitions of emergent literacy and general literacy. Significant 
gains in classroom practice were also evident, as teachers recognized the importance of book 
and writing areas to the classroom environment. Future evaluations are needed to determine 
whether these improvements are educationally significant, and whether they are linked to 
changes in classroom practice and activities with children. In addition, it will be critically 
important to ascertain whether the program may benefit children's developing literacy skills. 

The work reported herein was funded by a Heinz Endowment grant to the National Head 
Start Association for the purpose of evaluating the first year of HeadsUp! Reading. Support was 
also provided by the Center for the Improvement of Early Reading Achievement, University of 
Michigan. 

Reference 

Stanovich, K. E. & West, R. F. (1989). Exposure to print and orthographic processing. Reading 

Research Quarterly, 24, 402-403. 



Texas Head Start Coaching Grant Evaluation: 

Children's Early Literacy & Numeracy Outcomes 

Lin Moore, Karen L. Morrison 

PRESENTER: Lin Moore 

The Arlington Independent School District received a Texas Head Start Coaching Grant to 
provide professional development for prekindergarten teachers. A model incorporating small- 
group sessions, follow-up coaching, and classroom resources was implemented. Targeted 
teachers participated in summer training, were coached weekly by mentors, and received 
classroom resources. Comparison teachers will receive a comparable intervention during the 
second year. Professional development focused on promoting children's early literacy and 
numeracy learning. Project evaluation focused on improved outcomes in student learning 
(Guskey, 1997; Guskey & Sparks, 1996). 

Training topics included best practices, phonological and print awareness, written expression, 
language development, motivation to read, reading aloud, letter knowledge, and mathematics. 
Coaching by mentors supported implementation, and resources included manipulatives and 
200 children's books per classroom. The adult subjects included 20 Target and 15 Comparison 
teachers. Selection was determined by availability for summer training rather than through 
randomization. 

The student sample included 763 prekindergarten children with 17 different home languages. 
The students represent an ethnic composition of 53% Latino, 21% African American, 15% 

White, and 11% Asian. Children met eligibility requirements of Limited English Proficiency 
(26%) or low family income (74%) and attended half-day English as a Second Language (ESL) 
or bilingual classes. 




974 



969 



POSTERS 



The measures were administered in the fall and spring in the language of instruction, in 
either English or Spanish. The Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT-III; Dunn & Dunn, 1997) 
measured receptive vocabulary. The Expressive Vocabulary Test (EVT; Williams, 1997) measured 
expressive vocabulary in English only. The Developing Sldlls Checklist (DSC; CTb/ McGraw-Hill, 
1990) measured prereading and mathematical skills. 

Analysis of covariance tests, using pretests as covariates, compared posttest means by com- 
parison groups. Raw scores were converted to standard scores for comparisons with standardized 
norms and age equivalents. Children's receptive language evidenced average gains of 16 months 
during the 7-month intervention period. Expressive language showed average gains of 19-20 
months. Mean fall ages were 4.7 years, but diildren demonstrated the language skills expected of 
toddlers, ages 2.3 to 2.6 years. Mean ages were 5.1 years at the spring testing time, but children's 
skills were comparable to preschoolers aged 3.10 to 3.11 years. 

No age equivalents were available for the DSC scores since items measure typical skills for 4- 
to 5-year-olds. Normal curve equivalents (50 = norm) indicated that scores increased from 21 to 
28 in Mathematical Concepts and Operations. Memory scores increased from 30 to 40 NCE, 
Auditory scores increased from 29 to 34 NCE, and Print Concepts scores increased from 25 to 35 
NCE. Gains were significant in all subscales but remained below the norms for children their ages. 

Target and Comparison group scores did not differ for the PPVT-III, EVT, or DSC. The 
professional development intervention for Target teachers did not result in significantly higher 
achievement of children in their classrooms. Some possible explanations may be related to non- 
randomized sampling, the training focus, variability in implementation, or the processes of 
teacher change over time. The second year of the project will extend the teacher training and 
measure implementation of classroom strategies. The first year findings supported the needs of 
at-risk children for programs that promote language development while introducing children to 
early literacy and numeracy. 

References 

CTB/McCraw-Hill. (1990). Early childhood system: Developing Skills Checklist administration and 
score interpretation manual. Monterey, CA: McGraw-Hill. 

Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Examiner's manual for the PPVT-III Peabody Picture Vocabulary 
Test (3rd ed.). Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service. 

Guskey, T. R. (1997). Research needs to link professional development and student learning. 
Journal of Staff Development, 18(2), 36-40. 

Guskey, T. R., & Sparks, D. (1996). Exploring the relationship between staff development and 
improvements in student learning. Journal of Staff Development, 1 7(4), 34-38. 

Williams, K. T. (1997). Expressive Vocabulary Test manual. Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance 
Service. 




970 



975 



STAFF BELIEFS/ATTITUDES AND PROFESSIONAL TRAINING & DEVELOPMENT 



Jump Start: A Collaboration Between LSUHSC 
Occupational Therapy Program and Head Start 

Judith C. Vestal, Mary Lou Mills 

PRESENTERS: Judith C. Vestal, Mary Lou Mills 

Occupational therapy curricula emphasize experiential learning and exposure to "learning by 
doing." Often this learning takes place in the traditional hospital, clinic, or other medical 
setting. Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center felt a need to promote experiential 
learning in the community, thereby establishing a vehicle for enhancing student awareness of 
community strengths, needs, and priorities. 

The local Head Start program was an ideal community setting to begin this venture. Occupa- 
tional therapy students reviewed the literature to develop an understanding of the impact of 
socioeconomic status on child and family development. They found that consequences of 
children living in poverty were developmental delays, decreased cognitive functioning, academic 
failure, and an increase in emotional and behavioral problems (Bowman, & Wallace, 1990; 
McLoyd, 1998). Deficits such as these clearly hinder a child's school-readiness skills. 

The students relied on their understanding of occupational therapy as a health care profes- 
sion designed to assist individuals with participation in desired daily tasks or "occupations" that 
give one's life meaning. Applying this definition to a target population of children, the "occupa- 
tion" would be learning and developing through play and developing school-readiness skills. 
(Case-Smith, Allen, & Pratt, 1996). Occupational therapy students had a background in child 
and family development, neurological and orthopedic factors contributing to health, therapeu- 
tic activity, clinical reasoning, clinical evaluation, and treatment concepts. Drawing on a devel- 
opmental understanding of these areas, as well as an understanding of activity analysis and how 
activities might be broken down and sequenced to insure success, they were able to plan 
interventions to enhance skills that were deficient in the children enrolled in Head Start. 

A priority for the occupational therapy students was to determine which Head Start children 
could benefit from their intervention. The students developed age-specific screening tools that 
would allow Head Start teachers to review the children's sldlls in perceptual/fine motor, 
prewriting, self-care, visual perception, cognition, social-emotional, and sensory processing 
tasks. Screening forms were simple checklists and included tasks typical of classroom or play 
activities for the assigned age group. Teachers were asked to indicate in which tasks children 
might have been performing below the classroom standard. 

Head Start administrators supported the occupational therapy students in the distribution of 
the screening tools to 72 Head Start teachers. Teachers completed the screener on children in 
their respective classrooms. Return rate was 69% with 153 children reported to be performing 
below classroom standards. These children would receive further occupational therapy evaluation. 

The occupational therapy students nicknamed their program "Jump Start," an appropriate 
name for a plan that has certainly created the impetus for further growth and development. 

Head Start administrators, teachers, and support personnel have been more than supportive and 
encouraging of the students and the university program. 

References 

Bowman, O. J., & Wallace, B. (1990). The effects of the socioeconomic status on hand size and 
strength, vestibular function, visuomotor integration, and praxis in preschool children. 
American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 44(7), 610-621. 

Case-Smith, J., Allen, A. S., & Pratt, P. N. (1996). Occupational Therapy for Children (3rd ed.). St. 
Louis, MO: Mosby. 

McLoyd, V. (1998). Socioeconomic disadvantage and child development. American Psychologist, 
53(2). 185-204. 



POSTERS 



A Case Study to Train Head Start Staff 
for ESL Children and Their Families 

Betty Ansin Smallwood 

PRESENTER: Betty Ansin Smallwood 

A 6-month case study trained Head Start staff for its growing English as a second language (ESL) 
population and evaluated its effectiveness. It found the project met its goals, given time and 
resource limitations. Outcomes were specific recommendations and a staff development model. 

The setting was a Head Start program in Northern Virginia that spans 12 classrooms in four 
sites. It has an increasingly culturally and linguistically diverse program with over 40% of the 
children now speaking home languages other than English. In addition to Spanish speaking 
children from Central and South America, the multicultural population includes diverse 
languages and countries from Africa, the Mideast, the Indian subcontinent, and Eastern Europe. 
Because of this multilingualism, instruction is in English, yet adaptations for second language 
learners are needed. Despite this need, none of the teachers or aides had any formal training in 
second language acquisition or ESL. 

This case study used formative and summative methods for evaluation, and used participant 
observation and reflective practice as research approaches. Insights from classroom observations 
and interviews were integrated into the in-service workshops and site-based training. Data 
included field notes, audio and videotapes, and evaluation instruments. The data were analyzed 
by thematic codes, which emerged into patterns. The final report to the funder reviewed and 
evaluated the project (Smallwood, 1998). 

The final evaluation found this to be a successful project, given its short time span and 
limited resources and that it accomplished its goals, given these limitations. The classroom- 
based approach and participant observation model seemed particularly appropriate for the site- 
based training, and the full staff responded well to the inductive and interactive in-services. The 
ESL children seemed integrated into the Head Start program and appeared to be making good 
progress. However, one cannot expect staff untrained in ESL and busy with other obligations to 
fully absorb this complex field in 6 months. 

One outcome was specific recommendations to improve the educational services for ESL 
children and families. They included the following: (a) continued training for the staff in ESL 
methods, cross-cultural communication, and home-school relationships with culturally and 
linguistically diverse families; (b) an increase in multicultural classroom materials, including 
children s literature; (c) a video, with instructional guide, of best practices for first and second 
language development in preschools; and (d) research to better understand bilingual language 
acquisition and emergent literacy of ESL children in Head Start. 

Another major outcome was a staff development model that helps (a) preschool staff to 
become more knowledgeable, confident, and positive about multiculturalism, second language 
acquisition, and ESL and, in addition, (b) staff to use effective strategies for developing language 
and literacy skills. Other outcomes have been the refinement and dissemination of this model 
(Smallwood, 1999). 

As the second language population continues to multiply in preschools, increased training 
and staff support become critical for Head Start programs (Tabors, 1996; 1997, 1998). This 
researcher agrees with Tabors: ^^Planning ways to effectively serve these [ESL] preschoolers is now 
a major challenge for preschool educators" (1997:3). 

RbJ'ctcticcs 

Smallwood, B. A. (1988). Staff training for Alexandria Head Start in ESL methodology: Project report. 

Washington, DC: ERIC Clearinghouse for Languages and Linguistics. ERIC Document No. 

ED 420 210. 




972 



977 






Smallwood, B. A. (1999). Training preschool staff for ESL children and their families. Paper pre- 
sented at the 33rd International TESOL Convention, New York City, Mardi 1999 and at the 
Washington, DC First Annual Citywide Training Conference, "Touting the Future", Wash- 
ington, DC, May 1999. 

Tabors, P. O. (1996). Second language acquisition and preschool education: Research findings, 
methods, implications, and future directions. Washington, DC: National Research Council, 
Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, and the Institute of Medi- 
cine, Board on Children and Families. 

Tabors, P. O. (1997). One child, two languages: A Guide for preschool educators of children learning 
English as a second language. Baltimore: Brookes. 

Tabors, P. O. (1998). What early childhood educators need to know: Developing effective 

programs for linguistically and culturally diverse children and families. Young Children, 20-26. 



Teachers' Learning in Professional Discourse 

Carolyn Temple Adger, Susan M. Hoyle 

PRESENTERS: Carolyn Temple Adger, Susan M. Hoyle 

Mounting evidence shows that many children from low-income families experience reading 
difficulties as early as kindergarten (Whitehurst & Lonigan, 1998) and that early literacy deficits 
are likely to translate into long-term literacy failure (Snow, Burns, & Griffin, 1998). A national 
study of Head Start indicates that these classrooms may provide only limited support for literacy 
development and that there is no evidence of significant growth in literacy among 4-year-olds 
attending these programs (Zill, Resnick, & McKey, 1999). 

Providing a stronger preschool experience calls for improving teachers' abilities to support 
children's language and literacy learning. In response, the Education Development Center 
(EDC) has developed the Language Environment Enrichment Program (LEEP) and delivered it 
as an academic course for Head Start supervisor/teacher teams. During the sessions, these teams 
work to update their understanding of early literacy development so that they can implement 
effective strategies to foster it. Data analyses indicate sizable beneficial effects of LEEP on 
classroom environments and instruction and on children's reading and writing. 

LEEP's design reflects principles of adult learning, especially joint involvement in activities 
grounded in teachers' work (Hawley & Valli, 1999). In order to deepen their thinking and build 
a community of practice steeped in reflectiveness (Lave & Wenger, 1991), practitioners work 
together in using new information from reading and lectures to analyze videotapes showing 
exemplary teaching and to critique their own classrooms. Much of the learning occurs in the 
discourse among teachers and the instructor. Understanding what teachers learn and how they 
learn it calls for scrutinizing the talk that is both the engine and the evidence of learning. 

This poster presents findings from discourse analysis of LEEP interaction. Using an interactive 
sociolinguistic approach (Gumperz, 1982), linguists have examined 58 hours of videotape from 
the class, pa}dng close attention to the details of talk in order to ground interpretation in the 
data. This involves looking not only at the propositional content of what people say but also at 
the interactive means through which they accomplish topic development, and, over the long 
run, develop individual professional identities and communities of practice. These include turn- 
taking, lexical and format tying, paralinguistic phenomena, and politeness. Such discourse 
features create involvement among speakers. 

Involvement features are essential to creating complex, shared knowledge structures: When a 
class constructs an understanding of some concept, the fact that members closely track and 




973 

978 



engage with each other's talk allows them to build on each other's propositions. A schematic 
rendition of propositional meaning constructed during one brief discussion demonstrates that 
group members created a response to the instructor's question that is more complex and 
complete than any one member's response and that they did so using interactive resources. The 
corresponding transcript shows the details. 

This analysis illuminates the processes of teachers' learning that lead to observable changes in 
classroom practice and thus demonstrates the power of collaborative professional development. 
Teachers' talk in professional development venues is not icing on the cake for course delivery, 
but a major constituent of the course. 

References 

Gumperz, J. (1982). Discourse strategies. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge. 

Hawley, W. D., & Valli, L. (1999). The essentials of effective professional development: A new 
consensus. In L. Darling-Hammond, & C. Sykes (Eds.), Teaching as the learning profession (pp. 
127-150). San Francisco: Jossey Bass. 

Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge. 

Snow, C. E., Burns, S. M., & Criffin, P. (Eds.). (1998). Preventing reading difficulties in young 
children. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 

Whitehurst, C. J., & Lonigan, C. J. (1998). Child development and emergent literacy. Child 
Development, 69(3), 848-872. 

Zill, N., Resnick, C., & McKey, R. H. (April, 1999). What children know and can do at the end of 
Head Start and what it tells us about the program's performance. Paper presented at the conven- 
tion of the Society for Research in Children Development, Albuquerque, NM. 



Preparation of Minority Personnel in Head Start: A Collaborative 
Model between Communities and Higher Education 

Nancy File, Pauline H. Turner 

PRESENTERS: Nancy File, Pauline H. Turner 

One variable repeatedly shown to result in positive child outcomes is the specialized training 
and education of teachers (Burchinal, 1999; NICHD Early Child Care Research Network, 2000; 
Peisner-Feinberg & Burchinal, 1997; Whitebook, Howes, & Phillips, 1989). Because the field of 
early care and education encompasses many types of programs and teaching staff with dramati- 
cally varying levels of general and specialized education and training, the challenge of profes- 
sional development, both at the preservice and inservice levels, becomes enormous. 

The subject of this study was a grant-funded project designed to extend higher education 
programs in early childhood to underrepresented groups in New Mexico and bordering areas 
and to increase the cultural responsiveness of these programs. During the course of the project, 
the six participating institutions of higher education (IHE) provided new educational opportu- 
nities ranging from an entry-level course to the bachelor's degree. 

The data presented here were generated via the external evaluation of the project. Content 
analysis of interview and focus group transcripts and field notes was performed using the 
constant comparative method (Strauss, 1987). The major foci for identifying themes and 
patterns within the data were on describing the process of change and on comparisons among 
the "lessons learned" during the change process. 

The metaphor of bridge building aptly described the work across sites. Staff at the IHEs 
described efforts at relationship building as fundamental to their efforts. They described them- 



974 



979 



STAFF beliefs/attitudes and professional training & DEVELOPMENT 



selves as bridging professional fields, different institutions, and geographical regions. An 
important aspect of the bridge was that of decreasing insularity. 

Local councils of community-based stakeholders were involved at each site. Their involve- 
ment in decision-making was important, yet also sometimes a source of tension. The contribution 
of community insiders to program work was cited by IHE staff as key to program effectiveness. 

The process of bridge building was facilitated by opening new dialogue and relationships and 
also by consciously acknowledging issues of accountability and trust. The process of communi- 
cating with others, requiring precious time and effort, was mentioned across IHEs as an impor- 
tant lesson learned for effective change. Also important to bridge building was a sense of 
accountability. 

Students spoke highly of training built upon local childrearing values and offered in their 
home language. Those participants who took coursework in their home language identified 
language as a highlight of their experience. In the words of one student, "The training that I 
participated in, I believe really, really supported our way of life on Navajo Nation, on the 
reservation, and we were able to relate to what was being taught and how we could use that. My 
previous training was, of course, off-reservation and with nonindian instructors, and I just had 
to really blend in and take their philosophies and their learning as they presented it." Following 
up on this: "So before there wasn't really an attempt to reach you in terms of who you are?" The 
student responded, "Not who I was and where I came from, and not where I was going to go 
back to work with children. That was never really there." 

References 

Burchinal, M. (1999). Child care experiences and developmental outcomes. Annals of the 
American Academy of Political and Social Science, 563, 73-98. 

National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Early Child Care Research Net- 
work. (2000). Relation of child care to cognitive and language development. Child Develop- 
ment, 71(4), 960-980. 

Peisner-Feinberg, E., <& Burchinal, M. (1997). Relations between preschool children, child care 
experiences, and concurrent development: The Cost, Quality and Outcomes Study. Merrill- 
Palmer Quarterly, 43, 451-477. 

Strauss, A. (1987). Qualitative analysis for social scientists. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Whitebook, M., Howes, C., & Phillips, D. (1989). Who cares? Child care teachers and the quality of 
care in America: Executive summary. Washington, DC: Center for the Child Care Worlrforce. 



Head Start Teachers' Professional Development: Multiple 
Perspectives From a Head Start "Community of Learners" 

Ruslan Slutsky, Rebecca Kantor, David Fernie 

PRESENTERS: Ruslan Slutsky, Rebecca Kantor, David Fernie 

The purpose of this study research was to explore Head Start teachers' progress toward higher 
degrees, how they used technology, and the social support they received from their community 
of learners, faculty, and administrators using a sociocultural perspective. Our belief was that 
each community of leamers/learning community (COL) would, through social interactions, 
constmct their own norms, regulations, and expectations for how they do things. 

The participants in this study (9 Head Start teachers, 2 contact people, 4 higher education 
faculty partners, and 2 technology people) became proficient in technology by working in 




980 



975 



POSTERS 



groups (communities of learners) where teachers (as students) worked together on college 
coursework and technology (online courses, web boards, web searches, e-mail, and so forth). 

Existing research on communities of learners has tended to focus on traditional college 
students in traditional on-campus settings. This study, however, took a different approach in that 
it focused on nontraditional students (those not attending college via a campus). Head Start 
teachers and nontraditional students took college courses in a nontraditional way. Some courses 
were offered online as students came together as a part of a learning community working 
through the materials together. Throughout this distance learning process, the goal was that 
teachers would become more technologically proficient and would be able to carry those skills 
over to the classrooms in which they taught. 

Technology and social support were two key elements that were made available to the Head 
Start teachers. Technology support provided to Head Start teachers included (a) computers to 
every COL member taking college classes, (b) e-mail setup and training, (c) Internet training 
and access, (d) training in Microsoft Windows and Word, (e) use of message boards (threading 
discussion) for further discussion and support, and (f) use of Galileo assessment system at work. 

Some ways social support was provided to Head Start teachers included (a) library lending 
service (books for courses were provided at no cost); (b) monthly COL meetings where Head 
Start teachers had opportunities to engage and dialogue with each other, register for classes, and 
receive training; (c) the ability to e-mail each other with questions; (d) faculty coming to Head 
Start and offering courses on site; and (e) all course work paid for. Head Start teachers also 
mentored 4-year college students on how to work with children from low-income settings. 

The supports discussed above enabled the Head Start teachers to beconie technology profi- 
cient and then use that proficiency to enhance their own teaching of young children. The 
technology piece also opened up to them a world of distance education. They were no longer 
bogged down with the dilemma of how to take courses while working fulltime. They could now 
enroll in distance learning courses that made enrolling back into college easier and more 
manageable for their busy lives. 



Language and Literacy Training for Head Start Teachers 

Barbara A. Wasik, Mary Alice Bond, Annemarie Hindman 

PRESENTER: Barbara A. Wasik 

Significant research has shown the importance of the development of language and literacy 
skills for young children's success in reading (Snow, Burns, & Griffin, 1998; Whitehurst & 
Lonigan, 2001). Unfortunately, as shown in the results of the 1998 National Assessment of 
Educational Progress (NAEP), many children, especially those from high-poverty homes, enter 
school without the necessary reading readiness skills (U.S. Department of Education, 1999). To 
help Head Start teachers support the language and literacy development of young children, 

Johns Hopkins University researchers developed and implemented a training program that 
guides teachers in creating a classroom rich in language and literacy experiences. 

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effects of this teacher-training program on the 
language and literacy skills of young children in Head Start Centers in Baltimore, MD. During a 
school year, teachers were trained in four modules: (a) book reading, (b) active listening ^^d 
conversation strategies, (c) phonemic awareness, and (d) alphabet activities. During the training, 
university researchers explained the rationale for the modules, introduced explicit teaching 
strategies, and provided materials including books and center props that supported the imple- 




976 



931 



STAFF BELIEFS/ATTITUDES AND PROFESSIONAL TRAINING & DEVELOPMENT 



mentation of the strategies presented in training. After the initial training, the researchers 
modeled the explicit strategies in the classroom. Teachers were then observed and provided with 
feedback on their teaching during an individual conference. The content of the training was 
detailed in an interactive training manual. 

During the 2001-2002 school year, three intervention teachers and three control teachers 
were randomly assigned to either the treatment or control condition. Each classroom was 
observed using the Early Language and Literacy Classroom Observation (ELLCO; Dickinson & 
Smith, 1997), as well as observations of the following: (a) book reading, (b) questioning during 
book reading, (c) alphabet activities, (d) opportunities for children to speak and be heard, and 
(e) phonemic awareness activities. Ways in which book reading was integrated into the other 
activities were also observed. In addition to observational data, children were assessed on the 
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-111 (PPVT-111; Dunn &Dunn, 1998), the Expressive One-Word 
Picture Vocabulary Test (EOWPVT; Brownell, 2000), and their knowledge of the alphabet. The 
results of this analysis indicate that children in the intervention groups scored significantly 
higher on the PPVT-ltt and the EOPWPVT than children in the control classrooms. 

References 

Brownell, R. (Ed.). (2000). Expressive One-Word Picture Vocabulary Test manual (3rd ed.). Novato, 
CA: Academic Therapy Publications. 

Dickinson, D. K., & Smith, M. W. (1998). The Early Language and Literacy Classroom Observation. 

Newton, MA: Education Development Center. 

Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1998). Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test -III. Circle Pines, MN: 
American Guidance Services. 

Snow, C. E., Burns, S., & Griffin, P. (Eds.). (1998). Preventing reading difficulties in young children. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 

Whitehurst, G. J., & Lonigan, C. J. (2001). Emergent literacy: Development from prereaders to 
readers. In S. B. Neuman & D. K. Dickinson (Eds.), Handbook of early literacy research (pp. 11- 
29). New York: Guilford Press. 

U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement, National 
Center for Education Statistics. (1999). The NAEP 1998 Report Card for the Nation and the 
States. [Report written by P. L. Donahue, K. E. Voelkl, J. R. Campbell, & J. Mazzeo; NCES 
1999-500]. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. 



Computer Training for Preschool Teachers: 

Impact on Computer Self-Efficacy, Values, and Anxiety 

Mandy B. Medvin, Diana Reed, Deborah Behr 

PRESENTER: Mandy B. Medvin 



What factors impede preschool teachers' use of computers in the classroom? Donohue, Borgh, 
and Dickson (1987) identified several barriers to effective computer use in preschools, including 
uninvolved staff, unclear curricular goals, lack of training, and logistical issues. Landerholm 
(1995) found that the majority of preschools in her study were still in the early stages of 
organizing their computer curriculum and providing training to teachers. 

Our study examined teacher characteristics that influence the frequency of computer use in 
preschool classrooms. Research on elementary school teachers has focused on several measures, 
including prior experience and perceived past success (Cos, 1996; Kellenberger, 1996), com- 



i'Ub I tKb 



puter values (Kellenberger, 1996), anxiety (Bradley & Russell, 1997), and self-efficacy 
(Kellenberger, 1996). We also explored the effectiveness of a 3-hour computer workshop 
emphasizing social collaboration at the computer on enhancing teacher perceptions. 

Thirty-eight Head Start teachers and day-care providers from eight programs in rural Western 
Pennsylvania participated in a computer workshop at a local college. All participants had 
computer access, and 86.8% felt they needed more training in using computers. Questionnaires 
were administered before and after the 3-hour workshop, which included the following: (a) 
classroom logistics, curricular goals, and software; (b) two preschools' (one Head Start class- 
room) experiences with case studies, social facilitation protocols, and video clips; and (c) a 45- 
minute "hands-on" computer session where teachers learned several preschool computer 
programs working with partners. Our measures focused on perceived past success (Kellenberger, 
1996), computer self-efficacy (Landerholm, 1995), computer values (Landerholm, 1995; 
Kellenberger, 1996), and computer anxiety (Bradley & Russell, 1997). 

We found that both quantity and quality of computer experience influenced outcomes. The 
more training individuals had, the more likely they were to rate their prior success with comput- 
ers as high. Teachers with more years and types of training and higher prior success scores had 
higher computer self-efficacy and lower pretest computer anxiety. Frequency of computer use in 
the classroom, however, was related only to number of types of training and pretest computer 
anxiety. In addition, many pretest relationships were no longer found during the posttest, 
possibly due to the impact of the computer workshop. When examining sources of computer 
anxiety, teachers were most concerned about task demands and damaging the computer, rather 
than social anxiety related to computer use. 

Paired t-tests were used to compare a change in pre versus postworkshop measures. Across 
time, participants showed higher levels of computer self-efficacy, t(37) = 3.544, p < .001; 
computer values, t (37) = 2.303, p < .027; and lower levels of computer anxiety, t(37) = 2.954, 
p<.005. 

Our findings indicate that training for teachers should concentrate on reducing computer 
anxiety and providing a variety of learning opportunities. In addition, participants in our 
workshop showed increased computer self-efficacy and values and decreased anxiety. We 
attribute workshop effectiveness to our "hands-on" component, video clips, and social skills 
focus, an area where teachers already have a knowledge base. Future research should include a 
control group to fully evaluate this approadi. 

References 

Bradley, G., & Russell, G. (1997). Gomputer experience, school support and computer anxieties. 
Educational Psychology, 17(3), 267-285. 

Donohue, W. A., Borgh, K., & Dickson, W. P. (1987). Gomputers in early childhood education. 

Journal of Research in Childhood Education, 2(1), 6-16. 

Gos, M. W. (1996). Gomputer anxiety and computer experience: A new look at an old relation- 
ship. Clearing House, 69(5), 271-277. 

Kellenberger, D.W (1996). Preservice teachers' perceived computer self-efficacy based on 
achievement and value beliefs within a motivational framework. Journal of Research on 
Computing in Education, 29(2), 124-140. 

Landerholm, E. (1995). Early childhood teachers' computer attitudes, knowledge, and practices. 
Early Child Development and Care, 109, 43-60. 





978 



aiAhh HtLlEhS/ATTli UUES AND PROFESSIONAL TRAINING & DEVELOPMENT 



Beyond the Child Development Associate Credential: 

A Collaborative Model of Educating Head Start Teachers 
to Work With Children and Families in the 21st Century 

Mary Deluccie 

PRESENTERS: Mary Deluccie, Marcia Manter 
(Summary not available) 



Process Consultation in the Classroom: 

Developing Language and Literacy Facilitation Techniques 

John T. Lybolt, Ruth Watkins 

PRESENTERS: John I Lybolt, Ruth Watkins 
(Summary not available) 



Program Assessment and Professional Development: 

A University-Community Partnership 

Thomas Pavkov, Kelly Ricketts, Helen Unangst, Marla Olthof, Barbara Gustin , 
PRESENTER: Thomas Pavkov 

(Summary not available) 



Using Formative Research in a University-Community Partnership 
to Develop a Violence Intervention Program for 
Head Start Teachers and Staff 

Suzanne M. Randolph, Sally A. Koblinsky, Debra D. Roberts 

PRESENTERS: Suzanne M. Randolph, Sally A. Koblinsky, Debra D. Roberts 
(Summary not available) 




934 



979 



POSTERS 



Understanding Communities of Learners: Alternative Professional 
Development Pathways for Head Start Teachers 

James Scott Jr, David Fernie, Rebecca Kantor 

PRESENTERS: James Scott Jr, David Fernie, Rebecca Kantor 
(Summary not available) 



Pediatrician Practices Regarding 
Early Education and Head Start Referral 

Michael Silverstein 

PRESENTER: Michael Silverstein 
(Summary not available) 





980 



Appendices 



APPENDIX A 



Cooperating Organizations ' 
AND Program Committee 

Cooperating Organizations 



Ambulatory Pediatric Association 
American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry 
American Academy of Family Physicians 
American Academy of Pediatrics 
American College of Preventive Medicine 
American Educational Research Association 
American Nurses Association 
American Pediatric Society 
American Psychiatric Association 
American Psychological Association 
American Psychological Society 
American Public Health Association 
American School Health Association 
American Sociological Association 
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association 
Association for Childhood Education International 
Association of Black Psychologists 
Association of Maternal and Child Health Programs 
Association of Teachers of Maternal and Child Health 
Child Welfare League of America 
Children's Environmental Health Network 
Columbia University: National Center for 
Children in Poverty 

Columbia University, Teachers College: Center for 
Children and Families 

Council for Exceptional Children: Division for 
Early Childhood 



ERIC Clearinghouse on Elementary and 
Early Childhood Education 
Family Support America 
Federation for Children With Special Needs 
International Society for Infant Studies 
National Association for the Education 
of Young Children 

National Association of Elementary School Principals 
National Association of School Psychologists 
National Association of State Boards of Education 
National Association of State Directors of 
Special Education (NASDSE) 

National Association of WIC Directors 
National Black Child Development Institute, Inc. 
National Center for Learning Disabilities 
National Council on Family Relations 
National Fatherhood Initiative 
National Head Start Association 
National Medical Association 
National Mental Health Association 
Prevent Child Abuse America 
Society for Adolescent Medicine 
Society for Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics 
Society for Pediatric Research 
Society of Teachers of Family Medicine 
The World Association for Infant Mental Health 
ZERO TO THREE, National Center for Infants, 
Toddlers and Families 



Program Committee 

Ann S. Bardwell, Ph.D., Child Development Council of Franklin County, OH 

Kathryn Barnard, Ph.D., University of Washington 

Cynthia Garcia Coll, Ph.D., Brown University 

John W. Hagen, Ph.D., Society for Research in Child Development 

Gloria Johns on- Powell, M.D., University of Wisconsin 

Esther Kresh, Ph.D., Administration on Children, Youth and Families 

Faith Lamb-Parker, Ph.D., Columbia University's Mailman School of Public Health 

John Pascoe, M.D., Wright State University 

Gregg Powell, Ph.D., National Head Start Association 

Suzanne Randolph, Ph.D., University of Maryland 

Lonnie Sherrod, Ph.D., Fordham University 

Gerald Sroufe, Ph.D., American Educational Research Association 

RubyTakanishi, Ph.D., Foundation for Child Development 

Mary Bmce Webb, Ph.D., Administration on Children, Youth and Families 

Harry Wright, M.D., University of South Carolina 

Edward Zigler, Ph.D., Yale University 



987 



983 



Peer Reviewers 



Thomas M. Achenbach, Ph.D. 
Karen M. Anderson, Ph.D. 

Sally M. Atkins-Bumett, Ph.D. 
Sandra T. Azar, Ph.D. 
lira Jean Oyemade Bailey, Ph.D. 
Amy J. L. Baker, Ph.D. 

John W. Banaoft, M.Ed. 

John E. Bates, Ph.D. 

Lula A. Beatty, Ph.D. 

Leila Beckwith, Ph.D. 

Deborah E. Belle, Ed.D. 

Judith S. Bloch, M.S.W. 

Donald P. Bolce, A.B. 

Robert H. Bradley, Ph.D. 

Donna M. Bryant, Ph.D. 

Suellen Gawler Butler, Ph.D. 
Frances A. Campbell, Ph.D. 

Sam J. Ceccacci, M.A. 

Mary Anne Chalkley, Ph.D. 

Beryl Clark, M.S. 

Roseanne Clark, Ph.D. 

Richard M. Clifford, Ph.D. 
Rachel K. Clifton, Ph.D. 

Marvin Jerry Cline, Ph.D. 

Linda R. Cote-Reilly, Ph.D. 

Anne McDonald Culp, Ph.D. 
Nicholas Cunningham, M.D., 
Dr.P.H. 

Deborah A. Daro, Ph.D. 
Lois-Ellin G. Datta, Ph.D. 

Mary Cunningham DeLuca, B.A. 
Carl J. Dunst, Ph.D. 

Linda Eggbeer, M.Ed. 

Robert N. Emde, M.D. 

Doris R. Entwisle, Ph.D. 

Linda M. Espinosa, Ph.D. 

Jay S. Fagan, D.S.W. 

Dale C. Farran, Ph.D. 

Nancy File, Ph.D. 

Janet E. Fischel, Ph.D. 

Hiram E. Fitzgerald, Ph.D. 
Rowena Fong, Ed.D. 

Steven R. Fomess, Ed.D. 

Michele L. Foster, Ph.D. 

Paul J. Frick, Ph.D. 



Ann W. Garwick, Ph.D., R.N. 
Barbara Gebhard, M.A. 

Cynthia L. Gibbons, Ph.D., R.N. 
Rivka Greenberg, Ph.D. 

Daryl B. Greenfield, Ph.D. 

Ann Higgins Hains, Ph.D. 
Charley Hare, A.A. 

Harriet E. Heath, Ph.D. 

Susan M. Hegland, Ph.D. 

James Heller, M.A., M.S. 

Vivian Herman, M.S.W. 

Ellen Hock, Ph.D. 

Alice Sterling Honig, Ph.D. 
Sheldon H. Horowitz, Ed.D. 
Laura E. Hubbs-Tait, Ph.D. 
Marks. Innocenti, Ph.D. 

Debra Jervay-Pendergrass, Ph.D. 
Sheila Dove Jones, Ed.D. 

Lilian G. Katz, Ph.D. 

Anita F. Kieslich, Ed.D. 

Ellen Eliason Kisker, Ph.D. 
Nancy K. Klein, Ph.D. 

Lorraine V. Klerman, Dr.P.H. 
Sally A. Koblinsky, Ph.D. 
Michael E. Lamb, Ph.D. 
Marjorie W. Lee, Ph.D. 

Carol S. Lidz, Psy.D. 

Lewis P. Lipsitt, Ph.D. 

Patricia Goth Mace, Ph.D. 

David L. MacPhee, Ph.D. 
Rebecca A. Marcon, Ph.D. 

Silvia Martinez, Ed.D. 

Fern O. Marx, M.H.S. 

Lisa A. McCabe, Ph.D. 

Anne McGill-Franzen, Ph.D. 
John H. Meier, Ph.D. 

Gary B. Melton, Ph.D. 

Shitala P. Mishra, Ph.D. 

Janice M. Molnar, Ph.D. 
Carolyn Morado, Ph.D. 

Beverly A. Mulvihill, Ph.D. 
Minnie Murphy, M.A. 

Carmen A. Nicholas, Ph.D. 
MaryJ. O'Connor, Ph.D. 

Sherri L. Oden, Ph.D. 



Barbara Alexander Pan, Ph.D. 
Patricia H. Papero, Ph.D. 

Judy Perry, M.P.H. 

Monica Gordon Pershey, Ed.D. 
Luzanne B. Pierce, M A T. 

Douglas Robert Powell, Ph.D. 

Jane L. Powers, Ph.D. 

Amaldo J. Ramos, Ed.D. 

Virginia A. Rauh, Sc.D. 

JoAnn L. Robinson, Ph.D. 
Tommie L. Robinson, Ph.D. 

Lori A. Roggman, Ph.D. 

Harriett D. Romo, Ph.D. 

John P. Rossetti, D.D.S. 

Janis Santos, B.A. 

W. George Scarlett, Ph.D. 

Amy C. Schlessman, Ph.D. 
Victoria R. Seitz, Ph.D. 

Virginia C. Shipman, Ph.D. 
Milton F. Shore, Ph.D. 

Mary Lou de Leon Siantz, Ph.D. 
Clare Jean Siegel, M.S. 

Irving E. Sigel, Ph.D. 

Diana T. Slaughter-Defoe, Ph.D. 
Catherine E. Snow, Ph.D. 

Laura Jane Sokal, Ph.D. 

Helen Spence, M.Ed. 

Linda L. Sperry, Ph.D. 

Robert G. St. Pierre, Ph.D. 

Martha D. Staker, M.A., M.S. 
Prentice Starkey, Ph.D. 

Dorothy M. Steele, Ed.D. 

Jean Ann Summers, Ph.D. 
Eleanor Stokes Szanton, Ph.D. 
Catherine S. Tamis-LeMonda, 
Ph.D. 

Angela R. Taylor, Ph.D. 

Susan Taylor- Brown, M.P.H. 
Barrie Thome, Ph.D. 

Penelope K. Trickett, Ph.D. 
William Douglas Tynan, Ph.D. 
Leanne Whiteside-Mansell, Ed.D. 
Jo Ann Williams, M.Ed. 

Bonnie Wise, B.A. 

Hirokazu Yoshikawa, Ph.D. 



984 



988 



Subject Index 



Academic achievement 738, 772, 930, 932, 938, 
940, 942, 943, 946, 947, 949, 953 

Action research 152, 740, 741, 743, 744 

African American 474, 807, 811, 817, 818, 907, 
954 

Assessment/screening/diagnosis 150, 227, 250, 
391, 516, 737, 739, 745, 746, 747, 749, 752, 
753, 842, 881 

Attachment 159, 734, 735, 959 

Behavioral challenges/adjustment 193, 530, 721, 
735, 738, 756, 757, 758, 759, 761, 762, 765, 
965 

Bilingual education 797, 799, 800, 803, 804, 
853, 972 

Biobehavioral approaches to development 35, 
226, 227, 228, 378, 939, 954 

Child abuse/neglect 857 

Child care 540, 554, 728, 762, 765, 766, 767, 
768, 771, 772, 774, 776, 777, 778 

Child health 575, 590, 606, 766, 781, 783, 826 

Childhood chronic illness 766 

Classroom characteristics/environment 829, 841 

Cognitive development 35, 155, 231, 407, 747, 
797, 889, 946 

Community resources and services 743, 759, 

764, 780, 781, 783, 866 

Computer literacy 977 

Culturally competent treatment 21, 250 

Culturally sensitive methods/measures 150, 227, 
250, 391, 869, 870, 885 

Curriculum development 422, 447, 448, 764, 
785, 880 

Disabilities 150, 192, 250, 289, 302, 723, 784, 
785, 787, 789, 790 

Domestic violence 503, 820 

Early childhood intervention/prevention 3, 11 5, 
140, 230, 302, 536, 569, 759, 765, 781, 864, 
935, 960 

Early education 76, 187, 189, 198, 554, 641 

Early Head Start 140, 289, 723, 734, 776, 784, 
805, 810, 812, 824, 830, 842, 860, 861, 873, 
881, 901, 905, 927, 959, 966 



Ecological context 47, 226, 780 

Elementary school 792, 793, 795, 796, 835, 836, 
854, 879, 920, 930, 932, 934, 936, 938, 940, 
942, 943, 949, 953 

Ethnic minorities 278, 391, 687, 769 

Ethnography/qualitative methodology 226, 230, 
232, 468, 469, 781, 812, 873, 875, 922, 936 

Evaluation method/model 83, 100, 140, 228, 
821, 824, 888, 953, 979 

Experimental design 817 
FACES 83, 100, 797, 811, 869 

Family funaioning/systems 35, 154, 157, 289, 
302, 321, 474, 503, 734, 775, 805, 811, 855, 
857, 871, 900, 931, 943 

Family literacy 531, 844 

Family strengths 100, 159, 806, 807, 818, 832 

Family struaure 809 

Family support 47, 729, 759, 806, 822, 832, 871, 
899 

Fatherhood 47, 450, 469, 470, 471, 812, 813, 

814, 815, 816, 817, 818, 819, 820 

Federal Initiatives 187 
Foster care 849 

Government policies 63, 76, 187, 189, 321, 333, 
406, 423, 575 

Head Start history 344, 368 
Head Start Impact Study 172 
Health systems 47, 575, 606, 921 

Home visiting 152, 161, 228, 534, 535, 536, 

821, 822, 823, 824 

Immigration 159, 861, 899 
Inclusion 302, 723, 762, 784 

Infant/toddler 47, 211, 470, 471, 536, 537, 538, 
758, 799, 816, 819, 823, 826, 827, 829, 830, 
831, 832, 858, 860, 886, 927 

Information technology 785, 794, 795 

Instrument/measure/development 752, 780, 

841, 869, 874, 877, 879, 880, 882 

Language delay/impaired/speech problems 721, 
728, 788, 849, 934, 935, 943 



989 



985 



Language/literacy/development 151, 407, 425, 
446, 447, 724, 728, 783, 788, 799, 800,801, 
803, 804, 836, 838, 839, 840, 841, 846, 849, 
850, 851, 853, 893, 930, 934, 935, 943, 968, 
969, 976, 979 

Latino 159, 724, 729, 756, 801, 803, 839, 869, 
926 

Learning 198, 354, 407, 423, 641, 836, 874 

Male involvement 450, 468, 730, 900 

Maternal depression/distress 151, 159, 530, 531, 
734, 805, 811 

Maternal health 47, 151, 153, 159, 928 

Mathematics development 422, 423, 436, 725, 
752, 754, 768, 882, 913, 935, 943 

Media 703 

Mental health-adult 153, 154, 157, 516, 729, 

734, 805, 814, 816, 819, 821, 854, 855, 856, 
858, 861 

Mental health-child 193, 230, 231, 232, 

333,729, 749, 764, 765, 787, 797, 864, 866, 
909, 925 

Migrant families 926 

Native American 884, 885, 886, 888 

Neighborhood and community influences 779, 
863, 949 

Neighborhood violence/safety 811, 818, 979 

Normal child development 162, 211, 775, 890, 
893, 897 

Nutrition 741, 921, 924, 926 

Parent-child relationships/interaction 160, 468, 
470, 471, 474, 491, 732, 733, 830, 834, 854, 
889 

Parent involvement/ engagement 155, 160, 468, 
726, 729, 853, 897, 899, 902, 904 

Parent training and education 162 

Parental attitudes/expectations 911, 913, 914, 917 

Parenting 151, 157, 161, 163, 468, 474, 491, 

516, 733, 774, 811, 850, 860, 886, 901, 907, 
908, 909, 912, 914, 915, 917, 936 

Peer relationships 753, 765, 877, 889, 897, 955, 
957, 962 

Physical health and development 790, 894, 923, 
925, 927, 928 

Poverty 228, 530, 531, 606, 726, 740, 757, 758, 
783, 814, 912, 943, 947 



Prenatal care 140, 927 

Professional/child/parent/ family relationships 
160, 161, 231, 728, 735, 745, 753, 764, 769, 
815, 854, 960 

Professional development 21, 673, 728, 778, 

835, 847, 851, 876, 968, 969, 971, 972, 973, 
974, 975, 976, 977, 979, 980 

Program-initiated research partnerships 152, 

744, 952, 979 

Psychopharmacology 278 

Quality/ standards of care 35, 83, 115, 540, 673, 
739, 744, 765, 767, 776, 777, 778, 804, 829, 
952 

Quantitative methodology 640, 817, 936 

Research/community partnerships 230, 743, 

744, 899, 922, 944, 950, 952, 979 

School/family partnerships 21, 845, 904, 920 

School readiness 21, 115, 354, 726, 730, 757, 
779, 794, 837, 874, 915, 939, 944, 950, 957 

School reform 792 

Self-regulation 35, 226, 227, 228, 378, 939, 954 

Self-sufficiency/job training/self-efficacy 161, 
333 

Service delivery 187, 491, 575, 740, 783, 809, 
817, 863, 864, 866, 867, 922, 966, 980 

Single parenthood 907 
Social competence 788, 867, 955 

Social/emotional development 21, 35, 151, 226, 
230, 231, 234, 732, 739, 747, 753, 856, 858, 
889, 954, 957, 958, 959, 961, 962, 963, 965 

Social policy 47, 76, 187, 189, 333, 406, 726, 
771 

Social support 161 
Staff beliefs/attitudes 966, 967 
Student/ mentor 67, 622 
Television 961 

Transition to school 657, 931, 960 
Treatment models 250, 805 
Vision 746, 748, 751, 884, 892 
Welfare reform 321, 333, 726 



986 



990 



D IRECTORY OF PARTICIPANTS 



Abbott, Dana 739, 765 

Child Development Manager 

CEO-Head Start 

Early Childhood 

2331 Fifth Avenue 

Troy, NY 12180 

dabbot@ceo-cap.org 

Abbott-Shim, Martha S. U5, 820 

Quality Counts, Inc. 

4 Executive Park East, Suite 318 
Atlanta, GA 30327 
masqcounts@aol.com 

Abrams, Patrida W. 

Vice President 

The Letter People Company 

61 Mattatuck Heights Road 

Waterbury, CT 06705 

patricia@letterpeople.com 

Abrams, Richard 

The Letter People Company 
61 Mattatuck Heights Road 
Waterbury, CT 06705 
ria@letterpeople.com 

Achhpal, Beena 911 

Assistant Professor 
School of Education 
Department of Early Childhood 
Education 

115 Davis, 501 Crescent Street 
New Haven, CT 06515 
ach hpal @sou thema. edu 

Adams, Gina C. 172 

The Urban Institute 
2100 M Street, N.W. 

Washington, DC 20001 

Adams, Irene 748 

Ophthalmology 
University of Arizona 
655 North Alvemon Way, #108 
Tucson, AZ 85711 
iadams@eyes.arizona.edu 

Adger, Carolyn 973 

Direaor 

Language in Society 
Center for Applied Linguistics 
4646 40th Street, N.W. 

Washington, DC 20016 
carolyn@cal.org 



Adler, Audrey 924 

Graduate Assistant 

Nutritional Sciences 

Rutgers University 

26 Nichol Avenue 

210 Davison Hall 

New Brunswick, NJ 08901-2882 

audler@aol.com 

Aguiar, Gretchen 

Fellow 

ACF/ACYF 

Head Start Bureau 

U.S. Department of Health and 

Human Services 

Family and Community Partnerships 
330 C Street, S.W 
Washington, DC 20447 
gaguiar@acf.dhhs.gov 

Akers, James F. 744, 839 

Research Scientist 

Early Intervention Research Institute 

Utah State University 

6580 Old Main Hill 

Logan, UT 84322-6580 

akersj@cpd2.usu.edu 

Alba, Roman Gardade 869 

Doaoral Student 
College of Education 
School of Psychology 
Texas A&M University 
1601 Valley View, #1602 
College Station, TX 77840 
roman2000@neo.tamu.edu 

Allen, Velma 743 

Vice President 

Mott Children's Health Center 
806 Tuuri Place 
Flint, MI 48503 

Alvarado, M. Irma 789 

Graduate Student 
Child and Family Development 
Institute on Human Development 
and Disability 
University of Georgia 
850 College Station Road 
Athens, GA 30602 



Ama, Shane 762 

Research Assistant 
Regional Research Institute 
Research and Training Center on 
Family Support and Children's 
Mental Health 
Portland State University 
P.O. Box 751 

Portland, OR 97207-0751 
amas@rri.pdx.edu 

Amwake, Lynn 

Early Childhood 
SERVE. 

1203 Governor's Square Boulevard, 
Suite 400 

Tallahassee, FL 32301 
camwake@serve.org 

Andal, Jolynne 938 

1400 East 55th Place #1012-5 
Chicago, IL 60637 

Anderman, Lynley 796 

Assistant Professor 
Educational and Counseling 
Psychology 

Department of Education 
University of Kentucky 
133 A Dickey Hall 
Lexington, CT 40506-0017 
lande2@pop.uky.edu 

Anderson, Susan 406 

Iowa Department of Education 
Grimes State Office Building 
Des Moines, lA 50319-0146 

Andrews, Howard 640 

Professor 

Data Coordinating Center 
School of Public Health 
Columbia University 
1051 Riverside Drive, Unit 47 
New York, NY 10032 
hfal@columbia.edu 

Angelo, Lauren 880 

University of Pennsylvania 
1621 South Clarion Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19148 
langelo@dolphin.upenn.edu 

Anziano, Michael C. 

Associate Professor 

Psychology 

Fort Lewis College 

1000 Rim Drive, 108-H 

Durango, CO 81326 

anziano_m@fortIewis.edu 



Appleton, Julie Mary 741, 781, 
921 

Senior Research Assistant 
School of Public Health 
Centre for Public Health Research 
Queensland University 
of Technology 
Victoria Park Road 
Kelvin Grove 
Queensland, 04059 
Australia 

j . appleton@ qut.edu. au 

Armijo, Eduardo J. 162 

Evaluation Specialist 
College of Education 
University of Washington 
4725 30th Avenue, N.E. 

Seattle, WA 98105-4021 
armijoed@u. washington.edu 

Armstead, Cathleen 

Orange County Head Start 
2100 East Michigan Street 
Orlando, FL 32806 
cathleen.armstead@ocfl.net 

Arnold, David H. 436 

Associate Professor 
Department of Psychology 
University of Massachusetts 
at Amherst 

Tobin Hall, Box 37710 
Amherst, MA 01003-7710 
damold@psych.umass.edu 

Arnold, L. Eugene 264 

Professor Emeritus 
Child Psychiatry 
The Ohio State University 
479 South Galena Road 
Sunbury, OH 43074 
arnold.6@osu.edu 

Amquist, Valerie 

Director 
Head Start 

West Central Minnesota 
Communities Action, Inc. 

411 Industrial Park Boulevard 
P.O. Box 956 
Elbow Lake, MN 56531 
val.amquist@co.grant.mn.us 

Arons, Marilyn 784 

President and CEO 
The Melody Arons Center for 
Preschool Research and 
Education, Inc. 

210 Carlton Terrace 
Teaneck, NJ 07666 
marilyn_arons@yahoo.com 



Arons, Raymond R. 784 

Assistant Professor 
Sociomedical Sciences 
Mailman School of Public Health 
Columbia University 
600 West 168th Street 
New York, NY 10032 
rral@columbia.edu 

Ash, Michael J. 

Professor 

Educational Psychology 
Texas A&M Universisty 
College of Education 
College Station, TX 77843-4225 
mash@tamu.edu 

Astri, Kelly 

Research Analyst 

Human Resources Development 

Canada 

165 Hotel de Ville Street 
Hull, Quebec KIA 0J2 
Canada 

kelly.astri@brdc-drhc.gc.ca 

Atkins, Deborah Hammond 851 

Director of Research and 
Development 
College of Education 
University of North Texas 
P.O. Box 305458 
Denton, TX 76203-5458 
atkins@unt.edu 

Atwater, Jane B. 160 

Assistant Research Professor 
Juniper Gardens Children's Project 
University of Kansas 
650 Minnesota Avenue, 2nd Floor 
Kansas City, KS 66101 
janea@ukans.edu 

Ayoub, Catherine C. 151, 827, 889 

Assistant Professor 
Harvard University 
Graduate School of Education 
613 Larsen Hall, Appian Way 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
catherine_ayoub@harvard.edu 

Azar, Sandra T. 862 

Associate Professor 

Francis L. Hiatt School of Psychology 

Clark University 

960 Main Street 

Worcester, MA 01610-1400 

sazar@clarku.edu 




Azhar, Rubina 

Chair 

Child Development 
Liberal Arts 

South Texas Community College 
3201 West Pecan Boulevard 
McAllen, TX 78501 
razhar@stcc.ee. tx-us 

Azzi, Lorenzo 938 

Illinois Institute of Technology 
4316 Baronne, Apartment E 
New Orleans, LA 70115 
loazzi@yahoo.com 

Balfanz, Robert Wayne 436 

Research Scientist 
CSOS 

Johns Hopkins University 
3003 North Charles Street 
Suite 200 

Baltimore, MD 21218 
rbalfanz@ csos. jhu. edu 

BaU, BUI D. 425 

President 

Institute for Program Evaluation 
407 Del Rio Court 
Allen, TX 75013 
bball@compuserve.com 

Balster, Julie 

Program Specialist 
Head Start Quality 
Improvement Center 
Community Development Institute 
1404 3rd Avenue, S.W 
Aberdeen, SD 57401 
jbalster@cditeam.org 

Bancroft, John 

Executive Director 
Head Start 

Puget Sound Educational Service 
District 

400 Southwest 152nd Street 
Burien, WA 98166 
jbanaoft@psesd.wednet.edu 

Banek, Vilma 764 

Co- Coordinator 
Project Succeed 
Portland State University 
1001 Southwest Baseline Street 
Hillsboro, OR 97123 
vbanek@msn.com 

Barbarin, Oscar A. 391 

Professor 

School of Social Work 
University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill 
102 Forest Ridge Drive 
Chapel Hill, NC 27514 
barbarin@unc.edu 



988 



992 



appendix d 



Barday-McLaughlin, Gina U. 470 

College of Education 

University of Tennessee 

415 Claxton Addition 

Theory and Practice 

Inclusive Early Childhood Education 

Knoxville, TN 37996-3400 

gmclaugh@utk.edu 

Bardwell, Ann S. 21, 344, 354 

G. Tyree Learning Center 
Head Start Program 
Child Development Council of 
Franklin County, Inc. 

1077 Lexington Avenue 
Columbus, OH 43201-0293 
abardwel 1 @ cdcheadstart. org 

Barnard, Kathryn E. 76, 150, 162, 
516 

Professor of Nursing and Psychology 
Washington Children's Home 
Society 

School of Nursing 
University of Washington 
South Building, Room 212 
Box 357920 
Seattle, WA 98195-0001 
kathyb@u.washington.edu 

Barnes, Jessica V. 743 

Graduate Student 
Developmental Psychology 
Michigan State University 
6 Kellogg Center 
East Lansing, MI 48824 
bames33@msu.edu 

Barrett, William 

Deputy Director 
Head Start 
ABCD, Inc. 

178 Tremont Street 
Boston, MA 02111 
barrett@ bostonabcd . org 

Bamieco, Sandra 801, 803 

Children's National Medical Center 
111 Michigan Avenue, N.W 
Washington, DC 20010 
sbarruec@ cnmc. org 

Barton, Lauren R. 816 

Michigan State University 
941 Shorepoint Court, F206 
Alameda, CA 94501 
bartonro@msu.edu 



Basen, Micheie M. 

Substance Abuse Mental Health 
Services Administration 
Office of Early Childhood 
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
5600 Fishers Lane, Rockwell II 
Rockville, MD 20852 
mbasen@samhsa.gov 

Baskerville, Carl 

Principal 

Rosemary Hills ES 

Montgomery County Public Schools 
2111 Porter Road 
Silver Spring, MD 20910 
carlbaskerville@fc.mcps.kl2.md.us 

Baumwell, Lisa 155 

Lab Coordinator 

Department of Applied Psychology 

School of Education 

New York University 

239 Greene Street, #401F 

New York, NY 10003 

lb28@nyu.edu 

Beam, Judy B. 

Special Education Coordinator 
Etowah City School 
858 Eighth Street 
Etowah, TN 37331 
beamj 1 @kl 2tn.net 

Beck, Isabel L. 840 

Professor of Education and 
Senior Scientist 
School of Education; LRDC 
University of Pittsburgh 
647 Learning Rresear^ and 
Development Center 
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 

Behr, Deborah $. 977 

Preschool Teacher 
Psychology 
Westminster College 
Box 58 

New Wilmington, PA 16172-0001 
behrds@westminster.edu 

Beidler, Megan 904 

Psychology 

University of South Carolina 
Department of Psychology 
Columbia, SC 29208 




Bennett, Tess 966 

Direaor 

Children's Research Center 
for Disabilities 
University of Illinois at 
U rbana-Champaign 
51 Gerly Drive, Room 139 
Champaign, IL 61820 
t_benne@uiuc.edu 

Benson, Sheldon 

Three Feathers Associates 
9121 East Tanque Verde, #105-217 
Tucson, AZ 85749 
tfasw@aoLcom 

Bergmann, Barbara R. 554 

Professor Emerita 
Economics 
American University 
5430 41st Place, N.W. 

Washington, DC 22015 
bbergman@wam.umd.edu 

Bermann, Eric A. 753, 780 

Professor 

Department of Psychology 
University of Michigan 
525 East Hall 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1109 
erbman@umich.edu 

Berry, Daniel 

Child Trends 

4301 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20008 
dberry@childtrends.org 

Biembaum, Mark A. 854 

Research Scientist 
Family and Child Nursing 
University of Washington 
Box 357262 
Seattle, WA 98195-7262 
mbiem@u.washi ngton.edu 

Big Crow, Cecelia Kaye 885 

Professional Research Assistant 

Health Sciences Center 

NCAIANMHR 

University of Colorado 

P.O. Box 711 

Pine Ridge, SD 57770 

cbigcrow@gwtc.net 

Black, Kris 

Program Specialist 
Head Start Quality Improvement 
Center 

Community Development Institute 
9745 East Hampden, Suite 310 
Denver, CO 80231 
kblack@cditeam.org 



993 



989 



APPENDIX D 



Blackman, Lorraine C* 474 

Associate Professor 
School of Social Work 
Indiana University 
902 West New York Street 
Indianapolis, IN 46202 
lblackma@iupui.edu 

Blair, Clancy 

Department of Human 
Development & Family Studies 
Pennsylvania State University 
110 Henderson South 
University Park, PA 16802-6504 

Blair, Kimberly 

Assistant Professor 
School of Education 
Duquesne University 
600 Forbes Avenue 
Pittsburgh, PA 15237 
blair@dug.edu 

Bloch, Judith S. 264 

Founder/CEO 

Variety Child Learning Center 
47 Humphrey Drive 
Syosset, NY 11791 
jsbvpsw@aol.com 

Blumstein, Rachel 834 

Department of Applied Psychology 
New York University 
239 Green Street, Room 410F 
New York, NY 10003 

Bodrova, Elena 446 

Senior Researcher 
Mid-Continent Research for 
Education and Learning (McRel) 
2550 South Parker Road, Suite 500 
Aurora, CO 80014 
ebodrova@ mcrel.org 

Boettcher, Caroline 788 

School Psychologist 
Eastern Suffolk BOCES 
201 Sunrise Highway 
Patchogue, NY 11722 
carolineboettcher@hotmail.com 

Bogdonoff, Zelda 

Direaor 
Head Start 
Early Childhood 

Community Services for Children 
1520 Hanover Avenue 
Allentown, PA 18109 



Bokony, Patti Ann 

Programs Director 
Psychiatry 
Arkansas CARES 
University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences 
4301 West Markham, Slot 711-1 
Little Rock, AR 72205 
boko nypatti a@u ams .edu 

Bolce, Donald P. 

Assistant Director 
Center for Educational Planning 
Santa Clara County Office 
of Education 

1290 Ridder Park Drive, MC 243 
San Jose, CA 95131-2398 
don2@home.com 

Boiler, Kimberly 140, 795 

Senior Research Psychologist 

Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. 

600 Alexander Park 

P.O. Box 2393 

Princeton, NJ 08543-2393 

kboller@mathematica-mpr.com 

Bolz, Carol 870 

Curriculum Coordinator 
Thomas Roque Center 
3800 East 51st Street 
Kansas City, MO 64130 

Bond, Mary Alice 847, 976 

Instructional Facilitator 
CSOS 

Johns Hokins University 
3003 North Charles 
Baltimore, MD 21218 
mabond@csos.jhu.edu 

Booth, Meg 

Policy Analyst 

Association of Maternal and Child 
Health Programs 
1220 19th Sueet, N.W 
Washington, DC 20036 

Bordin, Judith A. 

Professor 

Child Development Program, 220 
California State University at Chico 
9114 Troxel Road 
Chico, CA 95928 
jbordin@csuchico.edu 



Bomstein, Marc H. 211 

Child and Family Research 
National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development 
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
National Institutes of Health 
6705 Rockledge Drive, Suite 8030 
Bethesda, MD 20892 
mbl06n@nih.gov 

Borozny, Nathalie 

Education Coordinator 
Head Start Education 
Philadelphia Parent Child Center, Inc. 
2515 Germantown Avenue 
Philidelphia, PA 18119 

Bowman, Barbara T. 21, 354 

Professor 
Erikson Institute 

420 North Wabash Avenue, 6th Floor 
Chicago, IL 60611-3539 
bbowman@erikson.edu 

Bowman, Laura 

Children's Research Institute 
Center 6 

Children's National Medical Center 
111 Michigan Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20010 
lebowman@cnmc.org 

Boyc^ Cheryl A. 124 

Developmental Psycholgy and 
Prevention Branch 
National Institute of Mental Health 
6001 Executive Boulevard, Room 6200 
MSC9617 

Bethesda, MD 20892-9617 
cboyce @ mai 1 . nih .gov 

Boyc^ Lisa K. 163, 471, 839 

Research Associate 
Department of Family and 
Human Development 
Early Intervention Research Institute 
Utah State University 
EHS-R, UMC 6580 
Human Services Research Center 
Logan, UT 84322-6580 
1 isab @ cpd2 . usu .edu 

Boyd, Maria 837 

Touching the Lives of Children 
108 Pine Ridge Drive 
Wallace, NC 28466 
mboyd@riverlanding.net ' 



990 



99-1 



APPENDIX D 



Bradley, K. Denise 

Research and Policy Analyst 
Office of the Assistant Secretary for 
Planning and Evaluation 
Division of Child and Youth Policy 
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
200 Independence Avenue, S.W. 
Room 450-G 
Washington, DC 20201 
denise.bradley@hhs.gov 

Bradley, Robert H. 157, 468, 469 

Professor 

Center for Research on Teaching 
and Learning 

Center for Applied Studies 
in Education 

Univeristy of Arkansas at Little Rock 
2801 South University Avenue 
Little Rock, AR 72204 
rhbradley@ualr.edu 

Bradshaw, John L. 790 

Monash University 
Psychology Department 
Clayton, Victoria 03800 
Australia 

john.l.bradshaw@sci.monash.edu.au 

Brady-Smith, Christy Leigh 140, 
912 

Research Scientist 

Center for Children and Families 

Columbia University, Teachers 

College 

525 West 120th Street, Box 39 
New York, NY 10025 
clb54@columbia.edu 

Bravo, Claudette L. 

Education 

University of Illinois 
1040 West Harrison 
Chicago, IL 60607 
csanch7@uic.edu 

Bravo, Irene 

Faculty 

Doctoral Program 
Carlos Albizu University 
2173 N.W 99th Avenue 
Miami, FL 33172 
lbravo@albizu.edu 

Bray, Janies H. 474 

Family Medicine 
Baylor College of Medicine 
5510 Greenbrier 
Houston, TX 77005 
jbray@bcm.tmc.edu 



Bredekamp, Sue 406 

Director of Research 

Council for Professional Recognition 

2460 16th Street N.W. 

Washington, DC 20009 
sueb@cdacouncil.org 

Brennan, Carolyn 231, 762 

Assistant Professor 
Department of Developmental 
Studies and Counseling 
School of Education 
Boston University 
605 Commonwealth Avenue 
Boston, MA 02215 

Brennan, Eileen M. 762 

Principal Investigator 
Graduate School of Social Work 
Regional Research Institute 
Research and Training Center on 
Family Support and Children's 
Mental Health 
P.O. Box 751 

Pordand State University 
Portland, OR 97207-0751 
brennae@rri.pdx.edu 

Bridges, Annette 796 

Kentucky Department of Education 
500 Mero Street 
Frankfort, KY 40601 
abridges @ kde. state, ky.us 

Bridges, Liza 

Consultant 
Child Trends 
1741 T Street, N.W. 

#405 

Washington, DC 20009 
1 izabridge @ aol . co m 

Bridges, Margaret 

Research Psychologist 
Pace 

University of California at Berkeley 
2140 Shattuck Avenue, Suite 705 
Berkeley, CA 94704 
mbridges@uclink.berkeley.edu 

Briggs-Gowan, Margaret 858 

Associate Research Scientist 
Department of Psychology 
Yale University 

The Connecticut Early Development 
Project 

P.O. Box 208205 

New Haven, CT 06520-8205 

margaret.briggs-gowan@yale.edu 





Brinkmeier, LaursT 

Heads Up! Reading 
National Head Start Association 
1651 Prince Street 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
lbrinkme@hotmail.com 

Brizzi, Elsa N. 664 

Program Coordinator 
Head Start-State Preschool ^ 

Los Angeles County Office 
of Education 
17315 Studebaker Road 
Cerritos, CA 90703 
brizzLel sa @ 1 aco e. edu 

Broitman, Marina 530 

Project Coordinator 

Health Policy and Management 

Bloomberg School of Public Health 

Johns Hopkins University 

624 North Broadway, Room 691 

Baltimore, MD 21205 

mbroitma@jhsph.edu 

Brookes, Sheila J. 807, 907 

Senior Policy Research Analyst 
Human Development and 
Family Studies 

University of Missouri at Columbia 
1400 Rock Quarry Road 
Columbia, MO 65211 
brookess@missouri.edu 

Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne 115, 124, 
140, 227, 812 

Director 

Center for the Study of Young 
Children and Families 
Columbia University, Teachers 
College 

525 West 120th Street, Box 39 
NewYork, NY 10027 
jb224@columbia.edu 

Brown, Christine 

Child Protection and Coordination 
Department of the Interior 
Office of Indian Education Programs 

Brown, David L. 851 

Professor of Early Childhood 
Education 

Department of Elementary 
Education 

Texas A&M University at Commerce 
P.O. Box 3011 

Commerce, TX 75249-3011 
dbrown8293@aol.com 



991 



Brown, E. Glyn 

Early Childhood 
SERVE 

1203 Governor's Square Boulevard, 
Suite 400 

Tallahassee, FL 32301 
gbrown ©serve, org 

Brown, Flora V. R. 

Professor 

Education 

University of Illinois at Chicago 
College of Education, MC 147 
1040 West Harrison 
Chicago, IL 60607 
florarb@uic.edu 

Brown, Janelle 749 

Doaoral Student 
Graduate School of Education 
Psychology in Education 
University of Pennsylvania 
3700 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
janelleb@dolphin.upenn.edu 

Brown, Jeff 823 

Direaor 

Department of Community Health 
General Pediatrics Division 
Denver Health 

660 Bannock Street, MC 1914 
Denver, CO 80204 
jeff.brown@dhha.org 

Brown, Rhonda Douglas 745 

Assistant Professor of Cognitive 
Developmental Psychology 
Educational Foundations & 
Department of Psychology 
Educational Studies 
University of Cincinnati 
PO. Box 210002 
Cincinnati, OH 45221-0002 
rhonda.brown@uc.edu 

Brunson-Day, Carol 673 

CEO 

Council for Professional Recognition 
2460 16th Street, N.W. 

Washington, DC 20009 

Bryan, Beth Ann 187 

Senior Advisor to the Secretary 
of Education 
Office of the Secretary 
U.S. Department of Education 
400 Maryland Avenue, Suite 7W205 
Washington, DC 20202 
bethann.bryan@ed.gov 



992 



Bryant, Beverly A. 

Professor 

School of Business 

North Carolina Central University 

1801 Fayetteville Street 

PO. Box 20024 

Durham, NC 27707 

bryant.b@att.net 

Bryant, Donna M. 115, 124, 902 

Research Psychologist, Principal 
Investigator 

University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill 

Frank Porter Graham Child 
Development Institute 
105 Smith Level Road, C/B 8180 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-8180 
bryant@unc.edu 

Budgell, Richard 

Division of Childhood and 
Adolescence 
Health Canada 
Tunney's Pasture 

Jeanne Mance Building, Room B948 
Ottawa, Ontario K1 A 0K9 
Canada 

richard_budgell@hc-sc.gc.ca 

Buell, Martha Jane 289 

Associate Professor 
Department of Individual and 
Family Studies 
University of Delaware 
316 Alison 
Newark, DE 19716 
m jbuell @ udel . edu 

Bullock, Bebe 804 

Bennington College 
Bennington, VT 05201 
bullock4@sover.net 

Bulotsky, Rebecca 622, 738, 749, 
757 

Doctoral Student 
Graduate School of Education 
Psychology in Education Division 
University of Pennsylvania 
3700 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
rbulotsk@dolphin.upenn.edu 

Burchlnal, Margaret R. 83 

Research Associate Professor 
Frank Porter Graham Child 
Development Center 
University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill 

105 Smith Level Road, CB 8185 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-8185 
burdiina@mail.fpg.unc.edu 



Bums, Barbara M. 856, 893, 925 

Professor 

Department of Psychological 
and Brain Sciences 
University of Louisville 
Louisville, KY 40292-2356 
bbums@louisville.edu 

Bums, Susan 446, 448 

Associate Professor 
Graduate School of Education 
George Mason University 
4400 University Drive, ls4S 4B3 
Fairfax, VA 22030-4444 
mbums2@gmu.edu 

Busch-Rossnagel, Nancy A. 908 

Dean, Graduate School of Arts 
& Sdences 
Psychology 
Fordham University 
Keating Hall, Room 222 
441 East Fordham Road 
Bronx, NY 10458 
busch@fordham.edu 

Butler, Suellen G. 920 

Instmaor 
Delaware County 
Sociology 

Pennsylvania State University 
222 Garrett Avenue 
Swarthmore, PA 19081-1432 
sgbl0@psu.edu 

Butterfield, Perry M. 823 

Consultant 

2198 South Jackson Street 
Denver, CO 80210 

Butz, Arlene 967 

Associate Professor 
Pediatrics 

Johns Hopkins University, CMSC 144 
600 North Wolfe Street 
Baltimore, MD 21287-3144 
abutz@jhmi.edu 

Byraa, Mary Woods 

Assodate Professor of Clinical Studies 

School of Nursing 

Columbia University 

630 West 168th Street 

New York, NY 10032 

mwb4@columbia.edu 

Caal, Selma 845, 899 

Ph.D. Student 

Graduate School of Education 
George Mason University 
4400 University 
Fairfax, VA 22030 
scaal@gmu.edu 



996 



APPENDIX D 



Cabrera, Natasha 450 

National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development 
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
National Institutes of Health 
Demographic and Behavioral 
Sciences Branch 

6100 Executive Boulevard, Room 8B07 
Bethesda, MD 20892-7510 
cabreran@exchange.nih.gov 

Cain, Johnnie 876 

Grantee Specialist 
School of Extended Studies 
Early Childhood Training Center 
Portland State University 
1 633 S.W. Park Avenue 
Portland, OR 97201 
johnnie.cain@worldnet.att.net 

Calabrese, Barbara 967 

Senior Research Project Coordinator/ 
Manager 

School of Medicine 
Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Johns Hopkins University 
5501 Hopkins Bayview Circle, 

Room 4B32A 
Baltimore, MD 21224 

Calkins, Julia K. 

Child Trends, Inc. 

4301 Connecticult Avenue, N.W. 

Suite 100 

Washington, 20008 
jcalkins@childtrends.org 

Callow-Heusser, Catherine 

Onsite Coordinator 

Family and Human Development 

Early Head Start 

Utah State University 

2905 Old Main Hill 

Logan, UT 84321 

cheussen@cc.usu.edu 

Campbell, Bernadette 953 

Doctoral Student 
Pennsylvania State University 
N253 Burrows Building 
University Park, PA 16802 
bxcl 8@psu.edu 

Campbell, Catherine Elaine 

Clinical Assistant Professor 
Psychology 

Finch University/Chicago Medical 
School 

3333 Green Bay Road 

North Chicago, IL 60064-3095 

catherine.campbell@finchcms.edu 



Campbell, Frances A. 935 

Senior Scientist 

University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill 

Frank Porter Graham Child 
Development Center 
105 Smith Level Road 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599 
campbell@mail.fpg.unc.edu 

Campbell, Mary M. 

Public Interest 

American Psychological Association 
750 First Street, N.E. 

Washington, DC 20002-4242 
mcampbell@apa.org 

Capizzano, Jeffrey 775 

Research Associate 
Urban Institute 
2100 M Street, N.W. 

Washington, DC 20037 
jcapizza@ui.urban.org 

Cappiello, Clara 

Training and Development 
East Coast Migrant Head Start 
Program 

131 3rd Street, S.W. 

Winter Haven, FL 33880 
cappiello@ecmhsp.org 

Carey, Karen 756 

Associate Professor 
Psychology 

California State University at Fresno 
5241 North Maple 
Fresno, CA 93722 

Carlisle, Erin E. 

Student 

Special Education and School of 
Teaching and Learning 
University of Florida 
4455 S.W. 34th Street, UU250 
Gainesville, FL 32608 
eliz@ufl.edu 

Carothers, Shannon Shamiel 

Graduate Student 
Developmental Psychology 
University of Notre Dame 
Center for Children and Families 
1602 Ironwood 
South Bend, IN 46635 
carothers. 1 @nd.edu 



Carpenter, Jeanie Kim 

Director of Primary Care Services 
Ambulatory Services Administration 
The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia 

34th Street and Civic Center Boulevard 
Suite 1380,3535 Market 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
carpenterjk@email.chop.edu 

Carr, Andrea 

Direaor 

Research Division 
Ounce of Prevention Fund 
122 South Michigan Avenue 
Chicago, IL 60603 
acarr@ounceofprevention.org 

Carrere, Sybil 35, 378 

Research Assistant Professor 
Family and Child Nursing 
University of Washington 
Box 357262 
Seattle, WA 98195 
carrere@u.washington.edu 

Carrington, Joyce Rookwood 

Senior Program Specialist 
Administration for Children 
and Families 
Head Start Bureau 
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
26 Federal Plaza, Room 4114 
New York, NY 10278 
jcarrington@acf.dhhs.gov 

Carta, Judith J. 160, 289, 778 

Juniper Gardens Children's Project 
University of Kansas 
650 Minnesota, 2nd Floor 
Kansas City, KS 66101 
carta@ukans.edu 

Carter, Alice S. 230 

Associate Professor 
Department of Psychology 
University of Massachusetts 
at Boston 

100 Morrissey Boulevard 
Boston, MA 02125-3393 
alice.carter@umb.edu 

Cartozian, Clarissa 

Program Specialist 

Head Start Program 

Martin County, Florida School District 

3940 S.E. Salerno Road 

Stuart, FL 34997 

clarissaann@aol.com 



997 



993 



APPENDIX D 



Caruso, David A. 873 

Associate Vice President for 
Academic Affairs 
Worcester State College 
486 Chandler Street 
Worcester, MA 01602 
dacarusol@mediaone.net 

Carvdl, NeU R. 425 

Consultant 

Learning Therapy Program 
Education and Lifelong Learning 
Southern Methodist University 
P.O. Box 750384 
Dallas, TX 75275-0384 
ncarvell@mail.smu.edu 

Cary, Sandra 

Executive Assistant 
Executive Office 
Parents In Community Action 
Head Start 

700 Humboldt Avenue North 
Minneapolis, MN 55411 
scary@picaheadstart.org 

Casady, M. Angela 821, 857, 936 

Research Assistant 

Applied Developmental Science 

Michigan State University 

6 Kellogg Center 

East Lansing, MI 48824 

casadyan@msu.edu 

Castleman, Pamela 

Director 

Northwest Tennessee Head Start/ 
Early Head Start 
938 C Walnut Avenue West 
Mckenzie, TN 38201 
pcastleman@ nwtnhs.org 

Castro, Dina C. 902 

Investigator 

University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill 

Frank Porter Graham Child 
Development Center 
105 Smith Level Road, CB 8180 
Chapel Hill, NC 275998180 
dina_castro@unc.edu 

Caswell, Linda 115 

Senior Research Associate 
Center for Children and Families 
Education Development Center 
55 Chapel Street 
Newton, MA 02138-1905 
lcaswell@edc.org 



Chang, Florence 856, 893, 925 

Graduate Student 
Department of Psychological and 
Brain Sciences 
University of Louisville 
Louisville, KY 40292 
florence.chang@louisville.edu 

Chang, Young Eun 

Department of Human Ecology 
University ofTexas at Austin 
117 GEA 

Austin, TX 78712-1097 

Charak, David A. 946 

Post Doctoral Fellow 
Applied Psychology 
University of Miami 
P.O. Box 249229 
Coral Gables, FL 33124-0721 
dcharak@ miami .edu 

Chase-Lansdale, P. Lindsay 228, 
939 

Professor 

Human Development & Social Policy 
Northwestern University 
2040 Sheridan Road 
Evanston, IL 60208 
Id @ northwestem.edu 

Chiang, Tsu-Ming 965 

Associate Professor 
Department of Psychology 
Georgia College and State University 
CBX 090 

Milledgeville, GA 31061 
tchiang@gcsu.edu 

Childs, Stephanie 

Graduate School of Education 
University of Pennsylvania/SDOP 
443 Old Farm Road 
Wyncote, PA 19095 
schilds@gse.upenn.edu 

Choi, Dong Hwa 870 

Assistant Professor 
Early Childhood Education 
Indiana State University 
66 Pear Tree Lane 
Terre Haute, IN 47803 
eechoi @ i sugw. i ndstate. edu 

Christensen, Donna H. 914 

Associate Professor 
Family and Consumer Sciences 
Family Studies and Human 
Development 
University of Arizona 
P.O. Box 210033 
Tucson, AZ 85721-0033 
dchriste@ag.arizona.edu 



Christensen, Michelle 885, 886 

Assistant Professor 
Psychiatry 

Arnerican Indian and Alaska 
Native Programs 
University of Colorado Health 
Sdences Center 
4455 East 12th Avenue 
Campus Box AO 11- 13 
Denver, CO 80220 
michelle.christensen@uchsc.edu 

Christie, James E 446, 447 

Professor 

Curriculum and Instmction 
Arizona State University 
P.O. Box 871411 
Tempe, AZ 85287-1411 
jchristie@asu.edu 

ChurchiU, Susan L. 747, 767 

Assistant Professor 
Family and Consumer Sdences 
University of Nebraska at Lincoln 
123 Home Economics 
Lincoln, NE 68583-0801 
schurchill2@unl.edu 

Ciando, Dennis |. 

Psychology 

University of Notre Dame 
208 Haggar Hall 
Notre Dame, IN 46556 
dciancio@nd.edu 

Claivson, Carolyn 

Human Development and 
Family Studies 
Iowa State University 
51 C LeBaron 
Ames, LA 50014 

Claxton, Jill 875 

Senior Research Assistant 

High/Scope Educational Research 

Foundation 

600 North River Street 

Ypsilanti, Ml 48198 

jiIlc@highscope.org 

Clements, Douglas H. 436 

Professor 

Mathematics and Early Childhood 
Education 

State University of New York 
at Buffalo 

Graduate School of Education 
505 Baldy Hall 
Buffalo, NY 14260 
dements@buffalo.edu 



994 



998 



appendix d 



Clements, Melissa 

Post-Doc 
Waisman Center 
University of Wisconsin 
1500 Highland Avenue 
Madison, WI 53705 
clements@waisman.wisc.edu 

CUfford, Candice 748 

Research Technician 
Opthamology 
University of Arizona 
655 North American Way 
Tucson, AZ 85711 
candice@u.arizona.edu 

Closter, Betsi 

Early Head Start Manager 
Fairfax County Office for Children 
1 2011 Government Center Parkway, 
9th Floor 
Fairfax, VA 22035 
betsicloster@fairfaxcounty.gov 

Clubb, Richard D. 157 

Associate Professor 
Department of Social and 
Behavioral Science 
Division of Social Sciences 
University of Arkansas at Monticello 
Monticello, AR 71656 
clubb@uamont.edu 

Coard, Robert 

President/CEO 

Executive Office 

Action for Boston Community 

Development, Inc. 

178 Tremont Street 
Boston, MA 02111 
coard@bostonabcd.org 

Cohen, Heather L. 879, 955 

Graduate School of Education 
Psychology in Education 
University of Pennsylvania 
3700 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
rouseh@dolphin.upenn.edu 

Cohen, Rachel Chazan 140, 199 

Senior Analyst 
Administration for Children 
and Families 

U.S. Department of Health And 
Human Services 

OPRE/ Child Outcomes Research and 
Evaluation (CORE) 

370 L'Enfant Promenade, S.W 
7th Floor West 
Washington, DC 20447 
rccohen@acf.hhs.gov 



Cohen, Sally 771 

Director 

School of Nursing 

Center for Health, Policy, and Ethics 

Yale University 

100 Church Street South 

New Haven, CT 0651 9 

sally.cohen@yale.edu 

Cohen, Sherry A. 924 

1 215 Livingston Avenue 

P.O. Box 1865 

North Brunswick, NJ 08902 

Coiro, Mary Jo 530 

Assistant Scientist 
Health Policy and Management 
Johns Hopkins School of 
Public Health 
624 North Broadway 
Baltimore, MD 21205 
mcoiro@jhsph.edu 

Coleman, Margo 

Research Associate 
National Center for Research 
and Data 

Child Welfare League of America 
50 F Street, N.W 
6th Floor 

Washington, DC 20001 
mcoleman@cwla.org 

V 

Collier, Dawne B. 

Program Director for Employment 
The Enterprise Foundation 
1801 K Street, N.W. 

M-lOO 

Washington, DC 20005 
dcollier@enterprisefoundation.org 

Collins, Edna Neal 768 

Assistant Professor 
Department of Curricular Studies 
University of North Carolina 
at Wilmington 
601 South College Road 
Wilmington, NC 28403-5940 
collinse@uncwil.edu 

Collins, Teresa 

Director 

Philadelphia Housing Authority 
12 South 23rd Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19103 
teresa.collins@pha.phila.gov 

Colon, R. Emilio 

Head Start Fellow 
Administration for Children 
and Families 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Switzer Building, Room 2046 
Washington, DC 20047 



o 

ERIC 



Conners, Nicola Allison 758 

Instmrtor 

Pediatrics 

Parmers for Inclusive Communities 
University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences 
4301 West Markham, Slot 711-1 
Little Rock, AR 72205 
connersnicolaa@uams.edu 

Constantine, J. 140 

(contact information not available) 

Contreras, Luisa 

1525 Saint Nicholas Avenue 
New York, NY 10033 

Cook, Gina A. 163, 471 

Research Associate 
Department of Family and 
Human Development 
Utah State University ^ 

Early Childhood Research Institute 
6580 Old Main Hill, UMC 2905 
Family Life Building, Florida 214 
Logan, UT 84322-6580 
gina@cpd2.usu.edu 

Cook, Robert S. 785 

Project Manager 

Center for Persons with Disabilities 

Projert SPIES 

Utah State University 

6818 Old Main Hill 

Logan, UT 84322. 

robertc@cpd2.usu.edu 

Cook, Ronna 172 

Westat 

1650 Research Boulevard 
Rockville, MD 20850 
ronnacook@westat.com 

Copley, Juanita 436 

Associate Professor 
Early Childhood Education 
University of Houston 
256 Parish Hall 
Houston, TX 77204 
ncopley@aol.com 

Cortes, Rebecca 733, 867 

Human Development and 
Family Studies 

Pennsylvania State University 
524 West Smith Street 
Seattle, WA 98119 
rcortes@u.washington.edu 



999 



995 



APPENDIX D 



Cosminsky, Sheila 926 

Associate Professor of Anthropology 
Department of Sociology, 
Anthropology, and Criminal Justice 
Rutgers University at Camden 
311 North 5th Street 
Camden, NJ 08102 
cosminsk@ crab, rutgers . edu 

Crawford, Shavon 

Student 

University of South Carolina 
Psychology Department 
Columbia, SC 29208 
shavon@mailbox.sc.edu 

Cristofaro, Tonia Natalie 622, 844 

Department of Applied Psychology 
New York University 
239 Greene Street, # 401 F 
New York, NY 10003 
tnc204@nyu.edu 

Crittenden, Ann 3 

Author 

3412 Lowell Street, N.W. 

Washington, DC 20011 
ann.crittenden@erols.com 

Cromey, Allison 938 

NCREL 

2023 West Roscoe Street, #3f 
Chicago, IL 60618 
acromey@ncrel.org 

Crouch, Myra G. 

Head Start Administrator 

Head Start Program 

Fairfax County Office for Children 

12011 Government Center Parkway, 

9th Floor 

Fairfax, VA 22035 

myr a. crouch @ fairfaxcounty. gov 

Crozier, Lindsay 795 

Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. 
P.O. Box 2393 
Princeton, NJ 08543 
lcrozier@mathematica-mpr.com 

Culp, Anne McDonald 811 

Human Development and 
Family Studies 
University of Alabama 
207 East Annex Building 
Box 870158 

Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0158 
aculp@ches.ua.edu 



O 996 

ERIC 



Culp, Rex E. 811 

Professor and Research Chair 
Department of Human 
Development 
University of Alabama 
Box 870158 

Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0158 
rexculp@ches.ua.edu 

Cunningham, Gayle 115 

Executive Direaor 
Administration/Child Development 
Head Start 

Jefferson County Committee for 
Economic Opportunity 
300 Eighth Avenue West 
Birmingham, AL 35204 
gcjcceo@aol.com 

Curenton, Stephanie M. 

Graduate Student 
Department of Psychology 
University of Virginia 
P.O. Box 400400 
Charlottesville, VA 22903-2477 
smc4u@virginia.edu 

Cutshall, Janice L. 

Teacher 

Tishomingo County Schools 
507 West Quitman 
luka, MS 38852 
lcutshall@nadata.net 

Da Silva, Julia M. 

Projea Manager 
Public Interest Directorate 
Public Interest Initiatives Office 
American Psychological Association 
750 First Street, N.E. 

Washington, DC 20002 
jsilva@apa.org 

Daniel-Echols, Marijata 115 

Research Associate 

High/Scope Educational Research 

Foundation 

600 North River Street 

Ypsilanti, MI 48198-2898 

marijatad@highscope.org 

Dannison, Linda L. 809 

Professor and Chairperson 
Family and Consumer Sciences 
Western Michigan University 
3018 Korman Hail 
Kalamazoo, MI 49008-5322 
linda.dannison@wmich.edu 

Darling, Cathia 

Transition Project Director 
Miami-Dade County Public School 
1500 Biscayne Boulevard, Room 335 
Miami, FL 33142 
ddarlingl @compuserve.com 



Darwish, Diane 729 

Mailman School of Public Health 
Columbia University 
Head Start and Early Head Start 
601 West 168th Street, Suite 42 
NewYork, NY 10032 

Davidson, Leslie 606 

Chair 

Heilbrunn Department of 
Population and Family Health 
Mailman School of Public Health 
Columbia University 
60 Haven Avenue B-2 
NewYork, NY 10032 
lldl@columbia.edu 

Davidson, Sherry 841 

Reseacher and Trainer 
Child and Family Policy Center 
New York University 
1775 York Avenue, #33G 
NewYork, NY 10128 
sdavi3 2449 @ aol .com 

Davis, Deborah Wnders 925 

Neonatal Follow-up Program 
University of Louisville 
233 East Gray Street, Suite 404 
Louisville, KY 40202 

Day, Carol Brunson 

President/CEO 

Council for Professional Recognition 
2460 16th Street, N.W. 

Washington, DC 20009 
carold@cdacouncil.org 

De La Torre-Spencer, Sylvia 

ESOL/Billingual Programs 
Montgomery County Public Schools 
4910 Macon Road 
Rockville, MD 20906 

DeBey, Mary 804 

Director 

BA/MAT Program 
Bennington College 
Route 67A 

Bennington, VT 05201 
debey@bennington.edu 

DeKlyen, Michelle 162, 474 

Researcher 

Office of Population Research 
Princeton University 
286 Wallace 
Princeton, NJ 08544 
mdeklyen @ aprmail .princeton . edu 



1 nnn 



APPENDIX D 



Delcannen, Rebecca 

Chief, Neorodevelopment Disorders 
National Institute on Mental Health 
6001 Executive Boulevard 
Bethesda, MD 20892-8612 
rdelcarm@nih.gov 

D'Elio, Mary Ann K. 100, 811 

Senior Research Analyst 

The CDM Group, Inc 

5530 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 1660 

Chevy Chase, MD 20815 

mdelio@cdmgroup.com 

Deluca, Mary Cunningham 780, 
928 

Children Programs 
Community Action Agency 
1214 Greenwood Avenue 
Jackson, MI 49203 
mdeluca@caajlh.org 

DeLucde, Mary 664, 979 

Associate Professor 

Family Studies and Human Services 

Early Childhood Education 

Kansas State University 

Justin Hall #307 

Manhattan, KS 66506 

hdfsmary@ksu.edu 

Deming, Joan 

Senior Professor, Research Assistant 
Psychiatry 

Program for Early Childhood 
Development 

University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center 

4200 East 9th Avenue, C-26869 
Denver, CO 80262 
joan.deming@uchsc.edu 

Demulder, Elizabeth K. 845, 899, 
959 

Associate Professor 

Graduate School of Education 

George Mason University 

10900 University Boulevard, MS 4E4 

Manasses, VA 20110-2203 

edemulde@gmu.edu 

Denham, Susanne A. 234, 959, 963 

Professor 

Department of Psychology 
George Mason University 
4400 University Drive, MS 3F5 
Fairfax, VA 22030-4444 
sdenham@gmu.edu 

Dervarics, Charles 

719 Timber Branch Parkway 
Alexandria, VA 22302 



Determan, Colleen M. 743 

Program Director 

Ready, Set, Grow! Passport 

202 East Boulevard Drive, Suite 240 

Flint, MI 48503 

Dethlefsen, Amy 886 

Research Assistant 
Psychiatry 

American Indian and Alaska Native 
Programs 

University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center 
4455 East 12th Avenue 
Campus BoxAOll-13 
Denver, CO 80220 

DlBella, Adam 422, 752, 754 

Graduate Student 
Graduate School of Education 
University of Pennsylvania 
3700 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
dibella@dolphin.upenn.edu 

Dickinson, David K. 115 

Senior Research Scientist 
Center for Children and Families 
Education Development Center 
55 Chapel Street 
Newton, MA 02458 
ddickinson@edc.org 

Dickstein, Susan 231, 232, 881 

Director, Early Childhood Center 
East Providence Bradley Hospital 
Brown University 
1011 Veteran's Memorial Parkway 
East Providence, RI 02915 
susan_dickstein@brown.edu 

Dighe, Judith 

Education Specialist 
Head Start 

Montgomery County, Maryland 
Public Schools 
4910 Macon Road 
Rockville, MD 20852 
judith_dighe@fc.mcps.kl2.md.us 

Dilling, Michelle 

Coordinator 
Early Head Start 

Community and Family Resource 
Center, Inc. 

P.O. Box 1186 
330 Fountain Street 
Lafayette, IN 47902 
mdilling@cfrc.org 



Dimino, Stacy 11^ 

Director 
Head Start 

Communities United, Inc. 

135 Beaver Street 

Waltham, MA 02452 

sdimino@communitiesunitedinc.org 

Divine> Patricia L. 

Child Care Bureau 
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
ACF/ACYF 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Switzer Building, Room 2046 
Washington, DC 20047 
pdivine@ acf. hhs.gov 

Doan, Henry M. 

Head Start Bureau 
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
ACF/ACYF 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Suite 2115 

Washington, DC 20447 
hdoan@acf.hhs.gov 

Dobbs, Jennifer 

Graduate Student 
Department of Psychology 
Clinical 

University of Massachusetts 
Tobin Hall 33710 
Amherst, MA 01003 
jendobbs@psych.umass.edu 

Dobson, Velma 884 

Department of Ophthalmology 
University of Arizona 
655 North Alvemon Way, Suite 108 
Tucson, AZ 85711 

Doctoroif, Greta L. 

Graduate Student 
Psychology Department 
University of Massachusetts at 
Amherst 
146 Hicks Way 
Tobin Hall, Box 37710 
Amherst, MA 01003-37710 
greta@psych.umass.edu 

Dodds, Vickie 

Special Services Coordinator 
Lycoming-Clinton Head Start 
2138 Boyd Street 
Williamsport, PA 17701 
vcdodds@stepcorp.org 





997 



APPENDIX D 



Dodson, Kathy 

Instructional Specialist 
Head Start 

Montgomery County, Maryland 
Public Schools 
Rocking Horse Road Center 
4910 Macon Road 
Rockville, MD 20852 
kathy_dodson@fc.mcps.kl 2. md. us 

DodgC'Magee, Karin 231 

Clinical Director 

East Providence Bradley Hospital 

Brown University 

1011 Veteran's Memorial Parkway 

East Providenc, RI 02915 

Doerr, Anne M. 664 

Director 

Lycoming-Clinton Head Start 
2138 Boyd Street 
Williamsport, PA 17701 
amdoerr@stepcorp.org 

Dominguez, Reyna 824 

Health Education 
Head Start 

Child Development Resources of 
Ventura County, Inc. 

221 Ventura Boulevard 
Oxnard, 93030 

reyna.dominguez@cdrofvtaco.org 

Domitrovich, Celene E. 664, 867 

Prevention Research Center 
Pennsylvania State University 
S-109 Henderson Building 
Prevention Center 
University Park, PA 16802 
cxdl30@psu.edu 

Dorn, Elizabeth 

Grant Writer 

Parents in Community Action 
Head Start 

700 Humboldt Avenue North 
Minneapolis, MN 55411 
ldom@picaheadstart.org 

Dossett, Dena H. 856, 925 

Graduate Fellow 
Department of Psychology 
University of Louisville 
358 Life Science Building 
Louisville, KY 40292-2001 
dmdossOl @ athena.louisville.edu 

Doughty, Sherri 

Senior Analyst 

United States General Accounting 
Office 

441 G Street, N.W. 

Room 5928 

Washington, DC 20024 
doughtys@gao.gov 



Doussard-Roosevelt, Jane A. 

Research Associate Professor 
Human Development 
College of Education 
University of Maryland 
3304 Benjamin Building 
College Park, MD 20853 
jdr@wamn.umd.edu 

Downer, Jason Troy 622, 730 

Graduate Research Assistant 
Department of Psychology 
Clinical-Community Program 
University of South Carolina 
Columbia, SC 29208 
downerjt@yahoo.com 

Draper, Diane C. 152 

Iowa State University 
1086 LeBaron Hall 
Ames, lA 50011 
dcdraper@iastate.edu 

Dubinchik, Lyudmila 

Health Services Manager 
H.C.S. Head Start 
30 Madison Avenue 
Springfield, MA 01105 

Duch, Helena 729 

Adult Development Coordinator 
Columbia University 
Head Start and Early Head Start 
601 West 168th Street, Suite 42 
New York, NY 10032 
hd284@nyu.edu 

Ducharme> Anita Louise 

Program Consultant 
Population and Public Health 
Branch 

Health Canada 
420-391 York Avenue 
Winnipeg, Manitoba R3C 0P4 
Canada 

anita_ducharme@hc-sc.gc.ca 

Dudas, Edith 

Research Analyst 

Human Resources Development 

Canada 

165 Hotel de Ville Street 
Hull, Quebec K1A0J2 
Canada 

edith.duclas@hrdc-drbc.gr.ca 



o 



998 





Dudley, Amanda Louise 790 

Psychologist/Research Assistant 
School of Psychology, Psychiatry, 
and Psychological Medicine 
Centre for Developmental Psychiatry 
and Psychology 
Monash University 
246 Clayton Road, Clayton 
Melbourne, Viaoria 03168 
Australia 

amanda.dudley@med.monash.edu.au 

Dungan, Shannon 

Student 

Early Childhood Education 
Wheelock College 
12 Wait Street, 2F 
Boston, MA 02120 
credasd@hotmail.com 

Eastin, Julie 753 

Department of Psychology 
University of Michigan 
525 East Univeristy Avenue 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 

Eckenrode, John J. 940, 947 

Human Development and 
Family Studies 
Cornell University 
FLDC 

N210 MVR Hall 
Ithaca, NY 14853 
jjel@comell.edu 

Edwards, Mark Christopher 783 

Psychologist 
Pediatric Psychology 
University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences 
800 Marshall Street 
Little Rock, AR 72202 
edwardsmark@uams.edu 

Efinger, Evelyn 

Coordinator 
New York University 
Head Start Quality Improvement 
Center 

1 Academic Drive 
Coming, NY. 14904 
efmger@coming.cc.edu 

Eguia, Maria E. 881 

Psychologist 

Psychiatry and Human Behavior 
Bradley Research Center/Brown 
University 
Bradley Hospital 
1011 Veteran's Memorial Parkway 
East Providence, RI 0291 5 
meguia49@yahoo.com 



APPENDIX D 



Elias, Doreen 

Coordinator 

Early Head Start 

Head Start Child Development 

Council 

2451 Country Club Boulevard 
Stockton, CA 95204 

Elicker, James 905 

Associate Professor 
Department of Child Development 
and Family Studies 
Purdue University 
1269 Fowler House 
Purdue University 
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1269 
elickerj@cfs.purdue.edu 

Ellingsen, Kirsten 

Research Analyst 
Education 

Child and Family Studies 
Westat, Inc. 

1500 Research Boulevard, TB 385 
Rockville, MD 20850 

Emde, Robert N. 150, 159, 211 

Professor 

Psychiatry 

Program for Early Childhood 
Development 

University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center 

4200 East 9th Avenue, Box C268-69 
Denver, CO 80262 
bob.emde@uchsc.edu 

Emmer, Casey 

Oral Health Policy 
Columbia University Dental School 
630 West 1 68th Street 
P & S Box 20 

SDOS/Community Health 
New York, NY 10032 

Enriquez, Blanca 

Executive Director 

Head Start Program 

Region 19 Education Service Center 

11670 Chito Samaniego 

El Paso, TX 79936 

benriquez@esc 1 9 . net 

Enticott, Peter 790 

Centre for Developmental Psychiatry 
and Psychology 
Monash University 
8 Beddoe Avenue 
Clayton, Victoria 03168 
Australia 

peter.enticott@med.monash.edu.au 



Escamilla, Manuel 803 

Direaor 

Rocky Mountain SER 
150 Sheriden Boulevard 
Denver, CO 80226 

Espinosa, Linda M. 673 

Associate Professor 

Early Childhood 

Curriculum and Instruction 

University of Missouri at Columbia 

311 D Towsend Hall 

Columbia, MO 65211 

espinosal@missouri.edu 

Evans, Kathy Deen 

Assistant Professor of Early 
Childhood Education 
University of Tennessee at Martin 
240 Goodi Hall 

Department of Educational Studies 
Martin, TN 38238 
kevans@utm.edu 

Everhart, Maria 866 

Regional Research Institute 
Portland State University 
P.O. Box 751 
Portland, OR 97207 
everhartm@rri.pdx.edu 

Fagan, Jay S. 817 

Associate Professor 
School of Social Administration 
Temple University 
Ritter Hall Annex, 5th Floor 
13th Street and Cecil B. Moore 
Avenue 

Philadelphia, PA 19122 
jfagan@nimbus.ocis.temple.edu 

Faldowski, Richard A. 153 

Assistant Professor 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences 
Medical University of 
South Carolina 
167 President Street, lOP 45 
Charleston, SC 29425 
faldowra@ musc.edu 

Fantuzzo, John W. 622, 726, 738, 
749, 757, 879, 915, 955 
Professor 

Graduate School of Education 
Psychology in Education 
University of Pennsylvania 
3700 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6216 
johnf@nwfs.gse.upenn.edu 



Farling, Lisa 871 

Research Assistant 
Individual and Family Studies 
University of Delawarwe 
Center for Disability Studies 
University of Delaware 
Newark, DE 19716 

Farran, Dale C. 829 

Professor 

Department ofTeaching 
and Learning 
Vanderbilt University 
Box 330, GPC 
Nashville, TN 37203 
dale.farran@vanderbilt.edu 

Farrell, Ann 740, 781 

Senior Lecturer 
School of Early Childhood 
Centre for Applied Studies in 
Early Childhood 
Queensland University of 
Technology 
Victoria Park Road 
Kelvin Grove 
Qld 4059 
Brisbane 04059 
Australia 

a.farrell@qut.edu.au 

Farris, Jaelyn Renee 

Graduate Student/ Research Assistant 
Department of Psychology 
University of Notre Dame 
Haggar Hall 
Notre Dame, IN 46556 
jfarris@nd.edu 

Fauth, Rebecca Carrie 912 

Center for Children and Families 
Columbia University, Teachers College 
525 West 120th Street, Box 39 
New York, NY 10027 
rcf25@columbia.edu 

Fedoravidus, Nicole 792 

Evaluation Coordinator 
Bush Center in Child Development 
and Social Policy 
School of the 21st Century 
Yale University 
310 Prospect Street, 3rd Floor 
New Haven, CT 06511 
nicole.fedoravicius@yale.edu 

Fell, Ed 115, 124 

Research Associate 
Oregon Research Institute 
1715 Franklin Boulevard 
Eugene, OR 97403 
edf@ori.org 




1003 



999 



appendix d 



Felleman, Elizabeth 834 

Research Assistant 
Applied Psychology 
Educational Psychology 
New York University 
61 West 9th Street, #8E 
New York, NY 10011 
ehf204@nyu.edu 

Fenske, Mary Ann 863 

Doctoral Student 
Department of Communicative 
Disorders and Sciences 
Wichita State University 
Box 75 

Wichita, KS 67260-0075 
mafenske@wichita.edu 

Fernie, David 922, 975, 980 

Higher Education Advisor 
Head Start Quality Improvement 
Center 

The Ohio State University 
College of Education 
Arps Hall, Room 333 
1945 North High Street 
Columbus, OH 43202 
femie.l@osu.edu 

File, Nancy 974 

Assistant Professor 

Department of Curriculum and 

Instruction 

University of Wisconsin at 
Milwaukee 
PO. Box 413 
Milwaukee, WI 53201 
nfile@uwm.edu 

Fine, Mark Allen 161, 907 

Human Development and Family 
Studies 

University of Missouri at Columbia 
316 Gentry Hall 
Columbia, MO 65211 
finem@nriissouri.edu 

Fischel, Janet 115, 934 

Associate Professor/ Division Chief 
Department of Pediatrics 
Development and Behavior 
State University of New York at 
Stony Brook 

Stony Brook, NY 11794-8111 
jfischel@notes.cc.sunysb.edu 



Fisher, Anita Rae 

Coordinator 
Administration 
Early Head Start 

Community and Family Resource 
Center, Inc. 

P.O. Box 1186 
330 Fountain Street 
Lafayette, IN 47902 
afisher@cffc.org 

Fisher, Paige Helaine 725 

9912 Bluegrass Road 
Potomac, MD 20854 
pfisher@psych.umass.edu 

Fisher, Ronni 868 

Assistant Executive Director 
University Settlement 
184 Eldridge Street 
New York, NY 10002 

Fitzgerald, Hiram E. 154, 468, 
470, 664, 743, 812, 815, 816 

Assistant Professor 
University Outreach 
Michigan State University 
22 Kellog Center 
East Lansing, MI 48820 
fitzger9 @ msu.edu 

Flanagan, Kathleen 

Program Coordinator 
Mental Health 

Washington County Head Start 
1 8 River Street 
Hudson Falls, NY 12839 

Flanagan, Rosemary 664 

SLPA Student 
Head Start-State Preschool 
Los Angeles County Office 
of Education 
10411 Trabuco Street 
Bellflower, CA 90706 

Flores, Alfredo R. 

Research Administrator 
Institute for Child and 
Family Studies 
Texas Tech University 
P.O. Box 41162 
Lubbock, TX 79409 
arflores@attglobal.net 

Fodness, Ruth 

Co-Chair 

Government/ Professional Relations 
National Association of 
School Psychologists 
4340 East West Highway, Suite 402 
Bethesda, MD 20814 
lnealis@naspweb.org 




Fogle, Livy Marie 877 

Psychology 

University of South Carolina 
Columbia, SC 29208 
fogle@sc.edu 

Forman, Jessica 830 

Researcher 

Pediatrics 

Behavioral Sciences 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine 
1300 Morris Park Avenue 
Bronx, NY 10461 

Fomess, Steven R. 124 

Professor 

Psychiatry 

Child and Adolescent 
University of California at 
Los Angeles 
760 Westwood Plaza 
Los Angeles, CA 90024 

Foster, Sandra 

Administrative Assistant 
Central Office 

Tishomingo County Schools 
Paul Edmondson Drive 
luka, MS 38852 
sfoster@ tishomi ngo.kl 2 . ms.us 

Fox, Christina 232 

Student 

School of Education 
University of Pennsylvania 
1500 Locust Street, Apartment 3403 
Philadelphia, PA 19102 
christinamfox@aol.com 

Frands, Judith L. 

Senior Research Associate 
Heller School for Policy 
and Management 
Family & Children's Policy Center 
Brandeis University 
MS035 

Waltham, MA 02454-9110 
francis@brandeis.edu 

Franklin, Brenda 853 

Masters Student 
Psychology 

San Francisco State University 
1600 Holloway Avenue, HSS 332 
San Francisco, CA 94132 
bfranklin@sfsu.edu 

Frankovich, Teresa 

Director 

B-H-K Child Development Board 
700 Park Avenue 
Houghton, MI 49931 
bhkmd@up.net 



1000 



1004 



APPENDIX D 



Frazier, Won 

Program Manager 
Head Start 
Early Head Start 

Economic Opportunity Commission 
of San Luis Obispo County, Inc. 
1030 Southwood Drive 
San Luis Obispo, CA 93401 
yfrazier@eocslo.org 

Frede, Ellen 446, 448 

Visiting Professor 
The College of New Jersey 
10 Seminar Place 
New Bmnswick, NJ 80903 

Freedman, Steve 47 

Executive Director 

Institute for Child Health Policy 

University of South Florida 

601 Fourth Street South, CRI 1008 

Saint Petersburg, FL 33701 

saf@ichp.edu 

Freeman, Nicole Rosemary 

Research Assistant 
HDFS Prevention Center 
Pennsylvania State University 
109 South Henderson Building 
University Park, PA 16802 
nrfl06@psu.edu 

Freese, Margaret P. 

Clinical Psychologist 
Early Childhood Services 
Division of Child and 
Family Services 

61 71 West Charleston Boulevard, 
Building 16 
Las Vegas, NV 89146 
m pfreese@dcfs. state, nv. us 

Freidman, Sarah 

NICHD 

6100 Executive Boulevard, MSC 7510 
Room 7B13H 
Rockville, MD 20852 

French, Janice 823 

Program Evaluator 

Best Babies 

Denver Health 

501 28th Street, MC 3600 

Denver, CO 80205 

janice.ffench@dhha.org 



Friesen, Barbara J. 764 

Director 

Research and Training Center on 
Family Support and Children's 
Mental Health 
Regional Research Institute 
Portland State University 
P.O. Box 751 

Portland, OR 97207-0751 
friesenb@pdx.edu 

Frye, Douglas A. 422, 423, 752, 882 

Associate Professor 
Graduate School of Education 
University of Pennsylvania 
3700 Walnut Street, D-18 
Philadelphia, PA 1 9104 
dffye@gse.upenn.edu 

Fu, Victoria R. 

Professor 

Department of Family and 
Child Development 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University 
309 Wallace Hall 
Blacksburg, VA 24061-0416 
vfu@vt.edu 

Fuligni, Allison SidleN140 

Center for Children and Families 
Columbia University, Teachers 
College 

525 West 120th Street, Box 39 
New York, NY 10027 
asf2 7 @columbia.edu 

Furrer, Carrie 161 

Psychology Department 
Portland State University 
P.O. Box 751 

Portland, OR 97207-0751 

Gadsden, Vivian L. 450 

Direaor 

National Center on Fathers 
and Families 

University of Pennsylvania 
Graduate School of Education 
3700 Walnut Street, Box 58 
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6216 
viviang@gse.upenn.edu 

Gallagher, Colleen 

Chief Operating Officer 
Community Coordinated Care 
for Children, Inc. 

3500 West Colonial Drive 
Orlando, FL 32808 
cgallag@4corlando.org 



Galligan, Roslyn Fay 

Lecturer 

Social & Behavioral Science 
'Psychology 
Swinburne University 
John Street, P.O. Box 218 
Melbourne, Viaoria 3122 
Australia 

rgalligan@swin.edu.au 

Garda De Alba, Roman 

Research Assistant 
Educational Psychology 
Texas A&M University 
704 Harrington Tower 
College Station, TX 77840 
roman2000@neo.tamu.edu 

Garda<Gettman, Maria 866 

Research and Training Center on 
Family Support and Children's 
Mental Health 

Regional Research Institute GSSW 
Portland State University 
1912 S.W. Sixth Avenue 
P.O. Box 751 

Portland, OR 97207-0751 
garciam@rri.pdx.edu 

Garfinkel, Robin 949 

Associate Research Scientist 

New York State Psychiatric Institute 

Columbia University 

1051 Riverside Drive, Unit 47 

New York, NY 10032 

rsg5@columbia.edu 

Gary, Barry M. 

Direaor 

National Center for Family Literacy 
325 West Main Street, Suite 300 
Louisville, KY 40202 
bgary@famlit.org 

Gassman-Pines, Anna 
Doaoral Student 
Department of Psychology 
New York University 
6 Washington Place, 2nd floor 
New York, NY 10003 
ag313@nyu.edu 

Gennetian, Lisa 333 

Senior Research Associate 

Manpower Demonstration Research 

Corporation 

16 East 34th Street 

New York, NY 1001 6 

lisa_gennetian@mdrc.org 



1005 



1001 



APPENDIX D 



Gensler, Taube 

Program Development Manager 
Head Start 

Program Development 
Southwest Human Development, Inc. 
202 East Earll Drive, #140 
Phoenix, AZ 85006 
tgensler@swhd.org 

George, TLene 932 

Graduate Student 
Deveolpmental Psychology 
University of Miami 
Department, of Psychology, 
Psychology Annex 
PO. Box 249229 
Coral Gables, FL 33124 
jgeorge@miami.edu 

Gerhardstein, Rebecca 853 

Department of Psychology 
Florida State University 
209 Copeland Street 
Tallahassee, FL 32306-1270 

Ghelfi, Linda 

Economist 

Economic Research Service 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
1800 M Street, N.W. 

Room S-2081 

Washington, DC 20036-5831 
lghelfi@ers.usda.gov 

Gibbons, Cynthia L. 928 

Department of Nursing and Health 
Wright State University 
3640 Colonel Glenn Highway 
University Hall 
Dayton, OH 45435 

Gill, Sukhdeep 901 

Research Scientist 
Pennsylvania State University 
Main Building 
York Campus 
York, PA 17403 
sgill@psu.edu 

Gillett-Shapiro, Sharyn Rae 892 

Optometrist 
School of Optometry 
University of California at Berkeley 
Berkeley, CA 94720-2020 
sgillett@speaacle.berkeley.edu 

Gilpin, Adele 967 

Assistant Research Professor 
Department of Epidemiology 
School of Hygiene 
615 North Wolfe Street 
Baltimore, MD 21205 
a gilpin@jhsph.edu 



Glassman, Kimberly Hope 913 

Research Assistant 

Graduate School of Education 

ISHD 

University of Pennsylvania 
3700 Walnut Sueet 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
kimberhope@yahoo.com 

Glenwick, David S. 765 

Professor of Psychology 
Department of Psychology 
Fordham University 
Bronx, NY 10458 
dglenwick@aol.com 

Godfrey, Michael 540 

Assistant Professor 
Human Development and 
Family Studies 
Iowa State University 
2360 Palmer 
Ames, lA 50011 
mgodfrey@iastate.edu 

Golas, Julianna C. 873 

Researcher 

Department of Human 
Development and Family Studies 
University of Rhode Island 
Transition Center 
10 Lower College Road 
Kingston, RI 02881-0818 
jgo3103u@postoffice.uri.edu 

Goldman, lane A. 911 

Associate Professor 
Human Development and 
Family Studies 
University of Connecticut 
348 Mansfield Road, Box U-2058 
Storrs, CT 06269-2058 
jane.goldman@uconn.edu 

Goldman, Maria 759 

Student 

School of Professional Psychology 
Wright State University 
3460 Colonel Glenn Highway 
Dayton, OH 45324 
goldman.2@wright.edu 

Goldstein, Howard 853 

Department of Communic Disorder 
Florida State University 
401A RRC 

Tallahassee, FL 32306-1200 



i 0 0 6 

er|c 



Goldstein, Naomi 

Division Direaor 
ACF/OPRE/ 

U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services 
370 L'Enfant Promenade, S.W. 
Washington, DC 20447 
ngoldstein@acf.hhs.gov 

Golly, Annemieke 115 

Associate Professor 
Institute on Violence and 
Destruaive Behavior 
University of Oregon 
1265 University of Oregon 
Eugene, OR 97403-1265 
agolly@darkwing.uoregon.edu 

Gonzales, Maricela 

Mental Health Intern 
Head Start 

Brazos Valley Community 
Action Agency 
100 West J. Bryan Parkway 
Bryan, IX 77803 
marciela-perez- 
gonzales@neo.tamu.edu 

Gonzales, Richard F. 172 

Assistant Deputy Commissioner 
Pelavin Research Center 
American Institutes for Research 
1000 Thomas Jefferson Street, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20007-3835 

Goodman, Rebecca Anne 

Coordinator 

SRCD Office for Policy and 
Communications 
750 First Street, N.E. 

Washington, DC 20002-4242 
rgoodman@apa.org 

Gordon, Lynwood V. 762, 764 

Research Assistant 
Graduate School of Social Work 
Portland State University 
P.O. Box 751 

Portland, OR 97207-0751 
gordonl@pdx.edu 

Gorvine, Benjamin |. 813 

Department of Psychology 
University of Michigan 
525 East University 
2024 East Hall 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-1109 
bengo@umich.edu 



1002 



APPENDIX D 



Gottesman, Jamie 

Education Manager 
Head Start 

Cincinnati-Hamilton County 
Community Action Agency 
1501 Madison Road 
Cincinnati, OH 45206 
jgottesm@cincy-caa.org 

Gouley, Kathleen Kiely 230, 231, 
232 

Associate Research Scientist 
New York University Child 
Study Center 

Institute for Children at Risk 
577 First Avenue, CSC Room 216 
New York, NY 10016 
goulekOl @med. nyu.edu 

Graham-Bermann, Sandra A. 403, 
530, 753, 780, 813 

Associate Professor 
Psychology 

University of Michigan 
525 East University Avenue 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1092 
sandragb® umich. edu 

Grant, Susanne 963 

Psychology 

George Mason University 
4400 University Drive, MSN 3F5 
Fairfax, VA 22030-4444 

Gravani, Eileen Hund 846 

Assistant Professor 
Department of Speech Pathology 
and Audiology 
State University of New York 
at Cortland 
P.O. Box 2000 
Cortland, NY 13045 
gravanie@cortland.edu 

Grayton, Candice 100 

Research Analyst 
The CDM Group, Inc. 

5530 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 1660 
Chevy Chase, MD 20815 
cgrayton@cdmgroup.com 

Green, Beth L. 161, 866 

Senior Research Associate 
Northwest Professional Consortium 
Research, Inc. 

5200 Southwest Macadam, Suite 420 
Portland, OR 97201 
green@npcresearch.com 



Greenberg, Mark T. 733, 867, 901 

Human Development and 
Family Studies 

Pennsylvania State University 
S-109 Henderson Building 
Center on Prevention Research 
University Park, PA 16802 
mxg47@psu.edu 

Greene, Sarah M. 

President and Chief Executive Officer 
National Head Start Association 
1651 Prince Street 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
sgreene@ nhsa.org 

Greene, Teresa 

Family/Community Manager 
M.C.C.A., Inc. Head Start 
P.O. Box 806, Ray Street 
Williamston, NC 27892 

Greenes, Carole 436 

Associate Dean and Professor 

Mathematics 

Boston University 

School of Education 

605 Commonwealth Avenue 

Boston, MA 02215 

cgreenes@bu.edu 

Greenfield, Daryl B. 724, 932, 

944, 946 

Associate Professor 
Department of Psychology 
University of Miami 
Psychology Annex, Room 226 
5665 Ponce De Leon Boulevard 
P.O. Box 249229 
Coral Gables, FL 33146-0721 
dgreenfield @ miami .edu 

Grisham-Brown, Jennifer 796 

Assistant Professor 
Family Studies 
University of Kentucky 
149 Washington Avenue 
Lexington, KY 40506-0054 
jgleat00@uky.edu 

Grissom, Sarah 

Program Analyst 
Office of Educational Research 
and Improvement 
Early Childhood Institute 
U.S. Department of Education 
555 New Jersey Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20208 
sarah.grissom@ed.gov 

Grossman, Judy 864 

277 North Avenue 
Westport, CT 06880 
jegl2@optonline.net 



Groves, Melissa M. 

Assistant Professor 
Child Development Program 
California State University at Chico 
Chico, CA 95929-0220 
mgroves @ csuch i co .edu 

Grymes, Joanna 

Program Specialist 
Administration on Children, Youth 
and Families 

Administration for Children and 
Fa miles 

U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
Child Care Bureau 
P.O.Box 23086 
Washington, DC 20026-3086 
jgrymes@acf.hhs.gov 

Guensburg, Carol 702 

Direaor 

Journalism Fellowhips in Child 
and Family Policy 
University of Maryland 
4439 North 15th Street 
Arlington, VA 22207 
cguensburg@jmail.umd.edu 

Guinee, Kathleen 827, 889 

Doaoral Candidate 
Human Development and 
Psychology 

Harvard Graduate School of 
Education 

6th Floor, Larsen Hall 
Appian Way 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
kguinee@alumni.princeton.edu 

Gunnar, Megan R. 35 

Institute of Child Development 
University of Minnesota 
51 East River Road 
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0345 
gunnar@umn.edu 

Gunthorpe, Dana 831 

Projea Coordinator 

Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 

University of Chicago 

5841 South Maryland Avenue, 

MC 3077 
Chicago, IL 60637 
dana.gunthorpe@ingenixps.com 

Gustin, Barbara 979* 

Assistant Director 
Head Start XXI Resource Center 
2200 169th Street 
Hammond, IN 46323 



1007 



1003 



APPENDIX D 



Hade, Delora 

Iowa Head Start Liason 
RVII MSQIC 

Community Development Institute 
4111 Phoenix 
Ames, lA 50014-3919 
djhade@aol.com 

Haden, Catherine A. 838 

Assistant Professor 
Developmental Psychology 
Loyola University Chicago 
Damen Hall 624 
6525 North Sheridan Road 
Chicago, IL 60626 
chaden@luc.edu 

Hagen, John W. 3, 35, 378, 407 

Executive Officer 

Society for Research in Child 

Development 

University of Michigan 

3131 South State Street, Suite 302 

Ann Arbor, Ml 48108-1623 

jwhagen@umich.edu 

Hair, Elizabeth C. 531 

Research Associate 
Child Trends, Inc. 

4301 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. 
Suite 100 

Washington, DC 20008 
ehair@childtrends.org 

Hall, David 606 

Professor 
General Praaice 
Sheffield University 
Storrs House Farm 
Storrs Lane 
Sheffield S6 6GY 
United Kingdom 
d.hall@sheffield.ac.uk 

Hall, Tonya 778 

Juniper Gardens Children's Projea 
University of Kansas 
650 Minnesota Street, 2nd Floor 
Kansas City, KS 66101 
tonyap@mail.ukans.edu 

Hallford, Doris 540 

Assistant Deputy Direaor 
Division of Family Services 
Missouri Dept of Social Services 
P.O. Box 88 

Jefferson City, MO 65103 
dhallfor@mail.state.mo.us 

Halpern, David 756 

Principal 

Special Education 
Fresno County Office of Education 
nil Van Ness Boulevard 
Fresno, CA 93721 



Halpern, Ellen 868 

Department of Psychology 
LaSalle University 
Philadelphia, PA 19141 
halpem@lasalle.edu 

Hamada, Hideko 963 

Department of Psychology 
George Mason University 
4400 University Drive, MS 3F5 
Fairfax, VA 22030-4444 
hhamada@gmu.edu 

Hamburg, Phillip 809 

Kent County, Michigan Head Start 
1805 Bristol, N.W. 

Grand Rapids, MI 49504 

Hammrich, Penny L. 835 

Associate Professor 
Temple University 
337 Ritter Hall 
Philadelphia, PA 19122 
phammric@temple.edu 

Hampton, Virginia R. 423, 879, 882 

Postdoaoral Associate 
Psychology in Education 
University of Pennsylvania 
Graduate School of Educattion 
3700 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
ghampton@gse.upenn.edu 

Han, Myae 446, 447 

(contaa information not available) 

Hancock, Terry B. 124 

Special Education Department 
Vanderbilt University 
Peabody College 
Box 328 

Nashville, TN 37203 

Hannibal, Bonnie 834, 900 

New York University School 
of Education 

239 Greene Street, Room 401 F 
New York, NY 10003 

Hansborough, Ann 

Specialist 

Instmctional Services 
Early Childhood 
Fairfax County Public Schools 
3705 Crest Drive 
Annandale, VA 22003 
ahansbor@fcps.edu 





Hansen, Janet 554 

Committee for Economic 
Development 
2000 L Street, N.W. 

Suite 700 

Washington, DC 20036 
janet.hansen@ced.org 

Hanson, Mard J. 302 

Professor 

Department of Special Education 
San Francisco State University 
1600 Holloway Avenue 
San Francisco, CA 94132 
mjhanson@sfsu.edu 

Harden, Brenda Jones 849 

Assistant Professor 
Institute for Child Study 
University of Maryland at 
College Park 
3304 Benjamin Building 
College Park, MD 20742 
bj34@umail.umd.edu 

Hardwick, Jan 

College of Continuing Education 
Southwest Prevention Center 
University of Oklahoma 
3126 South Boulevard, #145 
Edmond, OK 73013 

Hare, Charles 811 

Oklahoma Association of 
Community Action Agencies 
2915 Classen Boulevard, Suite 215 
Oklahoma City, OK 73106 
pawneehome@aol.com 

Hare, Charley 

AI/AN Collaboration Office 
9810 Mahogany Drive, #106 
Gaithersburg, MD 20878 
chare@cditeam.org 

Harne, Delores Jean 

Assistant Direaor 

Head Start of Washington County 

131 West North Avenue 

Hagerstown, MD 21740 

dhame@wcheadstart.org 

Harris, Georgia 

Head Start Program 
Adantic Human Resources, Inc. 

1 South New York Avenue, Suite 313 
Adantic City, NJ 08401 

Harris, Keecha 

Policy Fellow 

Mathmatica Policy Research, Inc. 
P.O. Box 2393 
Princeton, NJ 08543-2393 
keecha@ earthli nk. net 



1004 



APPENDIX D 



Harris, Warren 

5100 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 200 
Washington, DC 20016 

Hart, Andrea D. 163,471 

Research Associate 
Department of Family and Human 
Development 
Utah State University 
EHS-R, UMC 2905 
Old Main Hill 
Logan, UT 84322-2905 

Harvey, Erin M. 748, 884 

Ophthalmology 
University of Arizona 
655 North Alvemon Way, #108 
Tucson, AZ 85711 
emharvey@u. arizona.edu 

Hatcher, Barbara |. 

Director 

Scientific and Professional Affairs 
American Public Health Association 
800 1 Street, N.W. 

Washington, DC 20017-2750 
barbara.hatcher@apha.org 

Hausken, Elvira Germino 199 

1990 K Street, N.W 
Room 9037 

Washington, DC 20006-5650 

Havlik, Barbara S. 838 

Graduate Student 

Developmental 

Loyola University Chicago 

Damen Hall 624 

6525 North Sheridan Road 

Chicago, IL 60626 

bhavlik@luc.edu 

Hawley, Theresa Lawton 

Senior Research Associate 
The Ounce of Prevention Fund 
122 South Michigan Avenue, Suite 
2050 

Chicago, IL 60603-6107 
theresah@ounceofprevention.org 

Hayden, Margaret 837 

Early Childhood Specialist 
Child Wise 
156 Ridgetop Drive 
Blowing Rock, NC 27605 
pinky@boone.net 

Heckman, James |. 3 

Professor 

Economics 

University of Chicago 

1126 East 59th Street 

Chicago, IL 60637 

jheckman@midway.uchicago.edu 



Hegland, Susan M. 540, 896 

Associate Professor 
Department of Human Develop- 
ment and Family Studies 
Iowa State University 
2361 Palmer 
Ames, lA 50011-4380 
shegland @ i astate. edu 

Held, Camilla 

Westat, Inc. 

1650 Research Boulevard 
Rockville, MD 20850 

Hemmeter, Mary Louise 796 

Associate Professor 
Department of Special Education 
University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign 
288 Education Building, MC 708 
1310 South Sixth 
Champaign, IL 61820 
mlhemm @staff.uiuc. edu 

Hencke, Rebecca 958 

Research Associate 
Harvard Family Research Projea 
38 Concord Avenue 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
rebecca_hencke@gse.harvard.edu 

Henrich, Christopher Caldwell 792 

Assistant Professor 
Psychology 

Georgia State University 
University Plaza 
Atlanta, GA 30303-3083 
chenrich@gsu.edu 

Henry, Deborah 

Head Start Supervisor 
West Central Minnesota 
Communities Action, Inc. 

411 Industrial Park Boulevard 
Elbow Lake, MN 56531 
deb.henry@co.grant.mn.us 

Hensley, Abbe 794 

Senior Manager 
Ready To Learn 
Outreach Services 
Public Broadcasting Service 
1320 Braddock Road 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
ahensley@pbs.org 

Herman, Vivian 

Direaor, Early Head Start 
Office of Child Development 
University of Pittsburgh 
5600 Penn Avenue, Suite 208 
Pittsburgh, PA 15216 
vherman@pitt.edu 




1009 



Hernandez, Donald J. 687 

Professor 

Sociology 

University of Albany 
1600 Washington Drive 
Albany, NY 12222 

Herndon, Ron 21, 354 

Direaor 

Albina Head Start 
3417 N.E. 7th Street 
Portland, OR 97212 

Herren, JoAn Knight 

Chief 

Head Start Bureau 
U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services 
ACF/ACYF 
330 C Street, S.W 
Switzer Building, Room 2310D 
Washington, DC 20447 
j herren @ acf. hhs .gov 

Hester, Ricky D. 

Policy Committee 
CCSC Head Start 
1031 Superior Avenue 
Cleveland, OH 44115 

Hickmon, Audrey 

Family Worker 
Head Start 

Philadelphia. Housing Authority 
12 South 23rd Street, 6th Floor 
Philadelphia, PA 19103 
teresaxollins@pha.phila.gov 

Hill, Glinda Foster 

Office of Special Education 
Programs 

U.S. Deptartment of Education 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Room 3521 

Washington, DC 20202-2641 
glinda.hill@ed.gov 

Hill, Heather 

Research Specialist 
KDI 

National Center for Family Literacy 
325 West Main Street, Suite 300 
Louisville, KY 40202 
hhill@famlit.org 

Hill, Windy 63 

Associate Commissioner 
Head Start Bureau 
ACF/ACYF 

U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
Mary E. Switzer Building 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Washington, DC 20204 
whill@acf.hhs.gov 



1005 



APPENDIX D 



Hindman, Annemarie H. 847, 976 

Research Assistant 
Center for Social Organization 
of Schools 

Early Learning Program 

Johns Hopkins University 

3003 North Charles Street, Suite 200 

Baltimore, MD 21 21 8 

ahindman@csos.jhu.edu 

Hinkle, Donna 

Education Program Specialist 
National Institute on Early 
Childhood Development and 
Education 

U.S. Department of Education 
400 Maryland Avenue, S.W. 
Washington, DC 20202 
donna.hinkle@ed.gov 

Hobbs, Gladstone Ralph 

Education Coordinator 
Head Start 

Family Resource Agency, Inc. 

485 Second Street, S.E. 

Cleveland, TN 37311 
ralph@fratn.com 

Hogan, Anne E. 

Center for Prevention 
Florida State University 
1339 East Lafayette Street 
Tallahassee, FL 32301 
ahogan@mailer.fsu.edu 

Holden-Pitt, Lisa 

Education Research Analyst 
Office of Special Education Programs 
Research to Practice Division 
U.S. Department of Education 
Mary Switzer Building., Room 4628 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Washington, DC 20202 
lisa.holden-pitt@ed.gov 

Holdzkom, David 837 

Director, Education Research 
Touching the Lives of Children 
324 Wesley Drive 
Chapel Hill, NC 27516 
davidholdzkom@earthlink.com 

Hollis, Colleen 

Special Needs/Mental Health 
Coordinator 
Child Development 
Head Start 

Neighborhood House 
905 Spruce Street 
Seattle, WA 98104 
colleenh@nhwa.org 



Hong, Gui-Young 153 

Associate Professor 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences 
Medical University of 
South Carolina 
167 President Street 
10P45 

Charleston, SC 29425 
honggv@musc,edu 

Hooker, Beverly 

Director 

Green Hills Head Start 
North Central Missouri College 
205 West 18th 
Trenton, MO 64683 
hskids@lyn.net 

Horm-Wingerd, Diane M. 873 

Professor 

Human Development and 
Family Studies 
University of Rhode Island 
Transition Center 
2 Lower College Road 
Kingston, RI 02881-0818 
diane@uri.edu 

Horne McGee, Patrida 

Director 

Washtenaw County Head Start 
3075 Washtenaw 
Ypsilanti, MI 48197 
mcgeep@co.washtenaw.mi.us 

Homer, Paula L. 826 

Assistant Professor 
Truesdail Centre for Communicative 
Disorders 

University of Redlands 
11 31 A Cornell Avenue 
Redlands, CA 92374 
homer@uia.net 

Horowitz, Sheldon H. 

Director of Professional Services 
National Center for Learning 
Disabilities 

381 Park Avenue South, Suite 1401 
New York, NY 10016 
shhorowitz@ncld.org 

Horvath, Ellen 664 

Speech Pathologist 
Speech-Language Pathology Assisting 
Program 
Cerritos College 
11110 Alondra Boulevard 
Health Occupations/Speech 
Department 
Norwalk, CA 90650 
horvath@cerritos.edu 



O 1006 



10.10 



Horwitz, Rebecca 730 

Student 

Department of Psychology 
University of South Carolina 
Columbia, SC 29208 
bchoz@yahoo.com 

Houle, Gail 

Associate Division Director 
Office of Special Education Programs 
Research to Practice 
U.S. Department of Education 
400 Maryland Avenue, S.W. 

Switzer Buiding, Room 3524 
Washington, DC 20202 
gail.houle@ed.gov 

Howard, Carol L. 115 

Associate Project Director 
Education Development Center, Inc. 
Middlesex County 
55 Chapel Street 
Newton, MA 02458 
choward@edc.org 

Howard, Kimberly Sue 

Graduate Student/Research Assistant 
Developmental Psychology 
University of Notre Dame 
118 HaggarHall 
Notre Dame, IN 46556 
khoward@ nd.edu 

Howes, Carollee H. 159 

Professor 

Department of Education 
University of California at Los 
Angeles 
Box 951521 

Moore Hall, Room 3302 
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1521 
howes@gseis.ucla.edu 

Hoyle, Susan 973 

Consultant 
Language in Society 
Center for Applied Linguistics 
2921 Garfield Street, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20016 
susanhoyle@earthlink.net 

Hubbell McKey, Ruth 83, 100, 115, 
797, 869 

Vice President 

Research and Program Services 
Xtria, LLC 

1749 Old Meadow Road, Suite 600 
McLean, VA 22102 
rhmckey@xtria.com 



APPENDIX D 



Hubbs>Tait, Laura E. 811 

Professor 

Family Relations and Child 
Development 

Oklahoma State University 
333 HES 

Stillwater, OK 74078-6122 
hubbstait@aol.com 

Hudson, Stephanie 

Program Specialist 
Quality Improvement Center/ 
Disabilities 
Special Education 
I^nsas University Medical Center 
51 North 12th Street 
Hastings Hall, Suite 100 
Kansas City, MO 66101 
shudson®kumc,edu 

Huemoeller, Marda 

Executive Direaor 
Head Start Program 
Dane County Parent Council, Inc. 
2096 Red Arrow Trail 
Madison, WI 53711-4723 

Huey, Erron 811 

Graduate Student 
Child Development and Family 
Relations 

Oklahoma State University 
FRCD 

Stillwater, OK 74078-6122 
hueye@okstate.edu 

Hughes, Hester 

Graduate Student 
Family and Child Ecology 
Michigan State University 
107 Human Ecology Building 
East Lansing, MI 48824 
hugheshl @msu.edu 

Hughes, Kere P. 534, 536 

Juniper Gardens Children's Projea 
University of Kansas 
650 Minnesota Avenue, 2nd Floor 
Kansas City, KS 66101 
kereh@ku.edu 

Hunker, Margaret Daly 15 

Field Direaor 

Child & Family Studies Area 
Westat, Inc. 

1500 Research Boulevard, TB 384 
Rockville, MD 20850 
peggyhunker@westat.com 



Hunt, Emily 823 

Research Assistant 
Best Babies 
Denver Health 
501 28th Street 
Denver, CO 80205 
emily.hunt@dhha.org 

Huss, Karen 967 

525 North Wolfe Street 
Baltimore, MD 21205 
khuss@son.jhmi.edu 

Hustedt, jason 732 

Research Associate 
National Institute for Early 
Education Research 
Rutgers University 
120 Albany Street, Suite 500 
New Brunswick, NJ 08901 
jhustedt@nieer.org 

Hyde, Helen S. 

Interim Family and Community 
Partnership Manager 
Head Start 

Cincinnati-Hamilton County 
Community Aaion Agency 
1501 Madison Road 
Cincinnati, OH 45206 
hhyde@cincy-caa.org 

Hyson, Marilou C. 673 

Associate Executive Director for 
Professional Development 
National Association for the 
Education of Young Children 
1509 16th Sueet, N.W. 

Washington, DC 20036-1426 
mhyson@naeyc.org 

lansek, Robert 790 

Monash University 
Kingston Centre 
Warrigal Road 

Cheltenham, Victoria 03192 
Australia 

robert.iansek@med.monash.edu.au 

Ingraham, Loring |. 787 

Professor 

Clinical Psychology 

Center for Professional Psychology 

George Washington University 

2300 M Street, Suite 910 

Washington, DC 20037 

ingraham@gwu.edu 





Innocent!, Mark S. 302, 744, 839 

Co direaor 

Early Intervention Research Institute 

Utah State University 

Center For Persons With Disibilities 

6580 Old Main Hill 

Logan, UT 84322-6580 

minno@cpd2.usu.edu 

Isom, Aurlisa 

5928 Painters Street 
New Orleans, LA 70122 

Ispa, jean M. 161, 907 

Professor 

Human Development and 
Family Studies 

Human Environmental Sciences 
University of Missouri at Columbia 
314 Gentry Hall 
Columbia, MO 65211 
ispaj@missouri.edu 

Izard, Carroll E. 234 

Department of Psychology 
University of Delaware 
220 Wolf Hall 
Newark, DE 19716-2577 
izard@udel.edu 

janus, Magdalena 779 

Canada Center for Studies of 
Children at Risk 
McMaster University 
1200 Main Street West 
Patterson Building HHSC 
Hamilton, Ontario L8N 3Z5 
Canada 

janusm@mcmaster.ca 

jarratt, Kelly 

Mental Health Intern 
Head Start 

Brazos Valley Community Action 
Agency 

100 West J. Bryan Parkway 
Bryan, TX 77803 
k-pizzitola@tamu.edu 

Jarvis, Carolyn 841 

Research Director 
Head Start Quality Improvement 
Center 

New York University 
726 Broadway, 5th Floor 
New York, NY 10003 
Carolyn, jarvis@nyu.edjj 

Jennings, Helene 

Senior Technical Direaor 
AHT 

ORC Macro 
11785 Beltsville Drive 
Calverton, MD 20705 
jennings@macroint.com 



1007 



appendix d 



Jerald, Judith 140, 211 

National Director 
Early Head Start 
Head Start Bureau 
ACF/ACYF 

U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Room 2310-C 
Washington, DC 20442 
jjerald@acf.hhs.gov 

Ji Hyun, Kim 

Master Course 

Department of Child Development 
and Family Studies 
Seoul National University 
San 56-1 Sillim-dong Kwanak-Gu 
Seoul 151742 
Korea 

pury21 @hanmail.net 

Jiang, Hong 942 

Assistant Professor 
Education Leadership 
Azusa Pacific University 
901 East Alosta Avenue 
Azusa, CA 91702 
yhj@apu.edu 

Johnson, Barbara A. 

Principal 
DC Public School 
LaSalle Elementary School 
1 3019 Brahms Terrace 
Silver Spring, MD 20904 
barbaraajohnson@kl 2.dc.us 

Johnson, Danya Lee 

Data Coordinator 
Pediatrics 

University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences 

1110 West B Street 
Russellville, AR 72801 
johnsondanyalee@uams.edu 

Johnson-Powell, Gloria 321, 474, 
491 

Health Sciences Center 
University of Wisconsin at Madison 
Medical School 
1 300 University Avenue 
Madison, WI 53706 
gljohnsonpow@facstaff.wisc.edu 

Jolley, Sandra 162 

(contact information not available) 



Jones, Aziza 

Assistant Teacher 
Head Start 

Philadelphia Housing Authority 
12 South 23rd Street, 6th Floor 
Philadelphia, PA 19103 
teresa.collins@pha.phila.gov 

Jones, C. Wayne 871 

Associate Director 
Philadelphia Child and Family 
Therapy Training Center 
119 North Highland Avenue 
Bala Cynwyd, PA 19004 

Jones, Macy 

Director 

Alexander County Head Start 
330 West Jones Street 
Fuquay-Varina, NC 27526 
lmjfveic@intrex.net 

Jones, Malinda 

Ambassadors for Literacy 
2445 South Fillmore 
Denver, CO 80208 
mjcom86@aol.com 

Jones, Nancy Aaron 962 

John D. MacAnthur Campus 
Florida Adantic University 
5353 Parkside Drive 
Jupiter, FL 33458 

Jones, Rachel 702 

Reporter 

Science Desk 

National Public Radio 

635 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W 

Washington, DC 20003 

Jones, Stephanie M. 858 

Graduate Student 

Department of Psychology 

Yale University 

2 Hillhouse Avenue 

P.O. Box 208205 

New Haven, CT 06520-8205 

stephanie.m.jones@yale.edu 

Jones-Branch, Julie 767 

Lecturer 

Family and Consumer Sciences 
University of Nebraska at Lincoln 
123 Home Economics 
Lincoln, NE 68583-0801 
jjones5@unl.edu 




1008 



1012 



Joseph, Jill G. 783 

Dirertor 

Center for Health Services and 
Clinical Research 
Children's Research Institute 
Children's National Medical Center 
111 Michigan Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20010 
jjoseph@cnmc.org 

Joseph, Joanne 819, 900 

Research Assistant 
New York University 
239 Green Street, Room 410F 
New York, NY 10003 
jij202@nyu.edu 

Juhn, Young J. 766 

Assistant Professor 
Community Pediatric and 
Adolescent Medicine 
Mayo Foundation for Medical 
Education and Research 
Mayo Clinic 
200 First Street, S.W. 

Rochester, MN 55905 
juhn.young@mayo.edu 

Jump, Vonda Kay 744 

Research Associate 

Early Intervention Research Institute 

Utah State University 

6580 Old Main Hill 

Logan, UT 84322-6580 

vonda@cpd2.usu.edu 

Kagan, Sharon Lynn 115, 793 

Co-Director 

Center for Children and Families 
Teachers College, Columbia 
University 

525 West 1 20th Street, Box 39 
New York, NY 10027 
sharon.kagan@yale.edu 

Kahana-Kahnan, Ronit 830 

Assistant Professor 
Pediatrics 

Behavioral Sciences 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine 
Kennedy Center, Room 220 
1300 Morris Park Avenue 
Bronx, NY 10461 
kalrhan@aecom.yu.edu 

Kaiser, Ann P. 124, 721 

Professor 

Special Education Department 
Vanderbilt University 
Peabody College, Box 328 
MRL Building, Room 314 
Nashville, TN 37203 
ann.kaiser@vanderbilt.edu 



APPENDIX D 



Kalabaca, Irene 820 

(contaa information not available) 

Kallemeyn, Leanne M. 816 

Healthier Communities Department 
Spectrum Health 
1907 David Drive 
Champaign, IL 61820 
IvkIom58@yahoo.com 

Kaltreider, Dorothy Lynne 953 

Research Associate 
Pennsylvania State University 
N253 Burrowes Building 
University Park, PA 16802 
dlk6@psu.edu 

Kane, Cornelia 

Vice President 
Head Start 

Action for Boston Community 
Development, Inc. 

178Tremont Street 
Boston, MA 02111 

Kane, Margaret 

Outcome Manager III 
Hillsborough County Head Start 
4817 North Florida Avenue 
Tampa, FL 33603 
romanm@hiIIsboroughcounty.org 

Kantor, Rebecca 922, 975, 980 

Higher Education Advisor 
Head Start Quality Improvement 
Center 

The Ohio State University 
College of Education 
Arps Hall, Room 333 
1945 North High Street 
Columbus, OH 43202 
kantor-martin.l@osu.edu 

Karp, Naomi 

Office of Educational Research and 
Improvement 

U.S. Department of Education 
555 New Jersey Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20208 
naomi_karp@ed.gov 

Katsaros, Sarah 841 

Projea Coordinator and Trainer 
Steinhardt School of Education 
Child and Family Policy Center 
New York University 
239 Greene Street 
New York, NY 10003 



Katzev, Aphra 822 

Research Associate 
Oregon State University 
202 Bates Hall 
Corvallis, OR 97331-5151 
katzeva@orst.edu 

Kaufmann, Roxanne 765 

Georgetown Child Development 
Center 

Georgetown University 
3307 M Street, N.W. 

Washington, DC 20007 
kaufmanr@georgetown.edu 

Kaur-Keating, Jap-Ji 

Program Manager 
Head Start 

Community Learning 
The Seattle Public Schools 
1330 North 90th Street, Room 503 
Seattle, WA 98103 
jkkeating@seattleschools.org 

Keintz, Carol A. 

Head Start Program 
Dane County Parent Council, Inc. 
2096 Red Arrow Trail 
Madison, WI 53711-4723 

Keith, Lori 

National Program Manager 

Health Canada 

HPS 

First Nations Head Start 
2053 20th Floor 
Jeanne Mance Building 
Tunneys Pasture 
Ottawa, Ontario KIA OK9 
Canada 

lori_keith @ hc-sc.gc.ca 

Kelly, Brendan 

Program Analyst 
Administration for Children and 
Families 

370 CEnfant Promenade, S.W 
Washington, DC 20477 
bkelly@acf.hhs.gov 

Kennel, Portia 

Vice President 
Development and Training 
The Ounce of Prevention Fund 
122 South Michigan Avenue, Suite 
2050 

Chicago, IL 60603 

pkennel @ ounceofpreventio n. org 



er|c 



Kennani, Hengameh 

Associate Professor 
Department of Curricular Studies 
University of North Carolina 
at Wilmington 
Watson School of Education 
601 South College Road 
Wilmington, NC 28403 
kermanih@uncw.edu 

Kim, leeyung Cadlia 

Legislative Assistant 

United States Senator Jeff Bingaman 

703 Hart Senate Office Building 

Washington, DC 20510 

cacilia_kim@bingaman.senate.gov 

Kim, Kwang 115 

Research Analyst 
Westat, Inc. 

1650 Research Boulevard, TB-386 
Rockville, MD 20850 
kimkl@westat.com 

Kim, Stacy 115 

Research Scientist 
Center for Children and Families 
Columbia University, Teachers 
College 

Box 226, 371 GDH 
525 West 120th Street 
New York, NY 10027 
ssk2007@columbia.edu 

King, Melissa 958 

Harvard Graduate School of Education 
Appian Way 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
melissa_king@gse.harvard.edu 

Kirk, Rosalind 

Outcomes Specialist 
Psychology 

Michigan State University 
37 Kello^ Center 
East Lansing, MI 48824 

Kisker, Ellen Eliason 140, 289 

Mathematica Policy Research 
7639 Crestview Drive 
Longmont,. CO 80504 
ekisker@mathematica-mpr.com 

Klayman, Doug 869 

Direaor of Research 

Systems Assessment and Research, 

Inc. {SAR Corp.) 

5900 Princess Garden Parkway, 

Suite 670 

Lanham, MD 20706-2925 
dkIayman@sarcorp.com 



1013 



1009 



appendix d 



Klein, Evelyn 835 

Assistant Professor 
CRHDE 

Temple University 
Ritter Hall, 9th Floor 
1301 Cecil B. Moore Avenue 
Philadelphia, PA 19122 
aklein@astro.temple.edu 

Klein, Lisa 540 

Senior Program Officer 
Youth Development 
Kauffman Foundation 
4801 Rockhill Road 
Kansas City, KS 64110 
lklein@emkf.org 

King, Kristen 780 

Community Action Agency 
1214 Greenwood Avenue 
Jackson, MI 49203 

Klujsza, Veronica 234, 868 

Director 

Saint Mark's Head Start 
201 7 Beverly Road 
Brooklyn, NY 11226 
vklujsza@stmarksheadstart.org 

Knight, Jessica 

Head Start Bureau 
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
ACF/ACYF 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Washington, DC 20447 
jknight@acfhhs.gov 

Knitzer, Jane E. 530 

Deputy Director 
National Center for Children 
in Poverty 

Columbia University 
School of Public Health 
154 Haven Avenue, 3rd Floor 
New York, NY 10032-1180 
Jk340@columbia.edu 

Knoche, Lisa L. 776, 810 

Psychology 

University of Nebraska at Lincoln 
238 Burnett Hall 
Lincoln, NE 68588-0308 
lknoche@unlserve.unl.edu 

KobUnsky, Sally A. 811, 818, 979 

Professor/ Chair 
Family Studies 
University of Maryland 
1204 Marie Mount Hall 
College Park, MD 20742-7515 
sk38@umail.umd.edu 



Kochanoff, Anita T. 

Visiting Assistant Professor 

Psychology 

College of Liberal Arts 

Temple University 

822 North Judson Street 

Philadelphia, PA 19130 

anita.kochanoff@temple.edu 

Kolobe^ Thubi Hlapang 917 

Assistant Professor 

Physical Tharapy 

University of Illinois at Chicago 

1919 West Taylor Street, 4th Floor 

Chicago, IL 60612 

tkolobe@uic.edu 

Konald, Tim 960 

Associate Professor 
Curry School of Education 
University of Virginia 
P.O. Box 400265 
Charlottesville, VA 22904 
konald@virginia.edu 

Konantambigi, Rajani 

Reader 

Unit for Child and Youth Research 
Tata Institute of Social Sciences 
Georgia State University 
Department of EPSE 
University Plaza 
Atlanta, GA 30303 
eperkk@langate.gsu.edu 

Kopp, Claire B. 35, 378 

Consultant 
483 West Avenue 46 
Los Angeles, CA 90065 
cbkopp@earthlink.net 

Korbnacber, Jon E. 159, 534 

Assistant Professor 
Erikson Institute 
420 North Wabash Avenue 
Chicago, IL 60611 
jkorfmacher@erikson.edu 

Kostelc, Jane 

Manager ^ 

Program Development 
Curriculum Development 
Parents As Teachers National Center 
2228 Ball Drive 
St. Louis, MO 63146 
jane.kastelc@patnc.org 




1010 



1014 



Kotcb, Jonathan B. 

Professor 

Maternal and Child Health Programs 
School of Public Health 
University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill 
401 Rosenau Hall, CB 7445 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7445 
jonathan_kotch@unc.edu 

Kowalski, Kurt 745 

Assistant Professor 
Human Development and 
Family Studies 
Texas Tech University 
Box 41162 

Lubbock, TX 79409-1162 
kkowalski@hs.ttu.edu 

Kraft-Sayre^ Marda 960 

National Center for Early 
Development and Learning 
University of Virginia 
P.O. Box 800784 
Charlottesville, VA 22904-8784 
mek60@virginia.edu 

Kreider, HoUy 958 

Graduate School of Education 
Harvard University 
Harvard Family Research Project 
38 Concord Avenue 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
holly_kreider@ harvard.edu 

Krisbnan, Sandbya 753 

Research Coordinator 
Clinical Psychology 
University of Michigan 
Lane Hall 

Institute for Research on Women 
and Gender 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109 

Kubicek, Lorraine F. 823, 886 

Research Psychologist 
Program for Early Development 
Studies 

School of Medicine 
University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center 

4200 East 9th Avenue, C/B C268-69 
Denver, CO 80262 
lorraine.kubicek@uchsc.edu 

Kuersten-Hogan, Regina 881 

Instructor 

Assumption College 
500 Salisbury Street 
Worcester, MA 02609 
kuersten@ assumption.edu 



APPENDIX D 



Kuhns, Carole 67, 927 

SRCD Fellow 

Administration for Children 
and Families 

U.S. Department of Health And 
Human Services 

OPRE/Child Outcomes Research and 
Evaluation (CORE) 

370 DEnfant Promenade, S.W. 

7th Floor West 
Washington, DC 20447 
ckuhns@vt.edu 

Kupersmidt, Janis B. 115, 124 

Department of Psychology 
University of North Carolina 
Davie Hall, CB 3270 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599 

Kuvalanka, Kate 811 

Ph.D. Student 
Family Studies 
University of Maryland 
1204 Marie Mount Hall 
College Park, MD 20742 
katethor@peoplepc.com 

La Villa, Silvia |. 

Executive Assistant 
Kidco Child Care Inc. 

3630 N.E. 1st Court 
Miami, FL 33137 
silvia@kidco-childcare.org 

Laforett, Dor^ 801, 803 

University of South Carolina 
Department of Psychology 
Columbia, SC 29208 

Lalley, Jackie 

Direaor of Publications 
and Marketing 
Communications 
Family Support America 
20 North Wacker Drive, Suite 100 
Chicago, IL 60606 
jlalley@familysupportamerica.org 

LaMantia, Mary 794 

Public Broadcasting Service 
1320 Braddock Place 
Alexandria, VA 22341 
mlamantia@pbs.org 

Lambert, Richard G. 115, 820 

Assistant Professor 
Department of Education 
Administration Research, and 
Technology 

University of North Carolina at 
Charlotte 
3135 Colvard 

9201 University City Boulevard 
Charlotte, NC 28223-0001 
rglamber@email.uncc.edu 



Lamb>Parker, Faith 3, 63, 868, 949 

Assistant Professor 
Mailman School of Public Health 
Heilbrunn Department of 
Population and Family Health 
Columbia University 
60 Haven Avenue, B-3 
New York, NY 10032 
flpl @columbia.edu 

Lamy, Cynthia Esposito 943 

Research Associate 
National Institute for Early 
Education Research 
RutgersU ni versity 
120 Albany Street, Suite 500 
New Brunswick, NJ 08901 
clamy@nieer.org 

Lancelot, Barbra 

FACES Projea Coordinator 
Center for International 
Rehabilitation 
VSAArts 

1300 Conneticut Avenue, N.W 
Suite 700 

Washington, DC 20036 
b arb ral @ vsaarts. org 

Landry, Susan H. 21, 354 

Matthew Michael Knight Professor 
Developmental Pediatrics 
University of Texas at Houston 
7000 Fannin, Suite 2300 
Houston, TX 77030 
susan.landry@uth.tmc.edu 

Lane, Valeri 

Director 

Family and Child Development 
Center for Human Services 
600 East 14th Street 
Sadalia, MO 65301 
vlane@chs-mo.org 

Langkamp, Diane 

Associate Professor 
Developmental Pediatrics 
Children's Hospital Medical Center 
of Akron 
1 Perkins Square 
Akron, OH 44308 
dlangkamp@chmca.org 

Lannon, Carole 575 

Co-Direaor 

University of North Carolina 
1 700 Airport Road, CB 7226 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7226 
carole_lannon@med.unc.edu 




Lanzi, Robin Gaines 657 

Assistant Professor 
Sociology 

University of Alabama at 
Birmingham 

Civitan International Research Center 
1719 6th Avenue South 
Birmingham, AL 35294 
rlanzi@uab.edu 

Lawrence, Robert 

Assistant Direaor 

Georgia Office of School Readiness 

10 Park Place South 

Atlanta, GA 30303 

robert.lawrence@mail.osr.state.ga.us 

Leaf, Philip |. 783 

Department of Mental Hygiene 
School of Public Health 
Johns Hopkins University 
624 North Broadway, Room 819 
Hampton House 
Baltimore, MD 21205-1900 
pleaf@jhsph.edu 

LeCuyer-Maus, Elizabeth A. 855 

Assistant Professor of Nursing 
College of Nursing 
Washington State University at 
Vancouver 

14204 N.E. Salmon Creek Avenue, 
CL-208 

Vancouver, WA 98686 
lecuyer@vancouver.wsu.edu 

Ledet, Toni 

Grant Direaor 

University of Arkansas School of 
Medical Sciences 
North Little Rock, AR 72113 
ledetton@uams.edu 

Lee, Arlene F. 491 

Child Welfare League of America, Inc. 
Federal Resource Center for Children 
of Prisoners 
440 1st Street, N.W. 

Suite 310 

Washington, DC 20001-2085 
alee@cwla.org 

Le^ Carol Amundson 783 

SESS Projea Direaor 
Head Start 

Child Development, Inc. 

P.O. Box 2110 
Russellville, AR 72811 
clee@childdevinc.org 



1011 



appendix d 



Lee, Kangyi 

Post Doctorial Course 
Department of Child Development 
and Family Studies 
Seoul National University 
San 56-1, Shill imdong, Kwanakgu 
Seoul 151742 
Korea 

kangyil@snu.ac.kr 

Lee, Robert E. 857 

Department of Family and 
Child Ecology 
Michigan State University 
102 Paolucci Building 
East Lansing, MI 48824 
boblee@msu.edu 

Lee, Jr., Charles William 

Director 

Southwest Tennessee Head Start 
1527 White Avenue 
P.O. Box 264 
Henderson, TN 38340 
cwleejr@yahoo.com 

Lenrow, Peter 

Executive Director 
Somerville Early Head Start 
Somerville Mental Health 
Association 

167 Holland Street, Room 133 
Somerville, MA 02144 
smhaplenrow@aol.com 

Leonard, Carolyn Pisano 

Head Start 

Montgomery County, Maryland 

Public Schools 

Rocking Horse Road Center 

4910 Macon Road 

Rockville, MD 20852 

carolyn_p_leonard@fcmcps.kl 2.md.us 

Leong, Deborah Jane 446 

Professor 

Psychology 

Metropolitan State College 
of Denver 
CB 54 

P.O. Box 173362 
Denver, CO 80217-3362 
leongd@mindspring.com 

Leong, Norm 

Psychologist 
Head Start 

Montgomery County, Maryland 
Public Schools 
4910 Macon Road 
Rockville, MD 20852 
normleong@erols.com 



Leraas, Marilyn 

Head Start Supervisor 
West Central Minnesota 
Communities Aaion, Inc. 

P.O. Box 956 

Elbow Lake, MN 56531 

marilyn.leraas@co.grant.mn.us 

Letiecq, Bethany L. 818 

Department of Family Studies 
University of Maryland at 
College Park 
1204 Marie Mount Hall 
College Park, MD 20742 
bl3838@netscape.net 

Levine, L,ori 

Psychology 

Mailman School of Public Health 
Free to Grow 
Columbia University 
722 West 168th Street 
NewYork, NY 10032 
ls273@columbia.edu 

Lewin, Amy B. 783 

Assistant Professor 
CRI Center 6 

Children's National Medical Center 
111 Michigan Avenue, NW. 
Washington, DC 20010-2970 
alewin@cnmc.org 

Licht, Jack 

State University of New York at 
Stony Brook 

Stony Brook, NY 11794-0001 
jlicht@acs.nyc.gov 

Lieberman, Alida 

Professor 

Psychiatry 

University of California at 
San Francisco 
SFGH Building 20 
Suite 1200, Room 2122 
1001 Potrero Avenue 
San Francisco, CA 94110 
alicial@itsa.ucsfedu 

Liebow, Harriet 150 

Project Manager 
Department of Education 
Catholic University of America 
O'Boyle Hall 

620 Michigan Avenue, N.E. 

Room 239 

Washington, DC 20064 
liebow@cua.edu 





Liera, Letida 

Coordinator 
Early Head Start 
The Learning Center 
P.O. Box 3441 
Jackson, WY 83001 
lety2209@yahoo.com 

Li-Grining, Christine Pajunar 226, 
228, 939 

Graduate Student 
Human Development and 
Social Policy 
Northwestern University 
2040 Sheridan Road 
Evanston, IL 60208 
cpligrining@northwestem.edu 

Lin, Keh-Ming 278 

Professor 

Harbor-REI 

Psychiatry 

University of California at 
Los Angeles 

1124 West Carson Street, B-4 South 
Torrance, CA 90502 
linkeh@ucla.edu 

Lindsay, Judith K. 816 

Prevention Outreach Services 
Healthier Communities Department 
Spectrum Health 
100 Michigan, N.E. 

MC49 

Grand Rapids, MI 49503 
judith.lindsay@spectrum-health.org 

Linney, Jean Ann 115 

Professor 

Department of Psychology 
University of South Carolina 
1532 Pendleton Street 
Columbia, SC 29208 
linney@sc.edu 

Locke, Mona Lee 76 

First Lady, State of Washington 
P.O. Box 40002 
Olympia, WA 98504-0002 
robin.zukoski@gov.wa.gov 

London, Kevin 814, 819 

Applied Psychology 
New York University 
660 North Wolfe Street 
Baltimore, MD 21287 
kl350@nyu.edu 

Longcor, Susan Jane 

Health Manager 
Administration 
NORWESCAP Head Start 
604 Roseberry Street 
Phillipsburg, NJ 08865 
longcors@norwescap.org 



1012 



APPENDIX D 



Lonigan, Christopher J. 853 

Associate Professor 
Department of Psychology 
Florida State University 
209 South Copeland Street 
Tallahassee, FL 32306-1270 
lonigan@psy.fsu.edu 

Loomis, Lucy 823 

Director 

Department of Community Health 
Family Medicine Division 
Denver Health 

660 Bannock Street, MC 1914 
Denver, CO 80204 
lucy.loomis@dhha.org 

Lopez, Frauds M. 748 

Ophthalmology 
University of Arizona 
655 North Alvemon Way, #108 
Tucson, AZ 85711 

Lopez, Lisa Maria 724 

NSF Postdoaoral Fellow 
Graduate School of Education 
Harvard University 
309 Larsen Hall 
14 Appian Way 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
lopezli@gse.harvard.edu 

Lopez, Michael 67, 172 

Administration for Children 
and Families 

U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 

OPRE/Child Outcomes Research 
and Evaluation (CORE) 

370 L'Enfant Promenade, S.W. 

7th Floor West 
Washington, DC 20447 
milopez@acfhhs.gov 

Lord, Catherine 250 

Director 

Autism and Communication 
Disorders Center 
University of Michigan 
111 East Catherine Street 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2054 

Love, John M. 140, 391 

Senior Fellow 

Mathmatica Policy Research, Inc, 
P.O. Box 2393 
600 Alexander Park 
Princeton, NJ 08543-2393 
jlove@mathematica-mpr.com 



Lower, Richard ). 812 

Graduate Student 
Department of Family and 
Child Ecology 
Michigan State University 
University Outreach Partnerships 
6 Kellogg Center 
East Lansing, MI 48824 
lowerric@msu.edu 

Loyde, Judy W. 

Executive Direaor 
Head Start 

Regina Coeli Child Development 
Center 

22476 Highway 190 
Robert, LA 70455 
jloyde@rccdc.org 

Lublin, Nina E. 

Program Direaor 
Resources for Children With 
Special Needs 

116 East 16th Street, 5th Floor 
New York, NY 10003 
nina@resourcesnyc.org 

Lucero, Ana 914 

Graduate Student 
Family and Consumer Sciences 
Family Studies and Human 
Development 
University of Arizona 
P.O. Box 210033 
Tucson, AZ 85721-0033 
1 ucero @ ag. a rizo na.edu 

Luster, Tom 936 

Department of Family and 
Child Ecology 
Michigan State University 
101 H Morrill Hall 
East Lansing, MI 48824-1030 

Lutz, Cheryl 

Program Specialist 
ACF/ACYF 
Head Start Bureau 
U.S, Department of Health and 
Human Services 
1961 Stout Street, 9th Floor 
Denver, CO 80294 
cIutz@acf,dhhs.gov 

Luze, Gayle 152, 534 

Assistant Professor 
Human Development and 
Family Studies 
Iowa State University 
54 LeBaron Hall 
Ames, lA 50011-1030 
gluze@ iastate. edu 



ERIC 



Lybolt, John 979‘ 

Direaor 

LEAP! to Language 
1535 Lake Cook Road, #212 
Northbrook, IL 60062 
johnlybolt@aol.com 

Machida, Sandra K. 957 

Coordinator 
Child Development 
California State University 
Chico, CA 95929-0234 
smachida@csuchico.edu 

Magana, Lynette 905 

Graduate Student 
Child Development and 
Family Studies 
Purdue University 
1269 Fowler House 
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1269 
lalilyn@cs.com 

Mann, Emily 569 

University of Wisconsin-Madison 
1500 Highland Avenue, Room 5379 
Madison, WI 53705 
eamann@students.wisc.edu 

Mann, Tammy Lynn 

Director 

National Early Head Start National 
Resource Center 
ZERO TO THREE 
2000 M Street, N.W. 

Suite 200 

Washington, DC 20036-3307 
t.mann@zerotothree.org 

Manter, Marcia 664, 979 

Professional Development 
Community Development Institute 
5616 Raytown Road 
Raytown, MO 64133 
mmanter@cdi7.com 

Marchand, Vicky 

Program Analyst 
Head Start Bureau 
ACF/ACYF 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Washington, DC 20447 
vmarchand@acfdhhs.gov 

Marcon, Rebecca A. 894 

Professor 

Department of Psychology 
University of North Florida 
Jacksonville, FL 32224-2673 
rmarcon@unf.edu 



1017 



1013 



appendix d 



Marcynyszyn, Lyscha Ann 940, 947 

Graduate Student 

Family Life Development Center 

Cornell University 

MVR Hall 

Ithaca, NY 14853 

lam49@comell.edu 

Margie, Nancy 

Child Trends 

4301 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20008 
nmargie@childtrends.org 

Mariger, Heather Ann 785 

Technology Coordinator 

Center for Persons with Disabilities 

Project SPIES 

Utah State University 

6818 Old Main Hill 

Logan, UT 84322-6818 

heatherm@cpd2.usu.edu 

Mating, Christopher 

Intern 

Professional Development 
National Association for the 
Education of Young Children 
1509 16th Street, N.W. 

Washington, DC 20036 
maringc764@hotmail.com 

Mark, Melvin 953 

* Professor 
Psychology 

Pennsylvania State University 
407 Moore Building 
University Park, PA 16802 
m5m@psu.edu 

Market, Howard 590, 687 

Professor 

Pediatrics 

University of Michigan 
100 Simpson, Box 0725 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48109-0613 
howard@umich.edu 

Markowitz, Diane L. 926 

Associate Professor of Anthropology 
Department of Geography and 
Anthropology 
Rowan University 
201 Mullica Hill Road 
Glassboro, NJ 08028 
markowitz@rowan.edu 

Marr, Deborah 923 

Associate Professor 
Occupational Therapy 
Utica College 
1600 Burrstone Road 
Utica, NY 13502 
dmarr@utica.ucsu.edu 



Marsh, Cheryl 

Mental Health Coordinator 
Two Rivers Head Start Agency 
222 East Wilson Street 
Batavia, IL 60510 
trhsa@ameritech.net 

Marsh, Pamela T. 787 

Doctoral Student 

Clinical Psychology 

Center for Professional Psychology 

George Washington University 

2300 M Street, #910 

Washington, DC 20037 

marshpt@gwu.edu 

Martin, John 

Director 

Wood County Head Start, Inc. 

380 3rd Avenue South 
Wisconsin Rapids, W1 54494 
wchs@tznet.com 

Martin, Nanqr 

Director, Family Partnerships 
Preschool Education/Family 
Development 

Community Services for Children 
1520 Hanover Avenue 
Allentown, PA 18109 
nmartin@ptd.prolog.net 

Martinez, Elaine 

Manager 

Family and Community Partnership 
Social Work 

Pocono Services for Families 
and Children 
212 West 4th Street 
East Stroudsburg, PA 18301 
emartinez@psfc.org 

Martinez, Guillermo 

Evaluation Assistant 

Head Start Program 

Research and Evaluation 

Region 19 Education Service Center 

11670 Chito Samaniego 

El Paso, TX 79936 

gmartine@escl9.net 

Martinez'Beck, Ivelisse M. 

Policy Fellow 
ACF/ACYF 
Policy Division 
Child Care Bureau 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Room 2046 

Washington, DC 20447 
imartinezbeck@acf.hhs.gov 




iOl'8 



Marx, Mary 

Research Associate 
Evaluation Services Center 
Arlitt Child & Family Research & 
Education Center 
University of Cincinnati 
P.O. Box 210105 
Cincinnati, OH 45221-0105 
marxml@ucmail.uc.edu 

Massoff, Melinda 918 

Department of Applied Psychology 
New York University 
239 Green Street, Room 410F 
New York, NY 10003 

Mathews, Mary Anne 

Human Services 

North Carolina Central University 
P.O. Box 6421 
Beufort, SC 29903 
mamlsteps@hargray.com 

Malta, Mary Ann 909 

Ph.D. Graduate 
Human Development and 
Family Studies 
University of North Carolina 
at Greensboro 
228 Stone Building 
Greensboro, NC 27402 
m_matta@uncg.edu 

Mayer, Ellen 958 

Research Associate 
Harvard Family Research Project 
38 Concord Avenue 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
ellen_mayer@harvard.edu 

Mayfield, Wayne 777 

(contact information not available) 

Mazza, Carl 491 

Professor 

Department of Sociology and 
Social Work 

Lehman College of the City 
University of New York 
250 Bedford Park Boulevard West 
Bronx, NY 10468 
cmazza@alpha.lehman.cuny.edu 

McAllister, Carol L. 161 

Assistant Professor 
Behavioral and Community Health 
Sciences 

University of Pittsburgh 
230 Parran Hall 

Graduate School of Public Health 
Pittsburgh, PA 15261 
allister@pitt.edu 



1014 



McCabe, Lisa A. 124, 226, 227 

Research Scientist 

Center for Children and Families 

Teachers College, Columbia University 

525 West 120th Street, Box 39 

New York, NY 10027 

lm428@columbia.edu 

McCarthy, Mary E. 

Psychologist 

Head Start 

Early Childhood 

Montgomery County, Maryland 

Public Schools 

4910 Macon Road 

Rockville, MD 20852 

mary^mccarthy @ fc. mcps. k 1 2 . md . us 

McCarthy, Paul 766 

School of Medicine 
Department of Pediatrics 
Yale University 
333 Cedar Street, Suite A 
New Haven, CT 06520-8064 

McCormick, Katherine M. 796 

Assistant Professor 
Special Education and Rehabilitation 
Counseling 
University of Kentucky 
229 Taylor Education Building 
Lexington, KY 40506-0001 
kmcco2@pop.uky.edu 

McCowan, Leon R. 

Regional Hub Director 
Department of Health and Human 
Services 

Administration for Children 
and Families 

1301 Young Street, Room 914 
Dallas, TX 75202 
lmccowan@acf.hhs.gov 

McCrea, Nadine 741 

Program Director 
Faculty of Education, Health 
and Professional Education 
Early Childhood Education 
University of New England 
Armidale 

New South Wales 02351 
Australia 

nmccrea @ metz. une. edu.au 

McDermott, Paul 757, 880 

Graduate School Education 
University of Pennsylvania 
3700 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 191046216 



McDonald, lennifer 

Educational Services, Inc. 

1150 Conneaicut Avenue, N.W 
Suite 1100 

Washington, DC 20036 
jenm@esilsg.org 

McEvoy, Eileen 

Research Associate 

School of Education 

Child and Family Policy Center 

New York University 

239 Greene Street, 4th Floor 

New York, NY 10003 

eileen.mcevoy@nyu.edu 

McEvoy, Mary A. 302 

Chair, Educational Psychology 
CEED 

University of Minnesota 
215 Pattee Hall 
150 Pillsbury, S.E. 

Minneapolis, MN 55455-0223 
bartl002@umn.edu 

McFee, ]ohn 823 

Professor 

Obstetrics/ Gynecology 
Denver Health 
Medical Center 
777 Bannock Street, MC 0660 
Denver, CO 80204 

McGuigan, William 822 

Research Associate 
Human Development and 
Family Studies 
Oregon State University 
202 Bates Hall 
Corvallis, OR 97331 
william.mcguigan@orst.edu 

McKeam, Matthew 

Office of Management and Budget 
United States Federal Government 
725 17th Street, N.W 
Washington, DC 20503 
matthew_mckeam@omb.edp.gov 

McKelvey, Lorraine M. 154, 468, 
470, 806, 928 

Research Assistant 
Department of Psychology 
Michigan State University 
G36 North Hubbard Hall 
East Lansing, MI 48824 
mckelve9@msu.edu 

McKeown, Margaret 840 

Research Scientist 
University of Pittsburgh 
646 Learning Research and 
Development Center 
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 
mckeown@pitt.edu 



1019 



McKnight, Katherine 

Graduate Student 
Psychology 

University of South Carolina 
Department of Psychology 
Columbia, SC 29208 
kamcknight@hotmail .com 

McLanahan, Sara 474 

Princeton University 
Center for Research on 
Child Wellbeing 
Wallace Hall 
Princeton, NJ 08544 
mclanaha@princeton.edu 

McSwain, William D. 

Management Analyst 
Head Start 
TRET 

Neighborhood House Association 
5660 Copley Drive 
San Diego, CA 92111 
wdmcswain@yahoo.com 

McWayne, Christine M. 622, 915 

Doaoral Candidate 
Graduate School of Education 
Psychology in Education 
University of Pennsylvania 
3700 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 191046216 
cmcwayne@dolphin.upenn.edu 

Medvin, Mandy B. 977 

Associate Professor 
Psychology Department 
Westminster College 
South Market Street, Box 101 
New Wilmington, PA 16172-0001 
medvinm@westminster.edu 

Meisels, Samuel |. 391, 406 

President 
Erikson Institute 
420 North Wabash 
Chicago, IL 60611 
tfitterman@erikson.edu 

Melmed, Paul |. 837 

Research/D.evelopment 
Touching The Lives of Children 
3182 Suite A 
Old Tunnel Road 
Lafayette, CA 94549 
paul@melmedleaming.com 

Menaker, MicheUe Ruth 880 

Doctoral Student 
Graduate School of Education 
Psychology in Education 
University of Pennsylvania 
3700 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
menaker3@dolphin.upenn.edu 



1015 



APPENDIX D 



Mendez, Julia L. 115, 622, 877 

Assistant Professor 
University of South Carolina 
553 Barnwell 

Department of Psychology 
Columbia, SC 29208 
mendez@sc.edu 

Mendoza, Jaime 942 

Assistant Director 
Child and Family Development 
Center 

Azusa Pacific University 
901 East Alosta Avenue 
Azusa, CA 91702 
jmendoza@apu.edu 

Menon, Roshni 914 

Graduate Student 
Family and Consumer Sciences 
Family Studies and Human 
Development 
University of Arizona 
P.O. Box 210033 
Tucson, AZ 85721-0033 
roshni@ag.arizona.edu 

Mercer, Jessica 827 

Research Assistant 
Early Head Start Evaluation Project 
Harvard Graduate School 
of Education 
3rd Floor, Larsen Hall 
Appian Way 
Cambridge, MA 02138 

Mersky, Joshua Patrick 

Research Assistant 
Chicago Longitudinal Study 
University of Wisconsin at Madison 
1500 Hi^land Avenue 
Madison, WI 53705-2280 
jpmersky@students.wisc.edu 

Meyer, Jacqueline 846 

Lecturer 

Department of Speech Pathology 
and Audiology 
Professional Studies 
State University of New York 
at Cortland 
P.O. Box 2000 
Cortland, NY 13045 
meyerj@cortland.edu 

Meyers, Marcia K. 47 

Professor 

School of Social Work 
University of Washington 
4101 15th Avenue, N.E. 

Seattle, WA 98105 



Mi Hee, Min 

Master Degree Course 
Department of Child Developmet 
and Family Studies 
Seoul National University 
San 56-1, Shillimdong, Kwanakgu 
Seoul 151742 
Korea 

mkinder@hanmail.net 

Midgett, Corina 

Analyst 

Better Beginnings, Better Futures 
5504 Besley Court 
Rockville, MD 20851 
cmidgett@uoguelph.ca 

Milbum, Sharon Seidman 950, 952 

Assistant Professor 
Child and Adolescent Studies 
California State University 
at Fullerton 
P.O. Box 6868 
Fullerton, CA 92834-6868 
smilbum@fullerton.edu 

Miller, Alison Leslie 230, 231, 232 

Assistant Professor, Research 
East Providence Bradley Hospital 
Department of Psychiatry 
Brown University 
1011 Veterans Memorial Parkway 
East Providence, RI 02915 
alisonJ_miller@brown.edu 

Miller, Joseph M. 748, 884 

Ophthalmology 
University of Arizona 
655 North Albemon Way, #108 
Tucson, AZ 85711 

Mills, Mary Lou 664, 971 

Head Start Mental Health 
Coordinator 

4055 Saint Vincent Avenue 
Shreveport, LA 71108 

Minnis, Ann F. 425 

Director 

Texas Instmments Foundation , 
12500 TI Boulevard, MS 8656 
Dallas, TX 75251 
a-minnis@ti.com 

Mitchell, Christina M. 885 

Psychiatry 

American Indian and Alaska Native 
Programs 

University of Colorado Health 

Sciences Center 

C/BAOll-13 

4455 East 12th Avenue 

Denver, CO 80220 

christina.mitchell@uchsc.edu 





Mitchell, Karen 

Program Specialist 
Head Start Bureau 
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
ACF/ACYF 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Switzer Building 
Washington, DC 20447 

Mohamed, Rena 530 

Early Childhood Liaison 
Baltimore Mental Health Systems, Inc. 
201 East Baltimore Street, Suite 1340 
Baltimore, MD 21202 
rmohamed@bmhsi.org 

Mohan, Kathleen M. 884 

Ophthalmology 
University of Arizona 
655 North Alvemon Way, #108 
Tucson, AZ 85711 
kmohan@u.arizona.edu 

Mok, Doris S. 942 

Assistant Professor 
Graduate Psychology 
Azusa Pacific University 
901 East Alosta Avenue 
Azusa, CA 91 702 
dmok@apu.edu 

Monahan, Shannon Claire 752^ 754 

Research Assistant 

ISHD 

PED 

University of Pennsylvania 
Graduate School of Education 
3700 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
monahan2@dolphin.upenn.edu 

Mondanipour, Shahnaz 

Education Director 
Lycoming-Clinton Head Start 
2138 Boyd Street 
Williamsport, PA 17701 
shmondanipour@aol.com 

Montalto, Daniela 908 

Developmental Psychology 
Fordham University 
New York University Child Study 
Center 

New York, NY 07071 
montaltod@aol.com 

Montanez, Marcel 815 

Research Assistant 
Psychology 

Applied Developmental Science 
Michigan State University 
4660 South Haggadom, Suite 620 
East Lansing, MI 48823 
montanel @msu.edu 



1016 



APPENDIX D 



Montie, Jeanne E. 875 

Research Associate 
High/Scope Educational Research 
Foundation 
600 North River Street 
Ypsilanti, MI 48198 
jeannem@highscope.org 

Mooney, Carol Garhart 

Manager 

Belknap-Merrimack Head Start 
PO. Box 1016 
Concord, NH 03302-1016 
carolgmoon4@yahoo.com 

Moore, Bruce Dennis 757 

New England College of Optometry 
Marcus Professor of Pediatric Studies 
Vision in Preschoolers (VIP) Study 
Group 

1255 Boylston Street 
Boston, MA 02215 
mooreb@ne-optometry.edu 

Moore, Joseph S. 816 

Healthier Communities Department 
Spectrum Health 
100 Michigan, N.E. 

MC49 

Grand Rapids, MI 49503 
joseph.moore@spectrum-health.org 

Moore, Kristen A. 702 

Child Trends, Inc. 

4301 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. 

Suite 100 

Washington, DC 20008-2304 
kmoore@childtrends.org 

Moore, Lin 969 

Assistant Professor 

College of Professional Education 

Texas Woman's University 

Early Childhood/Teacher Education 

P.O. Box 425769 

Denton, TX 76204-5769 

linmoore@earthlink.net 

Moorehouse, Martha 

Director 

Office of the Assistant Secretary for 
Planning and Evaluation 
Division of Child and Youth Policy 
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
200 Independence Avenue, S.W 
Room 450-G 
Washington, DC 20201 
martha.moorehouse@hhs.gov 



Morgan-Sandoz, Beverly 

Manager 

Head Start-State Preschool 
Los Angeles County Office of 
Education 

17315 Studebaker Road 
Cerritos, CA 90703-2553 
morgan-sandozb@lacoe.edu 

Momingstar, Melanie 

Senior Program Manager 
Health Canada 
Children and Youth 
First Nations Head Start 
2048 20th Floor 
Joanne Mance Building 
Tunney's Pasture 
Ottawa, Ontario KIA OK9 
Canada 

melanie.momingstar@hc-sc.gc.ca 

Morrison, Frederick J. 407, 850 

Professor 

University of Michigan 
Department of Psychology 
Ann Arbor, MI 48104 
fjmorris@umich.edu 

Morrison, George S. 

Professor and Endowed Chair 
Counseling, Development, and 
Higher Education 
Velma E. Schmidt Programs 
University of North Texas 
P.O. Box 305458 
Denton, TX 76203-5458 
morrison@unt.edu 

Morrison, Karen 969 

HS Coaching Grant Program 
Facilitator 
Prekindergarten 
Arlington ISD 

Hilldale Annex, Arkansas Lane 
Arlington, TX 76016 
kmorriso@aisd.net 

Mosca, Samuel G. 749, 757 

Special Needs Coordinator 
SDOP Head Start Program 
Steven's Administration Building 
13th and Spring Garden Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19123 
smosca@aol.com 

Munis, Pelin 741 

Graduate School of Education 
Psychology in Education 
University of Pennsylvania 
13 Karen Drive 
Cherry Hill, N| 08003 
pelin@dolphin.upenn.edu 




Murphy, Janis 

Associate Professor 

Departnrient of ELC 

College of Education 

Murray State University 

3208 Alexander Hall 

Murray, KY 420713340 

janis.murphy@coe.murraystate.edu 

Nagib, Faye 

Early Head Start Specialist 
School of Educational Applied 
Psychology 

Head Start Quality Improvement 
Center 

New York University 
726 Broadway, 5th Floor 
New York, NY 10003 
fh4@nyu.edu 

Nance, Elsa Jones 115 

Center for Children and Families 
Columbia University, 

Teachers College 
200 Cold Spring Road, B215 
Rocky Hill, CT 06067 
ejnance@compuserve.com 

Nantambu, Nana 

Consultant 

Head Start New Orleans 
1715 Tupelo 
New Orleans, LA 70125 
nanaJoy2@yahoo.com 

Navaie-Waliser, Maryam 

Senior Research Associate 
Research Center 

Visiting Nurse Service of New York 
5 Penn Plaza, 11th Floor 
New York, NY 10001 
maryam.navaie@vnsny.org 

Nelson, Dana 162 

(contact information not available) 

Nelson, Dorothea 

Policy Committee 
Head Start 

Neighborhood Centers Association 
1761 East 30th Street, Suite 100 
Cleveland, OH 44101 

Nelson-Hooks, JoAnn 

Fatherhood Coordinator 
National Head Start Association 
1 651 Prince Street 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
j nelso n-h@ nhsa .org 



1021 



1017 



appendix d 



Neuman, Susan B. 187, 968 

Assistant Secretary 
Office of Elementary and 
Secondary Education 
U.S. Department of Education 
400 Maryland Avenue, S.W. 

Room 3W315 
Washington, DC 20202 
susan.neuman@ed.gov 

New, MicheUe 783 

Clinical Psychologist and 
Research Coordinator 
Outpatient Psychology 
Department of Psychology 
Children's National Medical Center 
111 Michigan Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20010-2970 
mnew@cnmc.org 

Newman, Mary 783 

San Mateo, CA County 

35 Tower Road 

San Mateo, CA 94402 

mnewman@co.sanmateo.ca.us 

Newton, Laura 845, 899 

Graduate Student 
Graduate School of Education 
George Mason University 
3330 King Street 
Alexandria, VA 22302 
lnewton@acps.kl 2.va.us 

Nicholas, Carmen A. 944 

Direaor 

Head Start and Early Head Start 
Palm Beach County Head Start 
3323 Belvedere Road, Building 501 B 
West Palm Beach, FL 33406 
chichola@co. palm-beach. fl.us 

Nixon-Cave, Kim 

Assistant Professor 
Temple University 
3307 North Broad Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19140 
kncave @ tempi e. edu 

Nolan, Jenine Mescher 664 

Instructional 

Speech Language Pathology Assistant 

Health Occupations 

Cerritos College 

11110 Alondra Boulevard 

Norwalk, CA 90650 

jnolan@cerritos.edu 

Noone-Lutz, Megan 757 

(contaa information not available) 



Nord, Christine 199 

Researcher 
Westat, Inc. 

1650 Research Boulevard, TA-2128 
Rockville, MD 20850 
christinenord@westat.com 

O'Brien, Eileen 

Casey Foundation 

Consultant, Office of Early Childhood 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration 
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
5600 Fisher's Lane 
Rockville, MD 20857 
eobrien@samhsa.gov 

O'Brien, James 289 

Health and Disabilities Services 
Branch 

Head Start Bureau 
Switzer Building, Room 2004 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Washington, DC 20447 
jobrien@acf.dhhs.gov 

O'Brien, Robert W. 100, 811 

Senior Research Analyst 
The CDM Group, Inc. 

5530 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 1660 
Chevy Chase, MD 20815 
bobrien@cdmgroup.com 

Ochoa, Salvador Hector 425 

Associate Professor 

Psychology 

School of Education 

Texas A&M University 

Mail Stop 4225 

College Station, TX 77845 

shochoa@tamu.edu 

Oden, Sherri L. 

Associate Professor 

Human Development/Child Studies 

Oakland University 

536 O'Dowd Hall 

Rochester, Ml 48309 

oden@oakland.edu 

O'Donnell, Ellen Haigh 

Graduate Student 
Clinical 

Clark University 
900 Main Street 
Worcester, MA 01610 
eodonnell@clarku.edu 




1018 




O'Donnell, Kevin 

Research Analyst 
Child and Family Studies 
Westat, Inc. 

1 650 Research Boulevard 
Rockville, MD 20850 
kevino'donnell@westat.com 

Offord, David R. 779 

Professor 

Head Division of Child Psychiatry 
McMaster University 
P.O. Box 2000, Station A 
Hamilton, Ontario L8N 3Z5 
Canada 

Ohl, Joan E. 3 

Commissioner 

ACF/ACYF 

U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
Mary Switzer Building 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Washington, DC 20204 
johl@acfhhs.gov 

Olmsted, Patricia P. 875 

High/Scope Education Research 
Foundation 
600 North River Street 
Ypsilanti, Ml 48198-2898 

Olsen, Nina 

Graduate Student 
Clinical 

Clark University 
960 Main Street 
Worcester, MA 01610 
nolsen@clarku.edu 

Olthof, Marla 979 

Consultant 

Head Start XXI Resource Center 
2200 169th Street 
Hammond, IN 46323 

Omar, Mildred A. 

Associate Professor 
College of Nursing 
Michigan State University 
A 230 Life Sciences 
East Lansing, Ml 48824-9553 

Ontai, Lenna L. 810 

Graduate Student 
Psychology Department 
University of Nebraska at Lincoln 
238 Burnett Hall 
Lincoln, NE 68588-0308 
lontai@unlserve.unl.edu 



APPENDIX D 



Orel-Bixler, Deborah Ann 892 

Assistant Professor of Clinical 
Optometry 
School of Optometry 
University of California at Berkeley 
Berkeley, CA 94720-2020 
dob@spectacle.berkeley.edu 

Osofsky, Joy D. 503 

Professor 

Psychiatry and Pediatrics 
Louisiana State University Health 
Sciences Center 
1542 Tulane Avenue 
New Orleans, LA 70112 
josofs@lsuhsc.edu 

Ou, Suh-Ruu 569 

School of Social Work 
University of Wisconsin at Madison 
1500 Highland Avenue, Room 537 
Waisman Center 
Madison, WI 53705 
ou@waisman.wisc.edu 

Ozretich, Rachel A. 961 

(contact information not available) 

Paez, Mariela 800 

Research Associate 

Graduate School of Education 

Harvard University 

303 Larsen Hall, Appian Way 

Cambridge, MA 02138 

mariela_paez@gse.harvard.edu 

Pai-Samant, Shefali 83, 100, 797 

Senior Research Analyst 
Education and Social Services 
Xtria, LLC 

1749 Old Meadow Road, Suite 600 
McLean, VA 22102 
shefali@xtria.com 

Palfrey, Judith 67, 368 

Chief 

General Pediatrics 
Children's Hospital 
300 Longwood Avenue 
Boston, MA 02115 
justine.cameiro@tch.harvard.edu 

Pan, Barbara 157, 827, 842 

Research Associate/Lecturer 
Human Development 
and Psychology 
Harvard Graduate School 
of Education 
302 Larsen Hall 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
barbara_pan@harvard.edu 



Pandn, Marlene 

Research Associate 
Center for Violence Research 
School of Public Health 
Columbia University 
722 West 168th Street 
New York, NY 10032 
map22@columbia.edu 

Papierno, Paul 940 

Department of Human 
Development 
Cornell University 
N202 MVR Hall 
Ithaca, NY 14853 
pbp2@comell.edu 

Park, Elizabeth Ann 871 

Research Assistant 
Family Studies 
Center for Disabilty Studies 
University of Delaware 
Newark, DE 19716 
1 izpark 1 @ co mcast. net 

Park, Se-Kyung 832 

Doctoral Student 
Human Development and 
Family Services 
Center for Family Policy 
and Research 

University of Missouri at Columbia 
1400 Rock Quarry Road 
Columbia, MO 65201 
spblb@miz 20 u.edu 

Park-Jadotte, Jennifer J. 

Research Associate 

Institute for Women's Policy Research 
1 707 L Street, N.W 
Washington, DC 20036 
parkjadotte@iwpr.org 

Pascoe, Elizabeth Jean 

Student 

School of Education 
Teaching Education 
Miami Llniversity 
1949 Winding Brook Way 
Xenia, OH 45385 
becky.valekis@wright.edu 

Pascoe, John M. 368, 575, 590, 606 

The Children's Medical Center 
Wright State University 
1949 Winding Brook Way 
Xenia, OH 45385 
john.pascoe@wright.edu 



Pasternack, Robert 187 

Assistant Secretary 
Office of Special Education and 
Rehabilitative Services 
U.S. Department of Education 
400 Maryland Avenue, S.E. 
Washington, DC 20202 
robert.pastemack@ed.gov 

Pate;, Henri 

North Carolina Central University 
1801 Fayetteville Street 
Durham, NC 27707 

PaUerson, Carla 740, 741, 781, 921 

Director Post Graduate Research 
School of Public Health 
Centre for Public Health Research 
Queensland University of 
Technology 
Viaoria Park Road 
Kelvin Grove 
Qld 4059 
Brisbane 04059 
Australia 

c.patterson@qut.edu.au 

Paulsell, Diane 140 

Researcher 

Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. 
RO. Box 2393 
600 Alexander Park 
Princeton, NJ 08543-2393 
dpaulsell@mathematica-mpr.com 

Pavkov, Thomasn 979 

Director 

Head Start XXI Resource Center 
Purdue University at Calumet 
2200 169th Street 
Porter Hall, Room E204 
Hammond, IN 46323 
tp avkov@ n wi . cal u met. p urdue. edu 

Peay, Lenore M. 868 

Executive Director 

Fort George Community Enrichment 
Center, Inc. 

1525 Saint Nicholas Avenue 
New York, NY 10033 
ftgeohs@aoLcom 

Peifer, Karen 783 

Direaory Research 
Center for Mental Health Services 
Research 

University of California 
15380 Woodward Road 
San Jose, CA 95124 
kpeifer@bc.netcom.com 



1023 



1019 



A F P h IN U 1 A U 



Peisner>Feinberg, Ellen S. 115, 
772, 902 

Scientist 

University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill 

Frank Porter Graham Child 
Development Institute 
105 Smith Level Road, CB 8180 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-8180 
ellenpf@unc.edu 

Pelnar, Michelle 814, 819 

Research Assistant 
Applied Psychology 
New York University 
239 Greene Street, Room 401 F 
New York, NY 10003 

Perales, Nina 

Research Assistant 
Child & Adolescent 
The University of Chicago 
5841 South Maryland Avenue, 
MC 3077 

Chicago, IL 60637 
naperales@yahoo.com 

Perez, Linda 783 

Department of Education 
Mills College 
Oakland, CA 94613 
lperez@pacbell.net 

Perez de Colon, Mercedes B. 

Vice President of Programs 
National Office 
Avance, Inc. 

San Antonio Area Chapter 
301 South Frio, Suite 380 
San Antonio, TX 78207 
mcolon_nat@avance.org 

Perry, Deborah Forsythe 765 

Research Assistant Professor 
Pediatrics 

Child Development Center 
Georgetown University 
3307 M Street, N.W. 

Suite 401 

Washington, DC 20007 
dfp2@georgetown.edu 

Perry, Judy 949 

Director 

Planning, Policy, and Analysis 
Head Start 

New York City Administration 
for Children's Services 
66 John Street, 8th Floor 
New York, NY 10038 
j perry @ acs. nyc. gov 



Perry, Mario A. 726, 874 

Graduate School of Education 
University of Pennsylvania 
3700 Walnut Street 
Psychology in Education Division 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
marlo@dolphin.upenn.edu 

Pershey, Monica Gordon 897 

Assistant Professor 
Speech and Hearing 
Cleveland State University 
1899 East 22nd Street 
Cleveland, OH 44114 
m.pershey@csuohio.edu 

Peters, Connie Jo 425 

Director Preschool Initiatives 

Learning Therapy 

Education and Lifelong Learning 

Southern Methodist University 

P.O. Box 750384 

Dallas, TX 75275-0384 

cpeters@mail.smu.edu 

Peters, Rachel A. 890 

Doaoral Candidate 
Human Development and 
Family Studies 
Prevention Research Center 
Pennsylvania State University 
113 South Henderson Building 
State College, PA 16802 
rap99psu@yahoo.com 

Peterson, Carla A. 152, 289, 534, 
535 

Associate Professor 
Human Development and 
Family Studies 
Iowa State University 
58 Lebaron Hall 
Ames, lA 50011-1030 
carl apet @ i astate. edu 

Phillips, Beth 739, 853 

Department of Psychology 
Florida State University 
Tallahassee, FL 32306-1270 
beth@psy.fsu.edu 

Phillips, Deborah A. 47, 211 

Professor and Chair 
Department of Psychology 
Georgetown University 
306A White Gravenor 
37th and O Streets, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20057 
dap4@georgetown.edu 



1020 

o 





Pianta, Robert 960 

Professor 
Psychology 
University of Virginia 
P.O. Box 800784 
Charlottsville, VA 22908 
rcp4p@virginia.edu 

Picart, Nancy L. 

Direaor 
Head Start 

Community Programs Center 
2210 Smithtown Avenue 
Ronkonkoma, NY 11779 
npicart@suffolk.lib.ny.us 

Pickett, Arcenia 

Chairperson 
Head Start 

Neighborhood Centers Association 
1761 East 30th Street, Suite 100 
Cleveland, OH 44114 

Pickett, Linda K. 836 

Assistant Professor 
Curriculum and Instruction 
Prekindergarten-Primary 
University of North Florida 
4567 Saint Johns Bluff Road South 
Jacksonville, FL 32224 
lpickett@unf.edu 

Piedra, Lorena 

17703 Topfield Drive 
Gaithersburg, MD 20877 
cisne46@yahoo.es 

Pinter, Ana-Maria 814, 819 

New York University 
Department of Applied Psychology 
New York University 
239 Greene Street, Room 401 F 
New York, NY 10003 

Pisdtelli, Vincenza 788 

Children's Specialized Hospital 
150 New Providence Road 
Mountain Side, NJ 07092 
vpiscite@childrens-specialized.org 

IHtUnan, Laura D. 226, 228, 939 

Research Scientist 
Institute for Policy Research 
Northwestern University 
2040 Sheridan Road 
Evanston, IL 60208 
l-pittman@nwu.edu 

IHtzer, Lindsay 

Research Assistant 
Child Trends 

4301 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20008 
lpitzer@childtrends.org 



APPENDIX D 



Place, Maireda Seaman 868' 
Teacher 

Early Childhood Center 
Therapy 

University Settlement 
711 Amsterdam Avenue, #15D 
New York, NY 10025 
placemnri@aol.com 

Poitier, Lanora 

Orange County Head Start 
2100 East Michigan Street 
Orlando, FL 32806 
lanora.poitier@ocfl.net 

Poison, Tracye 787 

Director, Therapeutic Nursery Program 
Reginald South Lourie Center 
12301 Academy Way 
Rockville, MD 20852 
tpolson@louriecenter.com 

Poon, Tracy 900, 918 

Research Assistant 

Department of Applied Psychology 

New York University 

239 Greene Street, #401 F 

New York, NY 10003 

tp229@nyu.edu 

Powell, Gregg 391 

R & P Associates, Ltd. 

1165 Lee Street 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
cgpowell@aol.com 

PowelMlensley, Korey 302 

Head Start Director 
Heartland Programs 
700 Jupiter 
Salina, KS 67401 
koreyhensley@usd305.com 

Prabhu, Romilla P. 882 

Doctoral Student 
Interdisciplinary Studies in 
Human Development 
Psychology in Education 
University of Pennsylvania 
3700 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
prabhu@dolphin.upenn.edu 

Preston, Debra 965 

Department of Psychology 
Georgia College and State University 
C/B 090 

Milledgeville, GA 31061 

Pretti-Frontczak, Kristie 745 

Assistant Professor 
Kent State University 
405 White Hall 
Kent, OH 44242 



Price, Leshawndra N. 

Psychologist 

Developmental Psychopathology 
and Prevention Research Branch 
Division of Mental Disorders, 
Behavioral Research and AIDS 
National Institute of Mental Health 
6001 Executive Boulevard, 

Room 6200 
MSC9617 

Bethesda, MD 20892*9617 
lprice@mail.nih.gov 

Privett, Nawanna 796 

Institute on Education Reform 
College of Education 
University of Kentucky 
103 Dickey Hall 
Lexington, KY 40506 

Puma, |ini Elizabeth 

Project Coordinator 
Ambassadors for Literacy 
University of Denver 
Department of Psychology 
2155 South Race Street 
Denver, CO 80208 
jpuma@du.edu 

Puma, Michael ). 172 

The Urban Institute 
2100 M SUeet, N.W. 

Washington, DC 20037 
mpuma@ui.urban.org 

Pungello, Elizabeth Puhn 935 

Investigator 

University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill 
Frank Porter Graham Child 
Development Center 
105 Smith Level Road, CB 8180 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599*8180 
li 2 _pungello@unc.edu 

Purcell, Edith 823 

Research Assistant 
Best Babies 
Denver Health 
501 28th Street 
Denver, CO 80205 
edith.purcell@dhha.org 

Qi, Cathy Huaqlng 721 

Ph.D. Candidate 
Special Education Department 
Early Childhood 
Vanderbilt University 
Peabody College 
P.O. Box 328 
Nashville, TN 37203 
meiniang@hotmail.com 




Qualls, Brocklln 

Associate Director 
Government Affairs 
National Head Start Association 
1651 Prince Street 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
bqualls@nhsa.org 

Quinn, Kevin P. 739, 765 

Associate Professor 
Educational and Counseling 
Psychology 
Special Education 
State University of New York 
at Albany 
Education 230 
Albany, NY 12222 
kquinh@uamail.albany.edu 

Quiroz, Blanca 800 

Human Development 
Harvard Graduate School 
of Education 
309 Larsen Hall 
14 Appian Way 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
blanca_quiroz@gse.harvard.edu 

Rachlin, Sidney 422 

East Carolina University 
School of Education 
Greenville, NC 27858 
rachlins@mail.ecu.edu 

Radke, Heather 232 

Research Assistant 

East Providence Bradley Hospital 

Brown University 

1011 Veteran's Memorial Parkway 

East Providence, RI 02915 

Rafferty, Yvonne 788 

Associate Professor 

Psychology 

Pace University 

41 Park Row, 13th Floor 

New York, NY 10025 

yrafferty@pace.edu 

Ragins, Anika 835 

Research Assistant 

Center for Research in Human 

Development and Education 

Temple University 

1301 Cecil B. Moore Avenue 

Philidelphia, PA 19122 

aragins@temple.edu 



1025 



1021 



Raikes, Helen H. 140, 468, 540, 776 

Visiting Scholar 
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
Head Start Bureau 
Gallup Organization 
3221 South 76th Street 
Lincoln, NE 68506 
helen_raikes@gallup.com 

Raikes, Hilary Abigail 622, 734, 810 

Department of Psychology 
Univeristy of Nebraska at Lincoln 
238 Burnett Hall 
Lincoln, NE 68588-0308 
araikesl@bigred.unl.edu 

Rakpraja, Ateptaya Tanya 

Research Assistant 
Child Care 

Center for Law and Social Policy 
1015 15th Street, N.W. 

Washington, DC 20005 
ateptaya@hotmail.com 

Ramey, Craig Thomas 657 

Professor 

School of Nursing and 
Health Studies 
Georgetown University 
3700 Reservoir Road, Box 571107 
Washington, DC 20057-1107 
ctr5@georgetown.edu 

Ramey, Sharon L. 657 

Professor 

School of Nursing and 
Health Studies 
Georgetown University 
3700 Reservoir Road, Box 571107 
Washington, DC 20057-1107 
slr22@georgetown.edu 

Ramirez, Eleazar 869 

Doctoral Student 
College of Education 
School of Psychology 
Texas A&M University 
M/S 4225 

College Station, TX 77845 
e0r4557@labs.tamu.edu 

Ramos, Jesus 

Evaluation Assistant 
Head Start 

Research and Evaluation 
Region 19 Education Service Center 
11670 Chito Samaniego 
El Paso, TX 79936 
jramos@escl9.net 



Rand, Cynthia 967 

Associate Professor 
School of Medicine 
lohns Hopkins University 
5501 Hopkins Bayview Circle, 

Room 4B43 
Baltimore, MD 21224 

Randolph, Suzanne 811, 979 

Professor 
Family Studies 
University of Maryland 
1204 Marie Mount Hall 
College Park, MD 20720 
sr22@umail.umd.edu 

Rao, Uma 278, 949 

Associate Professor 
Psychiatry and Biology 
Behavorial Sciences 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 
University of California at Los 
Angeles School of Medicine 
300 Medical Plaza, Suite 2253 
Los Angeles, CA 90095-6968 
urao@mednet.ucla.edu 

Rauh, Virginia A. 

Associate Professor 
Mailman School of Public Health 
Heilbrunn Department of 
Population and Family Health 
Columbia University 
60 Haven Avenue, B-3 
Room 321 

New York, NY 10032 
varl @columbia.edu 

Raver, C. Cybele 234, 333 

Assistant Professor 
Harris School of Public Policy 
University of Chicago 
Chicago, I L 60637 
cybele@uchicago.edu 

Raya>Carlton, Pamela A. 832 

Assistant Professor 
Human Development and 
Family Studies 

University of Missouri at Columbia 
308 Gentry Hall 
Columbia, MO 65211 
rayacarltonp@missouri.edu 

Reading, Jeff 

Scientific Director 
Public Health Sciences 
Faculty of Medicine 
Canadian Institutes of Health 
Research, Institute of Aboriginal 
Peoples' Health 
100 College Street, Room 2078 
Toronto, Ontario MSG ILS 
Canada 

j.reading@utoronto.ca 



Reaney, Lizabeth 199 

Research Analyst 

Education Statistics Services Institute 
1990 K Street, N.W. 

Suite 500 

Washington, DC 20006 
lreaney@air.org 

Reed, Diana M. 977 

Preschool Teacher 
Psychology 
Westminster College 
Box 58 

New Wilmington, PA 16172-0001 
reeddm@westminster.edu 

Renaud, Mary 

Supervisor, Parent Child Health 
Southwest Washington Health District 
2000 Fort Vancouver Way 
Vancouver, WA 98663 
mrenaud@swwhd.wa.gov 

Resendez, Victor 

Director 

Administration 

Education 

Metropolitan Area Advisory 
Committee Project Head Start 
800 West Los Vallecitos, Suite J 
San Marcos, CA 92069 
laguilar@maac.cc 

Reshef, Shoshana 967 

Project Coordinator 

School of Hygiene 

Epidemiology 

615 North Wolfe Street 

Baltimore, MD 21205 

sreshef@jhsph.edu 

Resnick, Gary 83, 115 

Senior Study Director 

Child and Family Studies Group 

Westat, Inc. 

1550 Research Boulevard, TB304 
Rockville, MD 20850 
garyresnick@westat.com 

Reynolds, Arthur J. 569 

Professor 

School of Social Work 
University of Wisconsin at Madison 
Waisman Center 
1500 Highland Avenue 
Madison, WI 53705 
areynolds@waisman.wisc.edu 

Rice, Liston Mike 425 

President 

Texas Instruments Foundation 
12500T1 Boulevard, MS 8656 
Dallas, TC 75265-3906 
m-moreno 1 @ti.com 



Richmond, Julius B. 67, 368 

Professor Emeritus of Health Policy 

Social Medicine 

Harvard Medical School 

641 Huntington Avenue, 3rd Floor 

Cambridge, MA 02138 

julius_richmond@hms.harvard.edu 

Ricketts, Kelly 979 

Early Childhood Development 
Coordinator 

Head Start XXI Resource Center at 
Purdue University Calumet 
2200 169th Street 
Hammond, IN 46323 
ricketts@ nwi. calumet, purdue.edu 

Riehm, Julia 853 

Department of Psychology 
Florida State University 
Tallahassee, FL 32306-1270 

Rigby, Elizabeth 115, 793 

Graduate Research Fellow 
Center for Children and Families 
Teachers College, Columbia 
University 

525 West 120th Street, Box 39 
New York, NY 10027 
der68@columbia.edu 

Rigsby, Leo 845, 899 

Director 

Initiatives in Educational 
Transformation 
Graduate School of Education 
George Mason University 
10900 University Boulevard, 

Suite 217 
MSN 4E4 

Manassas, VA 20110 
lrigsbyl@gmu.edu 

Riley, Anne W. 530 

Associate Professor 

Health Policy and Management 

Bloomberg School of Public Health 

Johns Hopkins University 

624 North Broadway, Room 692 

Baltimore, MD 21205 

ariley@jhsph.edu 

Rimm-Kaufinan, Sara E. 960 

Assistant Professor 
University of Virginia 
Department of Education 
PO. Box 400265 
405 Emmet Street South 
Charlottesville, VA 22904 
serk@virginia.edu 



Rinehart, Nicole J. 790 

School of Psychology, Psychiatry, 
and Psychological Medicine 
Monash University 
PO. Box 197 

Caulfield East, Victoria 03154 
Australia 

nicole.rinehart@med.monash.edu.au 

Ring'Cassidy, Elizabeth 

Student Services 

Christ the Redeemer Catholic Schools 
PO. Bag 3 
46 Elma Street 
Okotoks, Alberta TlS 2A2 
Canada 

eringcassidy@redeemer.ab.ca 

Risely, Todd 407 

Professor 
Psychology 
University of Alaska 
HC-5 Box 6820 
Palmer, AK 99645 
risley@alaska.net 

Risley, Cheryl 

Coordinator 

Intensive Early Intervention 
University of Alaska at Anchorage 
2600 Denali Street, Suite 304 
Anchorage, AK 99503 
risely@alaska.net 

Roberts, Debra D. 979 

Assistant Professor 
Department of Psychology 
Howard University 
C/B Powell Hall 
Washington, DC 20059 
ddroberts@howard.edu 

Roberts, Joanne 844 

Wellesley College 
106 Central Street 
Wellesley, MA 02481 
jroberts@wellesley.edu 

Robertson, Dylan L. 569 

Research Assistant 

School of Social Work 

University of Wisconsin at Madison 

Waisman Center 

1500 Highland Avenue 

Madison, W1 53705 

drobertson@waisman.wisc.edu 



027 



Robertson, Lynne 888 

Evaluation Analyst 
Aboriginal Head Start 
Childhood and Adolescence 
Health Canada 
Postal Locator 1909C2, 

Tunne/s Pasture 
J. Mance Building, 9th Floor 
Ottawa, Ontario KIA 0K9 
Canada 

lynne_robertson@hc-sc.gc.ca 

Robinson, Jo Ann L. 159, 226, 516 

Associate Professor 
Psychiatry 

Program for Early Childhood 
Development 

University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center 
4200 East 9th Avenue 
Box C268-69, UCHSC 
Denver, CO 80268 
joann.robinson@uchsc.edu 

Robinson, Julia 

Doctoral Student 
Department of Psychological 
and Brain Sciences 
University of Louisville 
401 Cardinal, #301 
Louisville, KY 40208 
jbrobiOl @athena.louisville.edu 

Robinson, Lina L. 

Department of Psychiatric Medicine 

University of Virginia 

310 Old Ivy Way 

PO. Box 801075 

Charlottesville, VA 22908 

llr5x@virginia.edu 

Rockenbach, Anne 823 

Research Assistant 

Best Babies 

Denver Health 

501 28th Street 

Denver, CO 80250 

anne.rockenbach@dhha.org 

Rodriguez, Carmen G. 729 

Director . 

Head Start 

Columbia University 
Head Start and Early Head Start 
601 West 168th Street, Suite 42 
New York, NY 10032 
crl4@columbia.edu- 

Rodriguez, Eileen Teresa 622, 844 

Research Assistant/Student 

Applied Psychology 

New York University 

239 Greene Street, Room 401 F 

New York, NY 10003 

etr212@nyu.edu 



1023 



appendix d 



Rodriguez, Vanessa Marie 812 

Department of Psychology 
Michigan State University 
University Outreach Partnerships 
6 Kellogg Center 
East Lansing, MI 48824 
rodri 178 ©yahoo . co m 

Rodriguez, Vanessa 814, 819, 834 

Research Assistant 
Applied Psychology 
New York University 
239 Greene Street, 401 F 
New York, NY 10003 
vmr218@nyu.edu 

Rogan, Martina 575 

General Health Manager 
Child Development Council of 
Franklin County, Inc. 

300 East Spring Street 
Columbus, OH 43215 

Roggman, Lori A. 163, 468, 471, 
534, 744, 805, 839 

Professor 

Department of Family and 
Human Development 
Utah State University 
EHS-R, UMC 2905 
Family Life Building, Fl 214 
Old Main Hill 
Logan, UT 84322-2905 
falori@cc.usu.edu 

Rolf, Mary 

Supervisor 
Head Start 

West Central Minnesota 
Communities Action, Inc. 

PO. Box 956 

Elbow Lake, MN 56531 

mary.rolf@co. grant, mn.us 

Rolston, Howard 

Direaor 

Office of Planning, Research 
and Evaluation 
Administration for Children 
and Families 

U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services 
Aerospace Building 
370 L' Enfant Promenade, S.W. 
Room 7 West 
Washington, DC 20447 
hrolston@acfhhs.gov 

Roman, Lee Anne 816 

Obstetrics/ Gynecology 
Michigan State University 
210 East Fee Hall 
East Lansing, MI 48824 
lroman@msu.edu 



Rosen, Alison 664 

Executive Director 
Capital Area Head Start 
3700 Vartan Way 
Harrisburg, PA 17055 
arosen@kss.org 

Rosen, fudith 

Agency Director 

Fairfax County Office for Children 
1 2011 Government Center Parkway, 
9th Floor 
Fairfax, VA 22035 
judithrosen@fairfaxcounty.gov 

Rosenkoetter, Lawrence I. 961 

Human Development and 
Family Science 
Oregon State University 
322 Milam Hall 
Corvallis, OR 97331-5102 
larry.rosenkoetter@orst.edu 

Rosenkoetter, Sharon E. 302, 961 

Associate Professor; Coordinator, 

EC Programs 

Human Development and 
Family Sciences 
Oregon State University 
322 Milam Hall 
Corvallis, OR 97331-5702 
sharon.rosenkoetter@orst.edu 

Roskos, Kathleen 446, 447 

Professor 

Education 

John Carrol University 
4791 Middle Road 
Conneaut, OH 44030 
pdroskos@suite224.net 

Rosoff, Saul R. 

6544 Sulky Lane 
Annandale, VA 22003 

Ross, Christine 140 

Senior Economist 
Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. 
600 Maryland Avenue, S.W. 

Suite 550 

Washington, DC 20024-2512 
cross@mathematica-mpr.com 

Rothenberg, Alyssa K. 811 

Research Assistant 
The CDM Group, Inc. 

15 Kendall Court 
Mendham, NJ 07945 
mdelio@cdmgroup.com 




Rothenberg, Dianne 

Co-Direaor 
ERIC/EECE 
51 Gerty Drive 
Champaign, IL 61820-7469 
rothenbe@uiuc. edu 

Rowan, Carol 888 

Consul tant/Teacher 
452 Greenwood Drive 
Beaconsfield, Quebec 
Canada H9W 4Z9 
carolrowan@videotron.ca 

Rowe, Meredith L. 842 

Harvard University 
Graduate School of Education 
311 Larsen Hall, Appian Way 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
roweme@gse.harvard.edu 

Rudin, Barbara |. 

Senior Managing Associate 
Child Care/Work Life 
Caliber Associates, Inc. 

10530 Rosehaven Street, Suite 400 
Alexandria, VA 22302 
rudinb@calib.com 

Rule, Sarah 785 

Direaor 

Center for Persons with Disabilities 
Utah State University 
6818 Old Main Hill 
Logan, UT 84322 
s_rule@cpd2.usu.edu 

Russell, Claire 889 

Research Assistant 
Human Development 
and Psychology 
Harvard Graduate School 
of Education 
c/o Cathy Ayoub 
711 Larsen Hall 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
claire_russell@gse.harvard.edu 

Ryan, Rebecca 912 

Center for Children and Families 
Columbia University, Teachers College 
525 West 120th Street, Box 39 
New York, NY 10027 
ryanreb @yahoo . co m 

Saad, Claudia 

Direaor 

Multicultural Affairs 
Multicultural Education 
American Speech-Language 
Hearing Association 
10801 Rockville Pike 
Rockville, MD 20852 
csaad@asha.org 



1024 



1028 



Sabatino, Christine A. 150 

Associate Professor 
School of Social Work 
Catholic University of America 
Shahan Hall 

620 Michigan Avenue, N.E. 
Washington, DC 20064 
sabati no @ cua. edu 

Saifer, Steffen L. 764 

Director 

Child And Family 
Northwest Regional Educational 
Laboratory 

101 S.W Main Street, Suite 500 
Portland, OR 97204 
sai fers@ nwrel . org 

Salandy, Anthony 

Congressional Fellow 
Society for Research in 
Child Development 
901 6th Street, S.W 
#905 

Washington, DC 20024 
salanad@aubum.edu 

Santiago, Rolando 

Center for Mental Health Services 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration 
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
5600 Fishers Lane, Room 17-99 
Rockville, MD 20857 

Santos, Janis 

Executive Direaor 
Holyoke-Chicopee-Springfield 
Head Start, Inc. 

30 Madison Avenue 
Springfield, MA 01105 
santosj @headstart. org 

Schatz, Julie Noel 

Graduate Student/Research Assistant 
Developmental Psychology 
University of Notre Dame 
50915 Cherry Farm Trail 
Granger, IN 46530 
jschatz@nd.edu 

Sdieer, Linda |. 333 

Training Coordinator 
New York University 
726 Broadway, Fifth Floor 
New York, NY 10003 
linda.scheer@ nyu. edu 



Sdiifhnan, Rachel F. 154, 470, 
806, 812, 815, 927, 928 

Health Scientist Administrator 
Human Development Unit 
National Institute on Dmg Abuse 
3709 Kayson 
Silver Spring, MD 20906 
rachel.schiffman@ht.msu.edu 

Schiller, Rhodanne M. 

Child and Family Development 
Institute 

Community Development Institute 
416 South Leonard 
Liberty, MO 64068 
rhodannes@aol.com 

Schleser, Robert 938 

Illinois Institute ofTechnology 
3101 South Dearborn 
Chicago, IL 60616 
schleser@iit.edu 

Schmidt, Michelle 959 

Department of Psychology 
Moravian College 
1200 Main Street 
Bethlehem, PA 18018 
mschmidt@moravian.edu 

Schmidt, Paulette P. 746 

VIP Study Chairperson 
The Ohio State University 
College of Optometry 
Vision In Preschoolers (VIP) 

Study Center 
320 West Tenth Avenue 
P.O. Box 182342-2342 
Columbus, OH 43218-2342 
schmidt.13@osu.edu 

Schochet, Peter 140 

Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. 
P.O. Box 2393 
600 Alexander Park 
Princeton, NJ 08543-2393 
pschochet@mathematica-mpr.com 

Schulman, Karen 

Program Associate 
Programs and Policy 
Child Care Division 
Children's Defense Fund 
25 E Street, N.W 
Washington, DC 22201 
kschulman@childrensdefense.org 



Schultz, Thomas 406 

Head Start Bureau 
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
ACF/ACYF 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Mary E. Switzer Building 
Washington, DC 20447 
tschultz@acf.hhs.gov 

Schumacher, Rachel 554, 641 

Policy Analyst 

Center for Law and Social Policy 
1015 15th Street, N.W. 

#400 

Washington, DC 20005 
rschumacher@clasp.org 

Schweder, Amanda Elizabeth 858 

Graduate Student 

Psychology 

Yale University 

P.O. Box 208205 

New Haven, CT 06520-8205 

amanda.schweder@yale.edu 

Schweingruber, Heidi 

Senior Research Analyst 
U.S. Department of Education 
Office of Educational Research 
and Improvement 
555 New Jersey Avenue, N.W. 

Room 602-C 

Washington, DC 20208-5501 
heidi.schweingruber@ed.gov 

Schweinhart, Lawrence Joseph 115 

Senior Research Scientist 
Research Division 
High/ Scope Education Research 
Foundation 
600 North River Street 
Ypsilanti, MI 48198-2898 
larrys@highscope.org 

Scott, Jaqueline 777 

Senior Policy Research Analyst 
Human Development and 
Family Studies 

University of Missouri Center for 
Family Policy and Research 
1400 Rock Quarry Road 
Columbia, MO 65211 
scottjac@missouri.edu 

Scott Jr., James 980 

Program Enhance met Specialist 
Region V QNET 
700 Ackerman Road 
Columbus, OH 43202 



1029 



1025 



Seery, Brenda 905 

Assistant Professor 
Child Development and 
Family Studies 
Purdue University 
1269 Fowler House 
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1269 
seeryb @ cfs. purdue. edu 

Segal, Ann 

Child Trends 
4301 Connecticut Avenue 
Washington, DC 20008 
asegal@childtrends.org 

Seifer, Ronald 230, 231, 232, 881 

Full Professor 

East Providence Bradley Hospital 
Department of Psychiatry 
Brown University 
1011 Veteran's Memorial Parkway 
East Providence, RI 0291 5 
ronald.seifer@brown.edu 

Seitzer, Jeffrey 

Psychologist 
Head Start 

Montgomery County, Maryland 
Public Schools 
4910 Macon Road 
Rockville, MD 20852 
seltzjeff@aol.com 

Sekino, Yumiko 749, 879, 955 

Graduate School of Education 
Psychology in Education 
University of Pennsylvania 
3700 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
ysekino@dolphin.upenn.edu 

Selden, Sally Coleman 641 

Associate Professor 

School of Business and Economics 

Lynchburg College 

1501 Lakeside Drive 

Lynchburg, VA 24501-3199 

selden@lynchburg.edu 

Senterfitt, Heather 

Coordinator, Research Programs 
and Services 

Florida Institute of Education 
University of North Florida 
1200 Alumni Drive 
Jacksonville, FL 32224 
hsenterf@unfedu 

Serna, Loretta A. 124 

CO E/Special Education 
University of New Mexico 
257 Hokona Hall 
Albuquerque, NM 87131 
rett@unm.edu 



Sewell, Margaret Garnett 

Director 
Head Start 

Monticello Area Community 
Action Agency 
5417 Sugar Hollow Road 
Crozet,VA 22932 
sewellm@cstone.net 

Shannon, Jacqueline 819, 834 

Research Assistant 
Applied Psychology 
Developmental Psychology 
New York University 
School of Education 
239 Greene Street, Room 401 F 
New York, NY 10003 
jds225@nyu.edu 

Shanok, Rebecca Shahmoon 
516, 868 

Institution for Clinical Studies of 
Infants, Toddlers, and Parents 
Jewish Board of Family and 
Children's Services 
Early Childhood Therapy Program 
120 West 57th Street 
New York, NY 10019 
rss3@att.net 

Shapiro, Eugene D. 766 

School of Medicine 
Department of Pediatrics 
Yale University 
333 Cedar Street 
New Haven, CT 06520-8064 

Shapiro, Sharyn R. 

Optometrist 

School of Optometry 

Pediatrics/Binocular Vision 

University of California at Berkeley 

390 Minor Hall 

Berkeley, CA 94720-2020 

sharyn2000@yahoo.com 

Sharp, Elizabeth 807, 907 

Graduate Research Assistant 
Human Development and 
Family Studies 

University of Missouri at Columbia 
1400 Rock Quarry Road 
Columbia, MO 65211 
sharpea@missouri.edu 

Shaughnessy, Catherine 

Intern 

Department of the Interior 
Office of Indian Education Programs 




1030 



Shaw, Daniel S. 854 

Department of Psychology 
University of Pittsburgh 
Clinical Psychology Center 
4015 O'Hara Street 
604 Old Engineering Hall 
Pittsburgh, PA 15260-0001 

Shaw, Judy 575 

Director, Pediatrics 
College of Medicine 
Vermont Child Health 
Improvement Program 
5 Arnold 
UHC Campus 
One South Prospect Street 
Burlington, VT 05401 
judith.shaw@vtmednet.org 

Shears, Jeffrey K. 159 

Department of Psychiatry 
University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center 

4200 East Ninth Avenue, C268-69 
Denver, CO 80262 
jefffey.shears@colostate.edu 

Shelov, Steven P. 590 

Chairman 

Department of Pediatrics 
Maimonides Medical Center 
4802 Tenth Avenue 
Brooklyn, NY 11219 
sshelov@maimonidesmed.org 

Shelton, Terri Lizabeth 922 

Director 

Center for the Study of Social Issues 
University of North Carolina 
at Greensboro 
41 McNutt 
P.O. Box 26170 
Greensboro, NC 27402-6170 
tlshelto@uncg.edu 

Sherrod, Jennie R. 211, 234, 450 

Department of Psychology 
Fordham University 
441 East Fordham Road 
Dealy Hall, Room 331 
Bronx, NY 10458 

Shields, Ann 231, 232 

Department of Psychology 
University of Michigan 
525 East Univeristy Avenue 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1109 
shieldsa@umich.edu 



1026 



Shine, Stephanie 

Project Manager 

Amarillo, Texas 

Head Start Component Grant 

Region 16 Education Service Center 

1601 South Cleveland Street 

Amarillo, TX 79102-4211 

sshine@nts-online.net 

Shivers, Eva Marie 

Graduate Student Researcher 
Education 

Psychological Studies in Education 
University of California at 
Los Angeles 

3189 Cheviot Vista Place, #107 
Los Angeles, CA 90034 
evamarie@ucla.edu 

Shrestha, Heather 

Acquisitions 

Brookes Publishing 

P.O. Box 10624 

Baltimore, MD 21285-0624 

hshrestha@brookespublishing.com 

Siegel, Willa Choper 

Head Start Bureau 
U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 
ACF/ACYF 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Washington, DC 20447 
wsiegel@acf.hhs.gov 

Silverstein, Mike 980 

Pediatrics 

University of Washington 
Health Sciences Center 
Box 357183 
Seatde, WA98195 
msilve@u. wash ington.edu 

Silverthom, Brandon 735 

Student 

Family and Child Ecology 
Michigan State University 
134 Durand Street, #7 
East Lansing, MI 48823 
silvert7@msu.edu 

Simmel, Cassandra A. 

Policy Research Fellow 
Administration for Children 
and Families 

U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services 
OPRE/Child Outcomes Research 
and Evaluation (CORE) 

370 L'Enfant Promenade, S.W. 

7th Floor West 
Washington, DC 20447 
csimmel @ acfhhs.gov 



Simmons, Betty J. 

Deputy Regional Hub Direaor 
Administration for Children 
and Families 

Office of the Regional Hub Director 
U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services 
1301 Young Street, Room 914 
Dallas, TX 75202 
bsimmons@acfhhs.gov 

Simmons, Claudia Nash 

Director 
Head Start 

Montgomery County, Maryland 
Public Schools 
4910 Macon Road 
Rockville, MD 20852 
daudia_n_simmons@fcmcps.kl 2.md.us 

Simon, Lorraine 765 

Department of Psychology 
Lab School of Washington 
5415 Connecticut Avenue, N.W 
Apartment 822 
Washington, DC 20015 
lorrainesimon@msn.com 

Simpson, Jean 

Head Start Bureau 
U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services 
ACF/ACYF 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Washington, DC 20013-1182 
jsimpson@acf.dhhs.gov 

Simpson, Jennifer 866 

Research & Training Center 
on Family Support & 

Children's Mental Health 
Regional Research Institute, GSSW 
Portland State University 
1912 S.W. Sixth Avenue 
P.O. Box 751 

Portland, OR 97207-0751 
simpsonj@rri.pdx.edu 

Sketchley, Kelley 905 

Graduate Student 
Child Development and 
Family Studies 
Purdue University 
1269 Fowler House 
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1269 

Skipper, Edith L. 768 

Project Coordinator 
Department of Curricular Studies 
University of North Carolina at 
Wilmington 
4450 Lloyd Court 
Wilmington, NC 28405 
edieskip@aol.com 



Slutsky, Ruslan 922, 975 

Assistant Professor 
Early Childhood 
University of Toledo 
2801 West Banaoft Street 
Toledo, OH 43606 
ruslan.slutsky@utoledo.edu 

Smallwood, Betty Ansin 687, 972 

Coordinator, School Services 
Center for Applied Linguistics 
4646 40th Street, N.W. 

Washington, DC 20016-1859 
betty@cal.org 

Smith, Andrea B. 809 

Associate Professor 
Education and Professional 
Development 

Western Michigan University 
2333 East Beltline, S.E. 

Grand Rapids, MI 49456 
andrea.smith@wmich.edu 

Smith, Everett 917 

Assistant Professor 
Educational Psychology 
College of Education 
University of Illinois at Chicago 
1040 West Harrison Street 
Chicago, IL 60612 
evsmith@uic.edu 

Smith, Joshua S. 761 

University of Albany 
1400 Washington Avenue 
ASC/US, LI-36 
Albany, NY 12222 
jsmith3@uamail.albany.edu 

Smith, Mary Kay 

Associate Administrator 
Head Start 

Brazos Valley Community Action 
Agency 

100 West J. Bryan Parkway 
Bryan, TX 77803 
mksmith@bvcaa.org 

Smith, Maureen C. 954 

Assistant Professor 
Child Development, SH 201 
San Jose State University 
One Washington Square 
San Jose, CA 95192-0075 
msmithl8@email.sjsu.edu 

Smith, Russell 

Director 
Head Start 

Harris County Department 
of Education 
1717 Turning Basin, #250 
Houston, TX 77029 



10-31 



1027 



APPENDIX D 



Smith, Sheila A. 841 

Research Scientist 

School of Education 

Child and Family Policy Center 

New York University 

82 Washington Square East, #220 

New York, NY 10003 

sheila.smith@nyu.edu 

Smith, Wanda |. 425 

CEO 

Executive Department 
Central Office 

Head Start of Greater Dallas, Inc. 
1349 Empire Central, Suite 300 
Dallas, TX 75247-4033 
hsgdwj @ anet-dfw.com 

Snow, Catherine A. 151 

Henry Lee Shattuck Professor 
of Education 

Graduate School of Education 
Harvard University 
Larsen Hall, Room 313 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
catherine_snow@ harvard, edu 

Snyder, Elizabeth 

Graduate Student 
Department of Psychological and 
Brain Sciences 
University of Louisville 
317 Life Sciences Building 
Louisville, KY 40292 
ehsnydOl @athena.louisville.edu 

Son, Seung-Hee Claire 850, 968 

Ph.D. Student 

School of Education 

University of Michigan 

525 East University, Room 1346 

Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1109 

seunghee@umich.edu 

Sophian, Catherine 422 

Professor, Psychology 
University of Hawaii at Manoa 
2430 Campus Road, Gartley 110 
Honolulu, HI 96822 
csophian@hawaii.edu 

Sosinshy, Laura Stout 858 

Doaoral Student 
Department of Psychology 
Yale University 
P.O. Box 208205 
New Haven, CT 06520-8205 
1 aura .sosi nsky @yal e. edu 



Sosna, Todd David 824 

Educator 

Child Development Resources 
of Ventura County, Inc. 

3788 Brenner Drive 
Santa Barbara, CA 93105 
tsanimatedconsult@worldnet. att. net 

Southward, Linda Hill 

Coordinator 

Social Science Research Center 
Family & Children Research Unit 
Mississippi State University 
P. O. Box 5287 
Mississippi State, MS 39762 
linda.southward@ssrc.msstate.edu 

Sowa, Jessica Elizabeth 641 

Research Associate 
Department of Public 
Administration 

Alan K. Campbell Public Affairs 
Institute 

Syracuse University-Maxwell School 
of Citizenship and Public Affairs 
306 Eggers Hall 
Syracuse, NY 13244 
jesowa@maxwell.syr.edu 

Spellmann, Mark 155, 918 

Social Work 
New York University 
1 Washington Square North 
New York, NY 10003 

Spelman, Erin 

Graduate Student 
Department of Psychology 
University of South Carolina 
Columbia, SC 29208 
elspeI@hotmaiI.com 

Spencer, Kimberly 664 

SLPA Student 
Head Start-State Preschool 
Los Angeles County Office 
of Education 
37940 Smoketree Street 
Palmdale, CA 93552 

Spicer, Paul G. 159 

Assistant Professor 
Psychiatry 

American Indian and Alaska Native 
Programs 

University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center 

4455 East 12th Avenue, CB AOll-13 
Denver, CO 80220 
paul .spicer@uchsc. edu 




1032 



Spieker, Susan |. 162 

Research Associate Professor 
Center for Human Development 
and Disability 
School of Nursing 
University of Washington 
CHDD, Box 357920 
Seatde,WA 98195-7920 
spieker @u. wash ington.edu 

Spier, Elizabeth 844 

Department of Applied Psychology 

School of Education 

New York University 

239 Greene Street, 4th Floor 

NewYork, NY 10003 

elizspier@aol.com 

Spira, Elana Greenfield 115, 934 

Graduate Student 
Department of Psychology 
State University of New York 
at Stony Brook 
Stony Brook, NY 11794-2500 
elana.greenfield@sunysb.edu 

Springs, Jo Ann 820 

Assistant Professor 
Child Development 
Diversity of North Carolina 
at Charlotte 

Charlotte, NC 28223-0001 

Sroufi^ Gerald 554, 673, 687 

Dirertor, Governmental and 
Professional Liaison 
American Educational Research 
Association 
1230 17th Street, N.W 
Washington, DC 20036-3078 
jsroufe@aera.net 

St. Pierre, Tena L. 953 

Associate Professor 
Institute for Policy Research 
and Evaluation 
Pennsylvania State University 
N261 Burrowes Building 
University Park, PA 16802 
ds@psu.edu 

St. Sauver, Jennifer 766 

Research Associate 
Mayo Clinic 
200 First Street, S.W 
Rochester, MN 55905 
stsauver.jennifer@mayo.edu 

Stacks, Ann M. 735 

Doaoral Student 
Family and Child Ecology 
Michigan State University 
1654 Seven Trail Court 
Okemos, MI 48864 
stacksan@msu.edu 



1028 



Staker, Martha D. 160 

Direaor 

Medical Center 

Projea Eagle Early Head Start 

University of Kansas 

400 State Avenue 

Gateway Center Tower II, Suite 900 
Kansas City, KS 66101 
mstaker@kumc.edu 

Stangler, Gary 161 

(contact information not available) 

Stanley, Amy 965 

Department of Psychology 
Georgia College and State University 
CBX 090 

Milledgeville, GA 31061 

Stansbury, Kathy 

Associate Professor 
Psychology Department 
Mount Holyoke College 
50 College Street 
South Hadley, MA 01075 
kstansbu@mtholyoke.edu 

Star, Jodi 

Physician 
Child Psychiatry 

American Psychiatric Association 
3333 Burnett Avenue 
Cincinnati, OH 45208 
dr2kds@aol.com 

Starost, Huei-Juang 811 

Graduate Student 
Child Development and 
Family Relations 
Oklahoma State University 
Stillwater, OK 74078-6122 
rita4kyle@yahoo.com 

Stechuk, Bob 446 

(contact information not available) 

Steinberg, Carrie Morgan 749,880 

Doctoral Student 
Graduate School of Education 
Psychology in Education 
University of Pennsylvania 
3700 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
carries@dolphin.upenn.edu 

Stevens, Pamela 569 

Manager, Child-Parent Centers 
Early Childhood Education 
Chicago Public Schools 
125 South Clark Street, 9th Floor 
Chicago, IL 60603 
pstevens@cps.kl 2.il.us 



Stevenson, Howard C. 817 

Assistant Professor 
Director, Department of Psychology 
in Education 

University of Pennsylvania 
3700 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6216 

Stock, Carol Dieringer 728 

Student 

Special Education 
School Psychology 
University of Oregon 
5208 University of Oregon 
Eugene, OR 97401 
carolcd@oregon.uoregon.edu 

Stoltz, Brett 115 

Graduate Student 
Department of Psychology 
State University of New York 
at Stony Brook 
Stony Brook, NY 11794-2500 
brett. stoltz@sunysb. edu 

Stolzer, Jeanne 747 

Student 

Family & Consumer Sciences 
University of Nebraska at Lincoln 
1250 Butler 
Lincoln, NE 68521 

Stoneman, Zolinda 747, 789 

Professor and Director 
Institute on Human Development 
University of Georgia 
University Affiliated Program 
RC-850 College Station Road 
Family Sciences Center II 
Athens, GA 30602-4806 
zo@arches.uga.edu 

Storch, Stacey Alisa 115, 737, 930, 
934 

Department of Psychology 
State University of New York 
at Stony Brook 
Stony Brook, NY 11794-2500 
Stacey, storch @ sunysb. edu 

Storer, Eileen M. 

2002-2002 Fellow 
Head Start Bureau 
ACF/ACYF 

U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services 

Mary Switzer Building, Room 2213 
330 C Street, S.W 
Washington, DC 20447 
estorer@acf.dhhs.gov 




Stowitschek, Joseph 162 

University of Washington 
4725 30th Avenue, N.E. 

College of Education 
Seattle, WA 98105-4021 
stowi@u.washington.edu 

Strobridge, Micbele A. 

Program Coordinator 
Disabilities and Education. 
Washington County Head Start 
18 River Street 

Hudson Falls, NY 12839-1308 

Studwell, Karen A. 

Legislative and Federal Affairs Officer 
Public Policy Office 
American Psychological Association 
750 First Street, N.E. 

Washington, DC 20002 
kstudwell@apa.org 

SuUivan, Anita 

Director 

The Learning Center 
P.O. Box 3441 
Jackson, WY 83001 
asullivan@msn.com 

Summers, Jean Ann 160, 468, 

470, 536, 540 

Associate Research Professor 
Juniper Gardens Children's Project 
University of Kansas 
650 Minnesota, 2nd Floor 
Juniper Gardens Children's Project 
Kansas City, KS 66101 
jsummers@ukans.edu 

Sung, Miyoung 

Graduate Student 

Department of Child Development 
and Family Studies 
Seoul National University 
San 56-1, Shillimdong, Kwanakgu 
Seoul 151742 
Korea 

minie@snu.ac.kr 

Sung, So-Young 769 

Graduate Student 
Curriculum and Instruction 
Early Childhood Education 
University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign 
311 Education Building 
1310 South Sixth Street, MC-708 
Champaign, IL 61820-6990 
soyoungg@hotmail.com 



1029 



appendix d 



Swagee, Karen 

Education Research Analyst 
U.S. Department of Education 
Office of Educational Research 
and Improvement 
555 New Jersey Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20208 
karen . swagee @ ed .gov 

Swanson, Mark E. 157 

Direaor 

Partners for Inclusive Communities 
University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences 
2001 Persuing Circle, Suite 300 
Litde Rock, AR 72114 
swansonmarke@uams.edu 

Swartwood, Michie 846 

Assistant Professor 
Department of Psychology 
State University of New York 
at Cortland 
PO. Box 2000 
Cortland, NY 13045 
mswartwood@cortland.edu 



Tada, Wendy L. 

Research Analyst 
U.S. Department of Education 
Office of Special Education Programs 
MES Building 
330 C Street, S.W. 

Room 3521 

Washington, DC 20202 
wendy.tada@ed.gov 

Taggart, Anne 

Program Specialist 
Head Start 

Fairfax County Office for Children 
12011 Government Parkway, 

9th Floor 
Fairfax, VA 22035 
anne.taggart@fairfaxcounty.gov 

Taisey, Jessica Lynne 853 

Site Direaor 

fumpstart San Francisco 

San Francisco State University 

1600 Holloway Avenue, HSS 328 

San Francisco, CA 94132 

jtaisey@sfsu.edu 



Swett, Judy 302 

Advocate/Parent Trainer 
PACER 

1656 Edmund Avenue 
St. Paul, MN 55104 
jswett@pacer.org 

Sykes, Dennis 922 

Projea Director 

Head Start Q.I.C., Region Vb 

The Ohio State University 

Center for Special Needs Population 

700 Ackerman Road, Suite 440 

Columbus, OH 43202-1559 

sykes.3@osu.edu 

Sylvia, Sarah Noel 901 

Graduate Research Assistant 
Prevention Research Center 
Pennslyvania State University 
201 Mateer Building 
University Park, PA 16802 
snsl29@psu.edu 



Takanishi, Ruby 47, 641, 702 

President 

Foundation for Child Development 
145 East 32nd Street, 14th Floor 
New York, NY 10016 
fifcd-mby@worldnet.att.net 

Talen, Mary 759 

Associate Clinical Professor 
Family Medicine 
Wright State University 
1020 Woodman Drive 
Dayton, OH 45432 
mary.talen@wright.edu 

Tamis-LeMonda, Catherine S. 
150, 155, 450, 622 

Associate Professor 

Applied Psychology 

New York University 

239 Green Street, 5th Floor 

New York, NY 10003 

catherine.tamis-lemonda@nyu.edu 



Szanton, Eleanor Stokes 

President 

Consulting for Infants and Toddlers 
3707 Ingomar Street, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20015 
eszanton@aol.com 

Tabors, Patton O. 800 

Research Associate 

Graduate School of Education 

Harvard University 

306 Larsen Hall, 14 Appian Way 

Cambridge, MA 02138 

patton_tabors@harvard.edu 



Tanner, Emily Mary 

Ph.D. Student 

Social Policy and Social Work 

University of Oxford 

Nuffield College 

New Road 

Oxford, 0X1 INF 

United Kingdom 

emily.tanner@nuf.ox.ac.uk 




1030 



1 

JL 




Tardif, TwUa 407 

Direaor 

Center for Human Growth 
and Development 
Culture and Development 
University of Michigan 
300 North Ingalls, 10th Floor 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0406 
twila@umich.edu 

Tarullo, Louisa B. 83, 100, 115, 
187 

Senior Research Analyst 
Administration for Children 
and Families 

U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services 
OPRE/Child Outcomes Research 
and Evaluation (CORE) 

370 L'Enfant Promenade, S.W. 

7th Floor West 
Washington, DC 20447 
Ibtaml lo @ acf. h hs.gov 

Tatterson, Jim 901 

(contaa information not available) 

Tayler, Collette 914, 957 

Head of School 

School of Early Childhood 

Education 

Queensland University of 
Technology 
Viaoria Park Road 
Kelvin Grove 
QLD 

Brisbane 04059 
Australia 

c. tayl er @ qut. edu.au 

Taylor, Angela R. 

Associate Professor 
Family and Consumer Sciences 
Family Studies and Human 
Development 
University of Arizona 
PO. Box 210033 
210 FCS Building 
Tucson, AZ 85721-0033 
artaylor@u.arizona.edu 

Taylor, Cornelia Bell 789 

Graduate Assistant 
Child and Family Development 
Institute on Human Development 
and Disability 
University of Georgia 
850 College Station Road 
Athens, GA 30602 
comeliataylor@hotmail.com 



ArriiiNUiA u 



Taylor, Nancy E. 150, 860, 861 

Associate Professor 
Department of Education 
Catholic University of America 
226 O'Boyle Hall 
620 Michigan Avenue, N.E. 
Washington, DC 20064 
taylor@cua.edu 

Taylor, Wade M. 805 

Mental Health Therapist 
Aspen Ranch 

2000 West Dry Valley Road 
Loa, UT 84747 
sl76c@cc.usu.edu 

Team, Rachel 

Mental Health Intern 
Head Start 

Brazos Valley Community 
Action Agency 

100 West William J. Bryan Parkway 
Bryan, TX 77803 
rteam@tamu.edu 

Temple> |udy 569 

Associate Professor 
Department of Economics 
Northern Illinois University 
910 Parkview Drive 
Stoughton, W1 53589 
jtemple@niu.edu 

Tennent, Lee 740, 781 

Senior Researcher 
School of Early Childhood 
Centre for Applied Studies in 
Early Childhood 
Queensland University of 
Technology 
Vicoria Park Road 
Kelvin Grove 
Brisbane 04059 
Australia 

1 .tennent@qut.edu. au 

Terrell, Dawn M. 853 

Jumpstart Faculty Director/ Professor 
Psychology 

Jumpstart/San Francisco State 
University 

1600 Holloway Avenue, HSS 328 
San Francisco, CA 94132 
dterrell @ sfsu.edu 

Terry, Martha Ann 161 

Parran Hall, Room 231 
Graduate School of Public Health 
Department of Behavioral and 
Community Health Sciences 
University of Pittsburgh 
Pittsburgh, PA 15261 
materry@pitt.edu 



Theobald, Amy 787 

Doctoral Student 

Clinical Psychology 

Center for Professional Psychology 

George Washington University 

2300 M Street, #910 

Washington, DC 20037 

amy,theobald@verizon,net 

Thompson, Ross A. 21, 354 

Professor 

Department of Psychology 
University of Nebraska 
238 Burnett Hall 
Lincoln, NE 68588-0308 
rthompson 1 @unl ,edu 

Thornburg, Kathy R. 161, 321, 
772, 807, 907 

Professor 

Human Development and 
Family Studies 

Human Environmental Sciences 
University of Missouri 
314 Gentry 
Columbia, MO 65211 
thomburgk @ missouri . edu 

Timberlake, Elizabeth M. 150, 
860, 861 

Professor 

The National Research Center for 
Child and Family Services 
Shahan Hall 

The Catholic University of America 
620 Michigan Avenue, N.E. 
Washington, DC 20064 
timberlake@cua.edu 

Timm, Matthew 124 

Tennessee Voices 
1315 8th Avenue South 
Nashville, TN 37203 
mtimm@tnvoices.org 

Tittnich, Ernie 

Infant and Child Mental Health 
Coordinator 

Office of Child Development 
University of Pittsburgh 
5600 Pennsilvania Avenue, Suite 208 
Pittsburgh, PA 15206 
ethelm@pitt.edu 

Tomonari, Dana Miyuki 829 

Graduate Student 
Department of Teaching and 
Learning 

Vanderbilt University 

369 Wyatt Center 

Box 330, Peabody College 

Nashville, TN 37203 

dana,a,tomonari@vanderbilt.edu 




Tonge, Bruce |. 790 

Centre for Developmental Psychiatry 
and Psychology 
Monash University 
Monash Medical Centre 
246 Clayton Road 
Clayton, Victoria 03168 
Australia 

bruce.tonge@med.monash.edu.au 

Tonniges, Thomas F. 606 

Director 

Community Pediatrics 
American Academy of Pediatrics 
141 N.W Point Boulevard 
Elk Grove Village, IL 60009-0927 
ttonniges@aap.org 

Topitzes, James 569 

Waisman Center 

University of Wisconsin at Madison 
1500 Highland Avenue 
Madison, WI 53705 

Torbenson, ReNae 534 

Early Head Start 
95 West 100 South, Suite 100 
Logan, UT 84321 
rrose@brheadstart.org 

Torquad, Julia 767 

Assistant Professor 
Family and Consumer Sciences 
University of Nebraska at Lincoln 
137 CDL 

Lincoln, NE 68535 

Tout, Kathryn A. 775 

Senior Research Associate 
Child Trends 

4301 Connecticut Avenue, N.W, 

Suite 100 

Washington, DC 20008 
ktout@childtrends.org 

Townsend, Sally Claycomb 

Associate Professor of 
Occupational Therapy 
Utica College of Occupational 
Therapy 

1 600 Burrstone Road 
Utica, NY 13502 
stownsend @uti ca .ucsu . edu 

Townsend, Tara 

Senior Manager 
Ready To Learn 
Research and Evaluation 
1320 Braddock Place 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
ttownsend@pbs.org 



1031 



A r r t. IN U 1 A U 



Travers, Stacey 

Project Assistant 

Association of Maternal and Child 
Health Programs 
1220 19th Street, N.W. 

Suite 801 

Washington, DC 20036 
stravers@amchp.org 

Tripp, Paula 

Director 
Head Start 
Early Head Start 

Economic Opportunity Commission 
of San Luis Obispo County, Inc. 
1030 Southwood Drive 
San Luis Obispo, CA 93401 
ptripp@eocslo.org 

Trust, Cathy 702 

4228 Leland Street 
Chevy Chase, MD 20815 
cltrost@aol.com 

Tschantz, Jennifer 723 

Graduate Assistant 
Department of Special Education 
University of Maryland 
1500 Benjamin Building 
College Park, MD 20742 
jentz@wam.umd.edu 

Turner, Pauline H. 974 

'Professor \ 

Family Studies 
University of New Mexico 
103 Simpson Hall 
Albuquerque, NM 87131 
ptumer @ unm . edu 

Turner-Musa, Jocelyn 783 

Faculty Research Associate 
Department of Mental Hygiene 
Johns Hopkins University 
School of Public Health 
624 North Broadway, 8th Floor 
Baltimore, MD 21205 

lyson, Joyce 

Health Coordinator 
Head Start Program 
Saint Mark's Head Start 
2017 Beverly Road 
Brooklyn, NY 11226 
jtyson@stmarksheadstart.org 

Uhl, Stacey 795 

Research Analyst 

Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. 
PO. Box 2393 
Princeton, NJ 08543 
suhl@mathematica-mpr.com 



Unangst, Helen 979 

Early Childhood Development 
Coordinator 

Head Start XXI Resource Center 
2200 169th Street 
Hammond, IN 46323 

Unger, Donald G. 871 

Associate Professor 
Department of Individual and 
Family Studies 
University of Delaware 
College of Human Resources, 
Education, and Public Policy 
Alison Hall Annex 
Newark, DE 19716-3301 
donald.unger@mvs.udel.edu 

Vaden>Kieman, Michael 

Senior Research Analyst 
The CDM Group, Inc. 

5530 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 1660 
Chevy Chase, MD 2081 5 
mvk@cdmgroup.com 

Vaden-Kieman, Nancy 100, 811 

Study Director 
Westat, Inc. 

1650 Research Boulevard 
Rockville, MD 20850-3129 

Vale, Elizabeth 866 

(contact information not available) 

Van Egeren, Laurie A. 806, 821 

Research Associate 
Institute for Children, Youth, 
and Families 

Michigan State University 
Kellogg Center, Suite 27 
East Lansing, MI 48824 
vanegere@msu.edu 

Vander Groef, Robin Lynn 

Disabilities/Transition Manager 
Administration 
NORWESCAP Head Start 
604 Roseberry Street 
Phillipsburg, NJ 08865 
vandergroefr@norwescap.org 

Vandivere, Sharon 775 

Senior Research Analyst 
Child Trends 

4301 Connecticut Avenue, N.W 
Suite 100 

Washington, DC 20008 
svandivere@childtrends.org 




Vanne, Anita 

Office Coordinator 

Head Start Collaboration Office 

Iowa Department of Education 

1435 19th Street 

West Des Moines, LA 50245 

anita.varme@ed. state, ia.us 

Vartuli, Sue 870 

Associate Professor of Early 
Childhood Education 
School of Education 
University of Missouri Kansas City 
R309 School of Education 
615 East 52nd Street, Room 309 
Kansas City, MO 641102499 
vartulis@umkc.edu 

Vaughan, Peggy 958 

Harvard Family Research Project 
38 Concord Avenue 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
pvaughanhull@aol.com 

VerzarO’O'Brien, Marce A. 

Director 

Training and Technical Assistance 
IV Quality Improvement Center 
Western Kentucky University 
640 99th Street, Ocean 
Marathon, FL 33050 
mvobrien@aol.com 

Vestal, Marilyn Anita 962 

Faculty 

Eastern Mennonite University 
14 Covington Drive 
Manchester, PA 17345 
vestala @ emu . edu 

Vestal, Judith Carson 971 

Program Director 

School of Allied Health Professions 
Occupational Therapy 
Louisiana State University Health 
Sciences Center 
1501 King's Highway 
Shreveport, LA 71130 
jvesta@lsuhsc.edu 

Vimpani, Anne F. 

Medical Officer 
Child and Family Health Team 
Child and Youth Health Network 
Locked Bag 1014 

Wallsend, New South Wales 02287 
Australia 

annevimpani@hunter.health.nsw.gov.au 



1032 



1036 



r r E. IN 1 w 



Vimpani, Graham V. 

Professor and Head 
Pediatrics and Child Health 
University of Newcastle 
Locked Bag 1014 

Wallsend, New South Wales 02287 
Australia 

graham .vi mpan i @ newcastl e. edu.au 

Visoky, Anita M. 897 

Speech-Language Pathologist 
Sunview School 

South Euclid-Lyndhurst Schools 
Meadow Wood Road 
South Euclid, OH 44121 
a.visoky@csuohio.edu 

Vitiello, Benedetto 264 

Chief 

National Institute of Mental Health 
6001 Executive Boulevard 
Room 7149, MSC 9633 
Bethesda, MD 20892-9633 
bvitiell@nih.gov 

Vitols, Roberta M. 950, 952 

Research & Development 
Coordinator 

Orange County Head Start 
1440 East 1st Street 
Santa Ana, CA 92701 
roberta_vitols@ochsinc.org 

Viveiros, Helena 779 

Research Assistant 
Psychiatry 

McMaster University 
1 200 Main Street West 
Patterson Building, Room 216 
Hamilton, Ontario L8N 3Z5 
Canada 

Vogel, Chen 140, 795 

Researcher 

Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. 
P.O. Box 2393 
Princeton, NJ 08543 
cvogel@mathematica-mpr.com 

Votniba>Drzal, Elizabeth 931 

Graduate Research Assistant 
Institute for Policy and Research 
Northwestern University 
2040 Sheridan Road 
Evanston, IL 60208-4100 
d-votruba@northwestem.edu 

Vukelicb, Carol 446, 447 

Education 

Delaware Center for Teacher 
Education 
Willard Hall 201 
Newark, DE 19716 
vukelich@udel.edu 



Waanders, Christine E. 904 

Doctoral Student 
University of South Carolina 
Department of Psychology 
Columbia, SC 29208 
waandersc@yahoo . co m 

Waizenhofer, Robyn 904 

Department of Psychology 
University of South Carolina 
Columbia, SC 29208 

Walker, HiU M. 115, 124 

Codirector 

Institute for Violence and 
Destmctive Behavior 
University of Oregon 
1265 University of Oregon 
Eugene, OR 94703-1 227 
hill_walker@ccmail.uoregon.edu 

Walker, Mary Ann 664 

Senior Project Specialist 
California Institute on 
Human Services 
Region IX QIC-DS 
Sonoma State University 
One University Drive 
Camarillo, CA 93012 
maryann.walker@csnci.edu 

Walker, Patty 744 

Early Childhood Coordinator 
Guadalupe Schools 
340 Soudi Goshen Street 
Salt Lake City, UT 84104 
patty.walker@slc,kl 2.ut.us 

Wall, Shavaun M. 150, 860, 861 

Chair 

School of Education 

The Catholic University of America 

620 Michigan Avenue, N.E. 

O'Boyle Hall 
Washington, DC 20064 
walls@cua.edu 

Wallach, Gila I. 938 

Graduate Student 

Psychology 

Clinical 

Illinois Institute of Technology 
550 West Brompton Street, Unit 1-S 
Chicago, IL 60657 
shabadoo@mindspring.com 

Wallach, Joseph E. 938 

Graduate Student 

Clinical Psychology 

Illinois Institute of Technology 

550 West Brompton Street, Unit 1-S 

Chicago, I L 60657 

shabadoo@mindspring.com 





Walling, Beth Ann 

Early Childhood Prof Development 
Consultant 
DOE&DHS 
DBDPS 
State of Iowa 
DHS, DBDPS 

Hoover Building, 5th Floor 
Des Moines, lA 50319-0114 
bwallin@dhs.state.ia.us 

Wallner-AUen, Kathleen E. 199 

Senior Study Director 
Child and Family Studies 
Westat, Inc. 

1605 Research Boulevard, 

Room TB286 

Rockville, MD 20850-3195 
kathleenwallner-allen@westat.com 

Walsh, Cindy 779 

Project Coordinator 
Canadian Centre for Studies of 
Children at Risk 

School Readines to Learn Project 
McMaster University 
Patterson Building, Room 411 
1200 Main Street West 
Hamilton, Ontario L8N 3Z5 
Canada 

walshci @ mcm aster, ca 

Warfield, Janeece 759 

Assistant Professor 
School of Professional Psychology 
Wright State University 
E217 B Ellis Human Development 
Institute 

9 North Edwin C. Moses Boulevard 
Dayton, OH 45324 
janeece.warfield@wright.edu 

Wamick, Edward 

Vice President 
FES 

National Center for Family Literacy 
325 West Main Street, Suite 300 
Louisville, KY 40202 
ewamick@famlit.org 

Wasik, Barbara 847, 976 

Principal Research Scientist 
Center for Social Organization 
of Schools 
Early Learning 
Johns Hopkins University 
3003 North Charles Street 
Baltimore, MD 21218 
bwasik@csos.jhu.edu 



1033 



Watkins, Ruth 979 

Associate Dean 

College of Applied Life Studies 

University of Illinois 

108 Huff Hall 

1206 South Fourth Street 

Champaign, IL 61820-6206 

rwatkins@uiuc.edu 

Watson, Kimberley 

Psychologist 
Head Start 

Montgomery County, Maryland 
Public Schools 
4910 Macon Road, Room 141 
Rockville, MD 20852 
kimberley_watson@fc.mcps,kl 2,md.us 

Watt, Norman E 159, 801, 803 

Professor 

Child Clinical Psychology 
University of Denver 
5578 South Hillside 
Englewood, CO 80111 
nwatt@du.edu 

Weatherholt, Tara 

Graduate Student 
Department of Psychological and 
Brain Sciences 
University of Louisville 
31 7 Life Sciences Building 
Louisville, KY 40292 
thwd99@yahoo.com 

Webb, John 

Senior Manager 
Head Start 

Cincinnati-Hamilton County 
Community Action Agency 
1501 Madison Road 
Cincinnati, OH 45206 
jwebb@cincy-caa.org 

Webb, Mary Bruce 

Senior Research Analyst 
Administration for Children 
and Families 

U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services 
OPRE/Child Outcomes Research 
and Evaluation (CORE) 

370 L'Enfant Promenade, S.W. 

7th Floor West 
Washington, DC 20447 
mbwebb@acf.dhhs.gov 

Wehry, Stephanie 

Assistant Director for Research 
Florida Institute of Education 
University of North Florida 
1200 Alumni Drive 
lacksonville, FL 32224 
swehry@unfedu 



1034 



Weidman, Lorraine 

Deputy Director 
Preschool Education/Family 
Development 

Community Services for Children 
1520 Hanover Avenue 
Allentown, PA 18109 
lweidman@ptd,prolog,net 

Welch, Glenda 922 

Head Start EHS Program Dirertor 
United Child Development 
Service, Inc, 

1200 Arlington Street 
Greensboro, NC 27406 
glenda@ucds.net 

Wells, Robert David 756 

Dirertor 

Pediatric Research 

Children's Hospital Central California 
9300 Valley Children's Place 
Madera, CA 93638 
wells@ucsffesno.edu 

Wertheimer, Richard 869 

Senior Research Associate 
Child Trends 

1749 Old Meadow Road, Suite 600 
McLean, VA 22102 

West, Jerry 199 

Dirertor 

U.S. Department of Statistics 
National Center for Education 
Statistics 

1990 K Street, N.W 
Suite 900, Room 9046 
Washington, DC 20006 
jerry.west@ed.gov 

Westby, Carol E. 863 

Grant Consultant 
Department of Communication 
Disorders 

Wichita State University 
1808 Princeton, N.E. 

Albuquerque, NM 87106 
mocha@unm.edu 

Wheelwright, May 

Children's Research Institute 
Center 6 

Children's National Medical Center 
111 Michigan Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20010 
mwheelwr@ cnmc.org 



1038 



White, Angela 

Study Coordinator 
Pediatrics 

University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences 
110 West B Street 
Russellville, AR 72801 
whiteangelal@uams.edu 

Whitehurst, Grover J. 187 

Assistant Secretary 
Office of Educational Research 
and Improvement 
U.S, Department of Education 
555 New Jersey Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20208 
grover.whitehurst@ed.gov 

Whiteside-Mansell, Leanne 157, 
758, 783 

Associate Professor 
Pediatrics 

University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences 
2001 Pershing Circle, Suite 300 
North Uttle Rock, AR 72201 
whitesidemansellleanne@uams.edu 

Whitley, Shirley 

Head Start Dirertor 
Johnson-Lee Harnett Community 
Action, Inc, 

P.O. Drawer 711 
Smithfield, NC 27577 

Williams, Constance 321 

Associate Professor 
Heller Graduate School 
Brandeis University 
MS 035 

Waltham, MA 02454-9110 
cowilliams@brandeis.edu 

Williams, Dianne 

Special Education 
Early Childhood Services 
Christ the Redeemer 
246 Canova Close, S.W. 

Calgary, Alberta T2W 6A6 
dianne.williams@shaw.ca 

Williams, Jo Ann 

Executive Dirertor 

Arkansas Head Start Association 

Child Development, Inc. 

P.O. Box 2110 

Russellville, AR 72811-2110 
jwilliams@childdevinc.org 



APPENDIX D 



Williams, Kelly 

Manager 

Education/Early Intervention 
Education 

Pocono Services for Families 
and Children 
212 West 4th Street 
East Stoudsburg, PA 18301 
kwilliams@psfc.org 

Williams, Keyette 

Vice Chairperson 
Head Start 

Neighborhood Center Association 
10512 Shale Avenue 
Cleveland, OH 44104 

Williams, Lorene 

Board Chair 

Touching the Lives of Children 
108 Pine Ridge Drive 
Wallace, NC 28466 
lwilliams®co.brunswick,kl2.ncus 

Winkelstein, Marilyn 967 

Associate Professor 

School of Nursing 

Johns Hopkins University 

525 North Wolfe Street, Room 444A 

Baltimore, MD 21205 

mwinkelstein@son.jhmi.edu 

Wishard, Alison G. 799 

Ph.D. Student 

Graduate School of Education 
Psychological Studies in Education 
University of California at 
Los Angeles 

1029C Moorehall, Mailbox 95-1521 
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1521 
awishard@ucla.edu 

Wolf, Anne 774 

Doaoral Candidate 
Graduate School of Education 
Harvard University 
14 Appian Way 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
wolfan 1 @gse. harvard.edu 

Wolfe, Barbara 321 

Professor 

Economics/Population Health 
University of Wisconsin at Madison 
Social Science Building 
1180 Observatory Drive 
Madison, WI 53706 
wolfe@lafollette.wisc.edu 



Wolfson, Mark 

Associate Professor 
Social Sciences and Health Policy 
Wake Forest University School 
of Medicine 

Department of Public Health 
Sciences 

Medical Center Boulevard 
Winston-Salem, NC 27157 
mwolfson@wfubmc.edu 

Wolverton, E. DolUe 

Chief, Education Services Branch 
Head Start Bureau 
ACF/ACYF 

U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services 
330 C Street, S.W 
Washington, DC 20447 
dwolverton@acf.hhs.gov 

Woodbury, Daniel 805 

Department of Family and 
Human Development 
Utah State University 
EHS-R, UMC 2905 
Family Life Building, FL 214 
Old Main Hill 
Logan, UT 84322-2905 

WoodrulQf, Geneva 922 

Direaor 

National Center for Young Children 
at Risk and Their Families 

25 Monmouth Court 
Brookline, MA 02146 
genevawoodruff@cs.com 

Worobey, Harriet S. 924 

Instruaor 

Nutritional Sciences 
Rutgers University 

26 Nichol Avenue, Room 209 
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-2882 
harrietw@rci.rutgers.edu 

Worobey, John 924 

Associate Professor 
Nutritional Sciences 
Rutgers University 
26 Nichol Avenue 
208 Davison Hall 
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-2882 
wo ro bey @rci . rutgers.edu 





Wright, Harry H: 250, 278, 503, 
516 

Professor 

Department of Neuropsychiatry 
School of Medicine 
University of South Carolina 
Clinical Education Building 
3555 Harden Street Extension, 
Suite 104 

Columbia, SC 29203 
hhw@medpark.sc.edu 

Wu, Sue-Yuen 535 

(contaa information not available) 

Wuest, Leslie 764 

Regional Research Institute 
Portland State University 
P.O. Box 751 
Portland, OR 97207 
wuestl@pdx.edu 

YaroHn, Maria 844 

Department of Applied Psychology 

School of Education 

New York University 

239 Greene Street, 4th Floor 

New York, NY 10003 

mcy210@nyu.edu 

Yazejian, Noreen 772 

Investigator 

University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill 
Frank Porter Graham Child 
Development Center 
105 Smith Level Road, CB 8180 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-8180 
noreen_yazejian@unc.edu 

Yom, Susan 

Administrator 

New Rochelle Public Schools 
131 Weyman Avenue 
New York, NY 10805 
syom@hotmail.com 

Yoshikawa, Hirokazu 100, 333 

Assistant Professor 
Department of Psychology 
New York University 
6 Washington Place, Room 279 
New York, NY 10003-6634 
hiro.yoshikawa@nyu.edu 

Young, Desia Grace 831 

Projea Coordinator • 

Child & Adolescent Psychiatry 
University of Chicago 
5841 South Maryland, MC 3077 
Chicago, IL 60637 
dgrace@yoda.bsd.uchicago.edu 



1035 



Younoszai, Tina M. 100 

Research Assistant 

University of Maryland, College Park 
Department of Human 
Development 
3304 Benjamin Building 
College Park, MD 20742-1131 
tinay@wam.umd.edu 

Zaijek'Farber, Midiaela L. 150, 
860, 861 

Research Associate 
The National Research Center for 
Child and Family Services 
Department of Education 
The Catholic University of America 
Shahan Hall 
Washington, DC 20064 
mlzfva@aol.com 

Zaslow, Martha J. 115, 333, 530, 
531, 775 

Vice President of Research 
Child Trends, Inc. 

4301 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. 

Suite 100 

Washington, DC 20008 
mzaslow@childtrends.org 



Zimmerman, Tracp 

The Hauser Group, Inc. 
1782 Columbia Road, N.W. 
#200 

Washington, DC 20009 
tracy@publicinterestpr.com 

Ziv, Margalit 423 

Assistant Professor 
Developmental Perspectives 
in Education 
Tel Aviv University 
Tel Aviv 69978 
Israel 

mziv@post.tau.ac.il 

Zukoski, Robin 

Washington State 
Office of the Governor 
P.O. Box 43113 
Olympia, WA 98504-3113 
robin.zukoski@gov.wa.gov 



Zhang, Chun 966 

Assistant Professor 
Division of Curriculum and 
Teaching 

Fordham University 
113 West 60 th Street 
New York, NY 10023 
czhang@fordham.edu 

Zigler, Edward F. 344, 368 

Director, Bush Center in 
Child Development 
Department of Psychology 
Yale University 
2 Hillhouse Avenue 
P.O. Box 208205 
New Haven, CT 06520-8205 
ed ward .zigl er @yal e. edu 



Zill, Nicholas 83, U5, 797 

Vice President 

Director, Child and Family Studies 
Group 
Westat, Inc. 

1650 Research Boulevard, TB300 
Rockville, MD 20850-3129 
nicholaszill@westat.com 




1036 



1040 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 



ERXC 

EWional Besources Intonniifofl CeniH 



NOTICE 



Reproduction Basis 



This document is covered by a signed "Reproduction Release (Blanket)" 
form (on file within the EWC system), encompassing all or classes of 
documents from its source organization and, therefore, does not require a 
"Specific Document" Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may be 
reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form (either 
"Specific Document" or "Blanket"). 



o 



ERLC EFF-089 (1/2003) 

hniimiiffnffTiiaaa ^ 



