English Language Teaching; Vol. 9, No. 4; 2016 
ISSN 1916-4742 E-ISSN 1916-4750 
Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education 


Diversity of Research Participants Benefits ESL/EFL Learners: 
Examining Student-Lecturer Disagreements in Classrooms 

Pattrawut Charoenroop 1 

1 English as an International Language Program, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand 

Correspondence: Pattrawut Charoenroop, English as an International Language, Chulalongkorn University, 
Phyathai Road, Pathumwan, Bangkok, Thailand. Tel: 66-8-1003-0840. E-mail: pattrawut.ch@gmail.com 

Received: January 18, 2016 Accepted: March 20, 2016 Online Published: March 22, 2016 
doi: 10.5539/elt.v9n4p214 URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.5539/elt.v9n4p214 


Abstract 

Reviews of literature made manifest that native English speakers who were research participants in many studies 
on disagreements were Americans (e.g., Beebe & Takahashi, 1989; Takahashi & Beebe, 1993; Dogacay-Aktuna 
& Kamisli 1996; Rees-Miller, 2000; Guodong & Jing, 2005; Chen, 2006). The excessive use of Americans as 
research participants presented a rather restricted view on how the disagreements could be performed by native 
speakers of English. These studies exhibited that Americans in a classroom context normally began their 
student-lecturer disagreements with a positive comment (e.g., ‘The idea is interesting but... ’)• Based on these 
results, the ESL/EFL learners might over-generalize from Americans to other groups of native English speakers 
and consequently postulate that all native English speakers initiate their student-lecturer disagreements with an 
optimistic remark. This current study chose a group of 13 Canadians and investigated their disagreement 
strategies in the identical context. The data were collected by videotaping the participants’ classroom for three 
hours every week for five consecutive weeks. Results showed that the participants normally disagreed with their 
lecturer explicitly but mitigated their explicit disagreements with some justification (e.g., 'No because... ’). The 
findings underscored that Americans and Canadians did not normally use the same disagreement strategies in the 
classroom context. If future studies increasingly use British English, Australians, New Zealanders or South 
Africans as research participants and investigate their expressions of student-lecturer disagreement, the ESL/EFL 
learners will become keenly aware of differences across all native English speakers. In other words, they will be 
able to avoid over-generalizing from Americans to other native English speakers. 

Keywords: disagreement strategies, strong and weak disagreements, native speakers of English, politeness 
theory 

1. Introduction 

Henrich et al. (2010, p. 61) proposed an acronym ‘WEIRD’ to represent Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, 
and Democratic people. In the realm of behavioral science research, the participants most frequently used to 
represent ‘WEIRD’ were empirically attested to be young, educated and middle-class Americans. Henrich et al. 
(2010) contended that the excessive use of these Americans as research participants might be conducive to 
population invariability. The ESL/EFL learners, for example, could misperceive the results from the narrowly 
defined samples. The same holds true in many studies on disagreement. There are an abundant number of studies 
(e.g., Beebe & Takahashi, 1989a, 1989b; Rees-Miller, 2000; Locher, 2004; Guodong & Jing, 2005; Chen, 2006) 
that used Americans as research participants. Regardless of how the data were collected-either implicitly or 
explicitly elicited, these studies yielded consistent results exemplifying that Americans did not directly disagree 
with the lecturer but typically commenced their expressions of disagreement with a positive statement, as shown 

in (1)- 

(1) While that is true, no doubt,... Rees-Miller (2000, p. 1108) 

The extract (1) illustrates that Americans do not immediately express their disagreement but initially reiterate 
what was said by the lecturer in an optimistic way. To some extent, the positive statement implies that the 
speaker agrees with the lecturer. However, the speaker eventually reveals that s/he does not entirely agree with 
the lecturer’s opinion. In some cases, the expressions of disagreement are postponed by a discourse connective 
‘but’ (Locher, 2004, pp. 135-137) as in ‘yes, but...’, a conventional expression for disagreement (cf. Bjorge, 
2012). Beginning the expressions of disagreement with a positive comment or a token of agreement, the speaker 


214 




www.ccsenet.org/elt 


English Language Teaching 


Vol. 9, No. 4; 2016 


can firstly acknowledge the lecturer’s need for solidarity. As a result, the threat of disagreement that follows can 
be counteracted and the lecturer’s positive face can be saved. In addition, Rees-Miller (2000, pp. 1106-1107) 
disclosed that American professors regularly commenced their lecturer-student disagreements with a positive 
remark, as shown in (2). Although the extract (2) may not be the focus of this current study, it is to show that 
Americans regardless of their power status in the classroom often made a pleasant comment to strengthen 
solidarity before performing the positive-face threatening act of disagreement. 

(2) The kind of explanation you're giving is useful in some ways, but... Rees-Miller (2000, p. 1107) 

The instantiation of these two extracts displays how Americans usually express their disagreements in the 
classroom context. The results from the past studies (that overly relied on Americans) might inculcate the 
ESL/EFL learners to expect that all native English speakers (Note 1) would abide by the same norm. This 
argument can turn out to be sensible because all native English speakers’ cultural backgrounds are purported to 
be compatible (e.g., Hall, 1976; Hofstede, 1980; Markus & Kitayama, 1991; Oyserman et al., 2002; Molding & 
Lamoreaux, 2008). Henrich et al. (2010, pp. 79-81), however, did not agree with the preceding assumption and 
pointed out that American participants cannot virtually represent all native English speakers. For instance, they 
are more individualistic than other native English speakers. Thus, this current study used Canadians as research 
participants and examined their expressions of student-lecturer disagreements in the classroom context. Findings 
from this study can enrich the ESL/EFL learners’ perception of other native English speakers, especially how 
they normally express their student-lecturer disagreements in the classroom context. 

2. Literature Review 

2.1 Disagreement in the Cross-Cultural Framework 

Several dichotomous classifications have been used to stipulate cultural differences between Westerners and 
non-Westemers. They are individualism-collectivism, low- and high-context cultures and independent- and 
interdependent construal of self (e.g., Scollon & Scollon, 1995; Hofstede, 2001; Gudykunst, 2003; Varner & 
Beamer, 2005). These dichotomies have been purported to govern people’s communication strategies. Gudykunst 
(2001, p. 37), for example, contended that Westerners, whose cultures are individualistic, low-context and 
independent, are more likely to express their opinions directly, precisely, clearly and absolutely. To the contrary, 
non-Westerners, whose cultures are collectivistic, high-context and interdependent, tend to express their opinions 
indirectly, ambiguously, implicitly and probabilistically. 

In relation to this study, Westerners and non-Westerners can be broadly expected to perform their student-lecturer 
disagreements differently due to their divergent cultural backgrounds. Generally speaking, disagreement is a 
positive-face threatening act (Brown & Levinson, 1987, pp. 68-74, pp. 102-117) that can be harmful to the 
hearer’s need for harmony (e.g. Rees-Miller, 2000, p. 1089). Based on this traditional assumption, the speaker is 
encouraged to mitigate his/her disagreement particularly when the solidarity is a chief goal to be maintained in 
their social interaction. In the identical context, however, people with different cultural backgrounds may be 
expected to express this positive-face threatening act in various ways. Following Gudykunst (2001), Westerners’ 
performances of disagreement are more likely to be unmitigated; while non-Westemers’ disagreement should be 
seen mitigated. Kieu (2006), albeit over-generalized, confirmed that Westerners normally performed their 
disagreements explicitly and frankly, but non-Westerners usually expressed their disagreements implicitly and 
tacitly, that is, their disagreements required indirect delivery with softening modifications in order to increase 
in-group solidarity or minimize the imposition. If Kieu’s (2006) conclusion is legitimate, the next question is 
whether a particular group of research participants adequately represent all Westerners and all non-Westerners. 

2.2 Americans as Research Participants 

In many studies on disagreements (e.g., Beebe & Takahashi, 1989; Takahashi & Beebe, 1993; Dogacay-Aktuna 
& Kamisli 1996; Rees-Miller, 2000; Guodong & Jing, 2005; Chen, 2006), Americans were frequently used as 
research participants to epitomize native English speakers. Most of the studies agreed that Americans usually 
commenced their disagreements with a positive comment, especially when disagreeing with a more powerful 
interlocutor. Beebe and Takahashi (1989) and Takahashi and Beebe (1993), for example, compared native 
speakers of Japanese and American speakers of English when they expressed disagreements in 
lower-to-higher-status situations. They similarly reported that Americans commonly began their performance of 
disagreement with a pleasant comment to satisfy the lecturer’s needs for commonality before they disagreed. 
Takahashi and Beebe (1993) further corroborated that their American participants often used more polite 
strategies than their Japanese participants when disagreeing with a more powerful interlocutor. Dogacay-Aktuna 
and Kamisli (1996) studied how native speakers of Turkish and American speakers of English expressed their 
disagreement in workplace. They discovered that Americans were sensitive to the interlocutor’s status and 


215 




www.ccsenet.org/elt 


English Language Teaching 


Vol. 9, No. 4; 2016 


usually initiated their disagreements with a positive statement. In a similar vein, Rees-Miller (2000, p. 1097) 
examined Americans when disagreeing with their professors in an academic setting and noticed that her 
participants frequently encoded a partial agreement to initiate their expressions of disagreement. By doing this, 
the participants were able to counteract the threat that was harmful to the lecturer’s positive face. 

The researchers of most studies above simply generalized the results based on their American participants to all 
native English speakers (e.g., Beebe & Takahashi, 1989; Takahashi & Beebe, 1993; Dogacay-Aktuna & Kamisli 
1996). They took it for granted that their American participants’ norm comported with all native English 
speakers’ norms. This evasiveness would certainly have some potential to mislead the ESL/EFL learners to 
construe that there is no difference (at all) across all populations of native English speakers, especially when they 
deal with student-lecturer disagreements. 

2.3 Disagreement Strategies 

Disagreement is an expression of an opinion that is incompatible with the preceding opinion expressed by the 
hearer (in a dyadic talk). Disagreement is often perceived as an inherently face-threatening act that easily 
jeopardizes the hearer’s face (cf. Brown & Levinson, 1987, p. 66). Therefore, disagreements in many 
institutional contexts are encouraged to be mitigated. As a result, the mitigated disagreements will not be 
threatening to the hearer’s face. The view above was used as a point of departure to distinguish two sets of 
disagreement strategies. They are (i) strong disagreements, i.e. disagreements that are not mitigated and (ii) weak 
disagreements, i.e. disagreements that are mitigated. All strategies are shown in Table 1. 


Table 1. Disagreement strategies 


Sets of strategies 

Disagreement 

strategies 

Realizations 

Strong 

disagreements 

Explicit 

disagreements 

‘no’(Locher, 2004, pp. 143-145) 

‘I disagree.’ (Emmerson, 2004, p. 64) 

‘I don’t agree.’ (Brieger & Sweeney, 2000, p. 188) 


Unmitigated 

disagreement 

‘We can’t do that.’ (Emmerson, 2004, p. 64) 

‘That’s not practical.’ (Walkinshaw, 2007, p. 280). 

Weak 

disagreements 

Delayed 

disagreements 

‘Well, but it is not.’ (Locher, 2004, p. 118) 

‘Oh! it doesn’t look red to me.’ (Charoenroop, 2014, p. 149) 

‘To be honest,... ’ (Emmerson, 2004, p. 65) 

‘I think it’s wrong,...’ (Locher, 2004, p. 164) 

‘I’m afraid,...’ (Sweeney, 2003, p. 151) 

‘You could be right, but...’ (Brieger & Sweeney, 2000. p. 178), 


Internally 

Mitigated 

Disagreements 

‘I know what you mean, but...’ (Emmerson, 2004, p. 65). 

‘I don’t quite agree’ (Jones & Alexander, 2003, p. 113) 

‘It might mean something’ (Locher, 2004, p. 129) 

‘I’m not sure we can do that.’ (Emmerson, 2004, p. 64).’ 

‘Won’t some people find that a little early.’ (Emmerson, 2004, p. 65)’ 


Disagreements 
with Justification 

‘I don’t agree with that point because...’ (Jones & Alexander, 2003, p. 
113) 



‘That’s going to happen anyway because...’ (Locher, 2004, p. 251) 


Disagreements that are not mitigated are categorized as ‘strong disagreements.’ There are two sub-strategies 
under the strong disagreements: (i) explicit disagreements, and (ii) unmitigated disagreements. The former 
encompasses disagreements that are explicitly performed, that is, the act of saying per se explicitly 
communicates the illocutionary act of disagreement. In other words, interpreting the explicit disagreements is 
likely to be context-independent. The latter refers to disagreements that are expressed without any softening 


216 




www.ccsenet.org/elt 


English Language Teaching 


Vol. 9, No. 4; 2016 


devices. The interpretation of unmitigated disagreements is context-dependent, that is, a preceding utterance 
must be taken into account in order to conclude that a responsive utterance is illocutionarily disagreement. On 
the other hand, disagreements that are mitigated are labeled as ‘weak disagreements.’ There are three 
sub-strategies under the weak disagreements: (i) delayed disagreements, (ii) internally mitigated disagreements, 
and (iii) disagreements with justification. Firstly, disagreements that are not spontaneously produced but 
prefaced with a token of agreement, a positive comment, or even a hesitation marker are subsumed as ‘delayed 
disagreements.’ Secondly, disagreements that are mitigated through some internal modifications such as the use 
of hedges, questions or indirectness are categorized as internally mitigated disagreements. Thirdly, some 
disagreements can be mitigated by an ensuing justification or clarification. The presence of justification or 
clarification ratifies the foregoing disagreements. 

The taxonomy in Table 1 exemplifies how disagreement strategies are realized without any combination of other 
strategies. In fact, the combination of two or three disagreement strategies in spontaneous talks is permissible. 
Table 2 instantiates 6 possible realizations that display two- or three-strategies combinations. 


Table 2. Combined disagreement strategies 


Sets of strategies 

Disagreement strategies 

Realizations 

Strong + 

Explicit + Justification 

‘no, because...’ 

Weak disagreements 

Unmitigated + Justification 

‘The idea is not practical because... ’ 

Weak + 

Delayed + Internally Mitigated 

‘I think it might be wrong.’ 

Weak 

Delayed + Justification 

‘I think it’s wrong because...’ 

Disagreements 

Internally Mitigated + Justification 

Delayed + Internally Mitigated + Justification 

‘I don’t quite agree because... ’ 

‘I think it might be wrong because... ’ 


3. Methodology 

3.1 Populations and Samples 

The research participants were 13 Canadian speakers of English. There were 5 males (Noah, Felix, Matthew, 
Antoine and Ryan), and 8 females (Emma, Victoria, Olivia, Clara, Grace, Ava, Sophie and Alice)-these names 
were pseudonyms. Their age range was between 19-27 years old. All of them were university students from 
Canada majoring in Tourism and Management and participated in this sudy while temporarily staying in 
Thailand for 4 months. Felix, Victoria and Clara had been in Thailand on travelling purposes twice but only for a 
few weeks. The participants’ self-report revealed that none of them had previously learned to speak Thai. They 
were monolingual who used English as their first language, except Noah, Olivia, Clara and Ava who were 
bilingual speaking Canadian-French and English. 

Phil was the professor who taught the class throughout the semester. Elis name was also pseudonym. Fie was a 
45-year-old, American-Thai lecturer who was bilingual. Phil had strong background in teaching at the tertiary 
level in Thailand. Fie always encouraged his students to participate in class discussions and provided an equal 
opportunity for everyone to speak. Phil addressed his students by their first names. Based on my observation, he 
was friendly; as a consequence, the participants felt comfortable talking to him. Detailed information about the 
class and the lecturer is re-presented in Table 3. 


217 




www.ccsenet.org/elt English Language Teaching Vol. 9, No. 4; 2016 


Table 3. Samples’ information and their classroom context 

Canadian Speakers of English 

Samples 

Male: Female 

Nationality: Native Language 

Age Range 

Level of Education 

5:8 

Canadian: English 

19-27 (mean 21.92) 

Second- and Third-year undergraduate 

Classroom Context 

Subject 

Class Period 

Duration of Classroom Videotaping 

Instructor (Gender, Age, Nationality) 

Medium of Instruction 

Cross-cultural communication 

3 hours per week (9-12) 

Jan 2013-Mar 2013 

Male, 45, American 

English 


3.2 Research Instrument 

The data was collected by means of classroom videotaping. Following Bardovi-Harlig (2013, p. 73), the 
participants’ pragmatic knowledge should by no means be elicited explicitly when pragmatic knowledge is not 
explicitly taught to the participants. In other words, the participants were not explicitly taught how to disagree 
with the lecturer in English; therefore, their performance of disagreement should not be deliberately elicited. 
Collecting naturally-occurring data in a natural setting, where the students and the lecturer were unaware that 
their expressions of disagreement were captured for analysis, can be implicit. In addition, data obtained 
implicitly from classroom videotaping can be claimed to be spontaneous, reflecting what the speakers actually 
say rather than what they are planning to say. This type of data can be a source of rich pragmatic structures (e.g., 
Kasper & Dahl, 1991; Cohen, 1996; Yuan, 2001). 

3.3 Data Collection 

Prior to the procedure of videotaping, an information sheet and a consent form were given to all participants, 
providing instructions of the research project. The participants reserved the right to accept or refuse the invitation 
to be involved in the project at any time. If this appears to be the case, his or her expression of disagreement will 
be abandoned (fortunately, none of them refused the invitation). There was no specification of any kind to notify 
the participants that their performance of disagreement was observed. All participants, however, were aware that 
their general classroom conduct was being captured. The videotape recorder was set up in front of the class 15 
minutes prior to the beginning of each class. It mainly recorded the students’ interactions with the lecturer. 

The classroom was videotaped for 3 hours every week for 5 consecutive weeks. The researcher videotaped the 
participants since the first week after they had arrived in Thailand. This is to ensure that their pragmatic 
knowledge was not, or at least minimally, interfered with by the Thai pragmatic knowledge after they had 
immersed themselves in Thai culture. 

3.4 Data Analysis 

The data appearing on the first week of videotaping was removed from the analysis in order to increase the data 
reliability because the participants were allowed to be familiar with the data collection method at least for three 
hours. The naturally-occurring data after the first week was transcribed in a form of talk exchanges between a 
student and the lecturer. In each transcription, there was at least one student-lecturer disagreement embedded. 
The transcription conventions can be seen in Appendix A. All disagreements were counted to find out how many 
times the students disagreed with the lecturer in 4 weeks or 12 hours. The student-lecturer disagreements were 
carefully analyzed in terms of disagreement strategies based on the taxonomy in Tables 1 and 2. The highest 
frequency or the norm of disagreement strategies used by the participants was underscored. The frequency was 
converted to percentage. In these stages, a rater who had a research background in discourse analysis provided 
assistance in scrutinizing the accuracy of the transcripts as well as the analysis. 


218 




www.ccsenet.org/elt 


English Language Teaching 


Vol. 9, No. 4; 2016 


4. Results 

In 4 weeks or 12 hours, the participants produced 108 disagreements, which were extracted from 94 talk 
exchanges. The participants never used ‘strong disagreements’ as described in Table 1. They always mitigated 
their disagreements with either a positive comment or some justification. In other words, the participants used 
combined strategies whenever they disagreed with their lecturer explicitly. The use of the combined strategies 
suggested that the participants also wanted to decrease the threat of their explicit disagreements. In 108 tokens, 
the participants most often initiated their expressions of disagreement explicitly with a negative marker, which is 
typically ‘no.’ In the same turn, the participants continued to buttress their explicit disagreements with some 
justification or clarification (cf. strong + justification strategies in Table 2). This combined strategy was found to 
be their norm because it was used in 67 tokens or 62.03 percent. The use of other disagreement strategies is 
presented in Appendix B. In the following section, three extracts are purposefully selected to delineate how the 
norm was realized. 

Extract 1 demonstrates how Ryan expressed his disagreement explicitly. In this extract, Ryan performed his 
disagreement one time in turn 3 but continued to give some justification to support his argument in turns 5 and 6. 

Extract 1 

1) Prof. Phil: You will never call anyone as IT 

2) Prof. Phil: (short pause) It’s not polite 

3) Ryan: (a student raises his index finger) No (short pause) unless we like them 

4) Prof. Phil: Really(/) 

5) Ryan: And some people call their child (short pause) IT= 

6) Ryan: =BUT it doesn’t have any mood in it 

In this extract. Prof. Phil contended that his students did not address anyone by the third-person singular 
pronoun-‘it.’ He argued that the use of this pronoun as an address term implies impoliteness. In turn 3, Ryan 
raised his index finger asking for permission to get the floor and began to express his contrary opinion. His 
explicit disagreement was initiated by a negative marker ‘no’ disputing that the third-person singular pronoun 
could be used to address someone. Ryan further reasoned his argument that this address term could be used for 
someone we disliked. The use of the first-person plural pronoun in Ryan’s explanation implies that his argument 
is also true for the professor. In the next turn, Prof. Phil uttered ‘really’ in a rising tone aiming to ask for a 
clarification. The professor expected Ryan to buttress his argument in more detail. However, Ryan did not further 
justify his argument but supported his explicit disagreement with another situation where the use of this pronoun 
was permissible and was not perceived impolite. Ryan corroborated that ‘it’ could sometimes be used to address 
a child and clarified that its utility in this particular context did not connote any negative consequences. In sum, 
this extract showed how an explicit disagreement was softened by two pieces of justification that followed. 

Extract 2 illustrates how Emma disagreed with the lecturer. In this talk exchange, Emma expressed her 
disagreement twice in turn 4 and again between turns 6 and 8. 

Extract 2 

1) Prof. Phil: Give me another word that ends with -ness 

2) Alice: Sorrowfulness 

3) Prof. Phil: Yeah yeah sorrowfulness 

4) Emma: (the student shakes her head) No not a word 

5) Prof. Phil: IT I:::S (short pause) sorrowfulness is an English word 

6) Emma: (P) sorrowfulness)/) (P) (the student shakes her head) NO::: 

7) Emma: (short pause) Not in English 

8) Emma: (short pause) Never heard of it 

9) Prof. Phil: Really)/) 

10) Emma: (short pause) I’ve heard only sorrow 

11) Emma: It sounds really weird (P) sorrowfulness (P) 

Prof. Phil asked the students to give him another English noun that ends with “-ness” as its suffix. Alice coined 


219 




www.ccsenet.org/elt 


English Language Teaching 


Vol. 9, No. 4; 2016 


‘sorrowfulness’ to the class discussion. In turn 3, Prof. Phil agreed with Alice and confirmed that the lexical 
derivation conformed to the English morphological rule under discussion. In turn 4, Emma stepped in and 
disagreed with the lecturer. She began her expression of disagreement explicitly with a negative marker ‘no.’ 
Emma’s linguistic realization was supported by headshaking to display disagreement non-verbally. Obviously, 
Emma’s disagreement was not prefaced by any positive statements. By contrast, she explicitly contended that 
‘sorrowfulness’ was a non-word. In turn 5, Prof. Phil ratified the existence of ‘sorrowfulness’ in the English 
glossary. Emma’s second disagreement was expressed explicitly in the next turn. She reiterated the word softly 
in a rising tone to question the lecturer about his certainty. Then, she disputed that ‘sorrowfulness’ was not an 
English word. Emma accompanied her linguistic realization with another headshaking gesture. In turns 7 and 8, 
Emma exhibited that ‘sorrowfulness’ was not an English word due to the fact that she had never heard it before. 
Prof. Phil did not explain the derivation of the word but urged Emma to think about it again. In turns 10 and 11, 
Emma insisted that she had heard ‘sorrow’ but had never heard ‘sorrowfulness.’ Based on her background 
knowledge, she clarified that ‘sorrowfulness’ sounded weird to her. In sum, this extract gives evidence that 
Emma did not preface her expression of disagreement with a positive statement. Her explicit expressions of 
disagreement, however, were modified by some justification. 

Extract 3 shows how Clara expressed her explicit disagreement. In this extract, Clara performed her 
disagreement three times in turns 5, 7 and 9. 

Extract 3: 

1) Clara: How do I say (short pause) I don’t want my food TOO spicy 

2) Clara: (short pause) I want OK spicy 

3) Clara: (long pause) That that’s what I want to say 

4) Prof. Phil: /mat p h 3d ma:k/= 

5) Clara: =NO I WANT spicy= 

6) Prof. Phil: =Yea::h BUT you want NOT TOO spicy 

7) Clara: NO::: I want how they make it FOR (short pause) [YOU(\) 

8) 8. Prof. Phil: /mat p h 3d ma:k/] 

9) Clara: (short pause) NO no no BECAUSE I am /fmvui (Note 2)/ 

In this extract, Clara initially asked Prof. Phil how to express her desire to order food that was not too spicy in 
Thai. Prof. Phil was the only person in the classroom who could answer the question since he spoke Thai. Clara 
had been in Thailand twice. She complained that her ordered food was often bland because many people 
over-generalized that she was sensitive to spicy food. They usually made food for her accordingly. In fact, 
medium spicy food was perfectly fine for her. Clara explained her situation in the first 3 lines. Prof. Phil 
proposed an adjectival phrase /mai p h 3d ma:k/ (‘not too spicy’ in English) to her. In turn 5, Clara immediately 
expressed her disagreement without any softening devices. She insisted that she would want something spicy. 
Based on my observation, her disagreement was engendered by her limited knowledge of Thai. She probably did 
not understand the whole phrase unequivocally. However, her explicit disagreement was mitigated by an 
explanation. In turn 6, Prof. Phil described what she wanted and reiterated it to her. Clara explicitly disagreed 
with him again. She further explained that she would want spicy food that was similarly made for the professor. 
There was an overlap where the professor tried to repeat the same phrase to her. In turn 9, Clara expressed her 
third disagreement explicitly by reiterating the negative marker ‘no’ three times. Her explicit disagreement was 
softened by an explanation introduced by a discourse connective ‘because’ to explicate that she was a non-Thai 
person. Although the conversation went on, these turns are adequate to show how explicit disagreements were 
supported by the subsequent justification. 

5. Discussion and Conclusions 

American and Canadain cultures are often assumed to be comparable because they are similarly individualistic, 
independent and low-context (e.g., Hall, 1976; Hofstede, 1980; Markus & Kitayama, 1991; Oyserman et al., 
2002; Morling & Lamoreaux, 2008). Moreover, their geographical habitations and religious traditions are 
compatible. Simply said, Americans and Canadians are native English speakers who have domiciles in North 
America. The religious tradition-Thanksgiving-is not celebrated in other English speaking countries, except in 
America and Canada. In these regards, Americans are obviously very similar to Canadians. However, these close 
similarities have been proved to be insufficient to govern their people’s linguistic behaviors. In the same given 
context, the participants’ expressions of disagreement did not necessarily conform to what has been widely tested 


220 




www.ccsenet.org/elt 


English Language Teaching 


Vol. 9, No. 4; 2016 


to be the norm for Americans. Obviously, they normally used different disagreement strategies. Future 
researchers should thus be more careful when using a particular group of native English speakers. The 
preliminary results have proved that the two groups of native English speakers-Americans and Canadians-are 
different in terms of politeness strategies they used to disagree with the lecturer in the classroom context. 

Last but not least, the excessive use of Americans as research participants is not literally weird as ones might 
literally interpret the WEIRD acronym according to Henrich et al. (2010). This current study by no means 
predisposes future researchers to eliminate American participants from their studies. However, they should be 
aware that disproportionate findings based on the narrowly defined samples could distort the ESL/EFL learners’ 
perceptions of, or attitudes toward, all native English speakers. The learners might perhaps over-generalize from 
Americans’ norm for student-lecturer disagreements to other native English speakers’ norms. The availability of 
results based on other groups of native English speakers can inhibit these learners’ over-generalizations. 
Provided an increasing number of studies with different groups of native English speakers as research 
participants, the learners will ponder about the variations across all native English speakers. The diversity of 
native English speakers used as research participants would definitely benefit the ESL/EFL learners. 

References 

Bardovi-Harlig, K. (2013). Developing L2 pragmatics. Language Learning, 63, Suppl.X, 68-86. 
http://dx.doi.Org/10.llll/j.1467-9922.2012.00738.x 

Beebe, L. M., & Takahashi, T. (1989a). Do you have a bag? Social status and patterned variation in second 
language acquisition. In S. M. Gass, C. Madden, D. Preston, & L. Selinker (Eds.), Variation in second 
language acquisition: Discourse and pragmatics (pp. 103-128). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. 

Beebe, L. M., & Takahashi, T. (1989b). Sociolinguistic variation in face-threatening speech acts: Chastisement 
and disagreement. In M. Eisenstein (Ed.), The dynamic interlanguage (pp. 199-218). New York: Plenum. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-l-4899-0900-8_13 

Bjorge, A. K. (2012). Expressing disagreement in ELF business negotiations: theory and practice. Applied 
Linguistics, 33(4), 406-427. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/applin/ams015 

Brieger, N., & Sweeney, S. (2000). The language of business English: grammar and functions. Essex: Pearson 
Education. 

Brown, P., & Stephen, L. (1987). Politeness: some universal in language usage. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

Charoenroop, P. (2014). A cross-cultural pragmatic study: politeness strategies and realizations of the strategies 
used to perform student-lecturer multiple disagreements by natives peakers of Thai and English. Journal of 
Educational and Social Research, 4(1), 146-157. 

Chen, M. (2006). An Interlanguage study of the speech act of disagreement made by Chinese EEL speakers in 
Taiwan. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation. National Sun Yat-Sen University. 

Cohen, A. D. (1996). Developing the ability to perform speech acts. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 18 
(2), 253-267. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S027226310001490X 

Dogancay-Aktuna, S., & Kamisli, S. (1996). Linguistics of power and politeness in Turkish: revelations from 
speech acts. Paper presented at the Annual International Linguistics Conference (pp. 1-36). Turkey. 

Emmerson, P. (2004). Email English. Oxford: Macmillan Publishers. 

Gudykunst, W. B. (2001). Asian American ethnicity and communication. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage. 

Gudykunst, W. B. (2003). Intercultural communication theories. In W. B. Gudykunst (Ed.), Cross-cultural and 
intercultural communication (pp. 167-189). Thousand Oaks: Sage. 

Guodong, L., & Jing, H. (2005). A contrastive study on disagreement strategies for politeness between American 
English and Mandarin Chinese. ASLAN EEL Journal, 7(1), 1-12. 

Hall, E. T. (1976). Beyond Culture. New York: Anchor Press. 

Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest people in the world? Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 33, 61-135. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X0999152X 

Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture’s consequences: International differences in work related values. Newbury Park, 
California: Sage. 

Hofstede, G. (2001). Cultures and organizations: Software of the mind. London: McGraw-Hill. 


221 




www.ccsenet.org/elt 


English Language Teaching 


Vol. 9, No. 4; 2016 


Jenkins, J. (2003). World Englishes: A resource book for students. London, Routledge. 

Jone, L., & Alexander, R. (2003). New International Business English Workbook. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa020286 

Kachru, Y. (1992). Culture, style, and discourse: Expanding noetics of English. In B. Kachru (Ed.). 

Kasper, G., & Dahl, M. (1991). Research methods in interlanguage pragmatics. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 13, 215-247. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0272263100009955 

Kieu, T. T. H. (2006). Disagreeing in English and Vietnamese: A pragmatic and conversational analysis 
perspective. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation. Vietnam National University. 

Locher, M. A. (2004). Power and politeness in action: Disagreements in oral communication. Berlin: Mouton de 
Gruyter. http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/9783110926552 

Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications for cognition, emotion and motivation. 
Psychological Review, 98, 224-253. http://dx.doi.Org/10.1037/0033-295X.98.2.224 

Molding, B., & Lamoreaux, M. (2008). Measuring culture outside the head: A metaanalysis of 
individualism-collectivism in cultural products. Personality and Social Psychology’ Review, 12, 199-221. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1088868308318260 

Oyserman, D., et al. (2002). Rethinking individualism and collectivism: Evaluation of theoretical assumptions 
and meta-analyses. Psychological Bulletin, 128, 1173-1175. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.128.L3 

Rees-Miller, J. (2000). Power, severity and context in disagreement. Journal of Pragmatics, 32, 1087-1111. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0378-2166(99)00088-0 

Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. (1995). Intercultural Communication. Oxford: Blackwell. 

Sweeney, S. (2003). English for business communication. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Takahashi, T., & Beebe, L. M. (1993). Cross-linguistic influence in the speech act of correction. In G Kasper, & 
S. Blum-Kulka (Eds.), Interlanguage Pragmatics (pp. 138-157). New York: Oxford University Press. 

Varner, I., & Beamer, L. (2005). Intercultural communication in the global workplace. McGraw-Hill: New York. 

Walkinshaw, I. (2007). Power and disagreement: Insights into Japanese learners of English. RELC Journal, 38, 
278-300. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0033688207085848 

Yuan, Y. (2001). An inquiry into empirical pragmatics data-gathering methods: written DCTs, oral DCTs, field 
notes, and natural conversations. Journal of Pragmatics, 33, 271-292. 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S03 78-2166(00)00031-X 


Notes 

Note 1. British English, Canadians, Australians, New Zealanders and South-Africans are officially native 
speakers of English (cf. Kachru, 1992, p. 356 and Jenkins, 2003, p. 14). 

Note 2. A generic Thai word used to address white Westerners regardless of their nationality and race. 

Appendix A 

The conventions of paralinguistic features used in the study, adapted from Locher (2004) 

\ : A backslash is used to indicate a falling intonation. 

/ : A slash is used to indicate a rising intonation. 

CAPS : Capital letters carry the primary stress in a monosyllable word. 

= : In order to show an immediate connection between two turns uttered by the lecturer and the student. 

::: : Colons are used to indicate lengthened vowels 

[...] : Square brackets indicate speech overlap uttered by lecturer and student or vice versa. 

@ : This symbol is used to represent laughter in syllable. 

X : The letter X indicates an unclear or unintelligible syllable or word. 

A.. .A : Utterances marked by this are rapid speech. 


222 




www.ccsenet.org/elt 


English Language Teaching 


Vol. 9, No. 4; 2016 


S.. .S : Utterances marked by this are slow speech. 

P.. .P : Utterances marked by this are soft. 

@...@ : Utterances marked by this are produced with laughs. 


Appendix B 

Disagreement Strategies Used by the Participants 


Disagreement Strategies (cf. Table 2) 

Frequency 

Percentage 

Explicit + Justification 

67 

62.03 

Unmitigated + Justification 

21 

19.45 

Delayed + Internally Mitigated 

2 

1.85 

Delayed + Justification 

3 

2.78 

Internally Mitigated + Justification 

11 

10.18 

Delayed + Internally Mitigated + Justification 

4 

3.71 

Total 

108 

100 


Examples of Disagreement Strategies 

Explicit + Justification 
S L: No, this isn’t acceptable! 

Unmitigated + Justification 

S -> L: This is not practical (short pause) nobody uses it! 

Delayed + Internally Mitigated 

S -> L: Well! it might not be too expensive. 

Delayed + Justification 

S L: I think it’s weird because I’ve not seen it before! 

Internally Mitigated + Justification 

S -> L: They shouldn’t register for the course because it’s too expensive for them! 

Delayed + Internally Mitigated + Justification 

S -> L: Oh, it couldn’t be too complicated because we’ve learned it before. 

Copyrights 

Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s), with first publication rights granted to the journal. 

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution 
license (http://creativecommons.Org/licenses/by/3.0/). 


223 












