DOCUMENT RESUME 

RC 016 287 

O'Connell, Joanne Curry; Johnson, Marilyn J. 
Special Education Issues. Native American 
Rehabilitation: A Bibliographic Series, No. 3. 
Northern Arizona Univ., Flagstaff. Native American 
Research and Training Center. 
Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
Services (ED) , Washington, DC. 
86 

G0083C0095 
46p. 

Native American Research and Training Center, Box 
5360, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 
($4.00). 

Reference Materials - Bibliographies (131) 
MF01/PC02 Plus hostage. 

American Indian culture; "American Indian Education; 
American Indians; Annotated Bibliographies; Bilingual 
Education; "Cultural Context; Disabilities; Early 
Childhood Education; Educational Research; Elementary 
Secondary Education; English (Second Language); 
Handicap Identification; "Instructional 
Effectiveness; Limited English Speaking; Literature 
Reviews; Program Descriptions; "Special Education; 
Teacher Education; Teaching Methods; Tribes 
Bureau of Indian Affairs; "Education for All 
Handicapped Children Act 



One in a series of seven bibliographies dealing with 
rehabilitation ox disabled Native Americans, this document focuses on 
special education issues * The 80 annotated entries were identified 
through a comprehensive search of relevant data bases covering the 
years 1966-1986 and were selected to be of use to consumers, policy 
makers, direct service providers, researchers, advocates, and 
parents. Each entry includes complete bibliographic information and 
an annotaticn of approximately 154 words. Entries all relate to 
Native Americans and deal with a wide variety of special education 
issues ranging from federal policies to exemplary practices for the 
classroom. Topics include teacher training, program evaluation, 
special education guidelines, Bureau *>f Indian Affairs involvement in 
special education programs, materials and activities for special 
education classrooms, cross-cultural awareness, services for 
preschool handicapped children, learning English as a second 
language, bilingual education for exceptional children, mental 
retardation, student assessment, language development, the Education 
for All Handicapped Children Act, parent aud community awareness of 
special education programs, and gifted minority students. (JHZ) 



************************************^ 

" Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made " 

" from the original document. " 

*************^ 



. ERIC 



ED 287 619 

AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 

GRANT 

NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 
ABSTRACT 




Native American Rehabilitation 
A Bibliographic Series, No. 3 



Special Education Issues 



Joanne Curry O'Connell, Ph.D. 
Marilyn J. Johnson, Ph.D. 
Northern Arizona University 




K^!W#^^1i|li«|M^'ict»U to consider 




-I 



4# 
• 3 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) " 




U 8. DEPART '* ~r OF EDUCATION 

Office of EducitKX «aaich and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

D Tl.is document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
ngmating it 

vtinoi changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 

o Points of view or opinions stated in this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or policy 



atlve American Research and Training Center 

mnHiilfW; ^mQ Box 5630 



'i 



BEST COPY iWAilABLt | 



"iff*' *• - K 



Native American Rehabilitation 
A Bibliographic Series, No. 3 



Special Education Issues 



Joanne Curry O'Connell, Ph.D. 
Marilyn J. Johnson, Ph.D. 
Northern Arizona University 



With assistance from 

Bob Colegrove 
Mary Havatone 
David DePauw 
Bennette Richardson 
Cynthia Dann 



Project Officer: Dr. Deno Reed 



The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of Elizabeth Reeg and 
Martha Probst in the preparation of these materials and their 
dissemination. The project was conducted under the auspices of the 
Northern Arizona University Native American Research and Training 
Center, funded by the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation 
Research, Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, 
Department of Education, Washington, D.C. (Grant No. G0083C0095). 



©1986 by Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona 

(All rights reserved) 



ERJC 



3 



If- 



Introduction 

The information listed here is intended to provide consumers, policy 
makers, direct service providers, researchers, advocates, and parents with 
a synthesis of knowledge regarding key issues related to the rehabilitation 
of Native Americans who are disabled. The Bibliographic Series consists of 
seven key topical areas including: (a) assessment issues; (b) rehabilitation 
issues; (c) special education issues; (d) family issues; (e) mental health 
issues; (f) health care issues; and (g) medically related disability issues. 
Selection Process 

Materials for inclusion in the Bibliographic Series were identified 
through a comprehensive search of relevant databases. The years of the 
computerized search included 1966 to 1986, varying across databases, 
depending on the availability of computerized material and the 
comprehensiveness of the database within this time period. The databases 
included in the search were: (a) ERIC (Educational Resource Information 
Center); (b) BRS (Bibliographical Retrieval Services: attitudes, education, 
intellectual development, language, and rehabilitation); (c) NARIC 
(National Association of Rehabilitation Information Center: RehabData); 

(d) Dialog (ABI/Inform, Medline, Psychlnfo, Sociological Abstracts); and 

(e) FAMULUS. 

In addition, materials identified by the Native Americar Research 
and Training Center research staff through journal content analysis were 
included. Materials identified through this first step were then 
individually reviewed for inclusion based on the criteria outlined below. 
Selection Criteria 

Materials were selected for inclusion in the Bibliographic Series if 
the information was relevant to one of the several identified topical areas. 



ERLC 



4 



In addition, material that was identified from non-computerized sources 
and consisted of incomplete bibliographic information such that the 
material could not be located through assistance from the library, or by 
writing the authors, was excluded. Abstracts were rewritten when 
necessary to provide further clarity of the study findings. The materials 
selected here represent what is believed to be a comprehensive summary of 
information related to the seven topical areas. 



1 



SPECIAL EDUCATION 

Baca, I*, & Miramontes, O. 0965). Bilingual special education teacher training 
for American Indians. Journal ^American Indian Education. 24(2), 38*47. 

This article discussed bilingual special education teacher training in 

general. It also focused specifically on the elements of three field-based 

training models, initiated by an agency of the Indian community. Two 

were on the Navajo reservation and one was on the Sioux reservation. 

Only the Nav«go Special Education Teacher Development Program 

(NSETDP), a Master's degree program, was described in detail. Findings 

from student and faculty interviews regarding their program experiences 

and recommendations for improvement were reported. Concerns about 

the availability of child care, the lack of school district cooperation, and 

the lack of funding and support were cited as personal comments during 

the interviews. Due to a lack of Navajo-specific bilingual special 

education emphasis, the authors developed three bilingual special 

education modules which were to be infused into existing programs. 

These were being field tested at the time of publication. 

Bayles, KA^& Harrfe, G. A* (1982). Evaluating speech-language sk 
inPap&go Indian Children. «Tnm»na1 nf American Indian Education. 
21(2), 11-20. 

As part of a training program for Native Americans in speech and 
hearing sciences, University of Arizona speech-language pathologists 
conducted speech-language screenings on 583 Papago Reservation 
children. The results identified 14% as having speech and language 
handicaps, 10% were found to have delayed English language 
development, 5% had an articulation handicap, and 0.6% were judged to 
be dysfluent. Patterns of English usage for this population and 



differentiation of speech-language disorders from dialectical differences 
were discussed, 

Benham, W. J. (1969). A foundation for Indian, cross-cultural education. 

Journal sdAauskaa Education* fi(2), 26-3L 

The author's contention was that American Indians experienced the 
same type of problems as other Americans. However, American Indians 
have greater health risks, lower economic status, and a lower education 
level as compared to the general population. He suggested that the above 
problems are only symptoms of a greater problem, helplessness. Many 
American Indians may feel helpless contending with health, economic 
and education problems on a daily basis, realizing how they compare with 
the general population. Benham believes that by developing pride in the 
American Indian, and establishing an attitude of respect and 
understanding towards them, one can help counter this helplessness. He 
also hopes that it will solve the problem of cross-cultural education 
between Americans and the American Indians. 

Herman, S. SI (1076). Speech and language services on an Indian 
reservation. LangMgBi Sneech. and Hearing Services in Schook. 7m 
56-60. 

This article described speech and language services on an Indian 
reservation. These services included treating 33 children with the 
following conditions: (a) cleft palate speech impairments, (b) cerebral 
palsy, (c) trainable mentally retarded for basic communication skills, and 
(d) articulation and language problems in the absence of mental or 
physical disorders. The discussion focused on the general environment of 
the reservation, the origins of special education, and the problems 
encountered in setting up a program. Among the problems discussed 

7 



were: (a) minimal levels of parental support; (b) high truancy and school 
drop-out rates; (c) poor sanitary conditions and low water supplies; (d) 
alcoholism; (e) child neglect and abandonment; (f) juvenile delinquency; 
(g) illegitimacy; (h) divorce; and (i) high suicide rates, which reflect 
feelings of helplessness, frustration, and alienation. 

Bland, E^Sabatino,D.A^Sedlak,R,& Sternberg, L. (1979). Availability, 
usability, and desirability of instructional materials and media for 
minority handicapped students. Journal gggpadal raiicntinw. 
12(2), 157-167. 

Findings of a 13-state survey of 270 educators were presented. 
Respondents who taught Spanish speaking students felt the existing 
media/materials were not compatible with the cultural backgrounds of 
their students and that the products on the market slighted this 
population, e.g., 82% of the respondents working with Black students felt 
materials had appropriate English vocabulary levels, compared with 66% 
and 55% of respondents working with Native Americans and Spanish 
surnamed children, respectively. Availability of materials for all groups 
was low with reported availability of material for Native Americans 
falling between the Black and Spanish speaking groups. 

Bureau of Indian Affairs. 0966). An interdiscinlinnrv aBUTQadl in the 
identification of mentally mfemiAd t«««ph rWIHwm Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Interior. 

This pilot study described special classes whei j 47 mentally 

handicapped Navajo children were enrolled at the Teec Nos Pos boarding 

school in Teec Nos Pos, Arizona. The project was divided into five phases: 

(a) screening of children to determine those who were mentally retarded, 

(b) preparing individual behavioral profiles on each of the selected 
children, (c) medical and paramedical examination of the referral group 



ERIC 8 



4 



(d) staffing these children to determine the nature of handicapping 
conditions, and (e) teacher supervision, special class organizing, and the 
instructional program. Particular emphasis was placed on the use and 
results of psychological tests included in the project. A discussion of 
teaching English as a second language to Navajo children was presented. 

Bureau of Indian Affidrs. (1972). Special activities far very SBfidal 
children. Tempe, AZ: National Indian Training and Research Center. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service Na ED 129 489) 

This booklet, which was developed by 41 Bureau of Indian Affairs 

special education teachers, included 25 teaching activities found to be 

helpful in their classrooms. The purpose, materials needed, and 

procedures were given for each activity. Activities were described for the 

development of sentence structure, paragraph structure, reading, 

following directions, eye-hand coordination, spelling, initiation of 

thinking, visual memory and perception, identification of words and 

sounds, auditory discrimination, phrase reading, development of memory 

and recall, sequencing, likenesses and differences of objects, development 

of self-confidence through fun and dramatization, animal categories, 

time sharing, number recognition, and basic addition and subtraction 

facts. 

Bureau of Indian Affidrs. (1973). An evaluatio n project: The Pierre 
Indian School Objectives #2 and *3-Fi"«l n«n™+- Aberdeen, SD: 
Bureau of Indian Affairs, Aberdeen Area Office. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 184 763) 

Assessment of the special education needs of Indian children in the 

Aberdeen area and six possible courses of action for the Pierre Indian 

School were discussed in this evaluation. Conclusions from the data 

supported the need for an off-reservation boarding school program for 



9 

ERIC 



3 



5 



students with unusual social-emotional learning handicaps and that the 
program should provide a quality family/home living component. 

Bureau of Indian Affairs. (1974). Special education guidelines. 
Albuquerque, NM: Bureau of Indian Affairs, Albuquerque Area Office. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction EP 102 795) 

This article included special education guidelines (revised 1974) for 

exceptional (handicapped or gifted) American Indian and Alaskan Native 

children from birth through 25 years of age in schools operated by the 

Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA\ Broad philosophical guidelines are 

reviewed which emphasize: (a) individualizing instruction, (b) 

decreasing school dropouts, (c) conducting biannual re-evaluations, (d) 

screening and assessment procedures for early educational intervention, 

and (e) parental approval. The guidelines also pointed out policies for 

special education support from local agencies and BIA central and area 

offices. It was stressed that the categorical descriptions and program 

placement suggestions are for administrative planning (not for labeling 

purposes). Preparation and duties of professional personnel and general 

suggestions were offered regarding curriculum and use of materials and 

equipment. Accountability was explored in terms of program structure, 

student analysis and appraisal, and assessment of objectives. The need 

for public relations information efforts were also identified. 



Bureau of Indian Affairs, ttflfiTO. Bureau nf Indian Affairs gBfifiial 
education opport unely for jgccgptioraij rhilHren. youth and flffa l tffi Th f 
first annual report to the Department of the Interior. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service Na ED 209 030) 

The first annual report o r the 15-member Bureau of Indian Affairs 

Advisory Committee for Exceptional Children included activities, 



er|c io 



f "- 

6 

concerns, and recommendations to the Department o^ the Interior for 
providing appropriate specialized programs and services for the 
education of a projected 4,506 American Indian and Alaska Native 
exceptional children. Recommendations included: (a) better information 
for parents, (b) formation of a Division of Exceptional Education within the 
office of Indian Education Programs, and (c) preservice/inservice training 
opportunities on special education regulations for BIA schools. 

Bureau of Indian Affairs, flflftll. Bram flOndlail Aff "*™ «r^ nl 
education opportunities far erantiniml rhfldren: The second animal 
report to the Department of the Interior. Washington, DC: VJS, 
Department of Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 225 839) 

The report described the 1980-81 meetings and efforts of the Bureau of 

Indian Affairs (BIA) Advisory Committee for Exceptional Children. 

Proceedings of three meetings were summarized in Part I. Part II was 

an analysis of the Department of the Interior/BIA state plans for fiscal 

years 1980-83. Part HI listed comments and recommendations on issues 

such as the federal hiring freeze, repeal of P.L. 94-142 and the 

establishment of block grants, and public notification of advisory 

committee meetings. Detailed comments were made on specific sections 

of the state plans. Among the five appendices were the Charter of the BIA 

Advisory Committee for Exceptional Children, the BIA Projected 

December FY 1980 Child Count, and a map of BIA area offices. 



9 

ERIC 



7 



Bureau of Indian Affairs. (1982). Bureau of In dian Affairs advisory 
mmmittftft for ttrmmtf nnal chiMrAm Tho thinri atinnfll rprmr* th a 

Department Af tire Infrriftr Washington, DC: UJS. Department of 
Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 236 992) 

The third annual report (1981-82) of the Bureau of Indian Affairs 

(BIA) Advisory Committee for Exceptional Children contained: (a) 

summaries of Committee meetings, (b) results of a survey of BIA area 

and agency special education coordinators regarding Committee 

activities, (c) recommendations, and (d) five appendices. Results of the 

survey of coordinators indicated a need for increased availability of 

information on Committee activities, more contact between Committee 

members, BIA, and school personnel, and a list of 24 activities the 

Committee could undertake in support of BIA special education 

programs. 

Bureau of Indian Affairs, & Southwest Regional Resource Center. (1980). 
Special TMiK»ati«n Ffrmdhnnk. Salt Lake City, T JK Southwest Regional 
Resource Center. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 215 
837) 

This handbook provided guidance to teachers and administrators 
who are charged with educating handicapped Navajo students to their 
full potential. The handbook was designed to address the implementation 
of various compliance requirements of Public Law 94-142 (The Education 
for All Handicapped Children Act) and Public Law 95-561 (Education 
Amendments of 1978). Topics of the 12 chapters included: (a) the special 
education process, (b) eligibility criteria and programming considerations 
for children with various handicapping conditions, (c) individualized 
education programs, (d) procedural safeguards, (e) teacher performance 
standards, and (f) allowable costs. 

ERJC Id 



CampbeE, T n & Lucille, C. (1979). Resources; Materials for medal needs 

lomrtuvm m jafl ™<nr fcgfrg mporinV (Bibliography Series No. 50). 
Washington, DC; Office of Education (DHEW). (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service Na ED 181 327) 

This bibliography contains publications which provided information 

that would help meet the needs of special individuals with unique 

characteristics. The bibliography is divided into 13 sections. Each section 

was identified by specific population and contained a listing of both 

generic resources and those specific to each individual special population. 

Special populations included were: (a) American Indians, (b) Asian 

Americana, (c) bilinguals and those with limited English proficiency, (d) 

Black Americans, (e) disadvantaged, (f) exceptional children, (g) gifted 

and talented, (h) handicapped, (i) Hispanics, (j) the incarcerated, (k) 

migrants, (1) older Americans, and (m) single parents. 

Cazden,C.R, John, V. P., & Hymes, D. (Eds.). (1972). Functions of 
language inJfafi daffiCaflm- New York: Columbia University, Teachers 
College Press. 

This book was comprised of three parts: (a) perspectives on non- 
verbal communication, (b) varieties of language and verbal repertoire, 
and (c) varieties of communicative strategies. Three chapters addressed 
specifically situations of language and learning by Indian children. In 
John's chapter, the image of "shy" Indian children was described as 
situational. Indian children, like many young children, are vocal and 
alert, when the conditions may permit Dumont investigated silence in 
the classrooms of Sioux and Cherokee children. In the third chapter, 
Phillip's analyzed classroom structures of participation between Indian 
and white children. The problem was defined in terma of "two sets of 
values" and "two speech communities" which permitted "personal 



13 



9 



community and worth . . • (thereby giving) access to means made 
necessary by forces outside the local community's control". 

Comptroller General of the UJS. (1979). The Bureau nf Tnriton Affairs is 
ulnwfa nrnvlitificr gpfi^jfl] <*hioati<m m*rvi<»a tn sill hftnHiram^H Trntinn 

chfldEBn" Washington, DC; Comptroller General of the UJ3. (ERIC 
Docurant Reproduce 

This report reviewed the problem that many handicapped Indian 

children in Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) schools fail to receive the 

benefits of special education services due to poor leadership and lack of 

emphasis on the program. Due to late and incomplete evaluations of 

students, too few special education teachers have been hired, and funds 

that should have been used for that purpose have been spent for other 

purposes. It was recommended that the Senate and House Committees 

on Appropriations restrict funds to the BIA for hiring special education 

teachers and specialists in FY 1980. The report also recommended that 

the Secretary of the Interior direct the Assistant Secretary for Indian 

Affairs to develop a plan for hiring needed special education personnel as 

soon as possible, and also in developing policies, guidelines, and realistic 

goals for the delivery of special education services to all eligible Indian 

children. 

DeCoteau,R 0981). Perceptions of selected groups toward the current 
and ideal role of special education directors as administrative leaders in 
North Dakota schools which have high concentrations of American 
Indian students. IKssertation Abstracts International. 42(d), 1394A- 
1395A. (University Microfilms International No. 8120391) 

This study examined the perceptions of special education teachers, 

administrators, and special education directors/coordinators concerning 

the role of the special education director/coordinator in North Dakota 

schools having high concentrations of American Indian students. There 



ERIC 



14 



were significant statistical differences among the perceptions of all 
groups toward the current and ideal role of the special education 
director/coordinator in all areas of administrative functioning including: 
planning, decision-making, operating, and appraising. 

Developmental Disabilities Law Pgqject (1982). Bfiadling^mLfaLflifi 
nnywwjft ^pyftlnnm wifnnv liimhUA Washington, DC: Administration 
on Developmental Disabilities. 

This report provided feedback on the Seven State Protection and 

Advocacy Pilot Program, an outreach program initiated in 1980 to target 

developmentally disabled populations. Included among the seven target 

groups were New Mexico American Indians and Arizona Navajos 

residing on the Navago Reservation a A Window Rock. The report noted 

that coordinators of the program initially discovered that: (a) staff in 

agencies serving these populations were often cui^urally insensitive, (b) 

though located in areas predominantly populated by members of these 

target groups, there was a paucity of staff racially representative )f the 

target group, and (c) agency personnel were unfamiliar with the 

provisions of Title VI and Section 504 and therefore, unaware of their 

agency responsibilities under this legislation. The seven projects 

developed individual outreach strategies for their target groups, which 

included: (a) training workshops on legal rights; (b) use of indigenous 

personnel; (c) utilization of the public school system, community groups, 

churches, and community leaders; and (d) development of advisory 

boards. Statistics of the individuals served during the first year of each 

project were provided. The report recommended that the Office of Civil 

Rights and the Administration on Developmental Disabilities (DD) 

cooperate to clarify existing policy on minorities and establish new policy 



and programs which make clear that special efforts are needed to reach 
these groups. 



Dunlap, D. A, Ondelacy, & Sells, E. (1971). Videotape involves 
parents; Identifies handicapped students. »Tnnmnl n f American Indian 
Education. 10(c). 1-& 

In the Navajo commuuity of Rough Rock, Arizona, special education 

staff of the Rough Rock Demonstration School used videotaped vignettes of 

typical special education services as a means of communication to 

parents. This program was developed in order to overcome the limited 

availability of news media and telephone service, poor transportation, and 

the prevailing use of the native language which hinders these Native 

American parents from learning what constitutes a handicapping 

condition, and what services are available to handicapped children. The 

program was well received and a thorough evaluation is presented. 

Employment and Training Administration (DOL). (1877). COSEP 
r^mpt^kmdim fipArf*1 ffrW»ti,m Protect). Thfad vanrvmnrL 1977- 
Advocacv far Native American staS^rx*^ ™*h*m TVKiwAflnte 
Washington, DC: Department of Labor. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service Na ED 149 895) 

Through the Comprehensive Special Education Project (COSEP), 

Indian youth advocates and Indian youth resource people were trained as 

liaisons between Indian families and the schools in northeastern 

Minnesota. Goals of COSEP included: (a) identifying in-school and out-of- 

school Indian youth, (b) determining needs, and (c) arranging for special 

in-school and out-of-school services for these youth. The three year 

evaluation of COSEP included tabular data on activities associated with 

the goals such as: the number of youth who were assisted by the 

program, type of service received, frequency of academic assistance, and 



12 



parent committees. Both the importance and success of this project were 
described by project personnel via anecdotal accounts. 



fihjIflEBn» Austin, TX: Southwest Educational Development Lab. (ERIC 
Document RepiXKiuctionSei^^Na EC 132885) 

Problems facing bilingual preschoolers with handicaps are 

addressed and 18 model programs are identified through brief 

summaries. Programs represented home-based as well as center-based 

approaches, English as a Second Language models, and both 

mainstreamed and special class settings. Program summaries obtained 

through written questionnaires and telephone interviews focus on eight 

topics: (a) site setting and funding; (b) number, types, and ages of 

handicapped children served; (c) identification and selection procedures; 

(d) staffing; (e) parent involvement; (f) program focus; (g) instructional 

language; and (h) major problems encountered. Among conclusions 

cited are that community support is important, parents must be involved, 

and that language is an important issue. 

Fedder, R, & Gabaldon,J. 0970). No longer deprived. New York: 
Columbia University, Teachers College Press. 

This study focused on disadvantaged children in regular classes to 

provide insight, knowledge, and understanding in order to help teachers 

develop confidence in dealing with this population. Dialogue between 

teachers, replete with examples of different situations encountered in the 

classrooms, illustrated the culturally dissimilar backgrounds of students 

and pointed out possible reasons for student problems, such as reading 

failure and communication disabilities. Navajo history and culture were 

explored, followed by a case history of a Navajo girl and the way her 



Evans, J. (1081). Modd preschool 



a for bandfaanpad hilinmal 



17 



13 

teacher approached reading instruction. Suggestions are made for 
teaching the disdvantaged. Principles of education for the disadvantaged 
are described. 

Fleshman,C. (1982). An flfflhiatiail «f medical service* Bcmdfid to 
fagtoggg^^ Selected research nnngrs 

from thft Bine Center for TTmtian Tkwlnnm^ Navitfo Nation, AZ: 
Navqjo Community College, Dine Center for Human Development 

Through case studies, this report showed the need for providing and 

managing medical resources for treatment of developmental^ disabled 

Navajo children. It was found that after the child entered the hospital, 

treatment was adequate but specialty intervention in developmental 

disabilities was lacking. As a result of the gaps in specialty services, 

educational and medical long-term planning for remediation and 

assessment of delays and progress were not documented. The primary 

caretakers demonstrated a lack of knowledge and skill which would be 

conducive to prevention or rehabilitation of the disability. Societal and 

economic factors implicate certain areas at greater risk than others. 

Foster, C.G. 0980). Chinta Attend medal education <mrrienhim 
mfafafflg Tfe » rationale run****** and wanted outcomes. Chinle, AZ: 
Bureau of Indian Affairs, Chinle Agency. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service Na ED 191 627) 

Special educator turnover and existing modes of instruction were 

causing minimal progress of exceptional Indian students. 

Representatives of the nine schools in the Special Education Department 

of the Chinle Agency developed and implemented programs that would 

better meet the needs of exceptional students. This report outlined the 

decisions that were made regarding the programming. By revising the 

curriculum agency-wide, to include sequential criteria for math, reading, 

• 18 



language arts and behavior, the turnover rate of special education 
teachers was expected to decrease. 

Foster C.G.,&Gable,E. (1980). The Indian child in snerffll adnrati nn- 
Two perso ns' perceptions . (ERIC Document Reproduction Service Na 
ED 188 837) 

Six essays addressed the implementation of PL 94-142, which 
established special education guidelines for Native American exceptional 
children. The rights of children and parents, as well as the process of 
entering special education are clearly outlined. Other issues addressed 
include: (a) the referral process and the role it takes at reservation 
schools, (b) assessment of the child's native language, and (c) 
mainstreaming is briefly discussed. 

Gqjar, A. (1986). American Indian personnel preparation in special 
education: Neetk, program components, programs. Journal of 

Anrnri^n Tndfan TCdnnotim, £4(b), 7-15. 

The author stressed the importance of establishing teacher training 
opportunities for American Indians in the field of special education. 
Based on this need for American Indian special education personnel, a 
number of training programs have been funded, one of which is the 
American Indian Training Program at Pennsylvania State University. 
Program components of the Special Education Training Program focused 
on competencies in areas which include: (a) diagnosis and evaluation of 
child characteristics; (b) formulation of instructional objectives; (c) task 
analysis; (d) selection, modification, and use of instructional materials; 
(e) use of appropriate instructional strategies, student evaluation, and 
parent involvement. The author provided a list of 10 personnel 
preparation projects for Native Americans in special education. 



15 

Golden, C. J., Roraback, J., & Pray, B, (1977). Neuropsychological 
evaluation in remedial education for the American Indian. .T««mal .~.f 

\ m *rin» n Tnrtiat, Mnnotinn Jgfc), 20-24. 

This article discussed the use of several different methods of 
performing neuropsychological evaluations on American Indians. A 
total of 18 American Indian adolescents from ages 15 to 18 years 
participated in the study. A control group of Caucasian adolescents wag 
also included. Some of the tests given were the Halstead Category Test, 
Halstead Tactual Performance Test, Halstead Speech-Sounds Perception 
Test, the Seashore Rhythm Test, and the Wechsler Adult Intelligence 
Scale. Test results demonstrated that the neuropsychological tests 
developed by Halstead and Reitan are not influenced by cultural demands 
with an American Indian population, and may be used in the educational 
evaluation of Indian adolescents. 

Hall,R. 0976). Special Oration efforts far A«i«rinan Tmtian «md 
Alflrfcnn Kntfpft rfiiMwmbv the Bureau of Trntinn Affairs CResmrrh and 

Evaluation Report Series No. 47). Albuquerque, NM: Bureau of Indian 
Affairs, Albuquerque Area Office. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 129 479) 

Studies conducted by the University of Tulsa, Arizona State 

University, Utah State University, and the Indian Health Service have 

indicated a high incidence of handicapping conditions among the Bureau 

of Indian Affairs student population. The two outstanding needs 

concerning full special education services in the BIA are a budget line 

item for initiating and maintaining special education programs and 

services in BIA operated schools, and mandatory legislation with respect 

to the education of exceptional Indian children. 



: eric 



20 



16 



Harriman, A. EL, & Ihkoedus, P. A. (1982). On why Wayne Dennis found 
Hopi infants retarded in age at onset of walking. Perreptnq] & Motor 
Skills 55(a), 79-«a 

In Dennis' (1940) study, he found that Hopi infants were slower in 

onset of walking, depending on whether or not the cradleboard was used, 

as compared with infants from other socio-ethnic groups. This study 

supplemented the interview procedure used by Dennis with questions 

concerning circumstances of Hopi life that may have been responsible for 

the delay. Results showed that contemporary Hopi infants, who began 

walking at a mean age of 12.5 months, were advanced by 2.5 months over 

the date of walking recorded by Dennis. Infants reared on the 

cradleboard, like those studied by Dennis, walked as early as 

unrestrained infants. Differences in genetic background, physical 

health, and nutritional status between the two studies accounted for 

differences in age at onset of walking. 

Haskins, J. S*& Stifle, J.M. (1978). He win lift m> his liaaA A Report to 

thft D^aaliaiBMPtal nimW1itiM on the mtnnrinn pfJiandicaBBfid 

Navalos and flie inrnlimttoiM there offer all Nntf ™ Amm-icsina. 
Washington, DC: Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Office 
of Human Development (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 
170984) 

Issues involved in the education of handicapped Navajo children 
were examined. Background sections contrasted the history of treatment 
for the handicapped in America with the treatment of Navajos with 
handicaps. Unemployment, substandard housing, lack of accessibility on 
the reservation, overpopulation, language barriers, and the relationship 
of the Navajo Nation to the U.S. government were explained as unique 
situations of handicapped Navajos. Reasons for more on-reservation 
facilities for handicapped Navajos were stressed. Existing programs 
were described briefly, as were pertinent federal laws. Health care needs 



9 

ERIC 



21 



17 



were listed, including needs for early childhood screening, diagnosis, and 
intervention. Housing and employment considerations were also briefly 
addressed. 



Hicks, J. (1982). Serving tm^hnnl hnn^nned children of various 
adtBCBS An annotated Hhllogwrohv- Chapel Hill; University of North 
Carolina, Technical Assistance Development System. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service Nd ED 224 226) 

A reference bibliography was designed to help state agency 

personnel, program directors and coordinators, and public and private 

school planners in obtaining information for planning services for 

culturally diverse handicapped children. Section one contained 18 

references with general information on special education and cultural 

diversity. A second section (16 references) addressed specifically the 

preschool handicapped child of a different culture. References in both 

sections covered such topics as: (a) planning a culturally sensitive 

program, (b) curriculum planning, (c) promotion of reading growth, (d) 

special education policy, (e) nondiscriminatory assessment (f) parent 

involvement, and (g) Spanish-speaking students. Information on each 

reference included the author, title source, number of pages, publication 

date, and an annotation. A final section listed the names and addresses 

of 13 national and regional organizations which may serve as resources 

on the topic. 



Hughes, D. M. (1980). Perceptions of parents, teachers, and 
administrators regarding procedures of the Individualize d Educational 
Program in selected South Dakota schools. Dissertation Abstracts 
International) dvRY 238QA. (University Microfilms International No. 
8025065) 



The author examined perceptions of parents toward Individualized 
Education Program (BEP) requirements in public, Bureau of Indian 



E A 22 



18 



Affairs, and contract Indian schools iu South Dakota. It was found that 
perceptions of the IEP were similar except in the area of confidentiality, 
where parents did not perceive compliance in the areas of confidentiality 
and due process. 

Indian Education Training, Inc. (1981). Resource Directory: Migrant 
and TinBftn **r™mtfni™1 fifafldEBP- Albuquerque, NM: Indian Education 
Training; Inc. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 204 075) 

Designed as a supplementary resource for special education 

directors and teachers, this directory covers the five state area of Arizona, 

California, New Mexico, Texas, and Washington, and concentrates on 

targeted resources for Indian and migrant children with exceptional 

needs. Included is a list of Bureau of Indian Affairs social service 

agencies. The directory includes all Title IV Indian Education Act 

projects for Texas. For each state, agencies of the Bureau of Indian 

Affairs and Indian Health Service are listed under their administrative 

area office. 

Johnson, M. J*, Ramirez, B. Trohanis, P. I*, & Walker J. L. (Eds.). 

(1380). Plnmi W gmnricAg tnr vnnncr JioTntir^nned American Tnrtinti rnirl 

Alaska MattoB Cbfldan- Chapel Hilt North Carolina Unive^ity, 
Technical Assistance Development System. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service Na ED 210 859) 

This hook provided a general overview of the many perplexing and 

complex problems of providing educational services to handicapped 

individuals who speak many diverse languages, who are geographically 

isolated from main service-giving areas, and whose culture and values 

conflict with the service providers The authors examined issues related 

to serving young American Indian and Alaska Native handicapped 

children including: (a) parent involvement, (b) service delivery systems, 



9 

ERsLC ^ 



(c) guidelines for designing an inservice training program, and (d) 
program operation description. Included in the appendices are samples 
of an IEP and of an interagency agreement. 



Kamp,S*&Chinn.P. (1982). A mnltipthni c curriculum for special 
education students. Washington, DC: Office of Elementary and 
Secondary Education. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service Na ED 
212107) 



The curriculum guide in this report focused on presenting ethnic 
heritage information to special education minority group students. 
Activities were listed in terms of background, objectives, materials, 
teaching time, and task guidelines for five units: (a) identity, (b) 
communication, (c) life styles, (d) immigration and migration, and (5) 
prejudice and discrimination. Each unit also provided information on 
resource films and filmstrips. Activities are explained to adhere to the 
basic principles of multiethnic education, multicultural education, and 
ethnic studies. Development of the guide was based on experiences and 
perspectives of five ethnic and cultural groups, that is, American 
Indians, Asian Americans, Black/Afro Americans, Mexican Americans, 
and Puerto Ricans. A bibliography of approximately 200 books and 
periodicals was also included in the document. 

Lenz,D. (1986). Wni^nirwitlimYw^ilfaiiHil AV^mh^mA^A 

language ^1^^ Emnfaaanent frf pflraprofessionfli^ Fiagstaffi 

Northern Arizona University, Institute for Human Development (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Sendee Now ED 260 875) 

The Paraprofessional Program at the Institute for Human 

Development has proven to be an effective means of providing early 

intervention services in northern Arizona's sparsely populated, culturally 

diverse rural communities. The program model includes identification 



24 



20 



and comprehensive professional evaluation of young handicapped 
children and hiring and training of indigenous paraprofessionals to 
provide on-going services to children and their families. As of March, 
1985, the Paraprofessional Program had five service centers, 3 on the 
White Mountain Apache and Navajo Reservations, and 2 in non- 
reservation communities. The need for two new sites on the Hualapai 
Reservation was being investigated. The paraprofessional staff of eight 
served 40 children from 8 months to 5 years of age whose handicaps 
ranged from moderate to severe. The annual program budget of $70,000 is 
considered cost-efficient. By employing local paraprofessionals, familiar 
with the culture and politics of their communities, the program is able to 
provide consistent services to a pop* llation ineffectively served by more 
costly, city-based programs. 

Leslie, E. (1977). Social factors contributing to exceptional Navajo 
Children. V<hin»«™ Tnrin W „f f lu» Mentally Ttetarrl**L 12(d). 5174- 

37a 

The factors leading to exceptionality in Navajo children were 
explored in this study. The author also examined the reactions of Navajo 
families to exceptionality and mental retardation, and problems in 
providing special education services to this population. Navajos were still 
plagued by a number of highly prevalent conditions which contribute to 
mental retardation such as: spinal cord injuries, diabetes mellitus, and 
alcoholism. Because of the great distances one must travel to obtain 
health services, many handicapped children received no services. The 
author emphasized that through increased parental awareness and total 
local community education, programs can be fostered to meet the needs of 
exceptional Navajo children. 



9 

ERIC 



25 



21 

Locust, C. 0983). Written regulations and policies governing the educational 
placements and services provided for handicapped American Indian children. 
Dissertation Attracts Tntowu»tinn«»1 r 42(7), 2313A. (University Microfilms 
International No, DA 8227359) 

Since the enactment of Public Law 94-142, the Education for All 

Handicapped Children Act of 1975, the Office of Special Education 

Programs within the United States Department of Education has allocated 

funds for the provision of services to handicapped American Indian 

children. Despite the multiple service providers and the funds available, 

services provided to handicapped Indian children do not appear to be 

adequate. Reservations generally have five main service providers: (a) 

state and local education agencies, (b) Bureau of Indian Affairs, (c) 

Health and Human Services, (d) Indian Health Service, and (e) Tribal 

Agencies. This study analyzed policies of the five agencies and the legal 

provisions under which they operate. It also offered some solutions to the 

chronic problems in education that are confronted by handicapped Indian 

children on Arizona Indian reservations. 

MaIlett,G. (1977). Using language experience with junior high Native 
Indian students. tZosnulaUteadJltf, 21(a), 25-28. 

The effectiveness of the language experience approach, which is 

based on the use of students' own vocabulary and language patterns, was 

investigated in a study involving 16 Indian remedial reading students in 

grades 8 and 9. The experimental treatment was a typical language 

experience approach employing reading materials developed by the 

students, while the control treatment consisted of a typical reading 

laboratory approach developed around diagnosis of students' reading 

problems. There were no statistically significant differences in 

vocabulary gains or in comprehension between the language experience 

ERIC 26 



approach and the typical reading laboratory approaches within the same 
students. Improvements in attitudes toward reading were noted. 



Megta8,L, J. 0970). Administers 1 opinions ftnri atfltfldgS CQPCBCOiag 
the Bimaa of Tndinn Affairs Nnvnio rehools! RpanowriWHtv in niYwiiW 

education far Mwrio MBBBlfoaal children- (Catalogue Na 20-23, 213). 

AimArix>r,MI:Me6tas,L«L (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
Na ED OH 067) 

The Navqjo Reservation was the target area for identifying special 
education needs of all exceptional Navajo children enrolled (1969*70) and 
served by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) in elementary schools of 
various types. Administrators from 57 BIA schools and 10 agencies 
responded to questionnaires. Individuals responded to issues such as the 
responsibility of special education, pupil-placement plan, per-pupil 
teacher norm, and internal administrative responsibility. 
Administrators agreed that the BIA should assume more responsibility 
in administering programs for exceptional children and that institutions 
should be responsible for children who are deaf, blind, sub-trainable, 
mentally retarded, and preschool blind children. 

Mickckon, N. L, & Galloway, C. G. 0969). Cumulative language deficit 
among Indian children. c>™] flkilri^ ggfc), 187-190. 

This study tested the Deutsch hypothec 3 that language deficiencies 

tend to remain in the verbal repertoire of the child. Data supported the 

hypothesis that this phenomenon can ?:3 corrected. Through concentrated 

efforts using specific and active language experiences, dramatic 

improvements were made in disadvantaged children's verbal patterns. 

The authors 1 findings focused on factors associated with these aspects of 

language development, specifically related to reading. 



23 



Mickelson, N. L, & Galloway, C. G. (1969). Language patterns of Indian 
Children. Snerial Brtmwlfcm fa Panada. 43(b), 11-13. 

Eight preschool Indian children participated in a 4-week language 

program consisting of individual instruction, a relaxed environment, and 

no punitive measures. These children were then retested on the 

Imitation- Comprehension-Production Test. Language comprehension 

improved significantly. Results indicated that improvement in Indian 

children's verbal patterns can be brought about quickly without the use of 

pressure tactics. Attention to specific deficiencies appeared to be helpful. 

Miles, M. (1973). The education of the American Indian rmrtfl in classes 
for. Aw mfiDtaHg Washington, DC: UJ3. Office of Education, 

Projects to Advance Creativity in Education. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 078 984) 

This article reported on the Elementary and Secondary Education 

Act, Title m, and provided additional information to teachers, 

administrators, and other educators on the special education needs of 

Indian children. The main focus of the Elementary and Secondary 

Education Act has been the Indian child in the educable mentally 

retarded program. None of the children depicted in the report were 

actually enrolled in special education classes. 

MuUer, J. P. (1977). Meeting the needs of exceptional children on the 

ROSebud ^wntifl" Frincatinn and TViiini'ntfnf^o TVfentaHv WAtarrtari. 

12(c), 246-248, 

Staff of the local Community Action Program project made efforts to 
identify and provide services to Indian children who were not in school 
because of learning handicaps. Development of the project was reviewed 
and ongoing concerns, such as the need for Indian associate special 



9 

ERIC 



24 

'education teachers to be state certified, were considered. Characteristics 
of the project's curriculum were mentioned. 

Murphy, E. A. (1974). The classroom: Meeting the needs of the culturally 
different child-Hie Navajo Nation. rc™»pHnnf>1 Children. 40(8). 601-flOft 

The author described the unique problems which faced the Navajo 

Nation in attempting to develop and deliver special education services to 

an estimated 18,000 children from low income families spread over the 

25,000 square miles of the Navajo Reservation. Three special education 

programs designed to meet the specific needs of the Navajo child were 

mentioned: (a) St Michael's Association for Special Education, serving 

children with mental or physical disabilities; (b) Navajo Children's 

Rehabilitation Center, Inc., serving mentally handicapped adolescents; 

and (c) Chinle Valley School for Exceptional Children for trainable 

mentally handicapped. The article also described the work of the Special 

Education Department of the Navajo Tribal Council's Division of 

Education to develop new special education programs. 

National Center for Law and the Handicapped, Inc. (1976), Special 
education needs of American Indian children. Amicus, 2(a), 33-36. 

The current status of special education for Alaska Native and 

American Indian children was reviewed in light of P.L. 94*142. Included 

in this report wero statements by members of The Council for Exceptional 

Children and the formation of advocacy groups for the handicapped. 

National Indian Education Association. (1977). Position paper National 
Indian Education Association: Classification of handicapped children 
as it affects Indian children. Tnrifan Edmafian, 2(4), 1-3. 

Following the passing of P.L. 94-142, the National Indian Education 

Association (NIEA) developed a position paper which outlined the 



ERIC 



25 



implications of P.L. 94-142 for American Indian children. Although the 
article pointed out that the incidence of handicapping conditions among 
Indian children is very likely greater than that of the general population, 
NIEA stressed the unreliability of the current classification system and 
the diagnostic methods when applied to Indian children to identify 
handicapping conditions. In this paper, NIEA recommended a number 
of ways to ensure accurate identification and placement of American 
Indian children. These recommendations included: (a) use of a 
developmental model, which recognizes cultural variables, to locate 
deficit areas of development and provide follow-up support services in 
these areas; (b) development of reliable test instruments; (c) provision of 
advocate services to work with parents from referral through placement; 
and (d) increa&ed preservice and in-service training which emphasize 
cultural awareness. 

Nielsen, A. I* (1973). Remediation of language skills of Navqjo children, 
CoWttrfn Jonrnal of Edncatinmil BfiagMCL 13(a), 10-12. 

Sixty-five Navajo children with hearing impairments were given 

intensive receptive language instruction in a residential, summer school 

program, ^n the Assessment of Children's Language Comprehension 

test (ACLGj, 56 of the children tested showed an increase in their scores, 2 

of the children had decreased scores, and 3 of the children received the 

same scores on both the pre-test and the post-test. Possible factors 

effecting the program's success included: (a) individualized instruction, 

(b) reinforcement in the dormitories, and (c) emphasis on understanding 

English language syntax. 



ERIC 30 



26 



Nutting; P. A (1979). Non-health professionals and the school-age child: 
EariyintervexitiOT .Tnwmnl n f School Health. 

A pilot study of early intervention was conducted on the use of 
dormitory parents in direct care situations for children with behavior 
problems. Seventy-one American Indian students 15-22 years of age who 
were attending a boarding school participated in the study. Four outcome 
measures were analyzed: (a) gross dropout rate, (b) mean duration in 
school, (c) alcohol abuse rate, and (d) mean monthly incidence of alcohol 
abuse. Comparisons between the control and experimental groups 
indicated that the experimental group had a significant reduction in 
alcohol abuse and school dropout rates. 



Office of Special Education and RehabiKtati^ Toflssiim 

Ml report to Ctm At» tfw» Wilmtiqnfa^ Pnfflfr T ffly 
94-142! The Education for AH UmMn^peA Children A«L W*«hincrt/m. 
DC: UJ3L Department of Education, State Program Implementation 
Studies Branch. (ERIC Document Reproduction Sendee Na ED 206 130) 



This document was the third in a series of reports on progress in 
implementing P.L. 94-142. Six different chapters each address a 
particular question regarding implementation. The subjects addressed 
include: (a) statistics on the number of children receiving special 
education and related services, including the types of handicapping 
conditions for which s Brvices are provided; (b) implementation of the least 
restrictive environment required by P.L. 94-142; (c) a description of the 
characteristics and content of individualized education programs as well 
as the statup of service providers; (d) the consequences of P.L. 94-142 at the 
local school district level as described in a series of case studies initiated 
by the Bureau of Education for the Handicapped (now the Office of Special 



ERIC 31 



27 



Education); (e) a discussion of federal and state roles; and (f) the degree of 
success in enforcing P.L. 84-142. 

Omark,D.IL,&Erickson, J.G.(Eds.). (1983). TTw bflingaa] »mptinr>Al 
Child- San Diego, CA: College Hill Press. 

Twenty-one authors contributed papers focusing on issues in 

educating bilingual exceptional children. Basic concepts were addressed 

in the first section, consisting of seven papers on psychological and 

educational assessment in diagnosis of language disorders, 

communication, audiological screening, and the development of locally 

normed instruments. The second section discussed specific disabilities 

within various cultural and linguistic groups, including communication 

disorders in Hispanic Americans and American Indians. Examples 

cited in this section included learning disabilities varying from 

handicapped to the gifted in bilingual children, and generalized to other 

cultures. The final section presented national issues regarding the 

education of bilingual exceptional children and also outlined model 

programs for providing diagrostic and educational services. 



Ostertag,R (1981). Nawfr* IaaihW dicuWbH npniKucr rrvnrtiro* mid 

procedures. Flagstaff: Northern Arizona University, College of 
Education. (ERIC Document Reproduction service Na ED 202 631) 



A survey was conducted on special educators who taught elementary 
learning disabled (LD) Navajo students in 15 public and 28 Bureau of 
Indian Affairs (BIA) schools. In the survey, educators identified the 
practices and procedures currently in use including the role responsible 
for teaching reading, reading assessment instruments, commonly used 
reading approaches, reading skills stressed, and commonly used reading 
materials. Teachers also responded to questions regarding their 



ERJC 32 



28 



educational and teaching experiences. Results of the study indicated: (a) 
there were no significant differences between public and BIA-affiiiated 
schools* (b) at least half of the teachers surveyed had a major reading 
responsibility for their LD students, and (c) a majority of the respondents 
believed more reading coursework should be required for special 
education credentialing. The data reflected the "state of the art' 1 on the 
Navajo Nation. It revealed currently used reading assessment 
instruments, approaches, skills, materials, and teacher and educational 
experiences. Finally, the data indicated teacher dissatisfaction with 
formal devices. The survey results are available for reference purposes by 
teachers desiring additional information regarding reading approaches, 
skills and materials for Navajo students. An appendix contains a sample 
questionnaire and frequency responses. 

Ramey, J. (1975). Prescriptions of learning: Resource centers for 
children with learning disabilities. Colorado J nnmnl nf FHiiretinnnl 
BfiSfiaisLH(c)»l&2L 

The author described a 1-year resource center program which served 

123 learning disabled Navajo children with 2 to 5 hours weekly of specific 

language and academic instruction. Program goals and procedures were 

noted as well as a description of the three instructional areas, language, 

conceptual skills, and motor skills. Personal and professional 

requirements for teachers and teacher aides were considered, along with 

the role of parents and the testing program. Results of the program 

included an average gain of one performance level in language 

development and one or more performance levels in conceptual skills, and 

full time return to the regular class fc r 42% of the students. A sample 

sti *ent profile showing progress was included. 



9 

ERLC 



33 



29 



Ramey, J. tt, & Sileo, T. W. (1975). A school for me. BIA Education 
Research Rnllfttin. 3( a ), 5-9. 

The special education program for trainable mentally handicapped 
American Indian youth at Leupp Boarding School was described. This 
article included a detailed description of the four components upon which 
the program focuses: (a) pre-academic development, (b) academic 
(English and Navajo language) development, (c) pre-vocational 
preparation for vocational training, and (d) vocational sheltered 
workshop. Parental involvement and evaluation data indicated the 
success of the program. 

Ramey, J.H*&Sfleo,T.W. (1975). Compensatory education on the 
Navajo Reservation. BIA Education Research Bulletin. 2(a), 24-29. 

Since 73% of the Navajo children entering school do not speak 

English well enough to complete a regular course of study, the academic 

curricula of the Bureau of Indian Affairs reservation schools is concerned 

primarily with acquisition of English as a second language. This article 

discussed several of the programs developed and implemented specifically 

for Navajo students, and included a discussion of Title I expenditures. 

Ramirez, B. A. (1976, January). Bnefcymn nd paper, on American Indian 
mapfiflna] ^"^»" Paper presented at the meeting of the National 
Advisory Council on Indian Education, Reno, NV. (EMC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 127 085) 

This paper focused on the diversity of the American Indian 

population coupled with the vaiiety of government units serving this 

population. The author discussed the difficulty in determining how many 

Indian children need special education services. A 1972 Bureau of Indian 

Affairs survey, however, estimated that 39% of the Indian school-age 



9 

ERIC 



34 



30 



population need special education services. The paper addressed further 
the special problems associated with educating the exceptional Indian 
child. Foremost among these problems are lack of: (a) a specific BIA 
budget line item for Special Education; (b) mandator legislation relative 
to special education for Indian children; (c) Indian special education 
personnel; (d) coordination between the states, the BIA, and the tribes; (e) 
funding for Indian children in contract schools; and (f) proper evaluation 
procedures relative to Indian special education classifications. 

Ramirez, B. A. (1977). Special Education policy and Indian handicapped 
Children. Journal ofAmgrirxm TnHUm VAnoaiin^ 1(dY dJL 

Through the use of studies, court cases, and policy mandates, the 
author discussed the status of special education services to Indian 
handicapped children. Among the findings were: (a) inappropriate data 
on disabling conditions of Indian children, (b) overplacement of Indian 
children in special education classes, and (c) the apparent low priority of 
special education within the Bureau of Indium Affairs. Five 
recommendations were given to remedy the existing situation. 

Ramirez, b. A. 0979). ^tinn magnaa fny American Indian 
exceptional children and yqbUl A voim analgia aiids. Reston,VA; 

Tbe Council for Exceptional Children. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 1S4 266) 

This guide was designed to assist state, Bureau of Indian Affairs, 

and tribal or Indian community controlled local educational units in 

analyzing their special education administrative policies. Policy 

statements were presented that meet the minimu m requirements of P.L. 

94-142 (the Education for All Handicapped Children Act) and also 

reflected the special considerations that should be acknowledged when 

programming for Indian exceptional children. 

m£ 35 



31 



Ramirez, RA^&Hockenberry, CM. (1980). finArfai **n™tinn pnHm'AQ 
for American Indian and Alaska Native mmtfonul stndente A 
devekmrn iwifr. and r esource guide. Reston, VA: The Council for 
Excep tional Children. 

This publication was designed as a program development and 

resource guide for special education of Native Americans. The first 

section dealt with service delivery, including such aspects as defining the 

population, child identification, student evaluation, and placement The 

second section dealt with procedural considerations such as due process, 

student records, administration of medication, school disciplinary 

methods, and child abuse/neglect reporting. The third section described 

administrative concerns, for example transportation and facilities. The 

final section discussed sources of revenue for special education programs. 

Ramirez, B. A* & Smith, B. J. 0978). Federal mandates for the 

handicapped: TmpHraitiniM ftw AnwwlAnw Twttnw TCrmgntinnal 

44(7), 521-528. 

This article focused on Public Law 94-142 and Section 504 of the 
Vocational Rehabilitation Act with regard to current practices in Indian 
education. Four target areas were revealed as needing immediate 
attention: (a) policies anu practices of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, (b) 
development of cooperative agreements, (c) recruitment and training of 
personnel, and (d) advocacy of needs and activities. 

Ramirez, B. A^&Tippeconnic, J. W. (1979). Preparing teachers of 
American Indian handicap ped children. T^w^tirm »^ 

gpecJa] Education, 2(4), gy-aa. 

The authors discussed the training of teachers to work with 
American Indian handicapped children. Three areas of academic 
preparation were emphasized: (a) inclusion of the necessaiy coursework 



ERIC 



36 



32 



in special education, (b) experience m Indian education, and (c) inservice 
training. The article also pointed out that the Education for All 
Handicapped Children Act (PX. 94-142) and basic federal policies 
provided the impetus for the federal government to exert leadership and 
give priority to specialized programs and projects to train teachers of 
Indian handicapped children. Without this emphasis by the federal 
government, it was concluded that the mandate to provide special 
education would not be met 

Reschly, D. J., & Jlpeon, F. J. 0976). Ethnicity, geographic locale, age, 
sex, and urban-rural residence at variable* in the prevalence of mild 

retardation. Anwrlwm .Tmrmal nf Mffntnl Dftfi:»tency. £[(2), 154-16L 

This study assessed intellectual performance by administering the 
WISC-R ti 950 of a stratified random sample of 1,040 children in Pima 
County, Arizona. The prevalence of mild mental retardation was 
significantly related to ethnicity and geographic locale, but not to sex, 
urban-rural residence, and grade level. In agreement with recent court 
decisions, it was concluded that manipulation of cutoff points will 
partially modify disproportionate representation of minority group 
children in classes for the mildly retarded. The article concluded, 
however, that the question of optimum education for these children 
remains unanswered. 

Bo s endo r &S. (1974). Pa-La-Tee-Sha-Tbey are blooming". Children 
Ifcdax. 3(2), 12-17. 

This article described a 3-year project titled, Pa-la-tee-sha, translated 

as "they are blooming" in the Yakima Indian tongue. The Project served 

95 Yakima children from infancy to 7 years of age who were handicapped 

in talking, hearing, learning, walking, or getting along with others. "Pa- 




37 



33 



la-tee-sha" coordinated efforts to serve young children through the Head 
Start Program. This program consisted of two components," day school 
involving informal but structured individual programs in areas of self- 
help, motor development, language, educational skills, and socialization, 
and a home based program involving teacher aide support to parents of 
children with handicaps such as cleft palate. 

Ross, A. C. (2982). Brain hemispheric functions and the Native 

American, .Iramnal nt Amttrtram TmBnw TC/Wntirwv 21(3), 2-5. 

Brain research conducted by Sperry in the 1960's was used to show 
that traditional Native Americans are more dominant in right 
hemisphere thinking, setting them apart from the currently left 
hemisphere-oriented society. The article described some characteristics 
of Native American thinking that illustrated a right hemisphere 
orientation. Subsequent to Sperry's studies, there is evidence that the two 
hemispheres may be in competition with each other, each hemisphere 
demanding that its perceptions and methods of organizing data be 
considered superior. Today, educators are becoming increasingly 
concerned with the importance of the functions of the right hemisphere. 



Sacks, & (1983). A study to investigate whether Navajo special education 
elementaiy students develop differences in cognitive afafli^ 
regularly placed Navajo elementary Djaaffitation At 

IrtfimatifiD&l> 43(H)), 3250A-3251A. (University Microfilms 
International No, DA 8305290) 



This study was meant to determine whether Navajo learning 
disabled (LD) children, aged 7 through 13, differed in cognitive abilities 
from regularly placed Navajo children of the same ages. Ninety-six 
Navajo LD children and 139 regularly placed Navajo children were tested 
with the Developing Cognitive Abilities Test in both Navajo and English. 



ERIC 38 



34 



ERIC 



Group mean raw scores of verbal, spatial, and quantitative abilities 
subtests were compared. Analysis of variance among ages, between sexes 
and groups, yielded significantly different mean scores between the 
Navajo LD and the Navajo regularly placed children with the ID scoring 
consistently lower. T-tests were used to locate specific areas of difference. 
It was concluded that the Navajo LD children have not developed overall 
cognitive abilities as effectively as regular Navajo children. 

Scruggs, T.E^&MastropieriM. A. (1083). Self-esteem differences by 

gar and aflmjgity; Nathra Ameirjnm, h>*nMmppt*A Noffra Awwrtram, 
and Anglo Children. .Irmmal nf TiKHsniH&rmftl Pgvcnnlotfv. 1Q(4), 177-180. 

This study compared the results of the Self-Esteem Inventory 
administered to 60 children of which 27 were nonhandicapped Anglo 
sixth graders (16 females, 11 males), 20 were nonhandicapped Native 
American sixth graders (11 females, 9 males), and 13 were nongraded 
learning disabled, behaviorally disordered, or educably mentally retarded 
middle-schocl Native American students (4 females, 9 males). Results 
indicated that although significant differences were observed between 
ethnic groups, larger differences were found between males and females 
in all three groups, with boys scoring higher than girls. 

Smith, J. (1979). Quality programs. Pointer. 24, 114-120. 

Four programs for exceptional children (including physically 
disabled, minority, and delinquent) were described in this article. The 
programs identified were: (a) a workshop series in which teachers and 
parents of physically disabled students develop their own curricula for 
family life and sex education, (b) a drug education program, (c) a camp 
for handicapped children that uses the arts as vehicles for growth and 
learning, and (d) a university project that prepares American Indian 

•-- 39 



1<« 



professionals to educate handicapped Indian children. Contact names 
and addresses for each program were provided. 



Smith, J. C (1980). When is a disadvantage a handicap? .Tnmnnl nf 

A ^ Mn Tt "«™ Education, 12(b), is-18. 

This article discussed the question of whether or not the 
disadvantages that American Indians often suffer upon entering school 
can be considered a handicap. The impact of federal laws such as the 
Education for All Handicapped Children Act (PX. 94-142) on Indian 
students in public and Bureau of Indian Affairs schools was examined 
along with the effect of bilingual programs, their logistics, and their 
effects on the Indian child. It was suggested that to improve the teaching 
of Indian students, the following steps be taken: (a) accountability in 
education should be reversed so that the bureaucracy could assist 
education, (b) politics should be cleared out of the classroom, and (c) the 
parents of Indian students should be listened to. 

Sonta&E. 0972). Washington report Bifawttirm and TVainW of the 

McptelbdBfitaEdai 2(3), 157-169. 

Four recent developments affecting handicapped children were 
examined: (a) efforts to coordinate education and health programs for 
American Indians and Alaska Natives, (b) creation of a task force on 
mental retardation/deafness, (c) new procedures for college and 
university training grants, and (d) increases in financial aid to 
institutions of higher education serving minority students. The formation 
of an Interagency Council on Indian Education for health was discussed. 
Major changes in grant procedures were said to involve the establishment 
of administrative units in colleges and universities in the place of 



40 



multiple grants to individual faculty members and the placing of the 
institutions on 3-year planning cycles. 



Stockdale,L. (1976). A 1ml admcatefc fiZBfirifiPCfr South Bend, IN: 
National Center fox Law and the Handicapped, Inc. 

This article presented the observations of a legal intern who served as 

a summer associate with Project Impact, a southwest program to 

promote outreach programs for low income mentally retarded persons. 

Noted were the unique problems of low income and ethnic minorities such 

as the American Indian, which resulted in the handicapped child's 

disability having a low priority among family problems. The need for a 

structured form of legal advocacy and the organization of parent action 

groups were stressed. 

Stuecber,U. (1985). Training project for Indian school liaison and 
support personnel in special education. Journal ofAn»«ri«.n Tndlnn 

E^BcaflaL 24(1), 9-19. 

This article described a 4-year training program for Indian 
paraprofessionalp as Social Work Aides to support Indian children, 
especially the handicapped, <n a non-Indian school system. The article 
reported: (a) positive program evaluations including high ratings for 
workshops and advocacy effectiveness, (b) decreased absenteeism for 
student? with advocate intervention, and (c) numerous and varied 
advocacy cc; itacts. 

Tjomas, & N. (1975). Culture baaed cmrlcnlam far vtam* Tndtan 
Cbjlitm Salt Lake City, UTrRanders Publications and Sales. (ERIC 
Reproduction Service No. ED 107 389) 

This publication was designed as a resource and curriculum guide 

for early childhood educators with primary emphasis on American 



41 



37 



Indian sociocultural background and culture based lesson 
pluis/activities. Specific chapters focused on: (a) discussion of 
contemporary issues including the historical failure of Indian education, 
(b) the need for culturally relevant education, (c) common misconceptions 
about Indians, and (d) the nature of federal and tribal organizations. An 
extensive bibliography of books, records, pictures, and films trips was 
included. 

Todacheeny,F. 0977). Progre» in providing mrvk^ to ex^ 
children; Focusing on parent/community awareness and involvement 

Education «™* ^*»^«^^ 12(4), 377-380. 

The author reviewed the history of the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
including the implications of the development of the Navaj j Division of 
Education and the functions of the Navajo Special Education Parents 
Advisory Council. The article focused on the involvement of parents and 
the community in the delivery of services to exceptional Navajo children. 

Torrance, E. P. (1974). Readiness of teachers of gifted to learn from 
odturallydttSBrent gifted children, nuwi fihflri Qno^. may 137. 



This study analyzed the responses of 72 teachers of the gifted to a 
questionnaire designed to determine their readiness to learn and the types 
oi: information they hoped to gain from six groups of culturally different 
gifted students. The results included findings that the teachers were 
most interested in learning about: (a) the philosophy of life and goals 
from rural Whites, rural Blacks, and ghetto Blacks; (b) the traditions and 
folklore from American Indians and Mexican Americans; (c) the 
language and dialect from Mexican Americans and Cubans; (d) the crafts 
from American Ir .dians; and (e) the coping techniques from ghetto 
Blacks. 



142. 




ERJ.C 



42 



38 



TwitcheD, W„ & Foster, C. (1981)c ARevi<reof aB.T^««mnffv«™rf n 1 
fiflBCatjon p™*-*""' Snnimiiw «nA reference. Washington, DC: US. 
Departrient of Interior, Bureau of 1^ (ERIC Document 

Reproduction Service No. ED 199 026) 

Special Education programs at nine Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) 

schools were investigated to establish and identify priorities for 

improvement and to determine the effectiveness of each program. The 

monitoring procedure involved random sampling of files of identified 

exceptional students and an in-depth examination of the documentation 

pertaining to each student's referral, placement, and individualized 

education program. Particular attention was paid to each student's 

educational environment as a means of determining and justifying the 

appropriateness of the child's experiences in the classroom and the 

teacher's methodological approach to service delivery and quantification 

of results. Although Special Education programs and service delivery at 

the BIA schools were generally in compliance with the intent of P.L. 94- 

142, the degree of acquiescence to federal mandate varied; no school vas 

in complete compliance. The report concluded that: (a) schools should try 

to attain at least the minimum level of compliance, Ob) auditors and 

programs should be evaluated annually, and (c) in-service training 

programs for staff and administration should be instituted. Individual 

reports on the nine agency schools are included. 

United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare. (1979). The 
develonmental fhsanffitias movement: A national study of minority 
participation Washington, DC: US. Office of Human Development 
02) 

This study was the result of a nationwide survey on minority 
participation in ths developmental disabilities movement. The survey 



ERIC 43 



grew out of concern regarding tbe utilization of developmental disabilities 
service systems by persons who are members of racial/ethnic groups 
because these groups are often seen to be isolated from the mainstream 
service system. The major findings included typical characteristics of 
service agencies such as length of service and urban versus rural 
services. Statistics regarding type of clientele were given. The type of 
administration and board structure used by the various agencies were 
also discussed. 



University of Arizona. (1983). Anntarf* irfH^Wi. ™ 
final M-rvinea rfhnuHnarrr** Pnnatftt stn^fcs. AFteri report). 
Tucson: University of Arizona, College of Education. (ERIC Document 
Reprodnction Service No. ED 239 468) 

This report described the accomplishments of a study of factors 

affecting the education of handicappea Papago children and youth. An 

investigation was conducted of procedures for identification, diagnostic 

evaluation, and placement wi+hin the reservation public schools, the 

Bureau of Indian Affairs St rstem, and the Papago Tribe's 

Department of Education. A*« ng project accomplishments described are 

the continuation of an effective interagency council and identification of 

staff needs, including further inservice training, use of assessment 

measures accommodating for language diversity, and practice in 

developing individualized education plans. 



Walker, J. L. 0984). An investigation of the relationship of levels of 
formal e du ca t i on and ethnicity to HeadstarttBachers' standards and 
expectations for handicapped students. Dissf frtytton Abstracts 
International 45(3), 815A. (University Microfilms International No. DA 
8414871) 



This study was designed to investigate several motors hypothesized 
as being related to the behavioral standards and expectations that Head 



Rjt 44 



40 

Start teachers hold for young handicapped students. Three research 
questions were addressed: (a) what is the relationship between the level of 
Head Start teacher formal education and their behavioral standards and 
expectations for handicapped students, (b) what is the relationship 
between the ethnic background of Head Start teachers and their 
behavioral standards and expectations for handicapped students, and (c) 
what are the differences between elementary and Head Start teacher 
behavioral standards and expectations for handicapped students. The 
results yielded no statistically significant relationships between levels of 
formal education or ethnicity, and Head Start teacher behavioral 
standards and expectations. There T/as, however, a statistically 
significant difference between elementary and Head Start teacher 
standards and expectations. 

Weaver, T. J. 0967). A closer look at TESL on the reservation. .Tnmmnl nf 

Amm-ir*™ ™\ m Erincatimv £(2), 2S-3L 

This article focused on the methods of presenting materials in 
Teaching English as a Second Language (TESL) programs to Navajo 
speaking students. While many TESL programs are basically valid, the 
author stressed the importance of being aware of the commercial TESL 
programs that are constructed with a Spanish-English bias. An initial 
examination of the comparison drawn between the three languages, 
English, Spanish and Navajo, showed that many of the difficulties 
encountered by the Navajo student present little or no difficulty to the 
Sprnish student attempting to learn English. It appeared that a language 
program designed to teach students whose native language is relatively 
close in syntax to the target language would d'ffer significantly from a 
program designed to teach those with a native language significantly 

45 



41 



different in syntax. It was evident that neither English nor Navajo 
sentences can be reordered to eliminate or modify these language 
differences. However, areas wherein the Navajo and English systems 
differ significantly shculd be programmed with care and be extended to 
include a greater emphasis on the language program. 

Willis, R. I* (1984). The Special Education resource room versus fan- 
time regular claw placement: A comparis<^of twomainstreaming 
optionufor Native American Learning Disabled students. Dissertation 
Abstracts Intarna<Wl 4#3), 697A698A. (University Microfilms 
International No. DA 8510994) 

This study compared the effectiveness of two approaches to teaching 
Native American learning disabled adolescents, resource room special 
education versus unsupported full-time mainstreaming. The population 
consisted of two experimental groups of learning disabled Native 
American adolescents, 15 liigh achievers who were mainstreamed full- 
time without special education support and 12 who were mainstreamed 
with resource room rmpport The control group was comprised of 16 
nonhandicapped peers. All participants were given the California 
Achievement Test at the beginning and at the end of the 1980-81 school 
year. This study supported other research findings that the resource 
room is a viable special education approach and that the learning disabled 
students do not succeed in the regular classroom without additional 
special support 



