DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 409 151 



RC 021 104 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Bates, Clif 

Alaska Native Education: Some Recommendations from This 
Corner . 

Jun 97 

22p. 

Information Analyses (070) -- Opinion Papers (120) 

MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage . 

*Alaska Natives; *American Indian Education; Cognitive 
Style; Culturally Relevant Education; *Culture Conflict; 
*Educational Needs; Elementary Secondary Education; 

*Eskimos; Higher Education; Oral Language; *Rural Education; 
Spatial Ability; Teacher Education; Verbal Ability 
*Alaska 



ABSTRACT 



Based on a literature review and the 20 years experience of 
an Alaskan teacher and administrator, some recommendations are proposed to 
improve education in rural Alaska school districts with Alaska Native 
students, particularly Yup ' ik Eskimos. Currently such school districts have 
an education system similar to that found throughout the United States and do 
not take into account the Native culture and heritage. Social and educational 
indicators show that rural Alaska schools are often not graduating 
individuals with adequate skills and attitudes. While there is no single 
definition of what constitutes success, a goal is suggested for rural 
schools: to graduate students who are confident and capable individuals, 
whether living in the traditional culture or the global society. To work 
toward this goal, recommendations are offered in the areas of oral language, 
intellectual strengths, instruction, and educator training. Eskimo children 
live in a world without print where the cul'ure emphasizes learning through 
observation rather than verbal explanations. To provide a foundation for 
reading and writing, schools must emphasize oral language development for 
Native students in the early grades. Schools should build on the strengths 
that Eskimo children consistently demonstrate: superior perceptual skills and 
spatial ability. Instruction could be improved by matching student learning 
styles and by moving to an ungraded elementary program. Finally, teachers 
must receive special training to understand the situation and meet student 
needs in rural Alaska schools. Contains 24 references. (SV) 



******************************************************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 

******************************************************************************** 



ERIC 



Alaska Native Education 
Some Recommendations from 
This Corner 



Clif Bates 
P.O. Box 106 
Aniak, Alaska 99557 
June 1997 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

BKThis document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



ISra* COPY AVAIMBUS 



2 



Alaska Native Education 
Some Recommendations from 
This Corner 



Based on a variety of educational research and on my nearly twenty 
years experience as a teacher and administrator in Alaska, I would like to 
propose some recommendations as to how the educational system can be 
Improved in rural Alaska school districts with Alaska native students, 
particularly Yup'ik. The current situation in such school districts is an 
education system that is basically the same model that exists in most 
school districts throughout the United States. What Hickel wrote in 1977 
is still true today, that "present policy makers seem to desire a carbon 
copy of the standard, white middle-class curriculum rather than taking 
into account the native culture and heritage" (p. 404). 

This education model has been superimposed over these aboriginal 
people with very few adaptations having been made. There have been 
superficial efforts, but they have not significantly improved the quality of 
Bush education and the "success" of the Yup'ik or Alaska native student. By 
taking into consideration native culture and heritage, I am not referring to 
efforts such as cultural heritage classes, native crafts or even native 
language teaching that occur during the school day. 

Four very realistic recommendations are offered that would not 

1 




3 



require dismantling the existing model, but would alter it in ways to more 
appropriately meet the needs of these students. There is no intent here to 
address sociological, economical, or issues other than specifically 
educational concerns. No panacea is offered, merely some suggestions that 
would likely result in improvements. This is not an exhaustive, all-- 
inclusive list by any means. In no way is this a criticism of the native 
culture or cultural traits. It is a matter of the school system adapting to 
meet the needs of these students, and not forcing these students to fit an 
established mold. No finger is being pointed at the native child, it is 
pointed directly at the educational system. 



A Definition of Success 

The appropriateness and success of our education system nation- 
wide is certainly in question. That is a macro issue and not one this paper 
intends to address. The concern here is what are some ways we can 
improve the current educational situation in the many villages throughout 
rural Alaska which have high Alaska native populations. 

I have spent the last twenty years in Alaska as an educator, the 
majority of the time in rural Alaska native school districts with Yup'ik 

students. There have been some changes, mainly in the bilingual education, 

2 




4 



but no significant alterations in the basic approach to schooling. If the 
education system keeps doing what it is doing, it will keep getting what it 
has been getting. The general consensus that I am able to determine is 
that there is not a great deal of contentment over what we are getting 
from our rural schools. 

There are several indications that show we are too often not 
graduating individuals with adequate skills and attitudes: standardized 
test scores (considering all their limitations), suicide rate, unemployment 
rate, alcoholism and alcohol related crimes, degree of college success, 
drop out rates, etc. all demonstrate a reason to be concerned and to 
consider making some alterations in the schools. 

Many students have done quite well and some improvements in 
student achievement have taken place over the years. This may or not be a 
result of the efforts of the school system. The more westernized a 
student is, the more apt that student is to do better in the western school 
system. This improvement can be because of or in spite of what goes on in 
the classroom. 

There is no single definition of what constitutes success in a high 

school graduate anywhere in the United States. Village schools have their 

own unique set of barriers, limitations, and influences. Based on the 

3 




5 



mission statement composed by Kuspuk School District educators, school 
board members, parents, and community members, I suggest the following 
goal for rural school districts to strive: to graduate students who are 
confident and capable individuals whether living in the traditional culture 
or the global society. A graduate would possess academic and 
technological skills and the ability to communicate effectively in the 
dominant society. The graduates would have pride in themselves and 
positive self esteem. In 1973 Collier proposed that education should 
"provide an opportunity for the Eskimo to excel successfully in the modern 
world as an Eskimo" (p. 125). 

Educators must go beyond making just superficial changes to better 
meet the needs of these students and be more successful in their mission. 
My recommendations relate to four main areas: oral language, intellectual 
strengths, instruction, and educator training. Communication skills and 
self esteem of students are the two overriding concerns. 

Recommendations 



Oral Language Foundation 

The western education system is one that honors verbal ability. 




4 



"Verbal ability has long been regarded as the best single predictor of 
academic success" (Stodolsky and Lesser, 1967, p. 33). As Ernest Boyer 
writes, "language is the center piece of learning. It's not just another 
subject but the means by which all subjects are perceived". There is ample 
evidence that verbal ability is the weakest area for many of our Alaska 
native students. Various studies show that Eskimos are low in abstract 
verbal abilities (Lipinski 1990, More 1984, Kleinfeld 1978, Bock and 
Feldman 1970). Brown (1991) explains that "native students rank far 
below norms in reading, language arts, and language arts related 
subjects." As Bock and Feldman found, Eskimo children scored 
significantly below the norms on all test items in the English vocabulary 
tests. Streiff's study (1980) showed that the nearly 3,000 Eskimo children 
of western Alaska are almost three grade levels below their ages in 
reading comprehension. 

I want to emphasize as Olsen wrote in 1971, "verbal deficiencies of 
the culturally different are not related to low intelligence or emotional 
immaturity" (p. 68). Salisbury echoes this in writing "Eskimos' 
communication problems stem from conflicting cross-cultural values, not 
from any lack of intelligence" (1969. p. 27). The Eskimos are of a culture 
and environment where there is little experience with the purpose of 

o 

ERIC 



7 



literacy and tittle exposure to reading and writing behavior, linguistic 
concepts or language usage. The education system needs to take this into 
consideration. 

Rural native students do not live in a world of print. There are few 
signs, billboards or written communication in village life. There often are 
no books in the homes and parents do not often model reading and writing 
behavior. Along with this is the cultural trait of emphasizing learning via 
observation, not by verbal explanations. As Collier points out "the 
information procedure amongst the Eskimos was terse in verbal 
explanation and highly non-verbal in demonstration." Florey (1986) shares 
findings that "the learning and behavorial characteristics of Native 
Americans as being different than the predominate culture in that they 
have a reliance on non-verbal communication and use undetailed verbal 
accounts". It is evident that the Eskimos' situation clearly coincides with 
the results of research that attempts to explain the causes of reading 
disabilities and poor "school language" skills. 

From a home and village environment that does not emphasize 
reading and writing behavior and a culture that is strong on learning by 
observation and non-verbal communication, an Eskimo student enters the 
school environment, a language-saturated institution. Short concrete 




6 



verbal exchanges with friends and family are now replaced with the 
"school language" of abstractions, concepts and long verbal explanations in 
the classroom, an unfamiliar world full of print and talk. Without making 
adaptations for these students, our schools follow the standard school 
model. Before these students develop an adequate foundation of listening 
and speaking skills of this school language, we try to teach them to read 
and write. 

Moore (1976) states that "oral language development is the single 
most important factor in determining readiness for reading." Buckley 
(1993, p. 7) explains that "a child's mastery of oral language determines 
his/her future mastery of reading and writing." Simpson-Tyson (1977 and 
1978) reports that "the study of oral language of Native American children 
indicates that many are not proficient enough in English to learn to read." 
It is not likely that a successful reading and writing program can be built 
on an inadequate base of oral language. 

Educators have a legitimate reason to consider making an adaptation 
to our school model. Our schools in general tend to give listening and 
speaking skill development a very limited amount of attention. In our rural 
schools evidence shows us that we must emphasize oral language 
development in our Alaska native students. We have to ensure that an 




7 



adequate foundation of listening and speaking skills in the school language 
is established before we ask these children to read and write. There are 
adequate, exemplary resources available to help in teaching these skills. 
Oral language development needs to be a definite strand that runs through 
the K-1 2 curriculum, but it must particularly be a large part of the first 
five years of schooling. We need to make an adjustment and stop trying to 
teach native children to read and write before they are cognitively ready, 
before they have adequate listening and speaking skills in this setting. If 
we do not do make this change, students will continue experiencing 
cognitive confusion at the integration level resulting in reading 
disabilities. 

In Bognar's research report (1981), he relates self-criticism and 
poor self-concept of Indians and Eskimos to reading ability. It is no 
wonder that students with problems in the area of verbal ability, reading 
and writing, develop poor self-esteem by attending a school system that, 
from the very beginning, marks success by proficiency in these skills. 

Intellectual Strengths 

It is ironic that the converse is true: a school system that allows 
success and positively rewards students with strength in communication 




8 



skills is the same system that often does not provide the opportunity for 
Alaska native students to demonstrate the special strengths they possess. 
More (1984) found, "Eskimos are significantly higher in perceptual skills, 
visuospatial abilities and imaginal decoding than other students. 
Kleinfeld (1973), Bock and Feldman, and Kaulbeck (1984) support this as 
well, and I have verified these findings with school pyschologists who 
have tested hundreds of Eskimo students on the Yukon-Kuskokwim and 
mid-Kuskokwim over the last several years. Kleinfeld goes as far as 
suggesting that Eskimos have a genetic superiority when it comes to 
perceptual skills and spatial ability. Florey also describes the "superior 
visual discrimination and fine motor skills of native Americans". The 
abilities of Eskimos to envision the workings of complex machinery and 
make repairs are legendary. 

There is sufficient evidence to ensure that the educational system 
teaches students to demonstrate special skills they possess. We cannot 
just concentrate on their area of weakness and ignore the talents they 
have which are exceptional. 

Spatial ability and perceptual skills can be included in the 
curriculum in a variety of ways: mapping, geometry, mechanics, drawing, 
carving, and model building are some examples. This cannot help but assist 



9 



in developing positive self-esteem and a more favorable attitude toward 
school in students who are experiencing negative rewards in an academic 
verbal world. We cannot continue concentrating on the weaknesses of 
these students, expecting them to fit into this model and, at the same 
time ignore their unique strengths. 

Instruction 

The mode of instruction is also reflective of the standard school 
model. It is often textbook driven and based on grade level concerns. Due 
to problems many of the native students have in communication skills, 
they often do not fit the grade-level "box". Teachers often look at 
retention. Title I, or special education services to help these students 
obtain certain grade-level achievement. Even in a very small remote 
village school where there might be five students in grades K-6, we still 
find each student labeled according to a grade level. 

There is enough evidence provided by researchers to consider 
drastically altering the standard mode of instruction in classrooms of 
Alaska native students. We most often find students asked to gleen 
information and concepts from texts that many students cannot 
comprehend. The emphasis is on the written word and verbal explanations 

o 

ERIC 



12 



by the teacher. 

This manner of schooling Is not congruent with predominate Alaska 
native learning style. The findings of Wauters (1984) show a significant 
difference between the learning styles of Alaska natives and non-natives. 
This difference in learning style of Alaska natives is expressed by 
Swisher, "observation, demonstration, and cooperation are essential steps 
in learning... and these cultural styles of learning do not match the 
learning environment of the typical classroom" (1989 and 1991). Kaulback 
reviews the literature about learning styles and explains that native 
children learn best from visual stimulation. 

Stairs, (1994) in a study of native American students, challenges 
the Western cultural package of standard literary practice, schooling and 
abstract thought." Tharp and Yamauchi (1994) reinforce this belief In the 
diffrences between native learning and traditional western schooling. 
They point out the differences, for example, in conversational wait time 
for native and non-natives and the emphasis on visual/holistic approach 
by native students. They describe the "ideal Native American learning 
activity to be in the social context of small student-directed units 
engaged in a joint production activity that contextualizes formal 
knowledge in the Immediate experience and concerns of the learners". 

er|c 



13 



Alterations in this area of instruction relate to two main areas. The 
first change would be ensuring that the mode of instruction is congruent 
with the learning style of the students and not solely based on the 
standard literary practices of the Western classroom which largely relies 
on texts and verbal explanations. The second recommendation is to move 

to an ungraded K-8 educational program. 

If we would address where the child Is developmentally Instead of 
the current overconcern for grade level, we could better meet the 
student's needs. British Columbia's non-graded school system would be a 
model to investigate. There are other schools around the country designed 
In this fashion that can be looked at for ideas. In the multigraded small 
village schools it is particularly valuable to look at each student in terms 
of where that child is developmentally. Since language Is the key to school 
success and that is the area many of our students have difficulties, we 
could approach it In the way that we have nine years to work with these 
students to develop their language skills, knowledge base, and problem 
solving abilities. Not all students need to be doing certain things by grade 
two or by grade six for example. 




12 



Educators 



Another irony is educators who we predict would be a conduit for 
change, often are the main obstacle. Teachers are hired who are products 
of the existing K-12 system and have been schooled using and preparing 
for this model in teacher education classes. It is very difficult to break 
that paradigm. They continue to teach in the manner they have been 
taught. Often a teacher attempts to work with students, and when after 
repeated efforts, the learner does not demonstrate learning, the teacher 
tends to point the finger at the child. The teacher may think there must be 
something wrong with these students, instead of considering there is 

likely something wrong with his/her methodolgy. 

It is not a matter of trying to make a child fit into a grade level 

program. It is a matter of adjusting the curriculum and teaching methods 

and adapting materials to meet the needs of each child in the classroom. 

We need village teachers who understand this concept and can teach 

accordingly. Teachers are needed who know how to meet the needs of each 

student in a classroom with a wide range of abilities. And we need 

teachers who are able to make a paradigm shift and step out of the 

traditional western model and teach in ways these students learn best. 

Colleges of education, for the most part, are not training teacher 

13 



candidates in these attributes, skills, and approaches. 

This issue of effective teachers of Alaska native students is a huge 
topic and deserving of a paper unto itself. And there are exceptional 
teachers who are working quietly in far away classrooms who have so 
much to offer not only students but other teachers. My main concern here 
is that we do not at all prepare teachers to the degree they need to be 
prepared to be successful educators in these village schools with Alaska 
native students. It takes much more than the State requiring a couple 
generic classes in cross-cultural education to prepare an individual for 
the very complex array of forces and issues: cultural, political, 
economical, social, environmental, and educational that a teacher will 
face in a village. It is a fluid jigsaw puzzle and there are no easy 
solutions to problems and difficulties that a teacher will encounter. 

If Alaska State Department of Education understands the needs and 
the situation in rural schools, it could implement a teacher training 
program that is designed by experienced effective teachers, village 
people, school board members, students, and administrators. This training 
program must be designed for particular areas in Alaska. The situation in 
Chuathbaluk on the mid-Kuskokwim is quite different than the situation in 
Angoon in Southeast Alaska. 




14 



In Conclusion 



The purpose of this paper is to set forth some recommendations for 
altering what goes on in our schools in rural Alaska. The scope of it does 
not intend to include such things as methodolgy in teaching listening and 
speaking skills or teaching methods that are appropriate for native 
learning styles. I am suggesting that there is enough evidence to consider 
ensuring a definite strong emphasis on oral language development taking 
place throughout the K-12 program, but it is crucial to incorporate this in 
the first five years of school. We must allow these students access to 
success and not just concentrate on their area of weakness and ignore 
there unique strengths. Instruction must move away from mainly being 
based on texts and verbal explanations and must take into consideration 
the manner in which these students learn best. We need to consider a K-8 
ungraded program. Educators need to be trained and prepared more than by 
a token gesture. It does not need to be a sink or swim, survive or leave 
type of situation when districts hire individuals and place them in a 
village school. 

From the extremes of the missionary schools and the inflexibleness 
of the BIA schools to the current situation, the education system in rural 




15 



schools in Alaska has been the same basic model found throughout the 
United States. It is a school system which honors verbal ability which 
happens to be many of these students' weakest area. We have a school 
system which does not provide adequate opportunity for these students to 
demonstrate their strengths. We have State legislators with no 
understanding of the complexity of the situation who compare how well 
the standard school system model works in the Bush with how well it 

works in urban areas. 

There is a much larger core of educators with a better understanding 
of the situation in rural Alaska than there was just a decade ago. In the 
last dozen years an abundance of educators with master and doctorate 
degrees in cross-cultural education have surfaced around Alaska. A great 
deal has been written about education and the Alaska native. Resources 
are no longer on graduate library shelves Just gathering dust. Resources on 
this subject are quite abundant; now they are sometimes gathering dust in 
places that are at least physically closer to the classroom. 

But when it all comes down to it, there is still this western 
education system that has been superimposed over our rural Alaskan 
native communities with really very few adaptations. The paradigm 
remains the same. There have been improvements, but they may have been 




16 



accomplished despite the system as these students naturally become more 
westernized. 

It is important for rural Alaskan educators to realize that 
realistically we must work within the existing paradigm. It is difficult 
enough making changes within this model let alone trying to make a 
radical shift to a totally new system. The problems that beset the entire 
education system and that all youth everywhere must face in the rapidly 
changing times must be put in perspective. What we can do, what is m our 
power, is to make appropriate alterations in this model. From this corner, 
four possible changes are recommended for consideration. 

END 



Clif Bates 

P.O. Box 1 06 

Aniak, Alaska 99557 

June 1997 




17 



REFERENCES 



Bock, R. Feldman, C. Cognitive studies among residents of Wamright, 
Alaska, Arctic Anthropology . 1970, VII 1, 101-105 

Bognar, C. Self concept and native identity: comparison of four 
communities in Labrador, -Journal of Am erica n Indian Educatio n, 1981, vZO 

nZ, 28-32 

Brown, G. Reading and language arts curricula in elementary and 

secondary education for american indian and alaska natives, Review 
I iterature. 1991, 1-36 

Buckley, M. What Basic Oral Language Strategies Need To Be Included In A n 
Integrated English Language Arts Prog rajn, University of Alaska 

Anchorage, 1993, 7 

Collier, John Jr. Alaskan Eskimo Educati on: A Film Analysis of CulturM 
Confrontation in the Schools . San Francisco, California, Holt, Rinehart and 

Winston, 1973 

Florey J. Identification of gifted children among American Indian 

population, an inservice model, RIEJAN87, ED273399, May, 1986 

Hikel, J. Cross-cultural education in Alaska, not how but why? Phi Delt a 
Kapoan. 1977, 58, 403-404 

Kaulbeck, B. Style of learning among native children: a review of the 
research. Review Literature , 1984, vll, 27-37 

Kleinfeld, J. Intellectual strengths in culturally different groups: an 
Eskimo illustration, Review of Educationa l Research. 3, 1973 

Kleinfeld, J. Alaska Native Students and College Succes s. ISER Occasional 
Papers, University of Alaska, 14, 1978 




20 



REFERENCES continued 



Lipinski T. Visuospatial and verbal-sequential performance of rural 
remote Alaskan native, urban alaskan native, and urban Alaskan white 
male children, Research in Education. 1990, v6 n3, 43-47 

More, A. Learning styles and Indian students: a review of research. 
Evaluative Report: Conference papers: Review Literatu re, 1984, 1-13 

More, B. Living history: using role-playing in the classroom, Conference 
paper, 1976, 1-14 

Olsen J. The Verbal Ability of the Culturally Different, Teaching the 
I anau’aae Arts to Culturally Different Child r^, Editors: Joyce, Banks, 
Addison-Wesley, 1971, 68 

Salisbury, L Communication for survival, the COPAN program, Journal of 
English as a Second Language . 1969, vol. IV, 25-34 

Simpson-Tyson, A. Are native american first graders ready to read? 
Rfiading Teacher . 1978, 31, 7, 798-801 

Stodolsky, S. , Lesser, G. Learning patterns in the disadvantaged, Harvar d 
Educational Review . 1967, 37, 22-69 

Staire, A. Indigenous ways to go to school: exploring many visions. 
Journal of Multilingual and Multicultur al Development. 1994, v15 n1, 63- 

76 

Streiff, V. Reading Comprehension a n d Language Proficiency Among 
Eskimo Children . New York, Arno Press, 1 980 

Swisher, K. American Indian/Alaska native learning styles: research and 
practice, ERIC, EDO-RC-91-4, 1991, 1-3 

Swisher, K. Deyhie, D. American Indian/Alaska native youth, Journal o j 
Multilingual and Multicultural Development . 1987, v 8 n4, 345-360 




21 



REFERENCES continued 



Swisher, K. Deyhie, D. The styles of learning are different, but the 
teaching is just the same: suggestions for teachers of American Indian 
youth, Imirnal of American Indian Education, 1989, Aug., 1-14 

Tharp, R. Yamauchi, L. Effective instructional conversation in "at|^e 
American classrooms. Review Literature. 1994, Educ. Pract. Rprt 10, 1-30 

Wauters, J. Learning styles: a study of Alaska native and non-native, 
■ journal of American Indian Education, 1 989, Aug., 53-62 




22 




U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 




I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



cr L ' C* /9 

r^CK.'tWE, ^otixcaXtOiTL ^ oTo/ne. 

r K /c Car f\E.r 




Author(s): C! if 


Corporate Source: 


Publication Date: 












II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents 
announced in the monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system. Resources in Education (R IE), are usually made available to users 
in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, and electronic/optical media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
(EDRS) or other ERIC vendors. Credit is given to the source of each document, and. if reproduction release is granted, one of the 
following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following options and sign the release 
below. 




Sample sticker to be affixed to document 



Sample sticker to be affixed to document 



Check here 


“PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 




“PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 


MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




MATERIAL IN OTHER THAN PAPER 


Permitting 






COPY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 


microfiche 
(4” X 6” film), 
paper copy, 
electronic, and 






w 


optical media 
reproduction. 


TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 


INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)" 




INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)" 



Level 1 Level 2 




or here 

Permitting 
reproduction 
in other than 
paper copy. 



Sign Here, Please 

Documents wilt be processed as Indicated provided reproduction quality permits. If permission to reproduce is granted, but 
neither box is checked, documents wilt be processed at Level 1 . 



“I hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERlC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce this document as 
indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic/opticat media by persons other than ERIC employees and its 
system contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other 
service agencies to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries.” 



Signature: 



Printed Name: 



Address: 






Position: >1 ^ / C tA 

r\%sist Ja ^^pT, f/)Sfri 4 ct/o/\ 


^ CU-f Sa.tc£ 


Organization, SCHOQL Ol^lTilCJ 


P.O.Box 

Anioik, Alaita. 99/5“ 7 


Telephone Number: j ^ 





37 



OVER 




