DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 363 362 



JC 930 485 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Chu, Lap Tak 

Who Are the Model Minorities among the Junior College 

Asian-American Subgroups? 

91 

82p. 

Reports - Research/Technical (143) 
MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

^Academic Achievement; *Asian Americans; Chinese 
Americans; College Outcomes Assessment; Community 
Colleges; Filipino Americans; Japanese Americans; 
Korean Americans; ^Minority Groups; Outcomes of 
Education; Two Year Colleges; *Two Year College 
Students 

Asian American Students; Los Angeles Community 
College District CA 



ABSTRACT 

The purpose of the study reported here was to test 
the myth that As ian-Amer i can students are a "model minority," who 
consistently outperform Blacks, Hispanics, American Indians, Alaskan 
Natives, and other minorities. Using 1989 data on students attending 
the nine colleges in the Los Angeles Community College District 
(LACCD) , the study analyzed academic achievement by the following 
measures: ethnicity, including Chinese-, Japanese-, Korean-, 
Filipino-, and Vietnamese-American subgroups; marital status; age; 
gender; residence history; pre-college academic preparation; social 
class; employment status; scholarships; student aspirations; 
educational plans; academic involvement; and student major. Study 
findings included the following: (1) marital status, age, academic 
involvement, and change in major field of study affected academic 
achievement across all ethnic groups; (2) the mean grade point 
average (GPA) for White LACCD students was 1.86, while the 
Asian-American aggregate was 1.76; (3) Korean- Americans had the 
highest GPA among all As ian-Amer i can subgroups (2.02), followed by 
Chinese-Americans (1.83) and Vietnamese-Americans (1.73); (4) 
native-English speaking Whites and Japanese-Americans had the largest 
proportion of respondents with GPA's of 2.99 or below; (5) Filipino- 
and Korean-Americans had the largest percentage of students eligible 
to enter the University of California or California State University 
systems after high school graduation, and Japanese-Americans had the 
least; and lo) the level of acculturation may have an impact t» 
student performance- A review of the literature on the acade^i. 
performance of minorities is included. Contains 81 references. 
(MAB) 



'? it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it 



-it 

ititi 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 
from the original document . * 

't it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it 



9 

ERIC 



WHO ARE THE MODEL MINORITIES AMONG THE JUNIOR COLLEGE ASIAN- 
AMERICAN SUBGROUPS? 



Submitted 
by 



Lap Tak Chu 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



L.T. Chu 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



2 



t/rt 

A,. 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Eduction* I neeearch and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

f This document haa been reproduced aa 
^received from |h* prion or organization 
or iQ""* ting it 
3 Minor change* have been mede to improve 
reproduction quality 

» Pch nt i ol view or opinion* atatad in thia docu- 
ment do not nacaaaariiy represent otftaei 
OERi poaitton or pobcy 



Table of Contents 



Introduction 1 

Critical Research Questions 2 

Academic Achievement of Minorities: Some Theoretical 

Exp 1 anat i ons . . . 3 

Related Literature on Asian American Academic Achievement . . .7 

Rationale for Independent Variables 20 

Demographic & Background Characteristics 20 

Academic Variables 22 

Control Variables 26 

Research Hypothesis 26 

Analysis 29 

Limitations & Delimitation of the Study 30 

Summary of Ma jor Findings 34 

Implications & Suggestions 64 

Appendix 68 

Footnotes 70 

Bibliography 72 



Introdu ction 



Past research studi es and 1 i terature often provide the 
following reasons for explaining the high and the iow academic 
performance of minorities. They are: (a) Genetic explanation 
(b) Cultural Deprivation (c) Cultural Discontinuities (d) 
"Low- "income and Status" explanation ( e) "Response to Low 
Status" explanation (f) "Relative Functionalist" explanation 
and (g) "Pre-College predictors" explanation. Even though 
some of the explanations above do provide some hints for the 
understanding of the under achievement or over performance of 
some minorities as a whole, explanation( s ) for the success of 
the stereotyped Asian-Americans alone still need(s) further 
exploration. As a matter of fact, some of these explanations 
have been refuted or proved invalid and needed reexamination 
or testified. 

The purpose of this study is to test the myth of the 
umbrella term "model Asian minority." The main thrust is to 
show that this term can not be applied to al\ Asian-American 
ethnic subgroups ( Chinese , Japanese , Koreans , Fi 1 ipinos , 
Vietnamese or Southeast Asians.) Moreover, this research 
study also illustrates that certain combination of variables 
are able to distinguish the high-achievers from the 
average-achievers and the low-achievers among the Asian 
aggregate and the Whites. 



Critical Research Questions 



(1) Do the demographic, background and academic 
characteristics rel ated :o academic achievement differ by 
ethnicity? 

(2) Do the low-, the average- and the high-achievers 
differ significantly with respect to the demographic, 
background and academi c characteristics? 

(3) Can all Asian-Americans be covered under one umbrella 

term as "model minority 1 ' if judged purely on an academic 

basis? Who can and who cannot? Is it a myth or a reality? 

(4) What combination of variables (demographic, 
background and academic characteristics) discriminate against 
who are the high-achievers, the aver age- achi evers and the 
1 ow-achi evers? 

(5) Does the set of discriminating variables vary by 
race: the majority Whites and the minority Asian aggregate? 

There is without a doubt that Asian-Americans as an 
aggregate seem to stand out as a 11 success f ul " ethnic group 
when compared to other minorities like Black, Hispanic, 
American Indian or Alaskan Native. Nonetheless, this myth 
does not necessarily true for ail Asi an- Ameri can subgroups. 



Academic Achievement of Minorities: Some Theoretical 
Explanations 

With regard to the explanations of academic achievement 
among different minorities in general, there are at least six 
theoretical explanations. The first explanation deals 
directly with ,f heredi ty , 11 that is, a certain minority group is 
innately superior in intelligence than others (Jensen, 1969; 
Sowell, 1978; Lynn, 1977; Vernon, 1982). The second 
explanation is related to the "Cultural Deficit" or "Cultural 
Deprivation' 1 hypothesis, which postulates that poor children 
perform poorly in school because they are deprived of the 
stimulation of a home that emphasizes learning and a school 
curriculum that lack in content and style of learning. (Bloom, 
Davis, Hess 1965; Coleman, 1966; Goldberg and Tannenbaum, 
1967; Philips, 1976). The third explanation is concerned with 
"Cultural Discontinuities" (Ogbu, 1978; Trueba, 1983, 1987, 
1989:146; Erickson, 1982) which hypothesizes that the major 
differences in school experience are the difference or 
discontinuity in the cultural background of individuals and 
the culture of the school. The differences in academic 
success are often a repercussion of their "culturally- or 
psychological 1 y-determined boundaries' 1 and their responses to 
the oppressive "societal forces." Therefore, the more 
euphonious the school culture and one's cultural background, 
the better the performance and the faster the integration into 
the nost culture. In fact, this hypothesis also alludes the 

3 



6 



importance of the cultural value which is prevalent in a group 
(Godeon, 1964: Sue & Kitano 1973; Yamagata-No ji , 1987; Monzon, 
1984.) The fourth explanation refers to the "Low Income and 
Status 11 hypothesis, which assumes that the social position and 
the economic well-being of an individual or family will affect 
not only the knowledge and the experience of children but also 
the way they are treated in the public institutions (Cummins, 
1986; Cheng, 1987; Clark, 1983; Trueba, 1987a, b; Heath, 
1983).. This explanation can be conceived as a test of the 
"cultural Deprivation" hypothesis. They are similar in the 
sense that both indicate that a person's social position or 
status within a society determines the availability of public 
funding. The fifth explanation refers to the "Minorities* 
Response to Low Status" hypothesis. It refers to the 
collective responses of the status ascribed to some minorities 
which rationalize or explain the existing .social order and 
their subordinate positions under a rigid stratified society. 
This explanation untangles myths of why some minorities 
succeed or fail in a capitalist society (Bowles & Ginitis, 
197 7 ; Giroux, 1983 ; Willis , 1977 ; Ogbu & Matute-Bianchi 
1986:87 & 93). This Neo-Marxist approach attempts to explain 
the social inequality and injustice within the society by an 
unequal distribution of power and authority among groups. 
Those peopl e who have power or authority would try every 
measure, such as education, to legitimize and maintain the 
existing social order. The sixth explanation can be 

4 



ERLC 



7 



comprehended as a combination of some of the explanations 
above. It is called the "Relative Functionalist" hypothesis 
which states that unique cultural value can not be considered 
as the sole factor that contributes to the academic 
achievement of some minorities, there must be some mediating 
factors such as the minority's status in the society that 
makes this finai product (academic failure or success) 
inevitable. It hypothesizes that the narrower the 

non-educational avenue for social mobility, the greater the 
dependence of an individual on the educational route for 
upward mobility which is especially true among Asian-Americans 
(Sue, Feb. 1990:16 in press,) The last explanation of 
minority achievement is the "Pre-Col 1 ege Predictors" 
hypothesis, it proposes that high school achievement and 
performance are good predictors of college achievement. High 
school records and pre-ccllege achievement or admission tests 
are often used for this purpose (Passons, 1967; Goldman & 
Richards, 1974; Chissom & Lanier, 1975; Aleamoni & others, 
197 8 ; As tin , 1971 . 198 2 ; Blustein & others , 198 6 ; Doran, 
1987; Larson & Scontrino; Mcdonald Gawkoski; Weitzman, 1982; 
Sue & Abe, 1988. ) 

However, many of these achievement explanations above 
have been proved either deficient or wanting evidence. For 
example, the "Genetic" explanation has been refuted for 
lacking empirical evidence (Ogbu, 1978; Roosens , 1987; Sue, 
1990) and so has the "Cultural Deprivation" (Shultz & 

5 



ERLC 



8 



Zrickson, 1982; Ogbu, 1973) or cultural values hypothesis 
Hirschman & Wong , 198 6 ; Ogbu & Ma tut e-Bianchi , 1986 ; 
Steinberg, 1981; Sue, 1990:17.) Furthermore, the "Cultural 
Discontinuities" hypothesis is criticized for wanting 
empirical supports (Trueba, 1989:147-148; Erickson, 1984, 
1986) and so has the "Relative Functional ism" which demands 
further investigation and testing. The "Pre-College 

Predictors" hypothesis remains controversial (Crouse & 
Trusheim, 1988; McCornack & Mcleod, 1983; Mccornack, 1983; 
Nader & Nairn, 1980; Doran, 1987). Since no single 
explanation above addresses the Asian-Americans experience 
directly, all related concepts that explain the academic 
achievement of other minorities might not necessarily fit the 
Asian-Americans experience. This research study is stimulated 
by the need to search for a model that specifically explains 
the Asian-Americans experience. 



r elated Literature on Asian Amer ic an Academic Achievement 



Literature that deals direct 1 y with the academic 
achievement of Asian-Americans and its subcategories are very 
limited. Some of the representative works and related 
literature include: Astin, A. (1982); Bagasao (1983); Hsia, 
(1988); Sue & Zane (1985); Sue, 1988; Toupin and Son (1985); 
Blustein et als., (1986); Astin & Cross (1979); Pascarella, 
Duby and others (1981 and 1983); Tracey and Sedlacek (1985); 
and others . 

In Astin T s book of Minorities in American Higher 
Education, 1982, his major goal is to provide some vogue and 
current data concerning the academic progress and 
representation of the four minority groups (Blacks, Chicanos, 
Puerto Ricans and American Indians) in the American higher 
education. He wants to find out what additional factors 
influence the educational progress of these minority groups? 
Astin's study directs more on the reasons why these minority 
groups are under- represent ed in higher education and not on 
the verification of the success of the Asian-Americans in 
higher education- The Asian-Americans do not receive much 
weight in Astin's study. 

In addition to Astin's study, Bagasao's dissertation on 
Factors Related to Science- Career -Planning Among Asian and 
Pacific American College-Bound High School Seniors (1983), 
which displays a profile of the Asian American/Pacific 

7 



ERLC 



10 



Islanders (APA) who head for college. Bagasao reports that no 
matter the students are American born or foreign born but 
raised in America or recent immigrants, APA are recurrently 
science-oriented or quantitatively-oriented students. Her 
major thrust is to uncover the factors that contribute to the 
Science-Career-Planning of these college-bound high school 
seniors. She used the High School and Beyond Study data set, 
which was conducted by the National Center for Educational 
Statistics in 1980, to carry out her anal ys is . Bagasao ' s 
study is interesting in the sense that she tries to compare 
the APA aggregate and its subgroups with the Whites. 
Nonetheless, her interest is to identify those characteristics 
that distinguish between the science-career planner and 
non-science-career planner. In Bagasao's study, she has 
difficulties in comparing different Asic.n subgroups because of 
an insufficient sample size. In conclusion, she discovers 
that sex and residence history affect the career plans of the 
APAs , and verbal ability affects the career plans of the 
Whites . 

In relation to Bagasao's research, Hsia's book, Asian- 
Americans in Higher Education and Work 1988, presents her 
readers with more up-to-date information and literature 
concerning Asian-Americans' performances in higher education 
and work. Data pertaining to the demographic characteristics, 
academic aptitude, academic ability, academic performance, 
undergraduate admissions , col lege aspiration , degree 

3 

ER?C 11 



attainment, career choice, and so forth, are reviewed in her 
book. However, this book is not planned to provide a compre- 
hensive picture of why and what specific groups of 
Asian-Americans are doing well academically. Nonetheless, it 
is a very informative reference for students, teachers, school 
administrators, counselors and the public. The reason is that 
recent studies, especially "1 arge-scai e national 
representative" ones , on Asian-Americans achievement , ability/ 
and aptitude Asian-Americans are inadequate. 

Sue and Zane ' s article on "Acpdemic Achievement and 
Cocio-emotional Adjustment Among Chinese University Students, 
1985" reports the academic performance and socio- emotional 
adaptation of the Chinese university students studying in the 
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). The sample 
includes 177 enrolled students of different class levels, 
majors and sex. Three groups of students are compared based 
on their length of residence in this country and place of 
birth: American Born (AB), Early Immigrants (EI); and Recent 
Immigrants (RI). The result shows that Chinese university 
students' academic performances are above the university 
average. Nevertheless, RI often use some sort of adaptive 
strategies to maintain a high college performance. Although 
Sue and Zane's study include: length of residence, place of 
birth, majors, study habits, High School Grade Point Average 
(HSGPA) and SAT scores in their study, the study is confined 
to UCLA Chinese students and no information on Asian subgroups 

9 



12 



are collected. 

Sue & Abe's study on "Predictors of Academic Achievement 
Among the Asian-American and the White students, 1988" is a 
collaborative study of the University of California (8 UC 
campuses) and the College Entrance Examination Board. They 
attempt to examine the validity of the predictor variables 
(HSGPA, SAT-V, SAT-M, ECT , MI , Mil) in predicting academic 
achievement while controlling for gender and academic majors. 
In their study , 4,113 non- foreign born Asian- American 
freshmen, who are regrouped into 5 subcategories, are 
investigated. This study is interested in the predictor 
variables of academic achievement, such as: English 
proficiency level, soc o-economic status (3ES), and level of 
acculturation. Their generalizations, however, are 

circumscribed only to the more prestigious and selective UC 
students . 

Topin & Son's paper (cited in Hsia, J. , 1988) 
"Preliminary Findings on Asian-Americans: The Model Minority 
in a Small Private East Coast College, 1985" compares two 
matched groups (American born Asian American versus Non-Asian) 
on academic performance after controlling for several 
characteristics like class, gender, choice of college, 
parental education, type of high schools, SAT Scores, and 
soci o- economic factors . The resul t indicates that even 
well-off native-' born Asian-Americans use some adaptive 
strategies in order to maintain an above average academic 

10 



ERLC 



13 



score. Again this case study has limited predictive value. 

David 1. Blustein and others 1 article on ,r Identi f ying 
Predictors of Academic Performance of Community College 
Students' 1 identifies two essential predictors (cognitive 
ability and student expectations) for college GPA. A sample 
of 50 students is drawn from two independent but randomly 
selected groups. Nearly equal numbers of students in academic 
difficulty are included in order to assure heterogeneous of 
variance in the survey, and a follow-up interview of 30 
respondents is also made in order to supp 1 ement some back- 
ground information concerning student performance. Blustein 
and others also notice that past research studies on retention 
and academic performance often focus on four-year 
institutions; seldom do they pay much attention to the 
two-year institution. They try to include some new predictor 
variables which are often overlooked by scholars when studying 
two-year institution. These are: career indecisiveness , 
learning style, student's attitude toward education, cognitive 
ability and many others. However, their study does not look 
into ethnic differences in performance, and factors that 
discriminate between the high-achievers, the low-achievers, 
and the average-achievers. 

Pascareila, Duby and others' article "The Pre-enrol Iment 
Variables and Academic Performance as Predictors of Freshman 
Year Persistence, Early Withdrawal , And Stopout Behavior in an 
Urban, Nonresidential University (1981)" does go a little bit 

11 

ERLC 14 



further. They employ a multiple group discriminant analysis 
to determine the pre-enrol Iment characteristics - and 
first-quarter GPA in distinguishing freshmen who belong to 
persisters, stopout or early withdrawal. The college grade 
point average (GPA) is used as an intermediate variable in 
this study and the dependent variable can be a withdrawal, a 
stopout or a persistent decision. In this study, it discovers 
that the addition of the college GPA to the pre-enrol lment 
characteristics helps to distinguish the persisters from early 
voluntary withdrawals sharply. Before this, the nine 
pre-enrol lment variables (perceived likelihood of joining a 
social fraternity, sorority, or club; being Black; perceived 
likelihood of failing one or more courses; perceived need for 
academic remedy; perceived likelihood of dropping permanently; 
perceived likelihood of dropping out temporarily; perceived 
likelihood of transferring to another college, and age) are 
able to distinguish the stopouts as a group and the persisters 
and withdrawal as another group. The important thing in this 
study is that the perceived likelihood of college outcomes, 
racial groups and age are good predictors of college 
persistence. However, do these variables help to predict 
college achievement (GPA) are worth studying? The paper is 
more capable of using a more sophisticated research technique 
(discriminant analysis) to do the analysis. 

Up to this point, one can discover that past researchers 
are more interested in the traditional academic measures than 

12 



ERLC 



15 



non- traditional indicators to investigate college performance. 
3ut Tracey and Sedlacek in their paper "The Relationship of 
Non-cogni ti ve Variabl es to Academi c Success : A Longi tudinal 
Comparison by Race 11 hypothesizes that the non-cogni tive 
dimension is more important than the traditional academic 
measures, such as lack of ability, or poor study habits which 
predict academic success (Pentages & Creedon, 1978.) They 
devel op a Scale to cest this Non -Cognitive dimension . This 
Scale contains seven variables which are considered closely 
related to academic success". These are: "a) positive 
self -concept , as related to future expectations b) realistic 
sel f -appraisal , especially refers to academic abilities c) 
understanding of and an ability to deal with racism d) 
preference for 1 ong- term goal s over more immediate, short term 
needs e) availability of a strong support person f) successful 
leadership experience in both formal or informal settings and 
g) demonstrated community service before college enrollment h) 
academic familiarity, that is, the closeness of a student's 
extracurricular activities and interests relate to formal 
academic subjects." The goal of the study is to see how 
traditional and non-traditional predictors correlate with 
academic success beyond the first year of college. The Whites 
and the Blacks are compared for the year 1979 and 1980. The 
specific semesters for each period are: 1, 3, 6 for 1980 end 
1, 3, 5, 8 for 1979. Stepwise multiple regression is used. 
They attempt to extend the predictive validity of the Scale to 

13 

ERiC 



four years. The two variables that are predictive of grades 
at every semester are positive seif-concept and realistic 
sei f -appraisal . Other variables only appear at different 
points of time. In brief, the study reports that a positive 
global, self-concept and sel f -appraisal and other 
non-cognitive variables are likely to affect one's college 
grade point average (GPA.) 

College persistence and achievement are often used to 
indicate the academic success of an individual. In Helen S. 
Astin S Cross's study, "Factors affecting Black Students 1 
Persistence in College, 1 979, 19 they discover that of the 69 
potential predictors, 17 independent variables enter the 
regression equation with a statistically significant weight, 
the most significant "positive 11 predictors of full-time 
persisters 1 are: past academic achievements as measured by 
high school grade point average, SAT Scores, enrolled in the 
college preparatory curriculum in high school, and attempting 
to attend a four-year institution. Some of the significant 
negative predictors are: being employed 21 or more hours per 
week while attending college, and parental income. In this 
study, those Blacks who come mainly from low-income families, 
and who are more likely to get financial aid, will continue to 
stay in college because this is their only hope. Usually the 
financial aids that the Whites and the BlacKs received differ 
'ittle in the two-year college. The Whiles usually get one 
type of aid (either grants or loans) while the Blacks are more 



likely to get a "package" combining grant, loan and work study 
aid. It is found that unless the grant is a large portion of 
the black student's financial aid package, the effect may be 
negative to the recipient's persistence in college. In other 
words, the larger loan does not promise college persistence of 
low-income minority groups, because they may not feel 
confident in paying all this money back. In such a case, 
"they either leave or take up more hours of part-time work 
which may make their course works harder." Finally, in their 
study, the type of institution a black student attends also 
proves important. The black students with approximately the 
same input characteristics, like academic achievement, 
freshmen expectations, hours of work while in college are 
likely to persist full-time in college if they attend 
predominate! y Whi te ones. Judging from the above findings, it 
is very interesting to know whether these predictor variables 
(like paid hours work per week, high school GPA, institution 
type, high school track, college aspiration, and the rest) 
influence college GPA when applied to community college 
students . 

One classic model which relates to student retention and 
performance is Tinto's retention model. Tinto's conceptual 

scheme (1975, 1985, 1987) on the retention and dropout of 

college students has been tested by many researchers. Unlike 
Anderson : , Spady, and Rootman, Tint o 1 s attrition proposition 
has been accepted as a more empirical oriented model. His 



model can be seen as an extension of Spady and Rootman's 
model. Tinto f s model takes its root in Smile Durkheim's 
theory of suicide. As a sociologist, Durkheim contends that 
when peopl e are sufficiently integrated to the fabric of 
society, especial 1 y in terms of moral e and affiliation, 
suicide rate will decrease. Tinto also borrows from the field 
of economic of education which concerns the cost-benefit 
analysis of individual decision regarding investment in 
alternative educational activities. Central to Tinto's model 
is interaction oetween students and faculties in the formal 
academic and informal social settings, The frequency and 
quality of those interactions are important to modify a 
student's college completion goals and commitment to 
institutions. If the student-staff relation retrains strong 
and outweighs alternatives to college, retention will occur. 
If not, a decision will be made to withdraw. In his article 
(1985), he also tries to distinguish academic dismissal from 
voluntary withdrawal from col lege . According to Tinto, a 
college often contains both the academic system and the social 
system. A person may be able to integrate in one area but not 
the other. One can be integrated into the social sphere of 
the college and still dropout because of an insufficient 
academic performance , or one may be good in academic 
performance but f ; -ally dropout because of an inadequate 
integration into the social life of the institution. The 
interplay between these two relations is often very 

16 



intricatsd . In the case of the Asian-Americans, little is 
known how much the first of the two constructs of Tinto's 
conceptual scheme influence academic achievement, which forms 
a smal 1 part of the third construct . Students 1 background 
characteristics (that is, family background, pre-college 
schooling, individual attributes ) and initial commitments 
(that is, commitment to the goal of college graduation and 
commitment to the institution) art' the first two constructs. 
Pascarella and Others (1983) have conducted a similar study in 
a community college setting in order to test Tinto 1 s model, 
but again it is not an examination of the Asian-Americans, and 
the non-white sample that they used is very small. 

As mentioned above, Pascarella, Duby and others 1 article 
M A Test And Reconceptual ization of a Theoretical Model of 
College Withdrawal in a Commuter Institution Setting (1983)" 
attempts to test Tinto's model and examining its applicability 
to Non-residential institutions. The concept of social 
integration and institutional commitment seem not to work in 
this urban commuter institution. The basic argument is that 
commuter students have fewer opportunities to interact with 
faculties and student peers. Therefore, unlike the traditional 
residential students, the environmental factors play a minor 
role in the withdrawal or persistence decision. On the other 
hand, the pre-enrol iment student characteristics become mere 
important in affecting the withdrawal decision of a commuter 
student. This study provides one wi*;h some guidelines of how 

17 



ERIC 



^0 



to predict the college persistence of commuter students. As 
indicated by Astin (1973), and Chickeriag (1974), students who 
commute to school or attend a non-residential college usually 
have very different -input characteristics than students who 
reside on campus. Chickering concludes that commuting and 
residential students differ at least on three dimensions: 11 a) 
commuter students are less dispose to or engage in 
educationally and intellectually developmental activities or 
experiences; b) they are less likely to participate in 
non-compulsory social, cultural and intellectual activities; 
and are less likely to interact with faculty members and other 
students; c) and as a result, they are also less likely to be 
influenced by their college experience as measured in terms of 
degree aspirations, commitment to long term goals, and 
perceived competence and ability (Pascarella and others, 
1983:330.) In fact, this is also interesting to see how these 
variables such as, degree aspiration and commitment to long 
term goals change over time among different Asian subgroups 
who study in a community college setting. 

Pascarella and Chapman in another article, "A 
Multi-Institutional, Path Analytic Validation of Tinto's 
Theoretical Model of College Withdrawal/' continue to point 
out that Tint o 1 s model to a large extent assumes that the 
col lege envi ronment provides ampl e opportunities for social 
interaction. This is more likely in a traditional residential 
institution, but it is with hesitation to say that this also 

IS 



ERLC 



21 



holds in a non-residential setting. As we realise that 
students who attend community college are often older, full- 
time worker, more practically-oriented, and have a longer 
completion period. They have a higher affiliation expectation 
and an expectation for more major specific programs or 
curricula, especially for higher-achieving and 
intel lectually-orienred students (Pas car el la and others , 
1983:97.) Therefore, these initial differences may have more 
direct effects on college performance and persistence than the 
college experier.ee or impact on commuter students and students 
who att end a non- residential coi 1 age . 

In brief, as for community colleges in California or 
else where around the nation, they are accepted for their 
openness, large size, variety of courses, heterogeneous 
population and less selectivity; they are inclined to attract 
a population of all ages and of all concerns. Past research 
studies have focused on either traditional or non-traditional 
measures in predicting student outcomes. However, many of 
these findings are tentative and lacking concern for Asian- 
American experience . 



Rationale for Independent Variables 



Demographic and Background Characteristics 

In Tinto's conceptual scheme of attrition, background 
characteristics are usual ly considered to have secondary 
effects on college persistence than the social integration and 
academic integration constructs. Nevertheless, in Pascarella 
and others 1 findings (1981, 1983), pre-college enrollment 
characteristics are found to have a more immediate effect on 
college persistence among "commuting" students. To Tinto 
(1987), as well as to Pascarella (1983) and Astin (1970a, 
1970b, 1977, 1982), what students bring with them to college 
(or the input characteristics) help to facilitate their 

accomplishments in college. In other words, the pre- 

enrollment academic preparation, high school track bearing and 
personal ability (HSGPA) are often considered to be good 
predictors of college performance. For instance, Helen S. 
Astin mentions that enrollment in the college-preparatory 
track is positively correlated to college performance. 
Alexander Astin, on the other hand, also reports that input 
characteristics must be controlled in order to study the 
college impact on outcome variables. In Sue & Abe's study, 
HSGPA continues to be the best positive predictor among all 
predictor variables. 



20 



ERLC 



23 



Residence history of the student can be used to reflect 
the level of acculturation in this country and this is 
frequently measured in terms of the number of years resided in 
this united nation. Sue ( 1990 ) points out that in the case of 
Asian-Americans , education is the only sphere which they 
perceive little limitation in social opportunities, A strong 
educational background presumably helps them to broaden their 
non- educational arena, and so they are more willing to put 
more effort on educational perseverance. Conversely, this 
idea postulates that the longer the length of acculturation, 
the lower the reliance on academic achievement. A person will 
perceive more open opportunities in other non- educational 
avenues the 1 onger he/she "accul turat e , integrate and 
assimilate" into this country. The person knows where to 
proceed and search for opportunities other than the 
educational one. 

As for socio-economic status , it is often considered to 
be an important background variable by many sociologists, 
psychologists and educationists. Lareau (1987) says that the 
uneven possession of "cultural capital" within each social 
class creates a difference in school performance. But in 
Astin's (1973b) study of factors related to college attrition, 
family income is not a direct cause of attrition. However, in 
Astin's study on minorities in higher education (1982:94), he 
shows that parental income and education have significant 
positive relationships with undergraduate GPA and persistence, 



21 



ERLC 



24 



especially among Chicanos, Puerto Ricans, and Blacks, The 
lower the parental income, the lower the minority's 
persistence in higher education. 

Academic Variables 

Paid Hours Work Per Week : Cross & Astin (1979) believe 
that working during semester has a "negative" effect on 
college performance and persistence. The longer the hours one 
works during the semester, the more likely one is to withdraw. 
For working prevents one to concentrate cn study. 

Fellowships, Grants, Scholarships Awarded : Astin and 
Cross (197?) also review that a larger loan does not ensure 
college persistence for low income minority groups, because 
they may not feel confident of paying all these money back. 
In this case, they will prefer to leave or take up more hours 
of part-tine work which may make their course works even 
harder. In the case of community college students, I expect 
that grants or scholarships awarded do help minorities 
consolidate their studies and complement their school 
performance . 

Initial Goal Commitment (Student Aspirations): Astin 
says that minorities' initial goal commitment is imminently 
related to their actual degree commitment. A students 1 
initial choice of a major or a career is nothing random. This 
;.as a long term effect on a student's career development, 
undergraduate GPA and persistence. Tinto and Pascarella also 



ERIC 



25 



hold si mi 1 ar arguments. However, little is known when it 
pertains to Asian-Americans who study in community colleges. 
As mentioned previousl y by Pascarellaet als. (1983), students 
attending community college are more mature, and program- 
oriented. Many of them are working mainly full-time. They 
attend college either for the purpose of picking up some new 
skills or accumulating credentials for promotion and a better 
salary. Since over three-quarters of this study sample is 
aged 2 4 o- over, I expect that older Asian-Ameri cans are not 
likely aspire for a higher degree. 

Inst_i uti ona 1 z ommi tment : Students who have made up 
their decisions to stay in a particular college usually 
persist longer than those who do not. The reason is that they 
find what they want in this college, and they have positive 
attitudes toward their choices. This is especially true for 
students who study in four-year institutions. Nonetheless, 
when this variable is related to community college students, 
the situation will be very different. Academically high- 
achievers would like to move from a two-year college to a more 
prestigious four-year college. Those who can successfully 
transfer upward rely heavily on their performances in the two- 
year college. Therefore, planning to transfer is expected to 
have a positive correlation with college GPA. In other words, 
institutional goal commitment is inversely related to college 
GPA.. A high-achiever is expected -to have a lower 

institutional commitment and a higer chance of transf err* 1 in 

23 



ERLC 



26 



a community college setting. 



Academic participation : Chi eke ring and As tin have 
mentioned that students enrolled in a non-residential college 
are very distinct from traditional residential students. They 
have less time to interact with the faculty and student peers, 
and are less likely to be influenced by college experience. 
For Tinto, the more harmonious the interplay between social 
and academic integration, the better the persistence rate . 
This is because he assumes that students have ample 
opportunities to interact and experience with the college 
environment. Since college GPA is only part of the academic 
integration and so it is expected that college GPA and 
academic participation will be positively correlated. 
Nevertheless, this relation will be very weak among junior 
college student. 

Study Habits : Pantages S Creedon (1973) says that one of 
the obvious factor that affect student 1 s persistence is the 
poor study habits . Poor study habits not only affect a 
student's persistence but also a student's school performance. 
This is measured in terms of ones use of the existing library 
facilities. Since a large proportion of the junior college 
students are full-time commuting students, it is reasonable to 
think that their study habits are very different from 
traditional college students. Using the library for class 
assignment and reading are expected to be low among these 

24 



ERIC 



27 



commuting students as a whole. However, there are still much 
variations among different achievers. Poor study habits 
usually end up in poor academic results. 

Participation in Extracurricular Activities : Checkering 
also says (1974) that "commuter students tend not to 
participate in the various non-classroom social, cultural, and 
intellectual offering of the university. " It is expected that 
commuter students or students who attend a non-residential 
college usually have less time to involve in extra-curricula 
activities. This rr.ay limit a student's social interaction 
with nis school environment and consequently affect his 
educational experience (Pascarella & others 1981, 1983; Tracey 
& Sedlacek, 1983. ) 

Changing Majors : In addition, Parscarella & Others 
(1981) also report that changing majors during the academic 
year is helpful to a student's persistence. A college student 
may change his major serveral times to fit .his ability, 
interest, and possibly the market demand. A student is likely 
to dropout if he fails to realise his potentials in the area 
he is studying. However, the association between frequencies 
of changing majors and academic achievement is still vague 
among junior college students. The "time" factor is too short 
to allow any significant changes overt. But traditional 
college student who changes his/her majors more often is 
likely to have a positive effect on his/her college 
persistence even though his/her college GPA might not be the 

25 



ERIC 



28 



best . 



Control Vari abl es 

Control variables used in this study are: ethnic origin, 
native 1 anguage (first 1 anguage spoke) , semesters in the 
respective college. The first two variables are controlled to 
identify different Asian-American subgroups: Chinese, 
Japanese, Koreans, Filipinos and Vietnamese-Americans. The 
number of semesters m the college is restricted to two 
semesters or more. This will allow the respondent to 
accumulate a diverse grade point average for evaluation. With 
the rationale provided by each of the predictor variable 
above, the research hypothesis can be formula -d as follows: 

Research Hypothesis 

a) Ethnicity 

There will be a significant difference in college 
achievement within different Non-Native English speaking Asian 
subgroups as well as between the Whites and the Asian 
aggregate. This also holds when controlling for sex. 

b) Level of acculturation (residence history) 

Among different Non-Native English speaking -Asian 
subgroups, the longer the length of residence in this country, 
the lower the academic score. In other words, high-achieving 
Asians (that is, Aisan- Americans with a high college CPA) tend 



ERIC 



26 

29 



to be in this country for a shorter period of time. 

c ) Pre-college academi c preparation 

Pre-college academic preparation (pre-college education 
1 evel , high school GPA , el igibl e to enter UC or CSU) is 
positively related to college achievement among Asian- 
Americans. In other words, high-achievers are more likely to 
have a relatively distinguished high school GPA , pre-college 
education level and be more eligible to enter UC or CSU upon 
graduation from high school . 

Also among Asian-Americans, those who attended the 
college preparatory track in their high school program are 
likely to have a higher college GPA than those who attended 
the occupation-vocational track. 

d) Social class status (Parental education, and income) 

Among Asian-Americans, parental education and household 
income have significant positive effects on college 
achievement. Asian-Americans with high academic score usually 
have well-educated parents and high household incomes. 

e) paid hours worked per week 

Among Asian-Americans, paid hours worked per week and 
academic achievement are negatively correlated. Hence, high- 
achievers tend to work fewer hours per week. 

f) Scholarships, grants awarded 

Among Asian-Americans, the more the scholarships, loans 
or grants are awarded, the higher the college GPA score. Low- 
achievers tend to receive fewer grants, scholarships. 

27 



ERLC 



30 



g) student aspiration (initial goal commitment ) 

Among Asian-Americans, initial degree objective (such as 
Master degree or higher ) and coll ege GPA are positive 
cor rel ated . 

h) Institutional commitment (that is, planning to transfer) 

Among Asian-Americans, high-achievers tend to transfer to 
other colleges, and have a low institutional commitment. 
Hence, institutional commitment and college GPA are negatively 
correlated . 

i) Academic involvement, study habits and extracurricular 
activities" 

Among Asian-Americans, the academic involvement, study 
habits and extracurricular activities college achievement are 
positively correlated with college performance, 
j) Changing Majors 

Among Asian-Americans, changing major is more frequent 
among high-achievers than other achievers. 

All of the above research hypothes es also hoi d between 
the Native and Non-Native English speaking Whites and the 
Asian aggregate. 



9 

ERLC 



28 



31 



Analysis 

Simple univariate analysis tables will be run for each of 
the variables mentioned above, followed by a series of 
cross-tabulation tables between the dependent variables and 
independent variables (refer to Appendix.) The Chi-Square 
test, T Test, Test for Tau b, One-Way and Two-Way ANOVA are 
used to select signi f icant variables for final analysis . In 
order to save space, cross- tabul ati on tables or test for 
significance tables will not be shown. Consequently, a 
multiple discriminant analysis is used in order to distinguish 
what combination of variables can best discriminate the 
high-achievers, the average-achievers and the low-achievers. 

All discriminating variabl es , which correlate with 
college G?A and show statistically significant in the tests 
(X'- test, Test for Tau b, Two-Way Anova) are included in the 
final analysis. The multiple discriminant analysis can set up 
patterns for each group (that is, low, average, and high) on 
each variable and the inter-correlations of the variables. If 
the patterns are clearly distinct, the set of variables can 
discriminate between' the groups. 

A similar analysis is conducted for the Whites. The 
purpose is to find out whether the set of discriminators in 
predicting the high-, the average-, and the low-achievers are 
different across race. In the stepwise procedures, Wilks's 
lambda" is employed as a criterion for selecting 

23 



ERLC 



32 



discriminating variables. 

The final step is to include ethnicity (the five Asian 
ethnic subgroups ) as an added predictor variabl e onto the 
whole student sample who are classified as either the US 
citizens or permanent residents and have been in the 
respective college for two or more semesters. The purpose is 
to examine whether ethnic status is able to discriminate among 
the groups as well. 

Limitations and Delimitations of the Study 

This study relies on two sets of questionnaire designed 
by the LACCD Educational Service center to do a secondary data 
analysis. Therefore, it has two major limitations: (a) the 
items use in the analysis can only be seen as an approximation 
of some concepts being tested. For example, the measuring of 
study habits by the use of library facilities might not be 
good indicators, the number of hours used in studying may be 
a more appropriate indicator and (b) the number of students 
for certain subgroup, like Japanese Americans, is too small 
for valid interpretations and generalizations. 

This first limitation restricts this study to examine the 
effects of other variables (like cognitive abilities, 
sel f -concept , proficiency in Engl ish 1 anguage ) on academic 
achievement . 

With respect to the second limitations, the reader should 

30 

ERiC 33 



be careful when making generalisation about the nine community 
college students under study, especially to those community 
colleges where there are uneven distribution of Asian ethnic 
subgroups (Tab! e 1 . ) 




31 



34 



Table 1. SELECTED POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS 3Y COLLEGE 
SERVICE AREA , 1988 (TOTAL POPULATION=4 , 712 , 462 ) 



College Ethnicity Age- 
Service 



Area 


Asian 


White 


Others 


T ft ft A 

18-24 


ft C C A 

25-54 




% 


% 


% 


% 


% 


City 


13 . 6 


44.0 


39. 9 


52 ,488 


293 ,163 


East 


8 . 2 


20 .0 


71.0 


88,499 


321,350 


Harbour 


9.9 


50 .8 


38 . 2 


36,432 


159,552 


Mission 


4.1 


55.7 


39 . 3 


34,762 


144,417 


Pi erce 


4.2 


83.1 


11.7 


42 ,103 


195,468 


Southwest 


5.9 


7.8 


85.7 


41,736 


144,201 


Trade-Tec 


8.3 


8.1 


82 . 6 


56,386 


211,889 


Val ley 


4 . 3 


7 2.3 


22 . 2 


42 ,202 


221 ,274 


West 


5.5 


56.7 


35 . 4 


55,384 


282 ,283 


Whole 












District 


7 . 6 


43.3 


47 . 9 


449,992 


1973,597 



Source: Annual Information Digest, LACCD 1989. 

; Others, include Blacks and Hispanics. 

- Age, 54 and over are not listed in this table. 



32 

35 



In order to make up these deficiencies, a series of 
f ol low -up "snowbal 1 " like interviews is conducted by the 
researcher. He intends to collect more related information to 
interpret and verify the data he has analyzed. Meanwhile, 
other predictor variables which are not included in the 
student survey form, can also be explored. 

The delimitations of this study are that it includes both 
f ul 1 -time and part-time community college students. The 
student must enroll in one of the nine community colleges for 
at least two semesters and he/she must be either a U.S citizen 
or a permanent resident (Green Card holder.) 




33 



36 



Summary of Major Findings 

Do factors related to academic achievement differ by 
ethnicity? 

In brief, we can say that factors related to academic 
achievement do vary by ethnicity. Relatively speaking, there 
are things that are common across ethnicity but there are also 
things that vary across subgroups. The common things are: 
marital status of respondents, age, participation in 
extra-curricular activities and changing majors. The things 
that vary are: academic preparation, precollege education, 
high school program, socioeconomic status, resident history, 
paid hours worked, academic involvement, and study habits. 

Recent immigrants often earn less than those who have 
been in this country for a longer period of time. At least a 
quarter of the students among each Asian subset is married. 
The native-English speaking Whites and the Japanese-Americans 
have the largest proportion of respondents who have a 2.99 or 
lower high school GPA. Many of the respondents have attended 
a high school before or just attained a high school diploma. 
The "general" high school track is the average preference for 
all groups ypt the college preparatory track is also common 
among the native-English speaking Whites, Filipino- and 
Korean-Americans. The Filipino- and Korean-Americans have the 
largest percentage cf those who are eligible to enter UC 
: University of Cai if ornia system, 3 campuses ) or CSU 
'California State University, 2 n campuses) after high school 

34 



37 



graduation, the Japanese-Americans, on the other hand, have 
the least. 

Basically, rr.any students are in their early twenti es in 
this sample. Except for the Japanese-Americans, over 
three-fifth of other Asian ethnic subgroups are aiming at 
getting a baccalaureate or higher degree. Three out of five 
of these students in each As ian subset have attended the 
respective college for two to four semesters. The 
Vietnamese-, the Korean- and the Chinese-Americans represent 
the three largest subgroups which have the shortest resident 
record of less than ten years while the Japanese-Americans are 
more evenly distributed in all attributes of this variable. 
Around half of the students in each Asian subset works more 
than 20 hours per week. In fact, working full- or part-time 
is a common practice among ail commuting students. By far, 
the Vietnamese- and the Chinese-Americans receive the greatest 
support from the grants, scholarships or fellowships. Over 
two-third of the students are planning to transfer to a two- 
or four-year public or private institution. In general, all 
Asian ethnic subgroups used the library for study and class 
assignment r?.ors frequent than the native-English speaking 
Whites. Regardless of racial aifference, around three 
quarters of the students never participated in any athletic 
program. The native-English speaking Whites and Filipinos are 
more involved in class discussion than other Asian ethnic 
subgroups. Reading ether assigned materials are also common 



35 

38 



among the native-English speaking Whites than other Asian 
ethnic subgroups. A fifth of the Chinese- and 

Japanese-Americans never talk to their instructors in the 
whole semester. Except for the Japanese-Americans, over 
three-quarters of the students never participate in the 
Music-Theater Programs. Again, regardless of racial 
differences, a quarter of the student has changed their majors 
once or more times. Bearing with all these major differences 
in mind, we can see how these Asian-American subgroups vary 
when running the final discriminant analysis. 

Do All Asian ethnic subgroups perform equally well 
academically? Who Do and Who do not? Does this academically 
differences also vary by race? 

One way to validate the umbrella term "All Asian-Americans 

are model minority" is to compare the mean college GPA 

distribution of among each Asian ethnic subgroup and examine 

how they deviate from the grand mean. 

In table 2, with a scale of three levels, that is, a 

range of one to three or ranking from low to high, the 

Korean-Americans has the highest college GPA among all 

Asian-American subgroups (2.02) followed by the Chinese- and 

Vietnamese-Americans. If the grand mean is used as a cutting 

point between the low- and the high-achievers, those who are 

cl ose to the grand mean (1.809) are the average- achievers 

while those above or below the grand mean are the high- and 

the low-achievers respectively. In this case, the 

Korean-Americans ran be classified as the high-achievers, the 

36 

3D 



Chinese-Americans as the average-achievers, and the 
Vietnamese- and ?i 1 ipmo- Americans as the 1 or -achievers . In 
table 2, the F ratio is significant at p<.001 level indicating 
that the chances of getting a sample from a population of 
equal group means is only one out of a thousand. Therefore, 
it is likely that the sample is coming from a population with 
different group means. In the second half of table 2, the 
difference between the Asian aggregate and the Whites were 
also significant at p<.001 level (t=-3.40). The mean college 
GPA for the Whites (1.3534) was only slightly higher than the 
Asian aggregate (1.7598). Hence, it is hard to tell whether 
the college GPA of the Whites are higher than the Asian 
aggregate. However, when it is compared to the grand mean 
(1.3297), the Whites are just above the grand mean and the 
Asians slightly below it. In fact, there are much variation 
within the Asian-American subgroups as indicated above. 
Therefore, to consider the Asian aggregate as one homogeneous 
group can easily mask the result. 



37 



ERiC 40 



Table 2. Differences in Mean College GPA among Five 
Asian-American Subgroups and between the Asian Aggregate 



and the White with a Scale of 3 levels. 

Standard 

Asian Subgroups Mean Deviation Cases 



Chinese 1, 838 2 0 .78 47 27 2 

Japanese 1.6765 0.7270 34 

Koreans 2.0236 0.8014 127 

Filipino 1. 67 66 0 .7220 167 

Vietnamese 1.7381 0.7713 12 6 

Grand Mean 1.8085 0.7758 726 



F(4,721) = 4.3305 p< .001 

Eta = 0.1532 

Eta Square = 0.0235 



Race 



Asian Aggre. 1.7598 0.7672 1016 

White 1.8584 0.7808 2472 

Grand Mean 1.8297 0.7780 3488 

t-test (3486) = -3.40 p<.001 



If college GPA is a used as the only indicator of 
academic achievement then we can tell from table 2 that not 
all Asian-Americans are alike. They are significantly 
differed not only within group (five Asian-American subgroups) 
but also across group (the Whites versus the Asian aggregate.) 
Some of the Asian subgroups can be identified as the 
high-achievers while others the average- and the low- 
achievers . 



38 

41 



What are the demographic, background and academic 
characteristics that distinguish the high-, the average-, and 
the low-achievers? Do these factors differ significantly 
among the three achieving groups? And do they vary by race? 

In general, we can say that the demographic, background 
and academic characteristics among the three achieving groups 
differ. Some of these differences also reach the significance 
level of 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 but these factors seem to vary 
little across race. 

Among the Asian aggregate, the low-achievers are 
predominate 1 y sing; e rr.al e , with high parental e ducat i on but 
low total personal household income and have been in this 
country for a longer period of time. Their precollege academic 
preparation are less equipped than other achievers. They 
aspire to an AA or a baccalaureate degree and change majors 
more frequent than other achievers. Average-achievers are 
largely single or married female. High-achievers, on the 
other hand, are either married or single female, with fewer of 
them reported that English as their first language. Their 
parents' education level are low but the personal household 
incomes reported are high. They have been in this country for 
a shorter period of time, usually less than 10 years. Their 
precollege academic preparation are also more prepared than 
other counterparts . They have relatively distinguished high 
school GPA, and have a higher eligibility to enter the UC and 
CSU system. They are more likely to enrol 1 in the coll ege 
preparatory track. They aspire to a baccalaureate or a higher 

39 



42 



degree and are less likely to change majors. 

Among the Whites, the low-achievers also tend to be 
single male, with high parental education but low total 
household income . They are less prepared academical 1 y , and 
aspire to a baccalaureate or 1 ower degree. Changing majors 
are more frequent among the low-achievers. Similar to the 
Asian aggregate, the average-achievers are likely to be single 
female. High-achievers are either single or married female, 
with low parental education but high personal household 
incomes. Similar to the Asian counterparts, they are also 
more prepared before college, aspire to a baccalaureate or 
higher degree and less likely to change their majors. Other 
characteristics like: scholarships or grants awarded, 
institutional commitment, paid hours worked per week do not 
seem to vary much across the three achieving groups for the 
Whites . 

Basical 1 y , the differences in select ed characteristics 
among the three achieving groups look very similar between the 
Asian Aggregate and the Whites, except that the residence 
history in the United States among the Asian-Americans are 
much shorter. However, the difference between the Whites and 
the Asian Aggregate become more distinct when the set of 
variables are considered simultaneously as indicated earlier 
in the discriminant analysis. 

There is without a doubt that inferential statistics 
depicts information on how individual variabl e differs 

40 



ERLC 



43 



significantly between groups as well as among groups. But it 
is more interesting to analyze the variables together than one 
at a time. It is possible that variable which is significant 
in a bivariate analysis might become ins igni fi cant when 
treated as part of a set of measures. Discriminant Analysis 
is one of the multivariate techniques uses to detect these 
dif f erences . 

What sets of variables discriminate who are high-, average- 
and low-achievers? Does the set of discriminating variables 
vary by race? 

Results: Asian Aggregate & Whites (include both Native and 
Non-Native English Speakers) 

As indicated in table 3, the number of native-English and 

non-native-English speaking Asians are 139 and 906 cases 

respectively. Together they add up to 1,045 cases for 

analysis. Basically, those variables which show significant 

differences in the respective tests : a Two-Way Anova or 

t-test , Tau B test , and Chi -square test , wi 1 1 be used to 

discriminate among groups. But Tatsuoka reminds that "high 

statistical significance does not necessarily imply a large 

magnitude of difference or strong association especially when 

the sample size is large (Tatsuoka, 1970:48)." Variable 

which is significant in a univariate or bivariate analysis 

does not insinuate that it is also significant in a 

multivariate analysis. Discriminant analysis abets to gauge 




T h e m e a n 



standard deviation 



ERIC 



44 



and univariate F ratio of each discriminating variable for 
individual subgroups and for both Asian aggregate and the 
Whites are shown in Table 4, 5 and 6. These provide some 
ideas of how these variables differ across groups in the 
calibration sample. 

TABLE 3. SEX 3Y RACE 3Y ENGLISH LANGUAGE FOR THE SAMPLE 
POPULATION OF THE L.A.C.C.D. 



Non-English Speaking 
Asian White 
461 145 
445 146 



Total 133 2230 906 291 



English Speaking 

Asian White 

Female 6 5 12 IS 

Male 74 1012 




42 



45 



The Asian Aggregate 

Table 4 indicates how groups differ on individual 
characteristics for the Asian Aggregate. You can see that the 
mean age of the high-achievers is higher than the average and 
the low-achievers and so is their high school grade point 
average, precollege education level, paid hours worked during 
the semester, scholarship received and academic involvement. 
However, a reverse direction occurs when you examine the 
variables of parental education, household income, time in the 
United States and frequency cf changing majors. It indicates 
that high-achievers usually have a lower annual household 
income, a shorter residence history in this country, parents 
with lower education level and less frequent of changing 
majors. The dummy coded variables: sex, marital status, 
planning to transfer to other college, high school track and 
degree aspiration carry little information by looking at the 
mean. (refer to table 5) 

The stepwise discriminant analysis in table 7 shows the 
relative cont ributi on of the variabl es to the discriminant 
function I or II. Of the 21 variables used in the analysis 
only nine variables enter the equation and of the two possible 
discriminant functions only function 1 is significant at 
p<.001 level. The canonical Rc : for function I (rc = 0.5082) 
indicates a moderate positive relations between the set of 
dummy variables which define the group membership and the 
discriminant f ur.cz i cn . But the canonical Rc for function 1 1 

43 



ERIC 



46 



is weak (rc = 0.2} and insignificant. The Eigenvalue for 
Pucntion II and Wilk's Lambda after Function I, which indicate 
that the three groups had the same mean are not rejected. 
Hence, function II can be ignored. Since Function II is not 
likely to contribute much of the theoretical and practical 
importance , we focus on Function I for expl ana t ion (Kleck 
1984:17.) The first function is defined largely by a 
distinguished high school GPA, being older female, awarded 
with scholarships or grants, low parental education and 
aspiring for a degree ether than AA or BA (i.e. MA.) The 
average scores cr group centroids are "the mean discriminant 
score for each group. 1 ' 7 Here, the low-achievers have an 
average of -0.5893, the average-achievers have an average 
score of 0.2063 and the high-achievers have an average score 
of 0.9545. It indicates that function I separates the high- 
achievers from the average- and the low-achievers more clearly 
than the average- versus the low- or the average- versus the 
high-achievers. The separation of groups between the average- 
and the high- is a little bit blurred in this case. The 
average-achievers are closer to the high-achievers than to the 
low-achievers. When examining the results of the 

classification analysis in table 7. The overall percentage of 
rorrect classification based on the demographic, background 
and academic equation is 57.06% for the calibration sample. 
When the discriminant coefficient for function I, II are used 
to classify cases to the raw data of the validation sample. 

44 



ERIC 



47 



The overall correct classification of cases is 47.17%, a drop 
of 9.89%. Since the prior probabilities of each group are set 
at it's own group size ( . 44/ . 37/ . 19 ) for both calibration and 
validation samples. It is found that the correct 

classification for average-achievers is no better than chance 
and is under-represented in the validation sample. Therefore, 
it indicates that the discriminant model which is used to 
classify cases into the average group is less efficient. 
Perhaps, a pairwise comparison of the three groups (low versus 
average, average versus high, low versus high) might help to 
clarify these differences. 



45 



9 

ERLC 



48 



TABLE 4. MEANS , STANDARD DEVIATIONS, AND UNIVARIATE F 
RATIO FOR ALL INDEPENDENT VARIABLES IN THE CALIBRATION SAMPLE 
(ASIAN AGGREGATE ONLY) 



Univariate 
Variabl e 



Low_ 
Achievers 
N = 102 ) 



M 



SD 



Average_ 
Achievers 
( N = 36 ) 

M SD 



High_ 
Achievers 
( N = 45 ) 



M 



SD 



F 

ratio 



(DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES) 



Female 0.38 


0 . 


49 


U . 


3 o 


u . 


o u 


u . DU 


U . JU 


K 
>J 




Single 0.87 


0 . 


33 


U . 


1 U 


u . 




-u . ou 


ft ^ 


7 


ft A** 


Married 0.12 


0 


32 


0 


. 1 9 


0 


.39 


0 .31 


A A H 

U . 4 / 




4.1^* 


Age 23.16 


6. 


02 


26 . 


A A 

4 Z 


Q 

o . 


31 


28 . 58 


7.71 . 


1 ft 


.08** 


(BACKGROUND VARIABLES) 
















0 . 65@ 


IGC(Cer) 0.06 


0 


.24 


0 


.07 


0 


.26 


0 . 11 


0 . 32 




IGC(AA) 0.13 


0 


. 33 


0 




A 


. 3 1 


0.04 


0 . 21 




1 . 14(5 


IGC(BA) 0.55 


A 
J 




0 


. 45 


0 


. 50 


0 . 42 


0 . 50 




1.47Q 


Transfer 0.88 


0 


. 32 


0 


.85 


0 


.36 


0 . 69 


0 . 47 




4.50* 


HS GPA# 2.96 


A 


A A 




1 5 


0 . 


A 1 
1 — 


2 .39 


0.36 


18 


. 43** 


Pre Col 3.33 


0 


. 92 


3 


.59 


0 


. 94 


3.82 


1.07 




4.51* 


Col prep 0.25 


0 


. 44 


0 


.24 


0 


. 43 


0 . 33 


0 . 48 




0 . 67@ 


Occu Voc 0.13 


0 


.33 


0 


. 07 


0 


.26 


0 .07 


0 . 25 




1.12@ 


Eligible 0.42 


0 


. 50 


0 


. 42 


0 


. 50 


0 . 47 


0 . 50 




0.15$ 


Time US 2.58 




. 14 


2 


. 40 


1 


.30 


2 . 42 


1 . 44 




0 .53@ 


Par Edu 4.11 


1 


.79 


4 


. 13 


1 


.79 


3 . 49 


1. 67 




2 .29@ 


Household Income 




















23216.71 




19744 


. 69 




17733 . 33 










18747 


. 38 






1810 


.24 


14285 .08 




1.716 


Scholarship 




















0.65@ 


354.35 


782 


.32 


477 


. 8 


1038 


. 63 


506.03 


848 .82 





(ACADEMIC VARIABLES) 

Hrswork 19.97 15.24 21.36 

Aca Par 2.29 0.64 2.53 

Stu Hab 2.81 1 .00 2.83 

Cha Maj 1.53 0.71 1.45 



L6 . 27 
0.73 
1.08 
0 . 59 



22 . 69 
2 . 58 
2 . 71 
1.27 



15.59 

0 . 80 

1 . 10 
0.58 



0 . 63@ 

1 .486 
0 . 21@ 

2 .706 



High school GPA ' 3 ' = 3 . 50_4 . 00 
new students with no GPAs are 



'2'=3.00_3.49 'l'=2 . 99_2.00 
omitted from this analysis. 



0.0! 



eve] 



6 not significant at 
* p< . 05 
** p<.0001 

IGC = Initial Goal Commitment 



46 

4D 



The Whites 

When examining the simple descriptive statistics of the 
White subsample (table 5) I discovered that the age cohort 
among the high- achievers are much older (at 1 east 8 year 
difference) than the low-achievers and the average-achievers 
(at least 4 years older.) The high school GPA, precollege 
education level , scholarship received, and academic 
involvement also indicate lower among the low-achievers but 
higher between the average- and the high-achievers. The 
relation, however, is reversed when you examine the parental 
education, paid hours worked, household income, study habits 
and frequencies of changing majors, have parents with more 
years of education., higher household income, working more 
hours and strangely enough, more frequent use of library for 
study and course assignments. The variable Time in the United 
States were quite inconsistent across groups but the trend 
seemed to indicate that high achieving students tend to have 
a longer resident history. However, the contrast between the 
low- versus the average- or the low- versus the high- 
achievers are more cl ear-cut . 



47 

50 



TABLE 5. MEANS, STANDARD DEVIATIONS, AND UNIVARIATE AND 
MULTIVARIATE F RATIO FOR ALL INDEPENDENT VARIABLES IN THE 
CALIBRATION SAMPLE (WHITES ONLY) 



Low_ Average^ High_ 

Achievers Achievers Achievers 



( 


N = 


217 ) 


( 


N 


= 197 ) 


( N = 


132 ) 




Univariate 
















F 


Variable M 




SD 


M 




SD 


M 


SD 


ratio 


(DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES) 














Female 0.43 


0 . 


50 


0 . 


50 


0 . 50 


0 . 64 


0 . 48 


7 . 24** 


Single 0.81 


0 . 


40 


0 . 


64 


0 . 48 


0 . 40 


0.49 


32 . 94** 


Married 0.12 


0 . 


33 


0 . 


24 


0. 43 


0 . 43 


0 . 50 


23 . 70** 


Age 24.18 


7 . 


96 


27 . 


92 


9. 90 


32 .36 


10 . 12 


32 . 44** 


(BACKGROUND VARIABLES) 












2 . 73@ 


IGC(Cer) 0.04 


0 


. 19 


0 


.07 


0.26 


0 . 10 


0 . 30 


IGC(AA) 0.06 


0 


.24 


0 


.07 


0 .26 


0.14 


0 . 35 


4.14* 


IGC(BA) 0.51 


0 


. 50 


0 


.44 


0 . 50 


0 . 41 


0 . 49 


2 . 07@ 


Transfer 0.84 


0 . 


39 


0 . 


77 


0 . 42 


0 .70 


0 .46 


4.94** 


HS GPA# 2.89 


0 . 


40 


2 . 


99 


0 . 43 


3.11 


0 .53 


9 . 84** 


Pre Col 3.35 


0 . 


74 


3. 


73 


0 . 97 


3 . 99 


1.01 


22 . 38** 


Col prep 0.32 


0 . 


47 


0 . 


35 


0 . 48 


0 . 51 


0 . 50 


6 . 58** 


Occu Voc 0.07 


0 


. 25 


0 


. 11 


0.32 


0 .07 


0 . 25 


1 . 50@ 


Eligible 0.37 


0 


. 48 


0 


.36 


0 . 48 


0 . 33 


0 . 47 


0 . 22@ 


Time US 4.89 


1 


. 39 


5 


.23 


1.17 


5 .17 


1.24 


4 .08* 


Par Edu 4.55 


1 


. 47 


4 


. 40 


1 . 54 


4.29 


1.57 


1 . 34<§ 


Household Income 
















34535 .56 




32345 


. 68 


31864 .14 






19792 


. 91 




19463.01 


20799. 58 


0 . 99@ 


Scholarship 
















0 .78@ 


76.77 


458 


. 46 


121 


.30 


417 .56 


131 .16 


479.01 


(ACADEMIC VARIABLES) 












0 . 37@ 


Hrswork 24.54 


14 


. 38 


24 


.07 


14 . 88 


23 . 12 


16 . 12 


Aca Par 2 . 67 


0 


71 


2 . 


86 


0.78 


2 . 88 


0 . 62 


5 .02** 


Stu Hab 2.51 


1 


. 10 


2 


.36 


1.13 


2 . 28 


1.19 


1.860 


Cha Maj 1.59 


0 


. 69 


1 


.51 


0 . 69 


1 .40 


0 . 62 


3.07* 



# High school GPA ' 3 ' =3 . 50_4 . 00 ' 2 ' = 3 . 00_3 . 49 ' 1 ' = 2 . 99_2 . 00 
new students with no GPAs are omitted from this analysis. 

@ not significant 

* p< . 05 

** p<.0001 



48 



9 

ERJC 



51 



In table 1 , of the two possible functions, only function 
I is significant at p<.001, the Eigenvalue (0.2746) and the 
canonical r for function I (0.4641 ) all indicate that the 
ability of the discriminant function to distinguish among the 
groups. The canonical r for function is weak (r=0.1549) and 
the insignificance of the Wilk's lambda implies that further 
analysis using function II is of less substantive meaning. 
The variables which have the largest contribution on Function 
I are: having a good precollege education background, good 
high school GPA, enrolled in college preparatory track, more 
involved in academic participation, being married and more 
mature. Among the Whites, of the 13 variables in the 
discriminant equation, at least half of them (that is, with a 
loading of 0.24 or over) are found in the equation that 
discriminated the three achieving groups. The proportion of 
variance explained by the discriminant function I is 22%. The 
average score for the low-achiever in function I is -0.5525, 
the average-achiever is 0.0819 and the high-achiever is 
0.7860. Again, group 2 (average) is closer to group 3 (high) 
than group 1 (low). The distinction between average- versus 
high-achievers is not really that clear-cut when looking at 
the distribution of scatt er-pl ot . Hence, a pairwise 
comparison of the groups is necessary. 

In summary , an equation based on the 13 variabl es 
significantly discriminate the three groups of achievers and 
correctly identified 51.00% of an independent validation 

49 

ERiC 52 



sample. The overall percentage of correct classification in 
the validation sample is a significant improvement by chance 
(that is, .40/ .36/. 24 at p<.0001.) 




50 



53 



Separate Pairwise Comparison for Different Groups Between the 
Asian Aggregate and the Whites 

As recalled from previous analysis of the three achieving 
groups among the Asian aggregate and the Whites, not a very 
clear picture or a separation of the three groups is made by 
the set of discriminating variables especially between the 
average- versus high-achievers among the Whites and the Asian 
Aggregate. A pairwise comparison of the groups is used in 
order to find out which set of variables distinguished the 
low- versus the average, the average- versus the high-, and 
the low- versus the high-achievers. In order to save space, 
I try to summarize the result in Table 7. Interested readers 
can review the information given in this table themselves. 
With those variables that entered the equation, the researcher 
considered a loading of 0.25 or above is worth discussing. 



9 

ERLC 



51 



54 



Table 7. DEMOGRAPHIC, BACKGROUND AND ACADEMIC VARIABLES 
DISTINGUISHING LOW- , AVERAGE- AND HIGH-ACHIEVERS (3 GROUPS) AS 
WELL AS BETWEEN LOW- VERSUS AVERAGE-, AVERAGE- VERSUS HIGH-, 
AND LOW- VERSUS HIGH-ACHIEVERS FOR THE WHITES AND ASIAN 
AGGREGATE . 

Aggregate Subsamples 



AWAW AWAW 



L-A-H L-A L-A A-H A-H L-H L-H 



DEMOGRAPHIC VARS 

Female .33 .54 .11 

Age .47 .32 .55 .29 .41 .43 .30 

Marital Status 

Single -.23 -.21 .41 -.35 

Married .25 .64 .23 

BACKGROUND VARS 

Time in U.S. .20 .35 -.43 .19 

Precollege Edu . .24 .36 .23 .23 

Eligibility -.18 -.17 .27 

Hi Sch Track 
Occup-Voc -.22 -.01 -.32 .16 -.28 
Coll-Prep .28 .24 .09 

High Sch GPA .59 .32 .39 .33 -.81 .32 .66 .33 

Parent Edu -.27 

Household Inc -.21 -.26 

ACADEMIC VARS 

Paid Hrs Wks -.15 -.15 

Grants/Schrs .29 .40 .31 -.18 .11 

Goal Commit. 

Cert --1° 
AA -.34 .20 -.28 .43 -.25 

BA -.28 -.34 -.17 .50 -.32 -.18 

Instit. Com. -.12 

Acad Parti .24 .43 .25 

Study Hbts - -18 

Change Majors -16 -.18 

Group Centroids 
Low -.59 -.55 -.39 -.35 -.50 -.66 

Average .21 .08 .47 .38 .35 -.25 

High .96 .79 -.59 .37 1.21 1.06 



52 



9 

ERJC 



55 



Eigen Value 



(I) 


. 35 


. 28 


. 18 


.13 


. 21 


.09 


. 62 


. 70 


(II) 


.04 


. 05 














Wilk's Lambda 
















Canno . r(I) 


. 51 


. 46 


. 39 


. 34 


. 42 


. 29 


. 62 


. 64 


Canno. r(II) 


. 20 


.16 














Canno. r(I) 


.26 


. 22 


.15 


. 12 


.18 


. 08 


. 38 


. 41 


Canno. r* (II). 0 4 


.02 














(I) 77.04 


143. 35 


30 . 90 


50.59 


21. 20 


29. 34 


61.08 


184 


(ID 


9.23 


13.04 














DF (I ) 


18 


26 


7 


11 


4 


7 


8 


13 


(II) 


8 


12 














Sig. level 


















(I) 


.001 


.001 


. 001 


.001 


.001 


.001 


.001 . 


001 


(II) 


NS 


NS 














Overall % of 


















Corr Classi. 


















Calibra S. 


57 


54 


72 


65 


72 


62 


85 


81 


1 ow 


78 


74 


80 


75 






90 


88 


average 


43 


38 


61 


53 


87 


78 






high 


33 


42 






43 


37 


71 


69 


Valida S. 


47 


51 


59 


65 


70 


66 


79 


76 


1 ow 


65 


76 


68 


77 






86 


85 


average 


32 


34 


45 


53 


87 


81 






high 


24 


38 






37 


42 


64 


62 


Group Size 


















Proportion 


















1 ow 


. 44 


. 40 


. 54 


. 52 






.71 


. 61 


average 


.37 


. 3 6 


. 46 


. 48 


. 63 


. 59 






high 


.19 


.24 






. 37 


. 41 


.29 


.39 


Total N 


234 


546 


189 


414 


115 


336 


133 


355 



L-A-H stands for discriminant analysis with Low-Average-High 
groups. L-A is low- versus average-achievers, A-H is average- 
versus high-achievers and L-H is low- versus high-achievers. 



53 



ERIC 



56 



In a nutshell, the direction of all the discriminant 
variables that differentiate groups are as expected. There 
are variables which are common as well as unique to both the 
Whites and the Asian aggregate. Variables which are common in 
both ethnic groups include age, high school GPA, high school 
track, and initial goal commitment. The variables which are 
unique to the Asian aggregate are sex, parental education, and 
scholarships or grants awarded. But for the Whites, the unique 
variables are marital status, duration in the United States, 
precollege education, college-preparatory track, household 
income and academic involvement. 

Can different Asian ethnic identities be used to predict who 
are the high-, the average- and the low-achievers? In other 
words, can we classify people to the high, average, or the low 
achieving group by knowing their ethnic identities? 

In table 6 and 8, the five Asian-American sub-groups are 

entered simultaneously with the other twenty-one independent 

variables to see whether ethnicity helps to classify group 

membership. The two discriminant functions are found to be 

significant at 0.05 level. Variables which have a 

discriminant coefficient loading of 0.25 or higher in function 

I are: age ( .51) , high school GPA ( .52) , aspiring for a 

baccalaureate degree (-.30) and academic involvement (.32). 

In function II, we have predictors like Chinese (-.32), Korean 

'.26), Filipinos f-.25), married status (.35), rre-college 

education (-.52), paid hours worked per week (-.32) and grants 

cr scholarships awarded (.30). Even though demographic, 

54 



ERLC 



57 



background and academic variables all enter the equation 
simultaneously, demographic variables tend to weigh heavily on 
function II than on function I. In general, function I is 
likely to describe high-achieving students as being older, 
have a relatively distinguished high school GPA, more 
academically involved and do not aspire only a baccalaureate 
as their final degree objectives. But less academically 
involved young students, with a relatively low high school 
GPA , and aspire only an AA or a baccalaureate degree are 
likely to be i ow-achievers . The distinction between high- and 
1 ow-achievers is more ci ear -cut in function I . In function 
II, however, the discriminant variables tend to be more 
associated with the average-achievers than other groups. Being 
Chinese or Pilipinos, working during the semester, and having 
a good pre-college education background are likely to be 
average-achievers. Being older Koreans, married, and 
receiving grants or scholarships were likely to be 
high-achievers. Around 23% of the variance in predicting 
group membership is explained by function I and only 2% by 
function II. The overall percent of correct classification 
for the calibration sample and the validation sample are 
55.35% and 51.67% respectively. In a nutshell, Asian ethnic 
subgroups helps to classify cases into different group 
memberships. More people are correctly classified into the 
1 ow- and the high- achieving groups than to the average- 
achieving group, 

55 

ERiC 58 



In short, we can conclude that not all Asian-Americans 
studying in the nine community colleges are the same. Some of 
them can be identified as high- achievers whi 1 e others the 
average- and the low-achievers. And the linear combination 
of variables that differentiate the 3 achieving groups also 
vary across race. 




56 



59 



TABLE 6. MEANS, STANDARD DEVIATIONS, AND UNIVARIATE F RATIO 
FOR ALL INDEPENDENT VARIABLES IN THE CALIBRATION SAMPLE 
(ASIAN SUBGROUPS) 



Univariate 
Variabl e 



Low_ 
Achievers 
( N = 702 ) 

M SD 



Average_ 
Achievers 
( N = 528 ) 

M SD 



High_ 
Achievers 
( N = 262 ) 



M 



SD 



F 

ratio 



(DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES) 



Femal e 


0 . 


50 


0 . 


50 


0 . 


57 


0 . 


50 


0 . 


59 


0 . 


49 


4. 


05 


Singl e 


0 


78 


0 


41 


0 


64 


0 


48 


0 


45 


0 


50 


53. 


89 


Married 


0 


14 


0 


34 


0 


23 


0 


42 


0 


40 


0 


49 


41. 


89 


Age 


24 


. 23 


7 


.50 


27 


.76 


9 


. 26 


32 


. 47 


10 


. 63 


88. 


35 


Chi 


0 


03 


0 


18 


0 


05 


0 


22 


0 


.03 


0 


18 


1. 


18 


Jap 


0 


.01 


0 


.08 


0 


. 00 


0 


.06 


0 


. 00 


0 


.06 


0. 


38 


Kor 


0 


01 


0 


. 10 


0 


01 


0 


. 10 


0 


.03 


0 


. 18 


4. 


73 


Pil 


0 


.02 


0 


.14 


0 


. 03 


0 


. 18 


0 


.03 


0 


.16 


0. 


93 


Viet 


0 


.02 


0 


. 15 


0 


.02 


0 


. 13 


0 


.03 


0 


.17 


0 . 


75 



(BACKGROUND VARIABLES) 



IGC(Cer) 


0 . 


03 


0 . 


18 


0 . 


07 


0 . 


26 


0 . 


09 


0 . 


28 


7 


. 38 


IGC(AA) 


0 . 


13 


0 


33 


0 


09 


0. 


29 


0 . 


09 


0 


29 


2 


.27 


IGC(BA) 


0 . 


50 


0 . 


50 


0 . 


29 


0 . 


49 


0 . 


30 


0 . 


46 


18 


.18 


transf er 


0 . 


78 


0 


41 


0 


77 


0 . 


42 


0 . 


73 


0 


44 


1 


.47 


HS GPA 


2 . 


94 


0 


40 


3 


11 


0 . 


42 


3 . 


25 


0 


48 


57 


.55 


Pre Col 


3 . 


31 


0 


70 


3 


.70 


0 


99 


3 


88 


1 


.03 


51 


.86 


Col prep 


0 . 


28 


0 


45 


0 


35 


0 . 


48 


0 . 


37 


0 


48 


4 


.70 


Occu Voc 


0 . 


10 


0 


. 30 


0 


.10 


0 


30 


0 


11 


0 


. 31 


0 


.03 


El igibl e 


0 . 


34 


0 


47 


0 


.38 


0 


49 


0 


39 


0 


.49 


1 


.38 


Time US 


4 . 


16 


1 


. 62 


4 


. 30 




. 65 


4 


. 42 


1 


.79 


2 


.50 


Par Edu 


3 . 


74 


1 


.78 


3 


.77 


1 


72 


3 


88 




. 70 


0 


.64 



Household Income 

23150.07 '24858.45 27103.55 

19179.14 18857.11 19974.72 4.23 

Schol arship 

246.92 751.84 176.81 621.86 254.87 688.26 1.85 



(ACADEMIC VARIABLES) 

Hrswork 23.27 15.23 25.03 15.70 23.34 16.23 2.14 

Aca Par 2.61 0.69 2.77 0.73 2.91 0.77 18.72 

Stu Hab 2.72 1.04 2.58 1.10 2.58 1.14 3.13 

Cha Maj 1.53 0.69 1.43 0.62 1.38 0.61 6.48 



# High school GPA ' 3 ' =3 . 50_4 . 00 ' 2 ' = 3 . 00_3 . 49 ' 1 ' = 2 . 99_2 . 00 . 

New students with no GPAs are omitted from this analysis. 
@ not significant at 0.05 level 



57 



TABLE 8. ETHNICITY, DEMOGRAPHIC , BACKGROUND AND ACADEMIC 
VARIABLES DISTINGUISHING LOW-, AVERAGE- AND HIGH-ACHIEVERS (3 
GROUPS) 

Model 1 



Function I II 



DEMOGRAPHIC VARS 

Asian Subgroups 
Chinese .17 -.32 

Japanese 

Korean .20 .36 

Pilipinos .05 - . 25 

Vietnamese .09 .09 

Femal e 

Age .51 .32 

Marital Status 
Single 

Married .22 .36 

BACKGROUND VARS 

Time in U.S. .18 - .00 

Precoilege Edu. .14 -.52 
Eligibility -.09 .03 

Hi Sch Track 

Occup-Voc 

Col 1 -Prep 
High Sch GPA .52 - .04 

Parent Edu .07 .20 

Household Inc 

ACADEMIC VARS 

Paid Hrs Wks -.11 -.32 
Grants/Schrs -.02 .30 
Goal Commit. 
Cert 

AA -.14 .15 

BA -.30 .09 

Instit . Com. 

Acad Parti .32 -.18 

Study Hbts -.12 .18 

Change Majors 



58 

61 



Group Centroids 



Low 




51 


.07 


Average 




20 


-.18 


High 




95 


.17 


Eigen Value 




2955 


.0188 


Wi Ik 1 s Lambda 




7576 


. 9816 


Canno. 




4776 


.13 58 


Canno. r : 




2281 


.0184 


Chi - squared ( df ) 


411 . 


0 3 ( 34 ) 


Sig. level 


0 


. 00 


0.04 


Overall % of 








Corr Cl assi . 








Calibra S. 


55 


. 35 




Low 


81 


. 10 




Average 


33 


. 50 




High 


28 


. 90 




Valida S. 


51 


. 67 




Low 


79 


.10 




Average 


27 


.50 




High 


25 


.60 




Group Size 








Proportion 








1 ow 


0 


. 47 




average 


0 


. 35 




high 


0 


.18 




Total N 


1492 





ERIC 



59 

62 



The Korean-Americans by far have the highest scores among 
all Asian- Americans , f ol 1 owed by the Chines e-Ameri cans and 
Pil ipino-Americans . The Vietnamese- and the Japanese- 
Americans are close to and below average. The question here 
is why Korean-Americans attending mior college are likely to 
be high- achievers whil e Pil ipino- and Chines e-Ameri cans are 
aver age- achi evers and Vietnamese-Americans are 
lower-achievers? The answer seems to be a complicated one. 
The common belief that all Asians can be crowned as model 
minority does not hold in this study, especially in the 
context of a junior college. The data indicated that the 
col lege effects like academic involvement , extracurricular 
activities, study habits are quite uniform among the 
Asian-Americans. Therefore, what makes the difference in 
college performance is more likely to come from the background 
characteristics as mentioned above. The difference in college 
performance reflects, to a certain extent , a socio- cul tural 
one . 

Some Asian-Americans have been in this country for two to 
three generations while others are recent immigrants. Those 
who have a long resident history in this country must have 
gone through the process of adaptation: acculturation, 
integration and assimilation (Gordon, 1964) while others may 
still in their early stage of adjustment. For example, the 
third generation Asian-Americans may consider themselves not 

60 



ERLC 



63 



too distinct from the majority Whites even though they look 
physical ly different . At least , they have no language 
barriers. As Kitano indicated when he examined the Sansei 
(that is, third generation Japanese-Americans who are born in 
the United States to Nisei parents), "their test results, 
achievement and interest preferences and social values are 
typically American" (1969:142). The recent immigrants, 
however, are very different as recorded in my interviews. They 
carry not only many of their ancestor's cultural values like 
obedience, family pride, face-saving, high discipline, 
perseverance but also they are limited in English proficiency. 
Of course, this limitation in English proficiency can not 
apply to the recently immigrated Pilipino-Americans in this 
study. In addition, the cultural values that they accept also 
depend on which Asian ethnic group they belong to 
(Yamagata-Noji , 1987; Monzon, 1984; Thai, 1982). Hence, even 
among the Asian-Americans there are much background variations 
within themselves. 

Nevertheless, as reviewed earlier, the writer is much 
concerned with the social or school environment which is more 
or less the same. What explain the difference depends on how 
they adjust to this social environment. Some adjust more 
quickly with the 'resource' that they possess or what they 
brought with them when they immigrated to this country. 
Resources like wealth, professional skills, 1 anguage ski 1 1 s or 

61 



ERIC 



64 



other abilities. Others (like recent immigrated Vietnamese 
refugees) might have little or no 'resource 1 at all (e.g. the 
Vietnamese Hwong tribe.) The study reflects that recent 
immigrants with less than 10 years can perform better if they 
come from middle upper class families where they are more 
academically wel 1 -prepared before attending the respective 
college. This is confirmed in my interviews. For example, 
many recent immigrated Korean-Americans already have some sort 
of college background and a relatively distinguished high 
school GPA . They do not avoid the academic status differences 
between a two-year and a four-year college as much as other 
Asian-Americans who have been in this country for a longer 
period of time. The Vietnamese-Americans, on the other hand, 
do not perform as well as the Chinese-, the Korean-, and the 
Pilipino-Americans because i) many of them come from poor 
families ii) have weak educational background and iii) have 
limited English proficiency. Even though the reason for the 
poor performance of the Japanese-Americans is unclear in the 
junior college. I presume that the level of acculturation 
must have an effect in here. 

Sue and others (1988, 1990) have once denoted that the 
level of acculturation and the perceived limitation in social 
opportunity are inversely related. Recent immigrants often 
consider strong educational backgrounds essential in 
broadening their field in the non-educational area. Many 

62 

65 



recent immigrants in my interviews often stress the importance 
of having more credentials when applying for a job. They like 
to work in large "white-man company' 1 but realize that they are 
impaired in verbal ability and so they need to emphasize on 
their quantitative ski 1 Is in order to get hired (Bagasao , 
1983). Without a doubt, this will create unnecessary 
competition among themselves in the job market. A large 
proportion of my respondents plan to transfer to a better 
university after the completion of the required course works. 
They strive hard to maintain an 1 A 1 average. Given enough 
support from parents, friends, and financial programs, they 
really want to get a baccalaureate or higher degree in order 
to secure a better job in the future. They perceive a 
limitation in occupation opportunity if they rely solely on an 
Associate or a lower degree. Nonetheless, things never work 
out nice and easy, some Asian-Americans fail to perform as 
well as others. In my interview, they often reported parental 
support, home environment, cultural values and personal 
ability are closely connected with college performance. 
Parents with higher educational background usually give more 
attention to their children's school performance and are 
likely to provide a favorable home environment for them to 
study. Asian parents, in particular, prefer their children 
not to work during the school year. They encourage them to 
concentrate on their studies in order to get good grades for 

63 



ERLC 



66 



future "benefits." In contrast, parents with low education 
may not necessarily value the importance of these. Besides, 
the respondents also mention that big brothers and big sisters 
who attended university or college also act as role models to 
their academic success. If they have no brothers or sisters, 
their peer groups and parental influences become more 
essential. In addition, problems in academic studies can be 
remedied if they know where to get assistance such as 
brothers, sisters, friends and teachers. However, they seldom 
consult their teachers because of language difficulties or 
cultural barriers. Therefore, these added information has 
broadened our knowledge in understanding the differences in 
col lege performance among Asian*- Americans . 

Implications and Suggestions 

1. Since demographic and background variables are 
considered more essential in predicting college performance in 
both interview and secondary data analysis among community 
college students, it would be more advantageous if we could 
collect more background information that distinguish these 
differences . Factors like parental support , language 
proficiency, ethnic identity, cultural values, peer group 
influence and home environment are worth exploring. 

2 . Second 1 y , this study also discovered that not all 
Asian-Americans are aiike, and therefore, lumping all Asians 

64 



into one homogeneous group will mask the results of many 



represented. Financial budgets would not have been cut short 
or programs canceled if more representative data are collected 
from each of the ethnic subgroups. However, the researcher 
would like to remind to ail interested readers that this study 
can not generalize to all community college students, 
especially among ~he Japanese-Americans who have a very low 
college CPA m -.his study. The Japanese-Americans in this 
study only represent a very typical sample of all Japanese- 
Americans studying in the junior college. Japanese-Americans 
with distinguished high school performance may be more likely 
to choose a selective four-year college rather than a 
community college because they have been around long enough to 
recognize that the selective four-institutions have higher 
status or prestige and are more useful in occupational 
placement. Hence, that upper segment of the Japanese-American 
population is not represented in this study. 

3. This study uses college grade point average as the 
only criterion for classifying students into different 
achieving groups. And so, there are some limitations that 
interested parties should be aware of. Jonathan Warren 
(1971:8-20), in his examination of grading practices in 
college indicates that the purposes of grades are many. The 
purpose of grading can be used as a) a selection device for 



findings . 



Statistics could be underestimated or over- 



65 



ERIC 




advanced education, fellowships and awards, honors, transfers 
or employments or b) a motivator to induce students to learn 
and c) an informative mechanism about student performance. In 
fact, all these purposes can either be good or bad. They are 
good because they provide criteria for administrators to 
decide who should re-enroll in advanced education or for 
administrators to motivate competitive-oriented students to 
study. Nevertheless, a lot of side-effects may be overlooked 
if GPA is used as "he mere criterion to judge a student's 
performance. These unintended side-effects of grades may 
result in a) distortion of teaching b) affecting student 
attitude and behavior or c) affecting the existing social 
:rder of a society. 

Distortion of teaching can appear in several forms like 
imposing instructional constraints on instructors to vary 
their course contents, or setting up accomplishment standards 
where course work can be rated easily and mechanically, or 
stifling students to criticise old ideas by following the 
instructor 1 s guide! ines . 

Student's attitude and behavior can also be adversely 
affected by grades. Grades can lead to cheating in 
examination, anxiety among students, inhibition of student 
reoperation or collaboration, and discr uragement of advance 
s t udi es . 

Grades is said to have one effect of reordering or 

i 5 

6.9 



maintaining the existing social order. However, people also 
argue that good grades also act as a mechanism for upward 
mobility in our society,, this is especially true among the 
Asian minorities. 

In this study, college grade point average is the only 
indicator used to measure college achievement. High-, 
average-, and low-achievers are classified according to their 
:olleae graded point average. These who have an average grade 
point average of 'A' are identified as high-achievers, a '5' 
as the average-achievers and a 'C or below' as the low- 
achievers. Even though the classification is not arbitrary, 
the readers still perceive the limitations of using GPA as the 
only criterion for college achievement. And so readers should 
be careful about the generalisations made in here. 

4. Aside from using Discriminant Analysis, which used to 
classify cases into different group memberships, the readers 
might want to try logistic regression. This is a more robust 
research tool when many of the independent variables are 
categorical in nature (that is, either ordered or 
dichotomous . ) It is , by far, more robust than regular 
multiple regression analysis 'McFadden, 1376; Press and 
others, 1378.) 



ERLC 



70 



Appendix 



DEPENDENT VARIABLE 
College GPA 

with A average, B average, C average, C- or D 

average and D- or F average 

(recede and reorder 3,4,5=1; 2 = 2; 1=3) 
INDEPENDENT VARIABLES 

Individual Demographic Attributes: 
Ethnic group 

( 1= White , 0=non- white) 

( 1= Chinese , 0=non- Chinese ) etc . dummy coded 
Number of Semesters 

(0 to 9 or more) 
Mari tai status 

( I = singl e , 2 = mar ri ed cr divorced) 

Sex 

( 1 = female , 2=mai e) 
Age (raw scores) 
Background variab'l es : 
Residence History 

(less than 5 years to more than 3 generations) 

Precollege Academic Preparation: 
pre-college school ing 

( i=ei ementary or less, to 6=4-year college or 
higher ) 

eligible to enter UC or CSU after high school 
graduation 

( l=yes , 0=no) dummy coded 
high school track 

(i=college pre track, 0=others) dummy coded 
high school GPA 

(I=beiow 2.00 to 5=2.50-4.0) 
Fami 1 y background : 

father/mother's formal education 

( 1= el ementary or less, to 6=4-yr college or 

Higher ) 

total household income in 1988 

(I=nothing, to 9=$60,000) the mid point of the 
interval will be used for each categorical level 

Academic Variables 

Paid hours work per week 

(l = none, to 6 = 40 or more) the mid-point of the 
interval will be used for each categorical 1 evel 



ERLC 



68 

71 



Fei lows hips , grants scholarships awarded 
(I = nothmg, to 10=more than $8000 ); 
also receded into (1=1) (2 thru 10=2) 
the mid-point of the interval will be used for each 
categorical level 
Initial Goal Commitment (Expected final degree objective) 
( l=certi f icate , to 4=master or higher) recede into 
dummy variabl es 
Institutional Goal Commitment (Plan to Trans fer ) 

(l=not planning to , 2=pianning to) recede into 
dummy variabl es 
Academic Invo 1 vement 

frequency of semester period involved in non-class 
contacts with faculty about ci ass mater la 1 

• v l = never, to 4 -mo re than 5 times) 
studied course materials with other students 

i l = never , to 4 = mo re than 3 times) 
participated in class discussions 

( 1 = never , to 4-mo r e than 5 times ) 
read materials other than those assigned for courses. 
(i=never, to 4= mo re than 5 times ) 
Study Habi t s 

"used the library for study", and "used the library 
for class assignment 
( l = never , to 4 = mo re than 5 times ) 
Participation in Extracurricular Activities 

voluntary "participated in an athletic program" 
"participated in music or theater programs" and 
"participated in student government , clubs , 
act i vi ties" 

■' 1 = never , to 4-mor e than 5 times ) . 
Changing Majors 

receded into (3=1, 4=2, 5=3) 



CONTROL VARIABLES 
Ethnic background 

Native Language (also recoded into dummy code with 

l=English speaking 0=non-Engi ish speaking) 



69 

72 



Footnotes: 

I. This refers to age, secondary school performance, choice of this 
•university, highest academic degree expected, perceived need for academic 
remedy, parents 1 income, ACT conrposite score, father's education, mother's 
education, credit hours earned, grade point average, perceived likelihood 
of failing one or more courses, perceived likelihood of joining a social 
fraternity, sorority, or club, racial groups, college ma jors . 

2 . This inc 1 \ades ei ther academi c achi evement or academi c 
persistence. 

3. Anderson tries to modify Lev/in' s Field Theory to identify the 
forces that produce either academic achievement and persistence or 
academic failure and attrition. He reasons that once the forces (both 
negative and positive) have been identified, it is possible to discover 
the key to increase the driving forces or to decrease the restraining 
forces in order to achieve a desired change. Spady, however, developed an 
interactional model which emphasis the harmonious interaction between 
personal attributes (interests, attitudes, dispositions) and environmental 
influences (courses, family, peers, institutions), which is considered 
important to the student's retention. Rootman, similar to Spady, 
developed an interaction theory which explained voluntary withdrawal is 
related to unsuccessful integration between individual and college 
environment. Withdrawal is seen as one of the mechanisms to cope with 
strains. 

4. 3a.sed on the theoretical framework and factor loadings for 
Q. 38-47, new variables are constructed such as academic participation, 
study habits, and extracurricular activities. Q. 53-55 for Barriers of 
student progress . 

5. U Statistic or Wilks' lambda Statistic is "a multivariate 
measure of group differences over several discriminating variables" 
.Klecka, 1984:38). Since U statistic is an inverse statistic, a zero 
means high discrimination and the group centroids are greatly separated 
and distinct. But if Wilks' lambda equals one, the group centroids are 
ail equal. During the stepwise discriminant analysis, we usually select 
the Wilks' lambda which has the smallest lambda. 

A = i=k+l l/l+Ai 
k refers to the numbers of functions already derived. refers to 
the multiplication of functions derived.^ 

6. Canonical correlation n = 7\i / I + 7V where Ai is the 
eigenvalue. 

The standardized canonical discriminant function coefficients 
represent the relative contribution of certain variable on the calculating 
-f a discriminant score. The larger the standardized canonical 
:oef f icient , the greater the contribution. Since tne coefficient account 
for the simultaneous contribution of other variables, it is likely that 
the standardized coefficient of a variable will be affected by other 
variables which share the same discriminating information. (Keick, 
1384:33) 

^0 




73 



The total structure coefficients tell "how variable contributes to 
discrimination along that dimension" (Kelck, 1984:43) . It indicates how 
closely or similar the relation between a discriminating variable and a 
canonical discriminant function. If the coefficient approaches zero, it 
means that the two have little in cannon or else we can name that f met ion 
based on that large coefficient variables, usually a coefficient of less 
than 0.4 is not considered. If we want to examine how a function and a 
variable related within a group , we can look at the pooled within group 
structure coefficient. 

7. "Group centroids are the mean discriminant scores for each group 
on the respective functions. The centroids summarizes the group locations 
in the space defined by the discriminant functions. M (SPSS, 1982) 



ERLC 



74 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Aleamoni, L. M., and Oboler, L. (1978). ACT versus SAT in 

Predicting First Semester GPA ♦ Educational and 
Psychol ogical Measurement , 38 : 393-3 99 . 

Astin, A. W. (1982). M inorities in American Higher 
Educati on . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass . 

Astin, A. W. (1973b). Student Persistence: Some stay, Some 
don't --Why? College & University, 48 : 2 98-30 6. 

As tin, A. W. (1971). Predicting Academic Performance in 

College: Selectivity Data for 2300 American Colleges . 

The Free Press, New York. 1971. 

Astin., H. S. & Cross, P. H. ( 1979). Factors Affecting 
Black Students ' Persisten c e in Col 1 ege . 

Austin , Thomas L . , and others . (1988). Class Scheduling 

and Academic Achievement in a Non-Traditional Graduate 
Program. Innovative Higher Education, 12 (2): 8-90 
Spr-Sum. 

3agasao, Paula YLdefonza. (1983). Factors Related to 

Sci ence-Career-?l anning among Asi an and Pacific 

American College-Bound High School Seniors . University 

of California , Los Angel es . PH . D. Dissertation . 

Biustem, David L. et al . (1986). Identifying Predictors 
of Academic Performance of Community College Students. 
Journal of College Student Personnel. May 27 ( 3 ) : 
242-249. 

Cheng , Lucie. (1986). The New Asian Immigrants in 

California Department of Sociology and Asian American 

Studi es Center . University of California, Los Angeles. 

Chickering, A. (1974). Commuting versus Resident Students: 

Overviewing Educational Ineguit ies of Living off 

Campus . San Francisco, Jossey Bass. 



Chissom, B. S. and Lanier, D. (1975). Prediction of First 
Quarter Freshman GPA Using SAT Scores and High School 
Grades . E ducational and Psychological Measurement 

3_5: 461-o3. 

72 



ERLC 



75 



; 1 a r k , Burton. .1960). The Cooling Out Function in 
Higher Education. American Journal of Sociology, 
55( 6 ): 569-57 6 m Arthur M . Cohen and Leslie Purdy, 
Coll eg e Curriculum and Instruction , 1971. Simon and 
Schuste, N.Y.: A Selected Academic Readings Book. 

Clark, Reignald M. (1983). Family Life and School 

Achievement: Why Poor 31ack Children Succeed or Fail , 

Chi cago : University of Chicago Press . 

Grouse, James and Trusheim. Dale. (1988). The Case Against 

the SAT . The University of Chicago Press/Chicago and 

London . 

Cummins, rim. '1383). Language Proficiency and Academic 
Achievement 108-129 in Oiler. John W..Jr. (ed.) Issues 

m Language Tes ti ng Research, Rowley, Ma. Newbury 

House. 

Cummins, Jim. (1986). Empowering Minority Students: A 

Framework for Int erven ti on . Har vard E d ucational Review 
5_6(i) : 18-35. 

Doran, Neil J. (1987). Male-Female Differences in 
SAT-Verbal Ability Among Students of High 
SAT-Ma themat icai Ability. Journal of Educat i onal 

Measurement, f Spr ing )24 ( 1 ) : 6 5 - 7 1 . 

Enckson, F. ( 1984 ). School Literacy, reasoning, and 

civiiity: An anthropol ogist 1 s perspective . Review of 
E ducationa l Rese a rch 54 (4):525-544. 

Enckson, ?. (198/). Transformation and School Success: The 

Politics and Culture of Educational Achievement. 
Anthrop ol ogy and Education Q uarterly, 18( 4): 335-356. 

Giroux, H. (1983). Theories of Reproduction and Resistance 
in the New Sociology of Education: A Critical Analysis. 
Harvard Educational Review 53 ( 3 ) : 2 57 -93. 

Goldman. R.D. and Richards. Regma . ( 1974 ). The SAT 
Prediction cf 3rades for Mexican-American Versus 
Angl o-Amencan Students At University of California, 
Riverside. Jou rna 1 of Educat i onal Measurement , 11 

( summer 2 ) ' 12 9-35. 



ERLC 



-i /- 



3oi dman , R . D . , and Hewitt, B . N. ( 1976). Predicting the 

Success of Black, Chicano, Oriental, and White College 

Students . Journal of Educational Measurement 13: 

1 07-117. 



Goldman, Susan R. and Trueba, Henry T . ( 1987 Ed.). Becoming 

Literate i n Engli sh As A S econd Language . U . C . Santa 

Barbara . Abl ex Publ is her , Norwood , N.J. 

Gordon, Harold W. (1988). Specialized Cognitive Function 

and School Achievement . Devel opment al Neurops ychol ogy ; 
4(3) : 239-257. 

3ordon . Milton M. (1964 ), Assimilation in American Life. 
New York : Oxford university Press . 

I-ordon . Virginia N . '1984). The Undecided Col 1 ege 

Student: An Academic and Career Advising Challenge . 

Charles C. Thomas Publisher. 

Kirschman, Charles and Wong, Morrison G. (19S6). The 
Extraordinary Educati onal Attainment of Asian 
Americans: A Search For Historical Evidence and 
Expi ana t ions . Social Forces Sep. 55 ( 1 ) : 1-27 . 

Hsia, Jayjia. (1988). Asian Americans m Higher Education 
and at Work . Hills da 1 e , New Jersey : Lawerence Eribaum. 



H s i a , Jayjia. ( 1987-88 ). Asian Americans Fight the Myth 
of the Super Student . E ducational Recor d , 58(4/1 ) : 
94-97 . Fai 1 -Win. 

Hsia, Jayjia. (1987). Asian American Students: Ability, 
Achievement and Access to Higher Education . Paper 

read at American Educational Research Association, 

Washington D.C. April . 

Hsia , Jayjia. (March 31--April 4, 1985), The Silent 

Minority : As i a n Americ ans in Education and Work. Paper 
presented at the Annua 1 Meeting of the Ameri can 
Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL , . 

Hsia, Jayjia. f 1983) . Cognitive Assessment of Asian 

Americans in Chu-Chang , Mae ( ed . introd.) Rodriguez, 
Victor fed. ? pre i . ) Asi an and Pac ifi c Amer i can 

Perspecti ves in 5i 1 mgua 1 E ducation: Compara tive 

Research. jew York: Teacher College, Columbia 
University . 

7 4 



ERLC 



77 



Xitano, Harry H. L. and Kikumura, Akemi . (1980). The 

Japanese American Family in Endo , Russe 1 1 ; St an 1 ey Sue 
and Nathaniel N. Wagner, eds . Asian Americans: Social 

and Psychological Perspectives, Vol.11 Science and 

Behavior books . 

Kitano, Harry L . and Sue, Stanley. (1973). The Model 
Minorities. Journal of Social Issues, 21:1-9. 

Kitano, Harry L. (1969). Japanese Americans: The Evolution 
of a Subcul ture . Prentice-Hail Inc. , Englewood Cliffs, 
New Jersey . 

Klecka, William R . (1980). Discriminant Analysis. A 
Sage University Paper. 

Lareau , Annette . ( Apn 1 , 1987 ) . Social Class Di f f erences 
in Fami ly school Rei at ions hips : The Importance of 
Cultural Capital, Sociology of Education 60: 73-85. 

Larson, L. R . and Scontrino, M. ?. (1976). The Consistency 
of High School Grade Point Average and of the Verbal 
and Mathematical Portions of the Scholastic Aptitude 
Test of the College Entrance Examination Board, as 
Predictors of College Performance: An Eight-Year study. 
Educational and Psychologica l Measurement , 36 : 439-43. 

McCornack, Robert. L . (1983). Bias in the Validity of. 
Predicted College Grades in B'our Ethnic Minority 
Grouos . Educational and Psychological Measurement, 
43( 2 ): 517-522 V" 

McFadden, Daniel. (1976). A Comment on Discriminant 

Ana lysis "Versus" Logit Ana i y sis . Anna ls of Economic 
and S o cial M eas urement, 5( 4): 511-523. 

McDonald, R. T. and R. S. Gawkoski . (1979). Predictive 
Value of SAT Scores and High School Achievement for 
Success in a College Honors Program, Educational and 
Psyc hol ogical Measurement . 39 : 411-414. 

Monzon, Reynaldo Inocente. (1984). The E f fects of the 
Fam i 1 v Envi ronmen t on th e Academic Performance of 
Filipi no Am eric an College St udents. Master Thesis, San 
Diego State university. 

leader, Ralph and Nairn. Allan. ( 1980 ). The Reign of ETS. 



75 



Ogbu , John u . (1978). Minority Education and Caste : The 

American System in Cross-cultural Perspective . New 

York: Academic Press. 

Ogbu, John U. (1981). Origins of Human Competence: A 

Cultural-Ecological Perspective. Chi Id Devel opment , 
52.(2) : 413-429 . 

Ogbu, John U. (1982). Cultural Discontinuities and 

School ing . Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 
13,(4) : 290-307 . 

Ogbu, John U. (1983). Minority Status and Schooling in 

Plural Societies. Comparative Education Review , 
27_(2): 168-190. 

Ogbu, John U. (1987a). Variability in Minority Responses 
to Schooling : Nonimmigrants vs . Immigrants in 
Interpretive Ethnography of Education : At Home and 

Abroad . George Spindler and Louise Spmdler, eds ♦ 

pp,255-278. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum. 

Ogbu, John U. (1987b). Variability in Minority School 
Performance: A Problem in Search of an Explanation. 
Anthropology and Education Quarterly 18 ( 4): 312-334. 

Ogbu, John U. and Matut e-Bianchi , M. E. (1986). 

Understanding Sociocultural Factors : Knowl edge , Identity 
and School Adjustment in Beyond Language: Social and 

Cultural Factors m Schooling Language Minority 

Students . ( pp . 7 3-142 ) . Sacramento , CA : Bi 1 ingual 

Education Office, California State. Department of 
Educat i on . 

Pantages, Timonthy J. (1973). Studies of College 

Attrition: 1950-75. Review of Educat i onal Research, 
48_(i): 49-105. 

Pascareila, Ernest T., Duby , Paul B., Verr.on, A. M. , and Sue 
P. Rasher (1981). Pre-enrol Iment Variables and 
Academic Performance as Predictors of Freshman Year 
Persistence, Early Withdrawal and Stopout 3ehavior in 
an Urban , Nonresidential University. Research in 

Higher Education. 15 ( 4) : 32 9-349. 

Pascareila, Ernest T . ; Duby, P. 3.; and Inverson, 3. K. 
V 1983 ) . A Test and Reconceptuaiization of A 
Theoretical Model of College Withdrawal in a Commuter 
Institution Setting. S ociology of Education , 

56_(April): 88-100. 

76 



ERLC 



79 



Passons, W. R . ( 1967 ). Predictive Validities of the ACT , 
SAT, and High School Grades for First Semester GPA and 
Freshman Courses . Educat 1 onal and Psychol ogi cal 
Measurement 27 : 1143-44. 



Press, S. James and Wilson, Sandra. (1978). Choosing 

Between Logistic Regress i on and Discriminant Anal y si s . 
Journal of the American Statistical Association, Dec. 

73.(3 64) : 699-705 . 

Shuitz, J. J.; Floriao, S.; and Erickson, F. (1982) 
Where's The Floor? Aspects of the Cultural 
Organization of Social Relationships in Communication 
at Home and in School. In Perry Gilmore and Allan A. 
Gi at thorn , Children In And Out of School : Ethnography 

and Education . Center for Applied Linguistics, 

Washington, D. C. 

Sue, Stanley. (1980). Psychological Theory and 

Implications for Asian American in Endo , Russell; 
Stanley Sue and Nathaniel N. Wagner, eds . Asian 

Ameri cans: Social and Psychological Perspectives, 

Vol.11. Science and Behavior books. 



Sue, Stanley. (1990). Asian American Educational 

Achievements: A Phenomenon in Search of an Explanation . 

unpublished article, Univ. of California, Los Angeles, 

Sue, D. W., and Sue, S. (1972). Ethnic Minorities: 

Resistance to being Researched . Prof essi onal 
Psychol ogy 3 : 11-17. 



Sue, Stanley; Abe, Jennifer. C1988). Predictors of 

Academic Achievement among Asian American and White 
Students. College Board Report No. 88-11 . College 
Entrance Examination Board, New York, N. Y. 

Sue, Stanley and Kitano, Harry L. (1973). Stereotypes as 

a Measure of Success. Journal of Social Issues , 2 9 (2): 
83-98 . 

Sue, Stanley; Sue, Deraid Wing, and Sue, David W. (1975). 

Asian Americans as a Minority Group. American 
Psychologist, 30 : 90 6-910 . 

Sue , S . and Zane , N. W. S. (1985). Academic Achievement 

and Socioemotional Adjustment Among Chinese University 
Students. Jo urnal of Counseling Psychology 32 (4): 
570-79. 

77 



SO 



Tatsuoka , Maurice M. ( 1971 ) . Mul tivariate Anal vsis : 

Techniques for Educational and Psychological Research . 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. New York. 

Tatsuoka , Maurice M. ( 1970 ) . Discriminant Anal ysis : 
Study r of Group Differences. Institute for Personality 

and Ability Testing. 1602-04 Coronado Drive, 

Champaign, Illinois 61820. 

Tinto, Vincent (1987). Leaving Col 1 eqe : Rethinking the 

Causes and Cures of Student At tri tion . The Universi ty 

of Chicago Press . Chicago and London. 

Tinto, Vincent (1975). Dropout from Higher Education: A 

Theoretical Synthesis of Recent Research. Review of 
Educational Research, 45 ( 1 ) : 8 9-125. 

Tinto, Vincent (1985). Dropping out and other Forms of 
Withdrawal from College in Noel et al . Increasing 
Student Retenti on . Jossey-Bass , San Francisco . 

Tracey, Terence J. and William E. Sedlacek. (1985). The 
Relationship of Noncogni ti ve Variables to Academic 
Success: ~ Longitudinal Comparison by Race. Journal 

of College Student Personnel, 26 : 405-410. 



Trueba, Henry T. (1988). Culturally Based Explanations of 
Minority Students 1 Academi c Ac hi evement . Anthropol ogy 
and Education Quarterly, Sep. 19 ( 3 ) : 270-287 . 

Trueba, Henry T. (1989). Raising Si 1 ent Voices : Educating 

the Linguistic Minorities for the 21st Century . 

Newbury House. 

Trueba, Henry. (1987 ed. ) Success or Failure?: Learning 

and the Language Minority Student . New York: Newbury 

House/Harper & Row. 

Vernon , Phi lip E. (1982 ). The Abilities and Achievements 

of Orientals in North America , New York: Anaemic 

Press . 

Weitzman, R. A. (1982). The Prediction of College 

Achievement by the Scholastic Aptitude Test and the 
High Schooi Record. Journa 1 of Educa t i onal Measurement 

19.(3) : 179-91. 

Willis, Paul (1977). Learning to Labor : How Working Class 
Kids Get Working Class Jobs . Col umbia Uni v . Press . 



78 



ERIC 



Yamagata-No ji , Audrey Ayako. (1987). Academic Achievement 

of Japanese Americans . PH.D dissertation. University 

of California, Los Angeles. 



9 

ERLC 



79 



