DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 334 047 RC 018 251 

•iITLE Breaking New Ground for American Indian and Alaska 

Native Youth at Risk: Program Summaries. OSAP 
Technical Report 3. 
INSTITUTION National center for American Indian and Alaska Native 

Mental Health Research, Denver , CO. 
SPONS AGENCY Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration 

(DRHS/PHS), Rockville, MD. Office for Substance Abuse 
Prevention. 
ADM-90-1705 
90 

88-M-075606501-D 
123p. 

Information Analyses (070) — Reports ~ 
Evaluative/Feasibility (142) — Tests/Evaluation 
Instruments (160) 

MP01/PC05 Plus Postage. 

* Alaska Natives; * American Indians; *At Risk Persons; 
Community Programs; Cultural influences; 
Demonstration Programs; Federal Programs; Health 
Promotion; Intervention; *Prevention; Program 
Descriptions; *Substance Abuse; *Youth Programs 



This technical report examines the literature on 
substance abuse prevention programs among American Indian and Alaska 
Native populations, particularly high-risk youth, and reports on 
aspects of demonstration projects. The literature was reviewed for 
specific mention of attempted intervention activities focusing on 
alcohol and drug abuse prevention or related risk factors. Sixty 
strategies were identified and are described within the categories 
of: (1) historically significant programs; (2) programs targeting 
pregnancy and early child care; (3) programs targeting youth in 
foster care; (4) programs targeting Indian boarding school and public 
school populations; (5) community-based programs for youth; (6) 
residential programs for youth; (7) cultural enhancement for youth in 
the community; (8) programs within behavioral health clinics; and (9) 
intervention program planning. Most programs were promotional and 
primary in nature; educational and training activities predominated, 
synopses of 16 Office for Substance Abuse Prevention grantee projects 
are presented, focusing on primary, secondary, and tertiary 
prevention strategies. Managers of these demonstration projects were 
surveyed by telephone about prugram philosophy and beliefs, project 
characteristics, specific strategies, organizational structure and 
management, and evaluation. With the exception of rigorous 
evaluation, the projects showed moderate to strong adherence to 
factors associated with the success of prevention programs in 
general. This report contains 92 references, the survey instrument, 
and tables summarizing prevention activities. (SV) 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 



REPORT NO 
PUB DATE 
CON1TRACT 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



ABSTRACT 





Breaking • ' . - . 
New-' Ground For ^ 

, ' American Indian 

it 

" ■ And "Alaska 
■ Native Youth 

' At Risk: 
■ - . Program 

Summaries 





3: 



Ut,D«WrT«tNT tOOCATTON 

Otf*« d Educ**** Rtaaat* and impovamaot 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 

/a> CENTER (ERIC) 

Thit document hat b*«n raftfodocad ft 
raCttvtO from th# parson or oroamtatKMi 
ooflinatiny tt 

O Minor changa* hava boan mada .o improva 
reproduction Quality 



Point* of inaw <y opinions ttatad in \hm fiocu- 
mant do not nocsstaroy raoraaant official 
OERI petition or policy 



OSAP Technical Report-3 



Breaking New Ground 
For American Indian And 
Alaska Native Youth: 
Program Summaries 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 

Public Health Service 
Alcohoi, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration 
Office for Substance Abuse Prevention 
5600 Fishers Lane 
Rockville, MD 20857 



ERIC 



3 



OSAP Technical Reports are prepared by the Division of Demonstrations and 
Evaluation, Office for Substance Abuse Prevention (OSAP), and published by its 
Division of Communication Programs. The primary objective of the series is to 
facilitate the transfer of prevention and intervention technology between and 
among researchers, administrators, policymakers, educators, and providers in the 
public and private sectors. At times, this series will publish reviews of innovative 
or exemplary programming models and reviews of evaluative studies conducted 
by OSAP grantees. 

This publication was prepared by the National Center for American Indian and 
Alaska Native Mental Health Research, Department of Psychiatry, School of 
Medicine, the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado 
80262. The editors for this technical report were Eric N. Goplerud and Hank 
Resnik. Funding for this project was provided under contract number 88 M 
075606501 D from the Office for Substance Abuse Prevention. 

The term "alcohol and other drugs" used herein includes inhalants. The section 
entitled "OSAP Demonstration Project Survey" uses the term "substance abuse" 
throughout. This was the appropriate terminology when tiie survey was conducted. 
However, tlie term has since been replaced by the use of "alcohol and other drugs. " 

The presentations herein are those of the authors and may not necessarily reflect 
the opinions, official policy, or position of OSAP; the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and 
Mental Health Administration; the Public Health Service; or the U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services. 

All material appearing in this technical report, except quoted passages from 
copyrighted sources, is in the public domain and may be used or reproduced 
without permission from OSAP or the authors. Citation of the source is appreci- 
ated. 

OSAP Production Officer: Timothy F. Campbell 
DHHS Publication No. (ADM)90-1705 
Printed 1990 

Project Officer 
Eric N. Goplerud, PhD. 

OSAP Technical Report Series 
Elaine M. Johnson, Ph.D. 
Director, OSAP 

Bernard R. McColgan 
Director, Division of Demonstrations and Evaluation 

Robert W. Denniston 
Director, Division of Communication Programs 



ERJC 



4 



Acknowledgments 



Through the auspices of the National Center for American Indian and 
Alaska Native Mental Health Research, the following team of individuals 
contributed to the production of this document in a variety of ways. They 
provided ideas for the development of the OSAP project questionnaire, 
conducted the field site visits, performed the scientific literature review, 
and provided data and observations bearing on complex scientific, clinical, 
and societal issues. 



Candace M. Fleming, Ph.D. 
Spero M. Manson, Ph.D. 
Christine Duclos, M.RH. 
Alice Castillo, B A 



Fred Beauvais, Ph.D. 
Gregory Cornell, M.S. 

Joyce M. Kramer, Ph.D. 
Carol Lujan, Ph.D. 
Philip A. May, Ph.D. 
Valerie C. Montoya, Ph.D. 

Joseph E. Trimble, Ph.D. 



National Center for American 
Indian and Alaska Native 
Mental Health Research 

University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center 

Western Behavioral Studies 
Colorado State University 

Northwest Research Office 
Columbia University School of 
Social Work 

Department of Behavioral Sciences 
University of Minnesota, Duluth 

School of Justice Studies 
Arizona State University 

Department of Sociology 
University of New Mexico 

Department of Behavioral Sciences 

and Human Behavior 
University of Alaska at Fairbanks 



Department of Psychology 
Western Washington University 

Special recognition is offered to the many OSAP grantees who partici- 
pated and contributed to the development of this technical report. 



ill 



Foreword 



The Office for Substance Abuse Prevention (OSAP) is particularly 
pleased to present this third in a series of technical reports. It offers a 
state-of-the-art portrayal of alcohol and other drug issues and programs 
among an important population: American Indian and Alaska Native 
youth. It summarizes 16 demonstration grants that provide promising 
prevention models for working with these youth and also reviews 80 
articles identifying over 60 prevention interventions. As these summa- 
ries and articles demonstrate, many exciting approaches are being of- 
fered across the United States focusing on this youth group* 

Among the programs described, cultural considerations are especially 
prevalent, as well as concern for OSAPs two key target groups: youth 
and pregnant and postpartum women and their infants. Variables that 
have been incorporated into these programs include historical im- 
plications, familial patterns, educational environments, social patterns 
and environments, and patterns of use of alcohol and other drugs. We 
believe these programs have broken new ground and have also created 
a hopeful climate for continued effects among this population. 

OSAP s technical report series is designed to provide indepth, practical 
information about successful prevention activities, making available the 
most current and reliable information about effective strategies and 
techniques. In addition to reporting the latest findings from the field, 
OSAP hopes to answer many of the questions practitioners have about 
the realistic aspects of developing programs for those at high risk, 
including guidelines for selecting, recruiting, and retaining hard-to- 
reach youth for prevention activities. 

OSAP is an agency of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health 
Administration within the Departnu nt of Health and Human Services. 
It has been given a lead role in the Nation s effort to reduce the demand 
for and to prevent problems caused by the abuse of alcohol and other 
drugs, as mandated by Congress in the Anti-Dru£ Abuse Acts of 1986 and 
1988. Within this mandate, OSAP promotes partnerships with and 
between public- and private-sector organizations and agencies. OSAP 
believes such partnerships are the critical element for undertaking the 
comprehensive approach necessary to reduce alcohol and other drug 
problems in the United States today. 

This technical report continues to foster the networking process by 
sharing new knowledge about programs for those in high-risk environ- 
ments and by promoting the most effective approaches to the challenges 
we face. 

Elaine M. Johnson, Ph.D. 
Director 

Office for Substance Abuse Prevention 



Preface 



This review of literature and programs pertaining to the prevention of 
alcohol and other drug problems among American Indians and Alaska 
Natives is an important milestone for the Office for Substance Abuse 
Prevention (OSAP), which currently funds 18 programs in such commu- 
nities in 12 States. Much can be learned from these programs that should 
prove useful to the health and prevention fields. 

This technical report begins with a detailed review of the literature, 
including a glimpse of the historical context. This overview of different 
types of programming can be useful in understanding the background for 
the current OSAP-funded effort in American Indian communities. At a 
glance, we can see what types of programs and approaches have been 
implemented over a period of several decades. 

A systematic analysis of the current grantees' programs as outlined in 
their proposals follows. Then the report presents the results of a detailed 
process of telephone interviews and site visits conducted when most of the 
programs were well into their first year of implementing their OSAP 
grants. It concludes with a set of important recommendations for further 
action and study regarding prevention programming for American Indi- 
ans and Alaska Natives. 

The report makes several points clear. Most important, we are at a point 
where much has been done in American Indian and Alaska Native com- 
munities, much is known about what does and does not work, and the 
parameters for future study can be clearly defined. 

OSAP's mission has been significantly aided and advanced by the work 
that went into this publication. We are enthusiastic about sharing this 
technical report with the field. 

Bernard R. McColgan 
Director 

Division of Demonstrations and 
Evaluation 



Contents 



page 



Acknowledgments in 

Foreword v 

Preface vii 

Executive Summary i 

The Drug Problem Among Indian/Native Youth 1 

Literature Review 1 

Summary of Program Proposals 2 

Telephone Survey 2 

Conclusion 3 

The Nature and Extent of Alcohol and Other Drug Problems .... 4 

Literature Review 7 

Programs with Historic Significance 8 

Programs Targeting Pregnancy and Early Child Care 10 

Programs Targeting Youth in Foster Care 11 

Programs Targeting Indian Boarding School and 

Public School Populations 12 

Community-Based Programs for Youth 15 

Residential Programs for Youth 15 

Cultural Enhancement for Youth in the Community 16 

Programs Within Behavioral Health Clinics 18 

Intervention Program Planning 20 

Summary 21 

Analysis of Grantee Projects 23 

Synopses of Projects 23 

Classification by Prevention Strategies 30 

Classification by Site of Intervention 31 

Telephone Survey 33 

Philosophy and Beliefs 33 

Project Characteristics 35 

Specific Project Strategies 38 

Organizational Structure and Management 38 

Project Evaluation 41 

Site Visit Reports 43 

Summary and Synthesis 43 

Recommendations 46 

References 47 

American Indian and Alaska Native Demonstration Projects .... 51 
Appendix A: Summary of Prevention Activities From Literature . . 53 
Appendix Bi Summary of Prevention Activities From Proposals . . 65 
Appendix C: Telephone Survey 71 

ix 

o 



ERIC 3 



Executive Summary 



The Drug Problem Among 
Indian/Native Youth 

Although alcohol and other drug use has de- 
clined among American Indian and Alaska Native 
youth, as with the youth population generally, 
available findings indicate that more Indian 
youth use virtually every type of drug with 
greater frequency than non-Indians. This is par- 
ticularly true for alcohol, marijuana, and inhal- 
ants. Also, the age of first involvement with 
alcohol is younger for Indian youth, the fre- 
quency and amount of drinking are greater, and 
the negative consequences are greater. As adoles- 
cents, Indian youth are more likely than others 
to use alcohol and other drugs in combination. 

Although few satisfactory explanations exist 
for the higher rates of use for Indian youth, 
factors such as poverty, prejudice, and a lack of 
economic, educational, and social opportunities 
play a role. Among Indian youth, alcohol and 
other drug use appears to be related more directly 
to family influence than to peer influence. An 
important caveat is that most of these findings 
are drawn from studies of reservation youth, and 
much less is known about Indian youth in urban 
areas. 

Literature Review 

The literature reviewed for this report came 
from the National Center for American Indian 
and Alaska Native Mental Health Research. The 
center collects and indexes information about 
journal articles, books, dissertations, profes- 
sional papers, and research reports on American 
Indian and Alaska Native behavioral health. Ap- 
proximately 80 articles describing program activ- 
ities and 60 prevention interventions were 
identified. 

Programs were found in the following 
categories: 



• Programs with historic significance, e.g., 
the Native American Indian Church, which 
stresses abstinence from alcohol use and 
the preservation of traditional cultural val- 
ues; also, the Sweat Lodge and Sun Dance 
Rituals as culturally prescribed healing 
and health maintenar^ practices. 

• Programs targeting pregnancy ind early 
child care, e.g., child developm : courses 
for pregnant women and programs to pre- 
vent fetal alchol syndrome. 

• Programs targeting youth in foster care, 
e.g., incorporation of the traditional con- 
cept of the "Whipper Man" for maintaining 
discipline and well-being; also, alternatives 
to foster care. 

• Programs targeting Indian boarding 
school and public school populations, e.g., 
intensive counseling and one-to-one sup- 
port in residential settings; group therapy 
and group counseling for recent dropouts 
and students having problems; life 
skills/social competence training; and peer 
influence programs. 

• Community-based programs for youth, e.g. , 
positive alternatives, service opportuni- 
ties, and peer counseling. 

• Residential programs for youth, e.g., inter- 
vention and treatment activities. 

• Cultural enhancement for youth in the com- 
munity, e.g., tribal health fairs; education 
in traditional tribal arts, stories, and h JiiU 
icrafts; powwows and feasts; and culturally 
oriented family-strengthening programs 
for urban families. 

• Programs within behavioral health clinics, 
e.g., teen centers, mental health centers, 
counseling, and a combination of tradi- 
tional Indian values and group therapy 
techniques. 



9 

ERIC 



9 



2 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



• Intervention program planning, e.g., plan- 
ning to enhance cultural identity and em- 
powerment as part of service delivery; also, 
formation of support groups and organiza- 
tions such as the National Association for 
Native American Children of Alcoholics. 

Most of the programs included in the review 
were promotional and primary in nature. Fifty- 
five percent of the 60 programs reviewed pro- 
vided activities that could be classified as 
promotional. Education and training activities 
predominated (73 percent). More than half (58 
percent) of the promotional programs had a soci- 
ocultural component. Twenty-seven percent pro- 
vided recreational opportunities, and 24 percent 
provided consultation. 

Summary of Program 
Proposals 

The majority of the OSAP programs employed 
primary prevention strategies and approaches. 
Ninety-four percent of the projects provided 
some activities that could be classified as primary, 
63 percent promotional, 50 percent secondary, 
and 50 percent tertiary. Social action, education/ 
training, and cultural enhancement were the 
main promotional activities, included in 70 per- 
cent of the proposals. Recreational components 
were part of 60 percent of the projects. Primary 
interventions were mainly education/training 
(94 percent) and cultural activities (67 percent). 
Sixty percent provided consultation to schools, 
mental health agencies, and health clinics. 

Secondary-level strategies focused mainly on 
assessment and referral, individual and group 
therapy, and self-help groups. As a whole, the 
OSAP-funded projects appeared to be identifying 
youth who are most at risk and providing them 
with services that will keep them from developing 
an entrenched aScohoi- and other drug-using life- 
style. Tertiary interventions focused mainly on 
group and individual treatment. 

Five of the 16 projects (31 percent) can be 
described as comprehensive — that is, +hey pro- 
vided promotional, primary, secondary, and terti- 

* "Substance abuse" is used throughout this section because 



ary intervention techniques. Most of the others 
concentrated on primary and promotional inter- 
ventions. Not surprisingly, cultural activities fig- 
ured prominently in these projects. 

Telephone Survey 

A telephone survey to all the OSAP-funded 
sites covered five main topics: (1) program philos- 
ophy and beliefs, (2) descriptions of project char- 
acteristics, (3) descriptions of specific project 
strategies, (4) organizational structure and man- 
agement, and (5) project evaluation. Highlights 
from the survey include the following findings: 

• Poor self-esteem and parental alcoholism 
appear to be the most significant risks for 
substance abuse* (88 percent). Substance 
abuse by peers and friends follows, with 81 
percent of the respondents indicating its 
importance. 

• People with a defined spiritual belief sys- 
tem and/or positive self-esteem are 
thought to be least vulnerable to substance 
abuse/dependency (88 percent). Other pro- 
tective factors considered important are 
being able to make decisions based on in- 
ternal beliefs about personal responsibili- 
ties (69 percent) and/or to act 
independently (63 percent). 

• Nearly all respondents (94 percent) believe 
that parents who model appropriate and 
healthy behavior are the best defense 
against substance abuse. 

• The general intervention goals stressed 
most often are recognising risk factors, 
increasing/enhancing program or commu- 
nity resources, promoting cultural iden- 
tity, and promoting mental health (94, 88, 
88, and 81 percent, respectively). 

• Fifty percent of the programs were devel- 
oped and are implemented by the tribe. The 
remaining half are operated by private/ 
nonprofit corporations. 

• The majority of the programs are commu- 
nity-based (63 percent), and all programs 

e survey questions used that terminology. 



10 



Executive Summary 



3 



have some community prevention activity. 
Ninety-four percent direct their activities 
to adolescents (13-19 years old), 69 percent 
to school-aged children (6-12 years old), 
and 50 percent to preschool children (4-5 
years old). 

Eighty-seven percent of the programs tar- 
get reservation communities, while two (13 
percent) focus on urban populations. 

Ninety-four percent of the respondents use 
another agency for referrals, including 
schools. 

All but one of the programs is based to some 
degree on aspects of Indian/Native culture. 



Sixty-nine percent include cultural activi- 
ties to a significant extent. 

Conclusion 

The OSAP projects reviewed by this study ap- 
pear to be consistent with the current state of the 
art in substance use prevention among American 
youth in general. Although this is encouraging, 
the review also makes clear that further study 
and research are needed in a variety of key areas. 
As with the prevention field generally, program 
evaluation remains a weak area, and longitudinal 
research on program impacts is not only desirable 
but necessary. 



11 



The Nature and Extent of Alcohol 
and Other Drug Problems 



This technical report examines the literature 
relating to programs to prevent alcohol and other 
drug problems among American Indian and 
Alaska Native populations, with an emphasis on 
high-risk youth. It presents the findings of a 
survey of the OSAP grantees serving these pop- 
ulations conducted in the fall of 1988. To under- 
stand the context for programs serving this 
population, however, it is important to under- 
stand the unique aspects of alcohol and other 
drug use among American Indians and Alaska 
Natives. 

Epidemiological data about alcohol and other 
drug abuse among American Indians has been 
slowly emerging for both adults and youth, but 
more attention has been placed on studies of the 
youth. Important overviews that summarize 
these data are found in Oetting, Edwards, and 
Beauvais (in press), May (1982, 1989), and Austin 
(1989). 

The available findings indicate that more In- 
dian youth use virtually every type of drug with 
greater frequency than non-Indian youth 
(Beauvais and LaBoueff 1985; Beauvais et al. 
1985a, 19856; Oetting et al. 1988). Specifically, 
there is greater use of alcohol, marijuana, and 
inhalants among American Indian adolescents 
(grades 7 through 12), but less use of barbiturates 
(Oetting et al. 1980). According to Beauvais, 
Oetting, and Edwards (1985), the age at first 
involvement with alcohol is younger for Indian 
youths, the frequency and amount of drinking is 
greater, and the negative consequences are 
greater. A recent update on the Indian prevalence 
data (Beauvais et al. 1989) reiterates the higher 
rates of use for both male and female youth. 

Moreover, once they enter adolescence, Indian 
youth are more prone than others to use alcohol 
and other drugs in combination (Oetting and 
Beauvais 1985). These trends continue into 
young adulthood. For example, Strimbu et al.'a 



study of over 20,000 U.S. college students re- 
vealed a higher level of drug involvement among 
American Indians than all other student groups. 
This finding was recently corroborated by Welte 
and Barnes (1987). 

Alcohol and marijuana use are more common 
among American Indian youth; yet inhalant use 
is of equal concern because of its serious neu- 
ropsychological consequences. Oetting and Gold- 
stein (1979) reported that inhalant use by 
Indians is almost twice as high at all ages from 12 
to 17 as the U.S. averages. Between 9 and 11 
percent of all youth from 12 to 19 years of age 
have used inhalants, but less than 1 percent use 
them regularly (Abelson et ai. 1977; Ellinson et 
al. 1973). In a study of American Indian college 
students, Goldstein and his colleagues 0^9) 
found that among students aged 18 to 27, 30 
percent had tried inhalants. However, only 4 per- 
cent used them during the 2 months prior to 
interview, and none saw themselves as heavy 
users. Actual use of inhalants is highest in the 
early and middle teens and then tapers offin later 
years. It also appears to decline as other sub- 
stances such as marijuana and alcohol become 
more accessible (Oetting and Goldstein 1979). 
Clearly, these inordinately high rates of inhalant 
use pose a significant health threat for this pop- 
ulation (McBride 1980). 

There is no clear explanation for the higher 
rates of use fo* Indian youth. It is generally spec- 
ulated that the differences in rates are strongly 
linked to conditions that would make any group 
susceptible to alcohol and other drug use, i.e., 
poverty, prejudice, and lack of economic, educa- 
tional, and social opportunity. A prevailing the- 
ory is that alcohol and other drug use by Indian 
youth is linked neither to emotional distress nor 
acculturation stress (Oetting et al. in press). Al- 
cohol and other drug use appears to be related to 
peer drug associations although less strongly 



12 



The Nature and Extent of Alcohol and Other Drug Problem* 

than in Anglo youth, ar d is linked more directly 
than in Anglo youth to family influence. 



In reviewing their decade of research on youth 
and drug use patterns, Getting and associates (in 
press) also observed that drug use has declined 
among Indian youth as well as with other Amer- 
ican youth. Whereas it is not clear if this trend is 
due to antidrug publicity, prevention interven- 
tions, general social change, and/or other factors 
yet to be defined, what is clear is that the youth 
who have been most susceptible to these influ- 
ences are the light users. The rates for heavy 
users, who have a higher potential for dysfunc- 
tion, have remained fairly constant in the past 10 
years. Thus, there is a group of Indian youth who 
are most at risk for drug involvement and who 
are not being reached by alcohol and other drug 
interventions. The implications of these findings 
for prevention are that programs for Indian 
youth are critically needed, must be targeted to 
youngchildren, and tertiary care (i.e., treatment) 
must be a vital part of the package. 



5 

schools, public schools with large Indian youth 
enrollment, and public and private service pro- 
viders. Nationally, 420 schools and 160 alcohol 
and other drug abuse programs (71 percent of all 
IHS-funded programs) participated in the 
survey. 

The results of this survey indicated that an 
array of intervention and prevention activities 
have been developed and implemented along with 
treatment interventions in Indian and Native 
communities. There is much to suggest that 
many of the short- and long-term strategies used 
in these programs have replicability across tribal 
groups and regional areas, but that given the 
heterogeneity of the Indian and Native commu- 
nities, the approaches will need to be modified to 
address each community's uniqueness. Further, 
ongoing research and evaluation are critically 
needed to determine the effectiveness of these 
prevention/intervention activities. 

The survey's findings strongly suggested that 
interventions that attempt to enhance the health 
of Indian and Native families may be the most 
powerful in preventing and/or reducing the inci- 
dence of alcohol and other drug*»se among Indian 
youth. The key elements for success in early- 
intervention programs appear to be program 
ownership by the community, collaboration with 
appropriate agencies, and implementation by the 
tribes to enhance the concept of self-determina- 
tion. Alio, the tremendous nationwide impact of 
the film, "The Honour of All," a documentary of 
the Alkali Lake Indian community's achieve- 
ments, strongly advocates for the effective use of 
mass media in Indian and Native communities. 

Discussions about Indian prevention pro- 
grams seldom address administrative, political, 
and fiscal issues, all of which can determine the 
longevity of very effective programs that imple- 
ment state-of-the-art technology. Future ap- 
proaches to determine the effectiveness of 
prevention programs could include the construc- 
tion of a "natural history, " which highlights the 
conditions that lead to long-term survival or that 
seem to ensure program failure. 

Given this background, the challenge of this 
technical report is to catalog the range of preven- 
tion activities that are being pursued in the com- 

13 



Most of these findings, meager as they may be, 
derive from studies of alcohol end other drugs 
among reservation youth. Practically nothing is 
known about such behavior in urban areas, 
where living conditions are quite different (Trim- 
ble 1984). It is not surprising, then, that much of 
the ongoing preventive intervention program- 
ming in Indian/Native communities, rural and 
urban alike, proceeds in a virtual vacuum, left 
largely to trial and error. 

Li 1986, a questionnaire entitled the School/ 
Community Based Alcohol/Substance Abuse Pre- 
vention Survey was conducted in Indian and Na- 
tive communities nationally (Owan et al. 1987). 
The goals of the survey were to (1) determine the 
extent to which the schools/communities were 
involved in prevention activities; (2) seek vital 
information in areas regarding curricula, stu- 
dent/community/agency participation, interven- 
tion programs, and mass media programs; and (3) 
document the prevention activities that were tai- 
lored especially to reducing the risks of alcohol 
and other drug use in Indian and Native youth. 

The survey was disseminated to Indian Health 
Service (IHS)-funded alcoholism programs at the 
local tribal levels, Bureau of Indian Affairs 



ERIC 



6 American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 

munities, to identify those that may affect— phase of this project and the topic of this techni- 

directly or indirectly— the factors that place In- cal report involves reviewing various literature 

dian youth at risk for using alcohol and other to compile all published materials that speak to 

drugs, and to develop a framework for character- the prevention of alcohol and other drug use and 

izingthese activities that will facilitate their gen- the reduction of related risk factors, as outlined 

eralization across diverse settings. The first above, among Indian youth. 



o 

ERIC 



14 



Literature Review 



A review of the literature pertaining to pro- 
gramming for American Indians and Alaska Na- 
tives was a major focus of the research for this 
technical report. The bulk of relevant literature 
for review had already been located by the Na- 
tional Center for American Indian and Alaska 
Native Mental Health Research (the National 
Center) and i ts research associates. The National 
Center's bibliographic retrieval system collects 
and indexes information about journal articles, 
books, dissertations, professional papers, and re- 
search reports on American Indian and Alaska 
Native behavioral health. A similar effort by the 
National Center to identify effective prevention 
strategies directed at suicide and its related risk 
factors was an important resource. 

The literature was examined for specific men- 
tion of tried intervention activity focusing on 
alcohol and other drug prevention or rotated risk 
factors. Much of the research discussed broad 
program suggestions and recommendations, and 
the refers * to actual delivery of prevention 
intervention often lacked detail and complete- 
ness. Nonetheless, from these approximately 80 
articles designating program activity, 60 preven- 
tion interventions were identified. 

These interventions are described in tenrts of 
public health prevention strategies or subtypes — 
promotional, primary, secondary, and tertiary — 
as they apply to alcohol and other drug use and 
abuse. 

For our purposes, alcohol and other drug abuse 
and mental health promotional intervention is 
defined as an application to an entire population 
as opposed to a chosen risk group (e.g., dropouts). 
Health promotion and enhancement involve 
building or augmenting adaptive strengths, cop- 
ing resources, survival skills, and general health. 
The goal is to reduce the prevalence of disease or 
disorder in a giver population. 



Primary activity is directed at a special sub- 
group in danger of manifesting alcohol and other 
drug abuse and, based on an analysis of risk 
factors, attempts to manipulate one or more con- 
ditions to forestall the occurrence of the disease 
in question. Health protection techniques are 
also primary prevention, and these employ regu- 
latory and legislative action to reduce the proba- 
bility that the disease agent and host will come 
into contact. Four legal strategies are described: 
establishing the conditions of contact (availabil- 
ity), deterring undesired behavior through pun- 
ishment, symbolizing an official posture toward 
the behavior, and influencing the content of mes- 
sages in the mass media. 

Targeting those who have shown a developing 
pattern of alcohol and other drug abuse, second- 
ary intervention entails early case finding and 
treatment. A reduction in the duration of a case 
consequently decreases the total number of ac- 
tive cases at any given point in time. 

The degree of disability and further deteriora- 
tion of a condition well established through prior 
abuse is addressed by tertiary prevention. The 
most common approach is rehabilitation comple- 
mented by community support programs to re- 
duce the need for institutionalization. 

Focusing on these strategies, the interventions 
are organized by actual programmatic activi- 
ties — referral services, individual counseling/ 
psychotherapy, group counseling/psychotherapy, 
self-help groups, social action, education/train- 
ing, recreation, sociocultural, consultation, reg- 
ister, legal, and special facility. Only activities 
that were specifically mentioned in the writings 
were considered. Assumptions were not made 
about activities 'hat could be inferred from the 
wide use of the phrase "comprehensive substance 
abuse or mental health services" found in the 
literature. 



9 

ERIC 



American Indian and Alaska UatUie Youth 



8 

The following descriptions summarize, as of 
1988, most published accounts of preventive in- 
tervention activities that focus on alcohol and 
other drug abuse and/or related risk factors 
among Indian/Native persons. The program/proj- 
ect names may not be official, but for purposes of 
this report, were assigned in the absence of a 
design .ted title to facilitate discussion. Programs 
that function in similar ways are grouped to- 
gether, beginning with these that have historic 
significance and ending with those that target 
the Indian and Native community with preven- 
tion interventions. 

Programs with Historic 
Significance 

Handsome Lake Cult and False Face 
Society of the Iroquois 

Referenced in: Dozier 1966; Wallace 1952, 
1959; and Hall 1983. 

Some of the earliest attempts to intervene and 
prevent alcohol and other drug abuse occurred 
among the Iroquois communities in the period 
1799-1900. The founder of the cult, Handsome 
Lake, began his recovery from alcoholism after 
receiving visions in which he was instructed to 
embark on a mission to preach about the evils of 
alcohol, among other social messages. The activ- 
ities of his religion had strong tertiary elements 
in that he acted as a shaman for individuals and 
groups in treating the disease. He promoted the 
ritual of public confessions, and much of his ther- 
apy relied on repressive disciplinary measures. 
His evangelistic appeal to the entire community 
in practicing appropriate social mores is an exam- 
ple of the promotional interventions that served 
as a foundation of this movement. 

Native American Indian Church 

Referenced in: Dozier 1966; Albaugh and An- 
derson 1974; Bergman 1971; Albaugh 1973; 
Pascarosa et al. 1976; Pascarosa and Futter- 
man 1976; and Hall 1983. 

This religion, introduced to Southwest tribes 
by Mexican natives around 1870, has elements of 
all four levels of prevention. The doctrine stresses 



abstinence from alcohol use as well as other val- 
ues that promote health and wellness. The pres- 
ervation of cultural values is emphasized along 
with the development of a strong social support 
system for the individuals practicing the religion. 
One-to-one counseling relationships can be es- 
tablished as a tertiary intervention and the group 
meetings, in which members are encouraged to 
express thoughts and feelings, are considered by 
some as a viable therapeutic tool for those recov- 
ering from alcoholism and other mental/physical 
disorders. 

Ghost Dance Movement 

Referenced in: Dozier 1966; and Hall 1983. 

Ghost Dance was a brief nativistic movement 
that b3gan in 1890 among western plains tribes. 
The followers expected a miraculous release from 
their current conditions, chief of which was the 
devastation of alcohol and other drug abuse, and 
expected an immediate restoration of the previ- 
ous cultural ways. The promotional prevention 
strategy portrayed alcoholism as an evil symbol 
of Euroamerican culture and offered a revival of 
native traditions as an antidote. 

Indian Shaker Church 

Referenced in: Hall 1983. 

Aspects of this church, which was founded in 
the late nineteenth century, can be considered 
representative of community-based primary pre- 
vention in that its message called for personal 
reform and abstinence from alcohol. 

Prohibition 

Referenced in: Dozier 1966; Stewart 1964; 
Back 1981; and May and Smith 1988. 

The prohibition of liquor sales and liquor con- 
sumption on reservation lands can be considered 
a primary prevention activity (health protection) 
targeted to entire communities. In 1832, with the 
passage of the Indian Intercourse Act, possession 
and use of alcohol was prohibited on Indian land. 
This was repealed in 1953 and since that time, 
each tribal government has established legal 
codes regarding the prohibition of liquor. Techni- 
cal prohibition on reservations is still the norm; 



ER?C 



16 



Literature Review 



as of 1974, only 92 reservations had laws legaliz- 
ing alcohol. On reservations where prohibition 
exists, bootlegging, trips to border towns, and 
various other forms of contrived access are used 
to obtain alcohol. Access is more difficult and 
expensive under prohibition and may lead to 
more problem-related patterns of drinking than 
are encountered where alcohol is legal. Dozier 
(1966) stated that prohibition laws have kept 
Indians from learning the controlled use of alco- 
hol. The efficacy of prohibition in preventing 
alcohol abuse is questionable and in need of 
closer scrutiny; the reasons for maintaining pro- 
hibition on 69 percent of the reservations are not 
well understood. 

Legalization of Alcohol Sales and 
Consumption 

Referenced in: May 1975, 1976, 1977; May and 
Smith 1988; and Back 1981. 

Since 1953 each tribal government has had the 
power to establish legal codes regarding the pro- 
hibition or legalization of alcohol sales and con- 
sumption. As of the end of 1974, 31.4 percent of 
the 293 reservations in the lower 48 United 
States had passed laws containing increasingly 
more complex elements, ranging from the intro- 
duction, sale, and possession of alcohol to the 
specification of a taxing system, fees for a license 
system for retail and wholesale sales, hours of 
sale, conditions of sale, etc. Preliminary studies 
have shown that legalization tribes generally 
have lower rates of both mortality and arrest 
than similar prohibition tribes. The question of 
whether legalization could be a partial solution 
or a deterrent to solving the problems associated 
with alcohol abuse has yet to be thoroughly re- 
searched. Tribes then could act on the empirical 
results of such research and use the alcohol laws 
to their benefit. 

Legalization is only one policy issue; other 
important categories of policy to consider and 
discuss widely in Indian communities are how to 
control and manipulate alcohol availability for 
the learft problematic outcomes, how to minimize 
and restrict drinking and driving, how to mini- 
mize the drinking of females during pregnancy 
and males in other high-risk situations, and en- 



vironmental and health-system changes to re- 
duce trauma and death from alcohol-related 
behaviors. 

The Sweat Lodge Ritual 

Referenced in: Hall 1983. 

The sweat lodge ritual is one culturally pre- 
scribed healing practice that has been readily and 
widely adopted by alcohol and other drug abuse 
treatment prevention programs that serve a va- 
riety of tribes. It has elements of all four levels of 
prevention in that, beyond offering mental, spir- 
itual, and 1 physical cleansing, the practice pro- 
motes the expression of group unity and 
commitment to positive cultural values. The spir- 
itual leaders serve as models of sobriety and reli- 
ance on traditional culture. A powerful 
intervention, regular participation in the sweat 
lodge ritual can integrate the recovering individ- 
ual into the wider community. 

The Sun Dance Ritual 
Referenced in: Hall 1983. 

Participation in the Sun Dance has been seen 
as a powerful opportunity to pursue personal 
reform in which abstinence from alcohol is a 
major goal. Therefore, it can be viewed as primary 
prevention. 

Cheyenne and Arapahoe Lodge Gourd 
Clan Group 

Referenced in: Albaugh 1973. 

Tertiary intervention for male alcoholics in 
residential treatment consisted of group counsel- 
ing led by a clan member or elder one or two times 
a week focusing on Indian values. The clients 
were encouraged to join and/or participate in 
ceremonies and dances after discharge from the 
program. 

Alaskan Village Spirit Committees 
Referenced in: Vesilind 1983. 

Spirit committees have recently been reinsti- 
tuted in Northern Alaska Native villages. 
Through this promotion activity, the village el- 
ders meet regularly to deal with current issues 
such as alcoholism. 



o 

ERIC 



17 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



10 

Alcoholics Anonymous 

Referenced in: Dozier 1966; and Jilek-Aall 
1978. 

Alcohol a Anonymous is a tertiary interven- 
tion for alcobo* abuse/dependence. The utiliza- 
tion of AA by Indian individuals has been 
changing over the past 20 years. Whereas at the 
beginning of this period of observation, AA 
seemed to be used primarily by the highly accul- 
turated Indian, more recently, AA groups have 
been developed that adopt Indian culture and 
attract more group members from the Indian and 
Native communities. 

Programs Targeting 
Pregnancy and 
Early Child Care 

Child Development Course for Pregnant 
Women 

Referenced in: Berlin 1985. 

In this community-wide primary intervention 
activity, pregnant women are offered opportuni- 
ties to interact with babies and young children 
and to learn practical information about child 
development. 

Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Pilot Project 

Referenced in: May and Hymbaugh 1983, 
1989. 

This comprehensive program funded by the 
Indian Health Service from 1980 to 1982 was 
developed for the Indian population in New Mex- 
ico, southern Colorado, southern Utah, and 
northern Arizona. The project had three activi- 
ties that were primary, secondary, and tertiary in 
scope. Treatment efforts were organized around 
the establishment of community "developmental 
clinics'* to which developmental^ disabled chil- 
dren who were suspected of having fetal alcohol 
syndrome (FAS) or fetal alcohol effect (FAE) were 
referred. Multidisciplinary teams conducted the 
assessments to determine diagnosis and create 
individual treatment plans for the children and 
their families. Referrals to local or regional treat- 
ment agencies were made for needed services. 



The care of children with existing FAS/FAE or 
other developmental problems was a major focus, 
but the clinics provided a unique opportunity to 
interface with the parents and provide them with 
counseling regarding future pregnancies. The 
clinics also were seen as a way to provide specific, 
onsite training for local clinicians in the diagno- 
sis of fetal alcohol syndrome. 

A second phase of the project entailed commu- 
nity training sessions involving tribal councils, 
schools, and local government units. These ses- 
sions targeted all ages and were less detailed than 
the training offered to the clinicians. Posters, 
pamphlets, films, a bibliography on FAS/FAE, a 
resource guide, and a training guide were dissem- 
inated throughout the targeted communities. 

The third phase was a research component 
designed to expand knowledge about FAS among 
Indians. Specific goals were to establish incidence 
and prevalence figures for the entire population 
within that region and for individual tribes, to 
understand the etiological factors involved in the 
development of FAS, and to use this knowledge 
to devise prevention strategies. 

National Indian Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
Prevention Program 

Referenced in: May and Hymbaugh 1989. 

A comprehensive, macrolevel FAS prevention 
program for American Indians and Alaska Na- 
tives was funded by the Indian Health Service 
from 1983 to 1985. The program was designed to 
provide native communities throughout the 
United States with the knowledge, skills, and 
strategies to initiate primary, secondary, and ter- 
tiary prevention measures on their own. The key 
to the program was the training of a cadre of 
trainer/advocates in all local Indian and Alaska 
Native communities served by the Indian Health 
Service. These people were then supported and 
assisted in their efforts through a variety of 
means, such as the dissemination of state-of-the- 
art information and the provision of technical 
assistance. Evaluation of knowledge gained indi- 
cated that the local trainers had substantial suc- 
cess in imparting FAS information to a variety of 
audiences (prenatal groups, school children, and 
community groups). Further, the evaluation sam- 



ERJ.C 



18 



Literature Review 



11 



pies indicated that the knowledge was retained 
by these groups over time (2-4 months) and dif- 
fused among peers in local communities. 

Early Intervention Program for All New 
Mothers and Their Infanta 

Referenced in: Berlin 1985. 

This community-wide primary prevention in- 
tervention targeted new mothers who met two to 
three times each week to share their experiences 
with other new mothers. The women were taught 
infant stimulation, much of which was consistent 
with baby handling traditional to many tribes. A 
third component of the program was that the 
mothers exchanged babies with other mothers 
for 1/2 hour each week to further their practice of 
infant stimulation. 

High School Pregnancy Program 

Referenced in: Berlin 1985. 

This Indian high school-based primary preven- 
tion program was offered to pregnant girls and 
fathers-to-be and consisted of classes on practical 
child care and effective parenting, parenting vis- 
a-vis tribal customs and traditions, and problem- 
solving skills. The belief was that increasing the 
adequacy of parents would contribute to healthy 
emotional, social, and intellectual development 
in the children. 

Developmental Task Framework Project 

Referenced in: Dinges et al. 1974; Dinges 1982; 
and Beiser and Manson 1987. 

This project developed family-based efforts to 
procote mental health among rural, isolated 
Navajos through interactional activities between 
parents and children. The objectives noted were 
cultural identification, strengthening family ties, 
and enhancing child and caregiver self-image. 

Child Care Training for At-Risk 
Adolescent Females 

Referenced in: Berlin 1985, 1987. 

This early primary intervention program tar- 
geted a high-risk group of potential dropouts who 
drank, had problematic relationships with fam- 



ily, and associated with other depressed individ- 
uals. Female high school students were offered 
paid child care jobs at the local tribal child care 
center. To continue with the program, they had 
to complete essential high school courses and 
participate in child development seminars. Re- 
spected community elders participated in the 
seminars, and the experience stimulated the for- 
mation of a peer group centered around child care 
issues, which also elicited discussion on their own 
development. The participants usually com- 
pleted high school and did not continue to drink. 

Programs Targeting Youth 
in Foster Care 

Whipper Man Tribal Group Home 

Referenced in: Shore 1975; Shore and Nicholls 
1975; Shore and Keepers 1982; and Beiser and 
Manson 1987. 

The Whipper Man Project is a model primary 
intervention incorporating the Native concept of 
the Whipper Man as disciplinarian in the devel- 
opment of a tribally operated group home for 
children and adolescents, aged 1-18, who were 
removed from their family of origin because of 
neglect or abandonment. The link between alco- 
hol abuse in the parents and the neglect of chil- 
dren was articulated in the development of this 
facility, which provided short- and long-term 
placement counseling. Intensive outreach family 
counseling, outpatient followup, and case man- 
agement were made available. Some of the accom- 
plishments of this program included a reduction 
in the length of time that adolescents spent in jail 
and a reduction in off-reservation referral for 
foster care. 

Alternatives to Foster Care Program 

Referenced in: Ishisika 1978; and Beiser and 
Manson 1987. 

This primary prevention intervention, Alter- 
natives to Foster Care Program, provided fami- 
lies with apartment units in a residential facility. 
Services included child care, child management 
counseling, employment and social service advo- 
cacy, dietary counseling, and case management 



o 

ERIC 



19 



12 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



services. Alcohol and other personal functioning 
problems were referred to treatment services 
available in the general community* 

Programs Targeting Indian 

Boarding School and 
Public School Populations 

Preventive Mental Health Program for 
Indian Boarding School 

Referenced in: Shore 1975. 

This early example of a school-based promo- 
tional effort recognized that enrollment in this 
high school boarding school was often made on 
the basis of disorganizing social or interpersonal 
factors that made most of the student body at risk 
for dropping out and alcohol abuse. A survey 
identified the factors that were related to drop- 
outs for the school. The school board was actively 
involved from the beginning with the consultants 
in writing a successful grant to provide alcohol 
abuse counseling and education for the student 
body. In addition to the counseling staff, a peer 
counseling program was developed. Another ef- 
fective intervention proved to be the behavior 
management training program for the dorm 
aides, which led to a more nurturing dorm 
environment 

Toyei Dormitory Model 

Referenced in: Goldstein et al. 1974; Shore and 
Keeper! 1982; Belter and Manson 1987; and 
Oetting and Dinges 1972. 

This is the classic example of a school-based 
promotional effort, although of short duration 
owing to fbnding. It used Navajo houseparents in 
a significantly higher ratio of adults to children 
than normal in most boarding school staffing. 
Special training for these houseparents and in- 
structional aides was provided to better equip 
them for their individual roles. Compared to chil- 
dren in a control boarding school, students in this 
boarding school demonstrated better emotional 
adjustment, accelerated development, and supe- 
rior performance on tests of physical endurance 
and strength. 



Cbemawa Indian Boarding School 
Recreational Therapy Program 

Referenced in: Betaer and Manson 1987. 

A promotional recreational therapy program 
was developed at Chemawa Indian Boarding 
School. The objectives of the intervention were to 
reduce student risk for depression, use of alcohol 
and other drugs, truancy, and antisocial behavior. 
Outdoor adventures were planned and carried 
out by self-selected students under the guidance 
of two recreational therapists. These outdoor ac- 
tivities were designed to promote psychological 
well-being. 

Rough Rock Demonstration School 
Project Eagle 

Referenced in: Beiser and Manson 1987. 

Educational reforms have included attempts 
to balance mainstream American life with curric- 
ula designed to maintain and foster cultural iden- 
tity and parental involvement. These endeavors 
also attempt to place power in the bands of local 
school boards and to provide continuing educa- 
tion. These two projects are successful examples 
of these activities. 

St. Mary's Boarding School 

Referenced in: Kleinfeld 1982; and Beiser and 
Manson 1987. 

Noticing that upperclassmen and graduates of 
St. Mary's, a remote boarding school in south- 
west Alaska, appeared to have an unusually high 
degree of psychological health ("well put to- 
gether"), this promotional bicultural program 
was examined. Students were selected who were 
oriented toward the values and ideals of the 
school, thus fostering a peer culture that sup- 
ported the institution's ideology. One of the un- 
usual features of this educational system was the 
close relationship between teachers and stu- 
dents. The Catholic faculty of Jesuits and Ursul- 
ine Sisters was able to bring tradition and 
stability to the institution as well as knowledge 
of the students' way of life. Volunteers, young 
college graduates working without pay as an ex- 
pression of their commitment to Christian ser- 
vice, not only taught but spent most of their free 



20 



time with the students— in the dorms, aiding in 
the planning of special events, and helping with 
home work and chores. Education, counseling, 
and role-modeling took place in these informal 
contacts with the young volunteers that went 
beyond normal teacher-student relationships. 

Combining traditional Eskimo values with re- 
ligious and western ideals, St. Mary's stressed 
responsibility to others— being useful in the 
world and a help to the community. Traditional 
arts and crafts were encouraged. Planning skills 
were developed through the organization of re- 
creational activities. 

Mt Edgecumbe Dormitory Project 
Referenced in: Harvey et al. 1977. 

This primary prevention intervention used a 
small dormitory for students with severe behav- 
ioral problems. Group interaction and participa- 
tion in dorm management were promoted. 
Additional staff training was available for coping 
with these severe behavioral problems. 

Inhalant Abuse Intervention in an 
Elementary Boarding School 

Referenced in: Schottstaedt and Bjork 1977; 
and Manson et al. 1982. 

An attempt to interrupt dependence on inhal- 
ants at an early age was instituted at an Okla- 
homa Indian boarding school. Promotional 
activities centered on reducing adult-child ratio 
in the dorms, improving staff morale through 
child management training, and limiting access 
to the abusive substance. An example of promo- 
tional social action organized by a local youth 
group is illustrated in the campaign to get stores 
in nearby towns to stock paint and glue supplies 
out of reach of youth. A volunteer recreation 
component was added to improve the children's 
afterschool experience. Continued consultation 
to dorm aides was a primary intervention, and 
the provision of individual alcohol and other drug 
counseling to targeted habitual users was a ter- 
tiary intervention directed at eliminating this 
problem within the school. The authors discuss 
the theory that glue sniffing is a precursor of 
alcoholism and that the identification and treat- 
ment of glue-sniffing children becomes an impor- 
tant strategy for preventing alcoholism. 



teview 23 

Support Group for Achieving Female 
Adolescents in a Boarding School 

Referenced in: Berlin 1982 and 1985. 

Adolescent suicide attempters were identified 
and an intervention devised. The group consisted 
of girls in aboardinghigh school who were bright, 
attractive, and chosen to be debate captains, 
cheerleaders, etc. The Indian belief that it is not 
appropriate to be better than one's peers had 
resulted in harassment and emotional distress 
for these achieving girls, and several had at- 
tempted suicide. Primary and secondary inter- 
ventions included featuring tribal leaders as 
speakers in classes and student forums in which 
they sanctioned the need to be good learners and 
leaders of their people. Support groups of par- 
ents, counselors, and leaders were effective in 
relieving these adolescents of this bicultural 
dilemma. 

First-Offender Program for Alcohol- and 
Drug-Abusing Adolescents and their 
Parents 

Referenced in: Berlin 1985, 1987; and Snyder 
1981. 

First offenders and their parents were court 
ordered to participate in 10 family therapy ses- 
sions in which a Native counselor assisted each 
family in solving the problems that they were 
experiencing. 

Grade School Depression Project 
Referenced in: Berlin 1985, 1987. 

A variety of individual and group counseling 
sessions were targeted to fourth, fifth, and sixth 
grade children from dysfunctional alcoholic fam- 
ilies who showed signs of depression. Lacking 
nurturance, these children were enabled to deal 
better with feelings of abandonment. 

Papago Indian Reservation School Group 
Therapy Program 

Referenced in: Kahn et al. 1974. 

This primary school-based program consisted 
of group sessions targeted at potential school 
dropouts who were referred by the school coun- 
selor and the truant officer. These male adoles- 



21 



14 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



cents were offered payment for their attendance. 
Formal presentations were made on salient is- 
sues such as "family discord** and "Indian cul- 
ture.** Another aspect of the group was the 
discussion of their problems and their feelings. A 
marked decrease was observed in the number of 
arrests and school absences following the imple- 
mentation of the program. 

Project Catch-Up 

Referenced in: Mason 1968, 1969; and Manson 
1982. 

This primary prevention program focused on 
intensive academic summer instruction. Group 
vocational counseling was also directed to the 
socially disadvantaged Indian youths who partic- 
ipated. On followup, although academic perfor- 
mance showed no significant improvement, 
school dropout rates proved to be lower than the 
control group. 

Adolescent Indian Therapy Group 
Referenced in: Hammerschlag 1974. 

An elective course entitled "Human Relations'* 
was offered as a secondary prevention to urban 
and reservation youth attending a boarding high 
school. Some of the problem areas for these youth 
were academic delays, bilingual language difficul- 
ties, and social problems (behavioral and famil- 
ial). The course met for 2 hours each week for a 
period of 6 months. The course instructor was a 
mental health professional who facilitated the 
group much as one would a therapy group. The 
formation and maintenance of interracial rela- 
tionships was a fundamental theme of the group. 

Assertiveness Skills Training for 
Bicultural Competence 

Referenced in: LaFromboise and Rowe 1983. 

This primary prevention strategy focused on 
assertiveness training in a smail group setting 
that used instruction, modeling, behavioral 
rehearsal, reinforcement, feedback, skill im- 
provement, and generalization to the natural en- 
vironment. Skills training is applicable to a wide 
range of problem areas that are particularly rel- 
evant to Indian people, such as stress manage- 



ment, problem solving, parenting, alcohol and 
other drug abuse, and coping with depression. 
Social acceptance of skills training relies upon 
the relevance of its goals to American Indian 
concerns regarding coping in two or more cultur- 
ally different worlds, self-determination, and ef- 
fective communication. 

Life Skills Training with Adolescents 

Referenced in: Gilchrist et al. 1987; Bobo et al. 
1988a, 19886; and Schinke et al. 1985. 

Cognitive-behavioral learning theory was the 
basis for these primary prevention interventions, 
which were field tested in tribal and public 
schools with junior high school youth. The inter- 
vention consisted of an educational group format 
of 10 to 12 sessions, with peer support and mon- 
itoring between sessions. Content areas that 
were addressed included information and stereo- 
types about Indian culture (spirit dancing, quest- 
ing, singing, drumming, and use of native custom, 
language, and healing practices), successful In- 
dian role models, problem-solving skills, coping 
skills including relaxation skills, interpersonal 
communication, discrimination skills, and the de- 
velopment of healthy social networks. 

Peer-Managed Self-Control Prevention 
Program 

Referenced in: Carpenter et al. 1985. 

This primary program targeted to Indian stu- 
dents enrolled in a residential high school predi- 
cated its interventions upon the idea that 
trainingyouth about responsible consumption of 
alcohol may be a realistic goal. Three approaches 
were implemented and evaluated. In the first 
approach, students participated in an alcohol ed- 
ucation class that focused on controlled social 
drinking, alcohol abuse, and alcoholism. In addi- 
tion, the students contracted with peer counsel- 
ors to monitor their blood alcohol content (BAC) 
three times a week, with the goal being to lower 
the levels. 

In the second approach, students met with a 
peer counselor three times a week, monitored the 
BAC, and contracted to lower the levels. The 
third group of students met with a peer counselor, 
monitored their BAC, but made no contracts. 



22 



Literature Review 



15 



Evaluation at the 4-, 9-, and 12-month followup 
revealed no differences among the three groups, 
and each group decreased their alcohol use and 
changed their attitudes about use/abuse. 

Community-Based 
Programs for Youth 

Mt. Edgecumbe Comprehensive Alcohol 
Program (MECAP) 

Referenced in: Harvey et aJ. 1977. 

Mt. Edgecumbe Comprehensive Alcohol Pro- 
gram (MECAP) was a student-run alcohol educa- 
tion and counseling program. This primary 
endeavor trained and used peer counselors. The 
project functioned from 7:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. 
Friday and Saturday nights from a renovated 
building used as a detoxification center. 

Chevak Milage Youth Association (CVYA) 

Referenced in: Kleinfeld 1982; and Beiser and 
Manson 1987. 

To aid in the development of adaptive values 
and skills, a youth organization in the Alaskan 
Catholic community of Chevak was established 
as a village institution. It was started by local 
young people for their own recreational activities 
and developed into an organization that planned 
and sponsored all the recreation for the commu- 
nity. This primary intervention viewed all young 
people of the village as members. 

Observation of the CVYA activities indicated 
that it served multiple social, educational, eco- 
nomic, and community service functions. CVYA 
sponsored league basketball, Eskimo and west- 
ern dances, and two annual festivals. It raised its 
own operating funds, and a third of the activities 
provided a community service. Stressing group 
process, group but not individual accomplish- 
ments were recognized. The education was on 
traditional skills, alcohol and other drugs, skill 
building in planning and organization, and role- 
modeling. 

The Acoma-Canoncito-Laguna Teen 
Center 

Referenced in: Beiser and Manson 1987. 

This program was one of the successful teen 
interventions surfacing within the Indian com- 



munities. The center's promotional activities in- 
cluded counseling, rap sessions, health educa- 
tion, workshop for teens and parents, acne and 
weight control programs, and inservice training 
for staff. Recreational activities were promoted 
such as exercise classes, library, and the develop- 
ment of a newsletter. This particular center was 
housed in a local junior/senior high school but 
remained organizationally distinct. It did, how- 
ever, cooperate with the school to reduce absen- 
teeisms and vandalism. 

DARE 

Referenced in: Beiser and Manson 1987. 

Launched by the Ute Mountain Ute Tribe, this 
promotional program that was modeled after the 
"Dare To Be You" curriculum emphasized 
decisionmaking abilities, assertiveness, self-re- 
spect, and self-esteem. It was intended to assist 
youths at risk for alcohol and other drug use, 
truancy, and delinquency. 

Residential Programs 
for Youth 

Fort Hall Medical Detoxification Center 
for Adolescents 

Referenced in: Ogden et al. 1970; and Shore et 
al. 1972. 

A medical holding facility was created on the 
reservation to hold adolescents and young adults 
picked up by the police for acute intoxication. 
The youth were detained locally under medical 
supervision instead of being held in the off-reser- 
vation jail. Other secondary prevention activities 
were the provision of crisis counseling by on-call 
tribal volunteers and referrals for individual and 
family therapy. 

Youth Chemical Dependency Center at 
North Dakota State Hospital 

Referenced in: Query 1985. 

A special facility was developed to offer terti- 
ary intervention to Indian and Anglo drug-abus- 
ing young adults from age 14 to 23. The 4- to 
6-week residential program found reality ther- 
apy to be an effective approach for these youth. 



e 

ERIC 



23 



1$ 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



Cultural Enhancement for 
Youth in the Community 

Mescalero Health Fairs 
Hop! Health Fairs 

Referenced in: Beiser and Manson 1987. 

The Mescalero and Hopi offer two good exam- 
ples of effective learning mechanisms through 
classroom activities. Their development of learn- 
ing centers that follow up themes introduced 
through local mental health fairs illustrates the 
important role that community-based tribal 
health fairs can play in promoting well-being as 
well as calling attention to the problems of Indian 
youths. 

Miccosukee Culture Program 

Referenced in: Lefley 1982; and Beiser and 
Manson 1987. 

The two promotional components of this cul- 
tural intervention under the control of tribal 
elders involved 2-day overnight trips of small 
groups of children to an ancestral Miccosukee 
campsite in the Florida everglades and formal- 
ized instruction in the school setting. Additional 
time was devoted to traditional Miccosukee arts 
and crafts. This program saw a reduction in the 
distance between actual and ideal self-percep- 
tion, increased preference for Indian stimuli, and 
an increase in the correlation between personal 
and ethnic self-perception. 

Tiospaye Project 

Referenced in: Mohatt and Blue 1982; and 
Beiser and Manson 1987. 

Spiritual advisors and traditional healers were 
involved in an attempt to reduce various social 
pathology indicators among Indian children and 
adolescents (e.g., arrest rates, delinquency, van- 
dalism, alcohol-related accidents). This promo- 
tional effort organized a series of community 
development projects that were designed to re- 
build the tiospaye, an expression of traditional 
Lakota lifestyle. This lifestyle is based on the 
extended family and shared responsibility. 

Activities included consultation in regard to 
community needs and reorganization of the com- 
munity by-laws. Building of a log meeting house 



and the introduction of other small subsistence 
projects met the interest of the residents and 
were a forum for educational efforts. A quilting 
cooperative was started as well as a local commu- 
nity television station. All interventions were 
conducted by local tribal members— fltaff or resi- 
dents. The project was able to demonstrate that 
social pathology rates slowed noticeably in the 
experimental community as opposed to its 
controls. 

WIDO-AKO-DA-DE-WIN 

Referenced in: Red Horse 1982; and Berlin 
1987. 

This project was designed within a cultural 
framework to use the natural support network as 
a promotional and primary prevention model for 
services to Indian adolescents. (WIDO-AKO-DA- 
DE-WIN is an Ojibwa word meaning "network- 
ing.") The participants were identified as 
experiencing life difficulties that might be amel- 
iorated by social services. Project staff met 
weekly with social workers. The major goals were 
to form a cohesive support group and to integrate 
project activities into the existing family systems. 
Cultural activities such as Pow Wows and feasts 
formed a continuing thread throughout the 
group process. It also served as an integrating 
component for primary clinical family and indi- 
vidual counseling. 

The success of the pilot program led to the 
school-based WIDO-AKO-DA-DE-WIN. This in- 
novative approach used the concept of family as 
treatment. Its primary goal was to develop a 
family support network for Indian students at 
South High. Promotional classes were offered in 
a group setting, and individual and family coun- 
seling sessions were offered to all students as a 
form of primary prevention. Curriculum develop- 
ment covered personal assessment, communica- 
tion skills, values, norms, Indian traditions, 
chemical dependency, family systems, male-fe- 
male relationships, health education, parenting, 
and school support systems. This focus was in- 
tended to clarify Indian values and identity in an 
urban setting. The use of an Indian elder as 
teacher in the classroom and trips to various 
reservations increased sociocultural support net- 
works for the teens. Information was also dissem- 



9 

ERIC 



24 



Literature Review 



17 



inated on health and personal relationships to 
help the teens plan or prevent pregnancies. 
School attendance, performance, and family rela- 
tions improved and frequency of encounters with 
the juvenile justice system decreased during the 
project. 

Family Mental Health Program— Urban 
Housing Project 

Referenced in: Red Horse 1982. 

This program, located in a densely populated 
urban housing unit, emerged as a response to a 
large number of Indian families being fractured 
through child protective services. All program 
strategies were adopted with community input 
and participation. Three traditional elders were 
hired to service the traditional families within 
the community. Rituals, ceremonies, and 
traditional healing practices were used to bring 
families together and strengthen family relation- 
ships. Pow Wows reinforced family structure and 
provided role models for the youths, and also 
served as a tool for promoting community orga- 
nization activities, i.e., fundraising, cultural 
advocacy, and lobbying. Other promotional activ- 
ities directed at all levels of families included 
consultation to medical services, recreation pro- 
grams, diagnostic evaluation tool revision to re- 
flect traditional health beliefs, services to teens, 
and preschool services. 

Primary clinical operations encompassed rou- 
tine crisis counseling and case management. The 
extended family system was identified for child 
placement when needed. Representatives of each 
major tribe v. ere hired as staff, and interventions 
were planned using the appropriate tribal mem- 
ber. A parallel Indian-controlled service system 
emerged comprising alternative schools, recrea- 
tional programs, health and social services, legal 
aid, group homes, an all-purpose Indian center, 
and half-way houses. A comprehensive network 
review model consolidated awareness of mental 
health issues and organized child care concerns. 

Project Nak-nu-we-sha 
Referenced in: Robbins 1982. 

An innovative primary child abuse/neglect 
demonstration project on the Yakima Indian Res- 
ervation provided foster care, medical, counsel- 



ing, and receiving home services. To end the in- 
appropriate removal of abused children from 
their kinship system, all area-wide Indian child 
welfare cases were monitored, completely halting 
adoption of children off the reservation. This was 
accomplished through intensive casework and 
advocacy services. All but 4 of the project's 23 
foster homes were placed within the local com- 
munity. Whenever possible, foster placements 
were within extended family or close family 
friends. 

The project focused on the family unit and 
conducted crisis and followup counseling, coun- 
seling in problematic areas, and case manage- 
ment. The project coordinated the delivery of 
multiple community resources and services. An 
effort was made to increase community aware- 
ness of child abuse and neglect and to develop 
positive alternatives to neglect and assaultive 
behavior. The counseling program was directed 
to Indian adolescents suffering from abuse/ne- 
glect and alcohol and other drugproblems. Indian 
paraprofessionals were used in the identification 
and assessment process, capitalizing on their fa- 
miliarity with the Native language and beliefs. 

Given its licensure as a child placement agency, 
the program was viewed as a resource by the 
courts and probation officers. Its widespread co- 
ordinating function was crucial to program 
success. 

Multidimensional Prevention and 
Intervention Program on the Manitoulin 
Island Indian Reserve 

Referenced in: Fox et al. 1984; Ward 1984; and 
Berlin 1987. 

Both school-based and community-based ac- 
tivities made up this program, which targeted the 
entire community. Most of what has been written 
has described tertiary interventions, specifically 
the Rainbow Lodge Recovery Centre, a residen- 
tial treatment facility for alcohol and other drug 
abuse; the hiring of two mental health workers; 
and the provision of a traveling mental health 
clinic. 

Promotional interventions within this com- 
munity included community outreach, commu- 
nity feasts, and spiritual groups. Various 
recreational and sports programs were planned, 



: 25 



18 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



stressing the nonuse of alcohol. School programs 
were offered to enhance self-esteem, traditional 
values, homemaking skills, and alcohol educa- 
tion. The program also enabled teens to provide 
community services such as babysitting or 
cleanup. Training of local tribal members to func- 
tion as mental health workers was paramount to 
the program's success. 

Primary interventions were comprehensive, 
beginning with the residential treatment facility. 
Youth considered to be at highest risk for alcohol 
and other drugs and suicidal behavior were 
trained to perform residential facility jobs. These 
jobs entailed community service, managing exer- 
cise equipment, and transportation. Consulta- 
tion was made available when needed to 
detention facilities and law enforcement. Backup 
consultation to the mental health workers was 
provided by the traveling mental health team. 
Alcohol and drug abuse education was an integral 
part of the treatment process. Crisis, individual, 
family, and group counseling services were con- 
ducted by the mental health workers. Local hos- 
pitalization was sought in emergency medical 
and psychiatric situations. 

Programs Within 
Behavioral Health Clinics 

Papago Community Mental Health Clinic 

Referenced in: Kahn and Delk 1973; and Kahn 
et al. 1980. 

A psychological clinic on the Tohono O'Odham 
Indian Reservation (formerly the Papago) en- 
gaged in a number of promotional interventions: 
a teen center, training tribal mental health work- 
ers, using and consulting with Native medicine 
persons, and consulting with community groups. 
Although many primary interventions were tar- 
geted to specific risk groups for suicide, alcohol 
and other drug abuse was also targeted through 
educational efforts. 

Psychiatric Consultation to Tribal Council 
Referenced in: Green 1982. 

General and child primary psychiatric consul- 
tation were provided to a local Indian Health 



Service clinic and a tribal health and social ser- 
vice branch. These service programs included 
group homes, a foster home program, an outpa- 
tient program, several alcohol and other drag 
programs, and a traditional resources program. 

USET Program— Seminole Tribe 

Referenced in: Kaven and Imotichey 1979; and 
Manson 1982. 

This primary program operating in the United 
Southern and Eastern Tribes (USET) was one of 
14 tribal mental health programs whose primary 
function was community prevention with a major 
emphasis on alcoholism. USET's general ap- 
proach was comprehensive and designed for its 
specific services populations. This particular pro- 
gram assisted 2,000 tribal members through the 
Special Services Department. Programming in- 
cluded mental health, alcoholism, and other drug 
abuse. Specific activities were not differentiated. 
Six mental health technicians and counselors 
covered three clinics and four reservation sites. 
The Indian medicine program for mental health 
was important to this agency's success. 

USET Program— Miccosukee Tribe 
Department of Community Mental Health 
and Alcoholism 

Referenced in: Haven and Imotichey 1979; and 
Manson 1982. 

Triage, counseling, and treatment were the 
main goals of this program servicing Indians in 
the Miami area. Special primary efforts by two 
Native medicine specialists, three mental health 
technicians, and one licensed clinical psycholo- 
gist were devoted to community stress 
monitoring. 

USET Program— Eastern Band of 
Cherokee Indians 

Mental Health and Alcoholism Program 

Referenced in: Haven and Imotichey 1979; and 
Manson 1982. 

This comprehensive mental health, alcohol- 
ism, child abuse, and drug abuse primary pro- 
gram worked closely with an IHS hospital 
psychiatrist to serve approximately 6,000 Indi- 



o 

ERIC 



26 



Literature Review 



19 



ans. Five counselors and mental health techni- 
cians were assisted by a wide range of consultants 
from local colleges and mental health centers. 
When these articles were written, programming 
was directed toward day care and half-way house 
concepts. 

USET Program— Coushatta and 
Chitimachl Tribes 

Referenced in: Haven and Imotichey 1979; and 
Manson 1982. 

Each of these tribes had an active mental 
health and alcoholism primary program offering 
crisis intervention, referral, and aftercare fol- 
lowup. Their promotional effort was education- 
ally oriented. 

Community Response to Suicide Epidemic 

Referenced in: Tower 1988. 

In bringing an adolescent suicide epidemic to a 
close, a multistrategic approach was used simul- 
taneously with traditional means. Statistics on 
suicide attempts and completions have been 
maintained since 1970. A rise in this secondary 
register prompted immediate crisis counseling 
and long-term grief counseling with family and 
friends. Outside psychiatric consultants were 
used during this crisis for planning the preven- 
tion of further attempts. Referrals were in- 
creased to a residential treatment facility for 
alcohol and other drug abuse. Supportive pri- 
mary school counseling was targeted to this large 
at risk group. Legal intervention resulted in spe- 
cific language insertion in an anti-drug abuse act 
providing funding for additional training. 

Traditional ceremonies were reinstituted that 
reinforced and promoted cultural pride and led to 
a decline in community anxiety. Spiritual leaders 
form. 1 an ecumenical religious front to aid the 
community. 

Promotional strategies also included hit >g ad- 
ditional mental health, law enforcement, and ju- 
venile staff. The schools developed learning labs; 
recreational programs including dances, holiday 
parties, and field trips were instituted. The bingo 
hall was opened one night a week for the teens' 
use. Education of the community and organiza- 
tion cf a youth recognition award were additional 
intervention activities. 



The communication system wks upgraded to 
include a 24-hour call emergency reap nse that 
facilitated rapid hospitalization. Tertiary efforts 
such as long-term counseling and case manage- 
ment were employed to prevent further 
deterioration. 

Following these positive changes, agencies 
were developing an integrated system of services 
dealing with mental health, child protection, al- 
coholism, job training, law and order, school pro- 
grams, and recreation. 

Alternative Community-Based Mental 
Health Prevention Program 

Referenced in: Fleming 1981 and 1983; and 
Neligh 1988. 

A Mental Health Indian Studies Group imple- 
mented two primary preventive interventions 
combining traditional Indian values and group 
therapy techniques. The participants were cho- 
sen from current case loads. The program was 
able to demonstrate reductions in the frequency 
and severity of emotional problems among par- 
ticipants. Mental health concerns were addressed 
by cultural specialists, spiritual advisers, and 
healers through group discussion during cultural 
activities. The Family Counseling/Cultural Cen- 
ter located in the community of Sc. Ignatius pro- 
vided a place for cultural awareness activity and 
group education/therapy. The Kootenai Mental 
Health Indian Studies Program, in Elmo, invited 
grade school children to participate in the group 
once a week, thus facilitating intergenerational 
discussions. 

Cultural Therapy Program 
Referenced in: French and Hornbuckle 1979. 

Staff members (enrolled members of the tribe), 
Indian clients, and other interested tribal mem- 
bers participated in informally structured Cher- 
okee cultural sessions. The assumption was that 
reestablishing a strong sense of cultural pride 
alleviates problems facing the Native American. 
This pr -notional model had three basic objec- 
tives: (1) to increase the clients' social integra- 
tion back into the community by enhancing their 
feelings of belonging; (2) to reinforce the clients' 
awareness of their proud cultural heritage; and 



27 



20 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



(3) to offer constructive, positive, and acceptable 
avenues for tension release. 

Ute Tribe Alcoholism Information and 

Counseling Program on tha Uintah and 

Ouray Reservations 

iicarilla Apache Alcoholism Program 

Nevada Intel -Tribal Council Alcoholism 

Program 

Reference! in: Shore and Von Fumetti 1972. 

Residential alcohol and other drug abuse treat- 
ment was offered on three reservations at the 
tertiary intervention level. The results under- 
score the necessity of matching the philosophy 
and methods to the specific needs of a particular 
population of alcoholics. One example was re- 
ported: Out of respect for the special cultural 
characteristics of these tribal groups, group 
meeting?, were structured to avoid the situation 
in which a confession of behavior or the sharing 
of intimate feelings was a primary goal. 

Intervention Program 
Planning 

Reservation Improvement Model 

Referenced in: May 1987. 

This author urged consideration of prevention 
programming directed not only at the individual 
but also at community morale. Promotive activi- 
ties that would enhance the "collective tribal 
identity" include increased public tribal leader- 
ship in human services (education, housing, 
health, and social services), increased advocacy of 
self-determination in governmental and legal 
matters, the development of new recreational 
facilities and increased visibility of leaders and 
role models who affirm the importance of tribal 
customs, community, and family. 

Navajo Alcohol Abuse and Education 
Project 

Referenced in: Navajo Health Authority 1979. 

The project elements described here were 
mostly tertiary in nature and reflected compre- 
hensive treatment services for alcohol-abusing 
individuals. Examples were medical/nonmedical 
detoxification programs, residential treatment, 



group homes, outp^ient treatment, and day cen- 
ters. This health planning document listed sev- 
eral recommendations for prevention efforts: 
community-wide education targeting parents, 
health providers, and tribal leaders; school-wide 
education (preschool-high school); troubled em- 
ployee programs; and interventions targeted to 
higfr-risk young people such as the children of 
alcohol abusers and children yet ro be born. 

National Association for Native American 
Children of Alcoholics 

Referenced in: Seattle Indian Health Board 
1988. 

The National Association for Native American 
Children of Alcoholics (NANACOA) was formed 
in 1988 with the vision of breaking the multi- 
generational cycle of addictions in Indian families 
and communities. The thrust of the association 
is primary prevention and its specific objectives 
are (1) to establish * national network and news- 
letter for Indian children of alcoholics, (2) to 
develop education and supportive information 
for dissemination to Indian communities, (3) to 
hold a national conference for Indian children of 
alcoholics and those concerned about that target 
group, and (4) to inform local and national poli- 
cymakers about the needs of Indian children of 
alcoholics and influence positive social change 
toward a healthy community. 

Address: NANACOA, PO. Box 3364, Seattle, 
WA 98114. 

Four Worlds Development Project 

Referenced in: Four Worlds Development Proj- 
ect 1983. 

The Four Worlds Development Project was 
funded by the Canadian National Native Alcohol 
and Drop Abuse Program of Health and Welfare 
for the purpose of developing effective preven- 
tion strategies for Canadian Indian communities. 
The project received its initial vision and direc- 
tion at a conference held in Lethbndge, Alberta, 
in 1982. The participants were Native elders, 
spiritual leaders, and professionals from diverse 
Indian communities in North America. The belief 
articulated by that group was that the problem 
of Native alcohol and drug abuse cannot be re- 
solved by propagandizing Native people about 



ERIC 



Literature Review 



21 



the ills of alcohol and other drug abuse. Rather, 
young Native people need a code to live by, ideals, 
and a vision of the future for Native society that 
is rooted in the strengths of the traditional past. 
It is a holistic approach to education and health 
that draws on the traditional teachings of Native 
culture as well as contemporary research. The 
project has developed curricula and training pro- 
grams for Indian communities. 

Address: Pour Worlds Development Project, 
Faculty of Education, The University of 
Lethbridge, 4401 University Drive, Lethbridge, 
Alberta, Canada T1K 3M4. 

Summary 

Of the approximately 80 articles perused, 
nearly 70 examined prevention activity. Of these, 
60 actual intervention programs were considered 
and reviewed. Fifty-five percent of the programs 
were providing some activities that could be clas- 
sified as promotional; G8 percent were primary, 
13 percent secondary, and 35 percent tertiary in 
regard to alcohol and ot? er drug-specific risk 
factors. A summary of all of the frequencies and 
percentages for the four types of prevention 
strategies is found in table 1. 

The predominant promotional activities were 
education/training. More than half of the promo- 
tional programs had a sociocultural component. 
Twenty-seven percent provided recreational op- 
portunities and 24 percent provided consulta- 
tion. Table A-l (in appendix A) lists the 33 
programs that described promotional activities. 

Primary interventions targeted at a particular 
risk group were mainly individual counseling and 
psychotherapy services (49 percent) and educa- 
tion and/or training (44 percent). Approximately 
one-quarter of the primary interventions in- 
volved the development of culturally relevant 
experiences and/or provided consultation ear- 
vices. Another large group of programs estab- 
lished a special facility (24 percent) and provided 
group treatment (22 percent). Table A-2 lists the 
41 programs that described primary strategies. 

Over half the programs providing secondary 
intervention offered individual counseling 
and/or psychotherapy. More than a third pro- 



vided group treatment, and a quarter provided a 
referral service and/or a special facility for indi- 
viduals identified in the early stages of alcohol 
and ether drug abuse and dependency. Informa- 
tion about the eight programs that described 
secondary intervention is detailed in table A-3. It 
is important to note that the least used preven- 
tion strategy was secondary prevention. This 
might indicate a need for more case-finding ap- 
proaches that identify children who are in immi- 
nent danger and providing them with extensive 
services that will keep them from developing an 
entrenched drug-using lifestyle. 

Counseling and/or psychotherapy was also 
made available in almost half of the programs 
identifying tertiary care. Fifty-two percent pro- 
vided group treatment. A social-cultural compo- 
nent was described in 43 percent, and over a third 
of the tertiary descriptions provided a special 
facility as an intervention for those individuals 
whose alcohol or other drug abuse and depen- 
dency were well established. Details about the 21 
programs identifying tertiary care are found in 
table A-4. 

Taking into consideration that we do not know 
the current status of the programs examined and 
are not evaluating the actual delivery of services, 
information gathered from this literature review 
suggests that the most comprehensive alcohol 
and other drug abuse prevention intervention 
programs were Inhalant Abuse Intervention in 
an Elementary Boarding School and the Commu- 
nity Response to Suicide Epidemic. Both of these 
programs were described as providing promo- 
tional, primary, secondary, and tertiary interven- 
tion techniques. The most referred to interven- 
tions were Native American Indian Church, Life 
Skills Training with A dolpscents, Toyei Dormi- 
tory Model, Whipper Man Tribal Group Home, 
and Handsome Lake Cult and False Face Society 
of the Iroquois. 

Rigorous evaluations were not done on the 
effectiveness of most of the reviewed programs. 
The work of Schinke and Gilchrist using the 
social learning model is the exception, and their 
work sete a standard for future program evalua- 
tion. This type of program needs to be extended 
to larger populations so that the issue of 



ERIC 



29 



22 



American Indian id Alaska Native Youth 



Table 1.- Summary of prevention activities from literature 

Prevention strategies 



Prevention 


Promotion 


Primary 


Secondary 


Tertiary 


activities 


N 




N 




N 


I 7 * J 


ft 


t*J 


Ail programs 


33 


(55) 


41 


(68) 


8 


(13) 


21 


(35) 


individual treatment 


1 


(3) 


20 


(49) 


5 


(63) 


10 


(48) 


Education/training 


24 


(73) 


18 


(44) 


1 


(13) 


1 


(5) 


wuiiurai aCuviues 


19 


(58) 


12 


(29) 


1 


(13) 


9 


(43) 


Consultation 


3 


(24) 


11 


(27) 


1 


(13) 


2 


(10) 


Special facility 


3 


(9) 


10 


(24) 


2 


(25) 


8 


(38) 


Group treatment 


1 


(3) 


9 


(22) 


3 


(38) 


11 


(52) 


Social action 


4 


(12) 


4 


(10) 






Self-help 


1 


(3) 


2 


(5) 


1 


(13) 


4 


(19) 


Legal 






2 


(5) 








Recreation 


9 


(27) 


1 


(2) 










Referral for treatment 






1 


(2) 


2 


(25) 


1 


(5) 



generalizability can be addressed. Followup at 
periodic intervals would also answer the question 
of the long-term effects of the intervention. 

In conclusion, the majority of the alcohol and 
other drug abuse prevention programming 
reported in the literature involves primary coun- 



seling and/or psychotherapy and promotes 
community education/training and cultural en- 
hancement. Most of the literature was limited in 
the scope and detail of prevention activity men- 
tior^d, making complete categorization difficult 
and in some cases incomplete. 



o 

ERIC 



30 



Analysis of Grantee Projects 



The Office for Substance Abuse Prevention, 
through its Division of Demonstrations and 
Evaluation (DDE), has identified key clusters of 
grants focusing on factors such as age, ethnicity, 
types of strategies employed, and risk factors. 
Within the ethnicity cluster, 18 grants in 12 
States target American Indian and Alaska Native 
populations (see figure 1). 

This section analyzes several dimensions of 
these projects. The information was gathered 
through a variety of activities that included (1) a 
careful reading of the proposals describing the 
interventions, (2) the administration of a tele- 
phone survey to project representatives, and (3) 
site visits to four projects. The ultimate goal of 
the research was to highlight the central issues 
in developing, implementing, and maintaining 
services that have high promise for preventing 
alcohol and other drug abuse among Indian and 
Native people. 

Synopses of Projects 

Rural Alaska Community Action Program 

Comprehensive Demonstration Project for 
High-Risk Youth 
Anchorage, Alaska 

This project has both school-based and com- 
munity-based elements of prevention program- 
ming for six villages (two Aleut, two Eskimo, and 
two Indian). Among the promotive activities are 
the identification of a resident alcohol resource 
person for each village; consultation leading to a 
needs assessment that involved the entire village; 
the offering of community workshops that fea- 
ture information on personal development, com- 
munity development, and cultural values/ideals; 
and the development of a holistic preschool 
through grade 12 curriculum. 

A primary intervention was the development 
of month-long educational workshops that tar- 
geted high-risk populations. Case finding (terti- 



ary intervention) was a result of the promotive 
and primary intervention activities, and referrals 
were made to agencies on the village, regional, 
and State levels. Tertiary activities for both com- 
munity members and school-aged children in- 
cluded the provision of individual and group 
therapy and the support of self-help groups. 

Tanana Chiefs Conference, Inc. 

Targeted Prevention for High-Risk Alaskan 
Village Youth 
Fairbanks, Alaska 

This project represents the application of a 
community-based model of intervention in 36 
Athabascan villages in Alaska. An underlying 
goal is to empower the villages to help them- 
selves. The specific target group consists of all 
youth living in these villages who are between 
the ages of 5 and 20, and thus, most of the activ- 
ities can be considered promotive in nature. Vil- 
lage elders and leaders were consulted heavily in 
the beginning to guide the needs assessment pro- 
cess. They further assisted in the selection of 
youth organizations (Boy and Girl Scouts, etc.), 
which were then modified to provide the struc- 
ture for conveying positive village values and 
beliefs through recreation and cultural activities. 
The activities were designed to develop the 
youths' problemsolving and social competency 
skills. The elders continued to serve as consul- 
tants for the youth of the village primarily 
through the organizations. 

Adults weia involved with an economic devel- 
opment program that promoted knowledge about 
the appropriate use of and respect for natural 
resources and also allowed the youth an opportu- 
nity to develop and practice economic skills. The 
youth were involved with community service ac- 
tivities to promote their positive identification 
with the community. An annual village youth 
conference served to celebrate this identification 
and was also an opportunity for specific alcohol 
and other drug abuse education. Promotion of 



23 



3 

ERIC 



Location of American Indian and Alaska Native OSAP Demonstration Projects 




9 

ERIC 



Analysis of Grantee Projects 



25 



the beauty and strength of diverse cultures was 
accomplished through a regional youth confer- 
ence held four times each year. 

Primary prevention was evidenced in the lead- 
ership training that was given to the adults in- 
volved with the youth organizations and to the 
youth leaders. Youth group leaders were then 
better able to identify peers that would benefit 
from a referral for specialized services such as 
individual counseling, and this case-finding con- 
stituted a secondary prevention activity. 

Eodiak Council on Alcoholism, Inc. 

Comprehensive Adolescent Alcohol and Drug 
Abuse Grant 
Kodiak, Alaska 

This is an enlargement of an existing commu- 
nity-based program that has been sponsored by 
four agencies. The early detection procedures 
(secondary prevention) of the local school district 
identify the candidates (students and their fami- 
lies) for the program interventions. 

Youth aged 10-18 who are caught under the 
influence or in the process of distributing drugs 
are suspended from public school for a period of 
time and referred to a day treatment program 
(Wings) that serves as the nucleus of primary 
prevention activities. This diversion program is 
used instead of legal proceedings. Each referred 
child is assessed in several dimensions: emo- 
tional, behavioral, physical, educational, social, 
spiritual, cultural, and alcohol and other drug 
involvement. The students receive onsite aca- 
demic schooling for half of their day-long involve- 
ment. Other activities are alcohol and other drug 
education, parent skills workshops, parent sup- 
port groups, AA and Narcotics Anonymous (NA) 
for the youth, family counseling, Alaska Native 
counseling, recreational activities, and aftercare 
support groups for the graduates of the program. 

A group home is available for youth from out 
of the area who have been referred for this inter- 
vention. In addition to most of the above services, 
these youth also benefit from the therapeutic 
milieu of the group home. An advisory board 
consisting of agency representatives and citizens 
meets regularly to provide input about the 
program's development. A video demonstrating 



the characteristics of this program will be distrib- 
uted statewide. 



North Olympic Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Program 

Comprehensive Student Assistance Program 
Port Angeles, Washington 

Four high schools in Clallam County, Washing- 
ton, serve as the base for this project. The adoles- 
cents and their families are the targets for the 
interventions. The promotion of healthy life- 
styles is a motivating force behind the work- 
shops, which are offered to the public at large. 
Effort is made to contract with nationally and 
regionally known speakers to draw the attention 
of the community. 

This project delivers primary prevention 
through several avenues, starting with a series of 
education and training opportunities. Alcohol 
and drug awareness classes for students and 
teachers are offered in the school setting. These 
classes include life skills and choice training. Al- 
cohol and drug awareness classes are offered to 
the parents of the students. Groups to support 
parents formed using the structure and 
philosophy of Families Anonymous. A major pri- 
mary intervention was the training and utiliza- 
tion of Natural Helpers, a cadre of peer 
counselors. A school team was formed to identify 
high-risk students for referral for evaluation by 
professionals and to establish intervention plans 
for these youth. Consultation between the school 
and parent groups, child protective service, juve- 
nile justice programs, and community alcohol 
programs was a key activity that facilitated effec- 
tive coordination among these entities. With re- 
gards to the Makah Indian catchment area, 
consultation was offered to the west end outreach 
substance abuse agency that serves Neah Bay. 

Early case finding is a secondary prevention 
that is inherent in the school team and the Nat- 
ural Helpers team. Tertiary services in the form 
of individual counseling, group counseling, and 
family therapy are offered to those identified as 
in need. All of these program elements are be- 
lieved to support a school environment that facil- 
itates recovery for the students who abuse 
substances. 



9 

ERIC 



American. Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



26 

Shoshone-Bannock Tribal School 

Early Intervention for Indian Children 
Fort Hall, Idaho 

The goal of this primarily school-based pro- 
gram is to reach most of the junior and senior 
high Indian youth enrolled in a nonresidential 
tribally controlled school with information about 
alcohol and other drugs and cultural pride. The 
parents of the students are also targeted with a 
variety of community-based activities. 

Primary prevention activities for the students 
themselves are numerous, beginning with the 
inclusion of a formal alcohol and other drug 
abuse prevention curriculum, Here's Looking At 
You, 2000, into the academic curriculum. Classes 
on Native American Studies (arts, crafts, history, 
etc.) are also integrated into the academic curric- 
ulum. Bibliographic materials on alcohol and 
other drug abuse and health are available to the 
student body through the school library. 

Counseling for students and their families is 
provided in the following ways: school counselors 
are available for one-to-one and family sessions; 
youth group sessions led by a counselor provide 
an avenue for discussing problems; and Alateen 
is available. Other secondary and tertiary inter- 
ventions include screening and assessment of 
high-risk youth for inclusion in a special program 
within the school that addresses special needs 
such as behavior problems and referral for alco- 
hol and other drug treatment utilizing commu- 
nity resources. 

Primary prevention for parents takes the form 
of sessions that clarify cultural values and pro- 
vide for multigenerational exchanges about cul- 
tural knowledge, e.g., tribal history, stories, arts, 
and crafts. A summer family campout is organ- 
ized to celebrate and solidify cultural identifica- 
tion. Parent groups also lentify and model 
involvement in healthy, drug-free mainstream 
recreation and leisure. 

Social action is addressed in the development 
of a child advocacy board that includes parents 
and oversees the treatment program of students 
with behavior problems. Parents also are in- 
volved in developing plans to recruit parents into 
active participation in the many elements of this 
project. Ongoing feedback about the progress of 



the project is given to the school student body and 
the community at large. 

Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribal 
Health Department of the Flathead 
Reservation 

Comprehensive Blue Bay Healing Center 
(referred to as the Blue Bay Project) 
Pablo, Montana 

Although all of the Indian residents of the 
Flathead Reservation are considered to be the 
target population, this program is designed to 
involve non-Indians in its many program ele- 
ments. This is particularly true of the school- 
aged population who attend the seven schools 
located on the reservation. Special groups that 
are targeted are human service providers and 
leaders at the tribal and community levels. This 
project advocates that healing and awareness of 
health need to take place not only at the individ- 
ual and family levels, but also at the community 
level. 

Promotive activities are the implementation of 
the BABES, Here's Looking At You, 2000, and 
Four Worlds curricula in the seven schools for 
kindergarten through high school grades; the 
scheduling of chemical-free activities for youth 
and/or adults (one example is the celebration of 
sobriety campout that takes place each summer); 
and the utilization of elders and cultural leaders 
in the planning and implementation of Indian 
studies classes and celebratory events. 

During the initial months of this project, pri- 
mary prevention has taken the form of training 
the project staff and other human service provid- 
ers in assessing and healing their own areas of 
personal and familial functioning that have been 
compromised by community and family alcohol 
or other drug abuse patterns. This emphasizes 
the creation of a reservation-wide network of 
recovering and actualizing individuals who, in 
the next stage, model the healing and learning 
process for community members. Support groups 
for adult children of alcoholics and the establish- 
ment of an employee assistance program within 
the tribal personnel department are examples of 
this intervention. Three dropin youth centers 
were developed, and youth support groups were 



35 



Analysis of Grantee Projects 



27 



formed, some of which directly reach out to chil- 
dren of alcohol and other drug abusing parents. 
Culturally prescribed healing practices such as 
the Talking Circle are incorporated into the 
structure of the support groups for adults and 
youth. 

Secondary and tertiary interventions include 
extensive assessment of high-risk youth and 
their family systems to identify needs from a 
varieiy of perspectives, referral of individuals 
and family units to in-house and contract therapy 
services that offer both residential and outpa- 
tient chemical dependency treatment, and day- 
treatment services for adults and youth. 

Chippewa Cree Tribal Business 
Committee 

Rocky Boy CAT Team's PRIDE Project 
Box Elder, Montana 

This school- and community-based project has 
at its core two teams (the CAT Team and the 
Awareness Team) whose goals are to establish 
and oversee the implementation of an assessment 
and training plan for the Rocky Boys Reservation 
communities. Members of the teams are trained 
to assess alcohol and other drug use in individual 
youth. A unified plan was developed to reduce 
student transfers among the three schools on or 
near the reservation. The teams also oversee a 
student survey of alcohol and other drug knowl- 
edge and a parent survey that asks about atti- 
tudes toward alcohol and other drug abuse 
intervention. A centerpiece of much of the pro- 
motional and preventive activities is the estab- 
lishment of a special facility, an afterechool 
resource learning center, for youth and their 
families. 

Promotive activities include the Here's Look- 
ing At You, 2000 curriculum in the school system; 
minieourses for youth; four training sessions for 
the teams, students, school faculty, elders, par- 
ents, and community members; chemical-free al- 
ternative activities (an example Is karate) for 
youth and community members; and cultural ac- 
tivities in the afterschool program. Coordination 
of the alcohol and other drug treatment resources 
that are available in the community is an impor- 
tant part of the Pride Project The project itself 



offers career counseling to students, and a chem- 
ical dependency counselor is available to provide 
tertiary treatment for individuals and groups. 

Arizona Department of Education 

Standing Strong: Targeted Prevention for 
Indian Youth 
Phoenix, Arizona 

The recipients of this school-based interven- 
tion are Indian children aged 3-10, their parents, 
and their teachers in three sites representing 
three groups: (1) children and their families from 
rural reservation areas who are newly arrived in 
the urban setting, (2) children and their families 
living in a reservation setting that is near an 
urban center, and (3) children and their families 
who are living in a rural reservation area. The 
primary prevention focus for this project was the 
development of an early childhood education cur- 
ricula for alcohol and other drug abuse preven- 
tion. These curricula contain culturally relevant 
material and specifically address communication 
issues with children, parents, and teach .rs who 
interface with two or more cultures. 

Primary prevention in the form of workshops 
for children, parents, and teachers is a major 
activity. The goals of the workshops are to impart 
knowledge about intervention/prevention strat- 
egies and effective relationships between parents 
and teachers. Workshops that are solely directed 
to parents also include information about career 
development that would benefit these adults in 
making family decisions in that arena. Training 
seminars and technical assistance are also pro- 
vided to community representatives who could 
serve as catalysts for intervention/prevention ac- 
tivities in their own communities. 

Santa Pa Group Homes, Inc. 

The Neuva Vlda: Comprehensive Prevention, 
Treatment, and Rehabilitation Demonstration 
Project 
Santa Pe, New Mexico 

This school- and community-based project is 
an extension of an existing program that serves 
the triracial (Anglo, Hispanic, and American 
Indian) population of Santa Pe and its surround- 
ing rural area. This project specifically targets 



28 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



children, grades K through 6, and their families. 
Another target group consists of adolescent fe- 
males who demonstrate involvement with alco- 
hol and other drugs. Consumer involvement is 
actively sought, and a network of providers, 
advocacy groups, and community consumers is 
maintained as part of this project's goals. An 
outcome of this promotional activity is a survey 
of existing community resources. The presence 
ol bilingual staff also signals the desire to serve 
the unique needs of the ethnic minority 
communities. 

Within this catchment area, primary interven- 
tion takes the form of educational groups for 
high-risk elementary school children and their 
parents. Individual and group therapy is pro- 
vided to students and their parents as needed. 
New secondary and tertiary services are provided 
through the establishment of a satellite clinic in 
an underserved rural community. The staff of 
this clinic complete indepth assessments of chem- 
ical-abusing adolescent females for possible ad- 
mission to the residential treatment facility. 
Individual and group therapy is provided to these 
girls and their families. Narcotics Anonymous, 
Alcoholics Anonymous, and Children of Alcohol- 
ics groups are also part of the treatment regime. 
Upon discharge, aftercare counseling is coordi- 
nated with community agencies. 

Sac and Fox Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma 

Calling All Kids Project 
Stroud, Oklahoma 

Indian and non-Indian youth aged 3-21 and 
their families who reside in the catchment area 
of the Sac and Fox Tribe are the recipients of this 
comprehensive school- and community-based 
program. The interventions range from promo- 
tive to tertiary levels. The program stresses the 
philosophy that all races need to be responsible 
for finding solutions to youth alcohol and other 
drug use. A planning board has been established 
that is composed of representatives from diverse 
parts of the community. This is the mechanism 
for maintaining long-term planning. Parent ac- 
tion groups and special interest groups also allow 
for community ownership and input. 



Community leaders are prepared to deliver 
training on alcohol and other drugs, communica- 
tion, and j- .renting skills. The youth receive both 
alcohol and other drug information and life skills 
training. Peer counselors are also trained and 
serve as resources for the school-aged population. 
Individual counseling focusing on future goals 
and career planning is offered. Youth group in- 
terventions include a support group for pregnant 
teens, a self-esteem group for fourth and sixth 
graders, Alateen, Alatot, Teens Helping Teens, 
and career development groups. A parent support 
group is also an essential part of the primary 
prevention program. 

Widespread screening efforts that address the 
dimensions of chemical dependency and physical, 
emotional, and mental health identify the youth 
most in need of primary and tertiary interven- 
tion. Referral and transportation services are 
offered to youth in need of residential treatment. 
Outpatient individual and family aftercare coun- 
seling is offered. A youth retreat is part of the 
aftercare package for those who have had resi- 
dential chemical dependency treatment. 

Indian Health Board of Minneapolis, Inc. 

Soaring Eagles: Targeted to American Indian 
Youth 

Minneapolis, Minnesota 

A social center for youth and families is the site 
for the delivery of this set of community-based 
prevention services for children aged 3-20 and 
their families. The availability of these services 
to all Indian families in the urban Minneapolis 
area makes this effort promotive in nature. Twice 
a month th« children meet with the program staff 
for an evening of events that serve several pur- 
poses: to recognize each child's academic achieve- 
ments, to provide positive adult role models, and 
to promote positive social skills in the children. 
Specific classes address decisionmaking skills 
and knowledge about Indian culture. 

Drug free alternatives for socialization are of- 
fered through rnsite recreational activities and 
field trips. An annual family retreat allows the 
entire extended family the opportunity to partic- 
ipate in these activities as well. The youth engage 
in community service projects that demonstrate 



37 



Analyst* of i 

the value of being a contributing citizen of the 
wider community. At the beginning of each 
youth's participation in the groupa, an individual 
assessment is completed that addresses these di- 
mensions: alcohol and other drug use/abuse, fam- 
ily issues, academic needs and strengths, 
self-esteem, and depression. Youth who have 
been identified as having specialized needs are 
then referred for psychotherapy or other appro- 
priate services. 

Fond du Lac Reservation 

Indian Youth Group Home 
Cloquet, Minnesota 

A special facility was acquired and established 
as a therapeutic group home for 12 Indian youth, 
aged 8-18, in need of out-of-home placement. Ac- 
ademic schooling is provided in the home, and the 
families of these youth are targeted for interven- 
tion. The goal is to return the youth after a period 
of up to 6 months to their families of origin and 
their home schools with an enhanced ability to 
function appropriately. Early in the admissions 
process, the youth are given a chemical depen- 
dency evaluation. 

Primary prevention takes several forms: alco- 
hol and other drug and life skills education (Proj- 
ect Charlie curriculum and staff-generated 
classes), an available library of alcohol and other 
drug and mental health materials (audiovisual 
and written), a variety of recreational activities; 
support groups (AA, ALA-TEEN, and COA), and 
counseling (individual, group, family, and 
postgraduation followup). 

Referrals are made for therapy as needed, and 
access to tertiary intervention is offered. Oppor- 
tunities to learn about Indian culture are found 
in the following circumstances: the in-house 
school curriculum, a foster grandparent pro- 
gram, regular visits by spiritual leaders and tribal 
elders, visits by positive Indian role models, and 
the participation of youth in local tribal ceremo- 
nies and cultural events. Another feature of this 
program is the work-study program, which pro- 
vides, the opportunity for the youth to work 
within a supportive environment and contribute 
to the community. 



ntee Projects 29 
Lac Du Flambeau Band of Ojibwa 

Prevention of AODA Problems in Targeted 
Indian Families 
Lac Du Flambeau, Wisconsin 

The target population of this project are 21 
families who were randomly selected from the 
total population of parents who were 40 years old 
or less and who had children in the 6- to 12-year- 
old range. This community-based primary pre- 
vention project, housed within the Elders 
Resource Center, emphasizes the power of revi- 
talization of cultural values and practices for 
healthy community, family, and individual devel- 
opment. The elders are viewed as a valuable re- 
source to the targeted families and to the 
community av large but are also targeted for 
primary intervention in the form of a support 
group for themselves. 

The teaching of the tribal language by the 
elders is central in this project and is achieved 
through intergenerational learning. The parents 
who participate attend a 14-week Parent Educa- 
tion Program that promotes Indian childrearing 
practices and beliefs. They also take part in 14- 
week Ojibwa language training sessions with the 
goal that they in turn would teach their children. 
The children separately and with their families 
participate in culturally oriented activities with 
the elders on a regular basis. A promotive activity 
is found in an annual 5-day event that celebrates 
the cultural knowledge, skills, and inter- 
generational relationships that have been nur- 
tured through involvement in this program. 

Bad River Band of Lake Superior Ojibwa 

Ojibwa T.RA.I.L.S. 
Odanah, Wisconsin 

This year-long community-based project is an 
expansion of an existing program that also em- 
phasizes the power of cultural revitalization 
through promotive and primary prevention ac- 
tivities largely targeted at 250 Indian youth aged 
1-18 years and their families. Promotive inter- 
vention is accomplished through the delivery of 
workshops on Indian culture and the administra- 
tion of an alcohol and other drug awareness sur- 
vey to all students (Indian and non-Indian) 
attending the K-12 schools near the reservation. 



30 



America* Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



An advisory board consisting of tribal educa- 
tors and elders was formed to give guidance on 
the development of a formal curriculum with five 
subject areas. They also identify community re- 
sources other than themselves for the teaching 
and modeling of cultural values, knowledge and 
skills. Specific activities are periodic campouts 
with the youth, attendance at local and regional 
pow wows, a mothers' support group, 1-day 
weekend workshops for youth and their families, 
recreational activities, and a yearly family appre- 
ciation pow wow. 

In addition to the consultation received from 
the elders and community leaders, the program 
staff are also given special consultation so that 
their teaching and group facilitation skills are 
enhanced. The staff also consults with school 
personnel regarding specific children and fami- 
lies, and consult with families through informal 
home visits. 

Rapid City Girls Club of America 

Friendly PeerSuasion: Targeted Substance 
Abuse Education 
Rapid City, South Dakota 

This urban program serves Indian and non-In- 
dian girls who have joined the local Girls Club 
and participate in its recreational and personal 
development activities. From the membership, 
several girls demonstrating promise as leaders 
are enrolled in an 18-hour peer leadership train- 
ing course that combines the YAAAJ and 
Winner's Circle curricula. The parents of the peer 
leaders receive orientation sessions and thus ben- 
efit by the information taught to their daughters. 
Younger girls within the Club are then taught the 
leadership concepts by the peer leaders. 

Cherokee Center for Family Services 

Cherokee Challenge Early Intervention Project 
Cherokee, North Carolina 

This existing community-based recreation 
program widened its scope to serve youth aged 
10-18 who are self-ascribed early alcohol or other 
drug abusers. It is the court diversion program 
for those identified through consultation with 
schools and human service agencies. Primary 
prevention activities are educational compo- 



nents (ROPES Course and sessions on peer rela- 
tionships); recreational opportunities that em- 
phasize adventure, education, and service; and 
the formation of Cherokee youth clans, which 
become the structure for experientially learning 
Cherokee culture. 



Classification by 
Prevention Strategies 

The vast majority of the prevention interven- 
tions are primary in nature (table 2). Social 
action, education/training, and cultural enhance- 
ment were the predominate promotional activi- 
ties, followed closely by recreational components. 
Table B-l (in appendix B) lists the 10 projects 
that described promotional activities. 

Primary interventions are mainly educa- 
tion/training and cultural activities. Sixty per- 
cent provide consultation to schools, mental 
health agencies, health clinics, and so forth. Over 
half of the projects specified the following activi- 
ties: assessment and/or referral, self-help groups, 
and social action. Table B-2 lists the 15 projects 
that described primary strategies. 

Assessment and referral services, individual 
and group therapy and self-help groups are of- 
fered in most of the secondary projects. Informa- 
tion about the eight projects that described 
secondary intervention is detailed in table B-3. 
As a whole, the OSAP-funded projects appear to 
be identifyingyouth who are most at risk and are 
providing them with services that will keep them 
from developing an entrenched alcohol and other 
drug using lifestyle. The investment of human 
and fiscal resources in these types of programs 
should be very great. 

Tertiary interventions are predominately 
group and individual treatment. The details 
about the eight projects identifying tertiary care 
are found in table B-4. 

No project established a register to identify 
individuals at risk such as is done for suicidal 
behavior. Actions thai target legal issues were 
mentioned by only 2 of the 16 projects. Economic 
development activities were seldom described. 



[C 



39 



Analysis of Grantee Projects 



31 



Table 2. -Classification of OSAP grantee projects by prevention strategies 



Prevention strategies 



Prevention Promotion Primary Secondary Tertiary 

activities N (%) N (%) N (%) N (%) 



Ail programs 


10 


(30) 


13 


(94) 


8 


(50) 


8 


(50) 


Education using 


















established curriculum 


7 


(z'O) 


14 


(94) 






2 


(25) 


Cultural activities 


7 


(70) 


10 


(67) 


3 


(38) 


2 


(25) 


Consultation 


2 


(20) 


9 


(60) 


2 


(25) 


2 


(25) 


Social action 


7 


(70) 


8 


(54) 










Referral for treatment 


3 


(30) 


8 


(54) 


7 


(88) 


4 


(50) 


Self-help 






8 


(54) 


6 


(75) 


5 


(63) 


Recreation 


6 


(60) 


7 


(47) 


2 


(25) 


1 


(13) 


Individual treatment 






6 


(40) 


7 


(88) 


7 


(88) 


Group treatment 






5 


(34) 


7 


(88) 


8 


(100) 


Special facility 


1 


(10) 


3 


(20) 


1 


(13) 


2 


(25) 


Economic development 


1 


(10) 


2 


(14) 










Legal 






2 


(14) 











Register 



Finally, 5 of the 16 projects can be described as 
comprehensive, that is, they provide promo- 
tional, primary, secondary, and tertiary interven- 
tion techniques. Most of the remaining projects 
concentrate their efforts in activities at the pri- 
mary and promotional levels of intervention. 
Most of these programs use multiple approaches 
and do not rely simply on education about factual 
drug information, an approach that has been 
found in recent studies to increase use. Not sur- 
prisingly, cultural activities figure prominently 
in these projects. More investigation is needed to 
better understand how culture affects the use or 
nonuse of alcohol and other drugs in Indian 
youth. 

Classification by Site of 
Intervention 

Table 3 categorizes the projects according to 
the type of activity and site of intervention 
(school-based, community-based, or based in 



both school and community). Of the 16 projects, 
2 can be classified as school-based, 8 as commu- 
nity- based, and 6 as both school- and community- 
base. 

Both of the school-based projects described ed- 
ucation/training and consultation as their pri- 
mary activities. All of the community-based 
projects utilized education/training and recre- 
ation interventions. The next most frequently 
described components were cultural activities 
and social action. 

All of the projects that intervened at school 
and community sites have assessment/referral, 
individual treatment, group treatment, social ac- 
tion, and education/training. The next most fre- 
quently described were self-help groups and 
cultural activities. 

In conclusion, these proposals described a wide 
array of prevention activities, with the most fre- 
quently endorsed activities being education/ 
training, cultural enhancement, assessment/ 
referral, social action, and recreation. 



40 



32 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



Table 3. -Classification of OSAP grantee projects by site of Intervention 



Sits of Intervention 



Prevention 
activities 



School-based 
N (%) 



Community 
N (%) 



School and 
community 
N (%) 



All programs 
N (%) 



All programs 
Education using 

established curriculum 
Cultural activities 
Recreation 
Social action 

Assessment and/or referral 

Consultation 

Self-help 

Group treatment 

Individual treatment 

Special facility 

Economic development 

Legal 

Register 



2 (13) 



2 
1 



1 
2 
1 
1 
1 



(13) 
(6) 



(6) 
(13) 
(6) 
(6) 
(6) 



8 

S 
/ 
6 
6 
5 
5 
4 
2 
1 

2 
2 
2 



(50) 

(50) 
(44) 
(50) 
(38) 
(31) 
(31) 
(25) 
(13) 
(6) 
(13) 
(13) 
(13) 



6 
5 
4 
6 
6 
4 
5 
6 
6 
3 
1 



(38) 

(38) 
(31) 
(25) 
(38) 
(38) 
(25) 

(31) 
(38) 
(38) 
(19) 
(6) 



16 (100) 



16 
13 
12 
12 
12 
11 
10 
9 
8 
5 
3 
2 
0 



(100) 
(81) 
(75) 
(75) 
(75) 
(69) 
(63) 
(56) 
(50) 

(31) 
(19) 

(13) 



ERIC 



41 



Telephone Survey 



A survey was developed for use in teiephor.3 
interviews with the program managers of the 
OSAP American Indian and Alaska Native 
grants. The goals of the survey were to identify 
common concerns and observations about family 
and community life and to identify beliefs that 
are perceived by the communities themselves to 
contribute to successful prevention and interven- 
tion across these very diverse communities. (The 
complete survey is contained in appendix C.) 

The survey addressed five major dimensions: 

• Philosophy and beliefs. The items in this 
section addressed the philosophy and belief 
systems that guided the development and 
implementation of each project. It asked 
for the views on how substance abuse de- 
velops in Indian and Native communities, 
how individuals and communities are pr* 
tected from the development of substance 
abuse*, and what is the best way for Indian 
and Native communities to promote 
health. 

• Descriptions of project characteristics. This 
section focused on the characteristics of 
the providers of the prevention services 
and the target population. Other items 
were designed to elicit descriptions of the 
context in which the services were offered. 

• Descriptions of specific project strategies. 
This section sought to better understand 
what the specific project activities were 
and how they were developed. 

• Organizational structure and manage- 
ment. Four stages were identified in this 
section: planning, outreach and recruit- 
ment, implementation, and evaluation. 
Questions sought to identify agencies that 
were available in the community and par- 
ticipated in the work of each of the four 



stages. In addition, a number of items 
asked for information about the adminis- 
trative characteristics of the project, such 
as the leadership structure and decision- 
making processes. 

• Project evaluation. The final section asked 
the grantees to assess their projects' effec- 
tiveness at that point in time. They were 
further asked to identify the barriers that 
have arisen during the projects* lifetime 
and to identify how the project might im- 
prove so that positive impact in the com- 
munities could be realized. Lastly, they 
were asked to describe how they measured 
client and project outcomes. 

The survey was mailed to the 18 OSAP grant- 
ees and 16 chose to participate in the telephone 
interview. A telephone interview was selected as 
the preferred method of data collection because 
it allowed for dialog between project representa- 
tive and researcher. This contributed to an 
increased understanding of each project's philos- 
ophy and the selected interventions. The findings 
in the five dimensions are summarized below. 

Philosophy and Beliefs 

Factors That Place an Indian 
Person at Risk for Substance 
Abuse/Dependency 

Poor self-esteem and parental alcoholism were 
both indicated by those questioned to be the most 
significant risks for substance abuse (table 4). 
Substance abuse by pears and friends followed 
closely, with abuse/neglect and family conflict/ 
disruption next. Sexual abuse as a child and 
emotional/psychological difficulties were indi- 
cated by over one-half. Previous suicide threat or 
attempt, poor and inconsistent family manage- 



* "Subsume* abuse* is used throughout thii lection because the survey questions used that terminology. 

33 



ERIC 



42 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



Table 4. -factors that place an Indian at risk for alcohol and other drug 

abuse/dependency 


rosm icjwiur 


None 


Significance 

Some Moderate 
(In percents) 


Great 


i&ioi llou cUv>Uf imiolli 






13 


88 


roof seu-esieern 




■ — 


13 


88 


ouusxancB use uy i nenos a no poors 






17 


81 


rvJUv&J 1 K^yJtTd 




6 


25 


69 


ramuy ufsrupitori or conutci 




13 


17 


69 


crTOCJOtiai/ psyCnOf Oy ICaJ ulmCUulOS 




6 


44 


56 


oexuaf aouse as cnuo 


6 


17 


17 


56 


rersoT? s eany suDSiance use 




6 


33 


50 


DaaJP A.*Yr| in^An^l^tAnft fAmtl%4 monnnAmAn^ 

rouf ano inconsisteni famtty rn^nagsmBni 


O 


13 


31 


50 


Atfonatlfvri frnm crucial \ioli iac rvf MotK/A 
/ViOilaiH/f 1 HO* II aUvtcU ValuUS Of fNSuiVe 










A moylAaw ai ilf 1 irn 


6 


25 


17 


50 


Drm lint 10 Ai it nt«*J a 4 Itr/H^t A+t-Ai*>%n+ 

rrevious suiCKje in real or atiompi 


17 


13 


17 


50 


rouf or unuennHa raoicii Kjynifiy 




6 


50 


44 


ruui « wsuoi isnips wiin laiTiiiy rneruDers 




13 


44 


44 


niyn aOocntcuism 




25 


31 


44 


ounooi uropout 


o 


25 


25 


A A 

44 


pArcr\na.l f\H\fotnol 00001 ilt 
r BioUnal pnysiCaJ aSSaUll 


17 


13 


25 


44 


niyn unemployment in community 




17 


44 


38 


Ml trtlrdo. h/>mo nlaoomAhto 

muiii(ji9 nom^ p»ctu©fn^ni5 


b 


17 


38 


38 


wci jocuioi 1 ot?t?i\ii iy 


IO 


13 


33 


AA 

38 


PAmmi in Ha/ H!©n.rna nf^Qt l^r* 

v/Ofiiiiiuiiiiy uisoi yciii r 2oiion 


o 


AJ 

31 


25 


38 


InAri Aril i£)to hoattHw FO/*roattonal o^tK/hH/ 
ii HttJtHjuaiB utraiiiiy r t^roaiionou aUiiviiy 




17 


50 


A 4 

31 


Rick taklnn 


O 


13 


50 


A A 

31 


v/i 111 m ku ut?iKavtui 111 jjcut?im> Ui cMOluiy9 


O 


25 


AA 

38 


Aj 

31 


Mvvfi 114 trot ivy/vf in to 




AA 

38 


31 


A A 

31 


neve! It wtfall 1 UI IciaUVt? Ui If ls?l rvJ 


D 


31 


31 


Ai 

31 


Piw Af^Hpmlr* rv* rf otitic rw^o. 

1 Wl avcivid 1 HV Ut?UUf IIKlllvO 


ft 


AA 

38 


25 


A 4 

31 


If KaUMIiy lO liK7laOUtl*£o alUOiH/i eiTiCif?nuy 


1 f 


31 


17 


A A 

31 


fvionctiK/f 1 irom swiai Values ot wnue cuiiure 




38 


25 


Af 

25 


riC7V(Uc7Ml IllOVca 


1 f 


31 


25 


25 


rdi si iicu orvorcc? 


13 


44 


17 


25 


tow ooviocrconornic DaCKyrouno 


1 / 


38 


17 


<_5 


low cornmarnoni io 90UC3iion 


13 


en 


1^ 


25 


rMienuon aencn oisoroer ana nyperaciiviiy 


to 


25 


31 


17 


M<vtqlk i/> Uaq irWIn/i o^li^wxl avr\AriAnAA 

ivc?yaiiv9 ooaioiny sonooi oxp^rio nrs 


1 f 


38 


25 


A ^ 

17 


Wvyi lillVW Ut^lIUilo 




44 


13 


17 


Lack of attachment to neighborhood 


38 


17 


31 


13 


Depressed autonomic and central nervous 










system arousal 


17 


56 


13 


13 


Physical handicap/illness 


31 


50 


17 




Other 










Rapid cultural change 








6 


Community-wide unresolved grief 








6 


Lack of family education 






6 




Perception of alcohol as normal 






6 





43 



Telephone Survey 



36 



ment practices, person's early substance abuse, 
and alienation from social values of the white 
culture were factors highlighted by 50 percent. 

It was interesting to note that more than one- 
third of the respondents placed little importance 
on lack of attachment to community as a signifi- 
cant risk factor for substance abuse/dependency, 
even though all the projects stressed community- 
based program intervention activities. Nearly 
one-third did not think physical handicap/illness 
was influential, and one-fourth indicated that 
cognitive deficits and attention deficit disorder 
were likewise not notable risk factors. 

Protective Factors 

Looking at personal protective factors, per- 
sons having a defined spiritual belief system 
and/or positive self-esteem were thought to be 
most shielded from substance abuse/dependency 
(88 percent). Being able to make decisions based 
on internal beliefs about personal responsibili- 
ties (69 percent) and/or to act independently (63 
percent) were also highlighted. Persons holding 
strong positive values for academic achievement 
and/or having the ability to know when it is 
appropriate to depend on others were noted by 
half the respondents. 

All of the protective environmental factors 
listed were judged to be greatly significant by half 
or more of the respondents. This suggests that 
the majority responding to the questionnaire felt 
that of all the protective factors listed, healthy 
environmental factors have a more protective 
quality than personal factors. Parental protec- 
tive factors were seen as the most important 
elements in preventing substance abuse/depen- 
dency. Nearly all respondents (94 percent) be- 
lieved that parents who model appropriate and 
healthy behavior are the best defense against 
substance abuse. Three-fourths indicated that 
persons perceiving respect from parents are sig- 
nificantly safeguarded. Parents who demonstrate 
positive interpersonal skills and/or have a value 
system that is clearly and consistently communi- 
cated were felt by 63 percent of the respondents 
to be shielding offspring from substance abuse. 
Over half listed setting limits for child's behavior 
by the parent as being important. 



Positive societal factors such as friends/peers 
modeling appropriate and healthy behavior were 
thought by three-fourths to be greatly significant 
in the prevention process. If society's expecta- 
tions for healthy and appropriate behavior are 
clearly communicated, 63 percent felt the person 
was least likely to become dependent on sub- 
stances. Fifty percent felt the demonstration of 
positive interpersonal skills by friends and peers 
(peer modeling) to be helpful. 

Philosophical Influences 

Of those listed, the most substantial influence 
on program development and philosophy (69 per- 
cent of respondents) was that espoused by the 
Children of Alcoholics literature. Tribal beliefs 
were a close second. One-fourth of the programs 
ascribed to the philosophy of the 12-Step tradi- 
tions. Eighty-two percent were moderately influ- 
enced by the Alkalai Lake experience. Of those 
listed, the Four Worlds Development Project and 
The Red Road were the least used approaches in 
the development of the projects* philosophies 
with 67 and 63 percent, respectively, responding 
to "never heard of* and "little or no influence." 

Intervention Goals 

The general intervention goals stressed most 
often were recognizing risk factors, increas- 
ing/enhancing program or community resources, 
promoting cultural identity, and promoting men- 
tal health (94, 88, 88, and 81 percent, respec- 
tively). Influencing legislative actions was 
indicated by only 17 percent of those responding. 

Project Characteristics 

Project Responsibility 

Fifty percent of the programs were developed 
and implemented by the tribe. The remainder 
were operated by a private/nonprofit 
corporation. 

Additional Funding 

Additional State funds were received by 44 
percent of the programs, while 31 percent supple- 
mented their funds with Indian Health Service 



36 

monies, and 31 percent, with contributions or 
donations. 

Setting of Prevention Activities 

The majority of the programs were commu- 
nity-based (see table 5), with all programs having 
some community prevention activity. Forty-four 
percent were directed from a substance abuse 
outpatient clinic, and more than one-third pro- 
vided services in the elementary, junior, and se- 
nior high schools. 

Duration 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 

planned activities for daytime during the week 
and/or weekday evenings. One-half promoted 
weekend evening programs. 

Languages Used 

Eighty-one percent of the projects used the 
English language 90-100 percent of the time in 
program activities, with 44 percent using English 
exclusively. Over one-third used Indian/Native 
language 2-10 percent of the time. 

Target Population 



Seventy-five percent of the programs con- 
ducted an indeterminate number of sessions/ 
classes, while one-half of the respondents held a 
predetermined number of sessions/classes. 

Schedule 

The majority of the programs (88 percent) im- 
plemented programming during the daytime on 
weekends. Eighty-one percent of the projects 



Table 5. -Setting of prevention activities 



Setting 



Percent 
of projects 



Community 

Home 

School 
Preschool 
Elementary 
Junior High 
Senior High 
Community College 
Four-Year College 

Human Service Agency 
Child Welfare Agency 
Court/Legal Agency 
Other 



63 
31 

31 
44 
44 
38 
13 
13 

25 
25 
13 



Outpatient Clinic 

Medical Health Clinic/Program 31 

Substance Abuse Clinic/Program 44 

Mental Health Clinic/Program 25 

Hospital 17 



All of the projects included both sexes in their 
target populations. Ninety-four percent directed 
their activities to adolescents (13-19 years old), 
69 percent to school-aged children (6-12 years 
old), and 50 percent to preschool children (4-5 
years old) (figure 2). 

Ethnicity of Target Population 

American Indian and/or Alaska Natives com- 
prised three-quarters of the client population 
90-100 percent of the time, with 3' J percent ex- 
clusively targeting Indians/Natives. Caucasians 
were 0-10 percent of the participants in 63 per- 
cent of the programs, while other minorities were 
0-10 percent of the target group in 88 percent of 
the projects. 

The resp indents listed 25 tribes in their client 
population: 



Aleut 


13 


Apache 


6 


Athabascan 


13 


Blackfeet 


6 


Chippewa/Cree 


6 


Chippewa 


17 


Clallam 


6 


Cocopaw 


6 


Eastern Band 




of Cherokee 


6 


Eskimo 


6 


Haida 


6 


Hopi 


6 


Inupiat 


6 


Makah 


6 


Navajo 


13 



0 

ERJ.C 



45 



Telephone Survey 

Figure 2 
OSAP Target Population 



37 



100% 



80% 



60% - 



40% - 



20% ~ 



0% 




Infants 
(0-3) 



Pima 
Porno 

Salish-Kootenai 

Shoshone-Bannock 

Sioux 

Tlingit 

Tohono O'odham 

Ibimpshian 

Yupic 

Residential Status 



Pre- 
school 
(4-5) 

6 

6 

6 

6 
13 

6 

6 

6 
13 



Eighty-seven percent of the programs targeted 
reservation communities, while two of the pro- 
grams dealt with urban populations. Two pro- 
grams targeted reservation youth exclusively. 
Forty-four percent of the projects accounted for 
80-100 percent of their clients' residential status. 

Indian/Native persons who live primarily in an 
urban setting were targeted exclusively by only 



School Adoles- Young Middle Elders 
(6-12) cents Adults Age (56 & 
(13-19) (20-35) (36-55) Older) 



one program, and 25 percent programmed no 
activities for urban settings. For 36 percent of the 
programs, 2-10 percent of their Indian popula- 
tion lived in the city. Thirty-eight percent of the 
programs did not target Indians that selectively 
migrate between Indian reservation/community 
and urban settings; 94 percent included 1-20 per- 
cent of these Indians in their client population. 

Referral Mechanism 

Ninety-four percent of the respondents used 
another agency for referrals (the school was in- 
cluded in this category). Sixty-nine percent 
served self-referrals, while 63 percent of the pro- 
grams had referrals through family channels; 56 
percent had in-house referrals and 38 percent 
received court referrals. 

Number of Participants 

The current number of participants ranged 
from 0-100 in 44 percent of the projects and 



e 

ERIC 



46 



38 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



100-300 in 17 percent Two programs targeted 
301-460 participants. Twenty-five percent did 
not respond to this question. Total number of 
participants since the beginning of the project fell 
between 0-100 for 31 percent of the programs, 
while 26 percent had 100-300 and 25 percent had 
301-500 participants; 17 percent did not respond. 

Provider Education 

Eighty-one percent of the paid providers had 
completed a bachelors degree; 75 percent had 
attended some college or received an AA; 69 per- 
cent had a masters degree and 25 percent had a 
doctorate. A high school education was the high- 
est level of formal education for 56 percent of the 
paid providers. Thirteen percent had completed 
specialized training pertinent to their activities. 

Provider Ethnicity 

Fifteen of the sixteen programs responding 
employed American Indians/Alaska Natives. Of 
the total employees, 70 percent were American 
Indian/Alaska Native, 10 percent other minority, 
and 20 percent Caucasian. 

Specific Project Strategies 

Family Involvement 

All the projects responded that they had some 
involvement with families. Fifty percent indi- 
cated great involvement and 31 percent, moder- 
ate involvement. 

Community Involvement 

All the projects involved the community in 
some aspect. Seventy-five percent claimed great 
community involvement in their planned 
activities. 

Cultural Involvement 

All but one of the programs based their pro- 
gram to some degree on aspects of Indian/Native 
culture. Sixty-nine percent programmed cultural 
activities a great to very great extent. 

School-Based Interventions 

Education in which an established curriculum 
was not used was the major school-based activity 
for the prevention of substance use/abuse (see 



table 6). Fifty percent of the programs provided 
referrals for counseling. Education using an es- 
tablished curriculum, self-help groups, and group 
counseling were important activities. Thus, pro- 
motional education and secondary traditional 
counseling and/or referral services were the main 
school-based project interventions. Legal inter- 
ventions were not planned in any of the projects 
interviewed. 

Community-Based Interventions 

Promotional efforts seemed to be the main 
thrust of the community-based interventions, 
with education not using an established curricu- 
lum as the most frequently noted activity (table 
6). Other interventions commonly used included 
recreational promotional interventions, cultural 
activities and education using an established 
curriculum, traditional psychotherapy tech- 
niques, referral for counseling, individual coun- 
seling, case/program consultation, and group 
counseling. 

Types of Curriculum 

One-quarter of the projects using established 
curriculum utilized Here's Looking at You, 2000. 
BABES, Children art People, Positive Indian 
Parenting, and Sacred Tree were each used by 13 
percent of the respondents. The majority of the 
respondents used their own project-developed 
curricula. 

Organizational Structure 
and Management 

Planning Stage 

The average length of the planning stage was 
12 months. Over one-third scheduled 6-10 
months for preparation work. As expected, rep- 
resentatives from the substance abuse program 
were involved in this stage of program develop- 
ment in 100 percent of the projects. Representa- 
tives from social service programs and the adult 
population at large were involved 76 percent of 
the time, while representatives from mental 
health programs, schools, and the adolescent 
population participated in more than two-thirds 
of the programs. Individuals from the elder pop- 



e 

ERJ.C 



47 



Telephone Survey 



39 



"fable 6. - Intervention approaches 



Available activities 



Percent of projects 



School-based Interventions 



Education/trailing not using established curriculum 
Referral for counseling/psychotherapy 
Group counseling/psychotherapy 
Self-help groups 

Education/training using established curriculum 
Individual counseling/psychotherapy 
Cultural activities 
Case/program consultation 
Recreational activities 
Special facility 

No school-based intervention 
Social action groups 
Special register 
Legal intervention 
Other 
Assessment 



69 
SO 
44 
44 
44 
38 
31 
31 
25 
25 
17 
13 
6 



13 



Community-based interventions 



Education/training not using established curriculum 
Referral for counseling/psychotherapy 
Individual counseling/psychotherapy 
Recreational activities 
Case/program consultation 
Group counseling/psychotherapy 
Education/training using established curriculum 
Cultural activities 
Self-help groups 
Special facility 
Legal intervention 
Social action groups 
Special register 

No community-based intervention 
Other: 

Community service for elders 
Education/training for service provider 



63 

63 
63 
63 
56 
56 
56 
38 
31 
17 
13 
13 



6 
6 



0 

ERIC 



48 



40 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



illation were involved in 63 percent of the 
programs. 

Outreach/Recruitment Stage 

Approximately 9 1/2 months were spent in iden- 
tifying and attracting potential project partici- 
pants from the target group; 38 percent required 
6-15 months. Representatives from the adult and 
adolescent population were involved in outreach 
and recruitment in 81 percent of the projects. Of 
the programs surveyed, three-quarters of the re- 
spondents cited assistance from the rahool sys- 
tem, whereas 63 percent indicated they received 
assistance from mental health and/or social ser- 
vice programs. Over one-half involved parent 
groups, representatives from the elder popula- 
tion, and/or substance abuse programs in their 
outreach and recruitment efforts. 

Project Implementation Stage 

On the average, the programs surveyed had 
completed 1 year of project implementation, fall- 
ing anywhere between 0 and 38 months — 42 per- 
cent indicated 6 to 15 months. The majority of the 
projects were funded for a number of years and 
were still in the implementation phase. Eighty- 
one percent of the programs had representation 
from the adolescent population at large. Adult 
and elder populations and/or substance abuse 
personnel were involved in 75 percent of the 
programs, and representatives from social ser- 
vice were involved with project implementation 
in 63 percent of the projects. 

Evaluation Stage 

The average time spent in evaluation planning 
and implementation was 9.6 months. Forty-two 
percent of the programs spent 1-10 months in 
program evaluation. Substance abuse represen- 
tatives were utilized in 63 percent of the respond- 
ing projects, while mental health, schools, adult, 
and/or adolescent populations were involved in 
44 percent. 

Administrative Characteristics 

All the programs felt that their administrative 
characteristics were described by clearly stated 
goals and objectives, and achievement of these 
goals being a source of individual initiative and 



gratification. Half thought these were moder- 
ately descriptive and half thought they were per- 
fectly descriptive. 

Organizational and 
Performance Characteristics 

Within the area of confidence and trust in staff, 
50 percent of the respondents felt they had com- 
plete confidence and trust in all matters relating 
to their staff. All the projects usually (38 percent) 
to always (63 percent) got ideas and opinions 
from staff, and usually to always tried to make 
constructive use of them. 

Rewards, occasional punishment, and some in- 
volvement in decisionmaking were strategies 
used by 56 percent of the projects to motivate 
their staff. Thirty-one percent used economic re- 
wards based on a compensation system developed 
through participation and/or group participation 
and involvement in setting goals, improving 
methods, appraising progress toward goals, and 
so forth. 

The majority of the projects' administrators 
(69 percent) felt that personnel at all levels felt 
real responsibility for the organization's goals 
anc behaved in ways to implement them. Eighty- 
eight percent of the respondents felt good about 
their organizational communication— that it was 
flowing down, up, and with peers. Downward 
communication was generally accepted and, if 
not, was openly and candidly questioned in 69 
percent of the programs. Sixty-nine percent of 
the supervisors observed that upward communi- 
cation from staff was accurate. The supervisor 
knew and understood problems of staff very well 
in 63 percent of the cases. A very substantial 
amount of cooperative teamwork throughout the 
organization was present in 88 percent of the 
cases. 

Fifty percent used a traditional decisionmak- 
ing process of broad policy and general decisions 
being made at the top, with more specific deci- 
sions being made at the lower levels. Less than 
one-third felt that decisionmaking was widely 
done throughout the organization and well inte- 
grated through a linking process. Decision- 
makers were generally quite well aware of prob- 



e 

ERIC 



49 



Telephone Survey 41 

lems, particularly at the lower levels of the proj- no support or positive feedback from 

ect organization, in 63 percent of the projects, ment; philosophy of project is unclear; and poor 

One-quarter felt that they were moderately training. Interesting to note is that 55 percent 

aware. Staff were involved ftilly in all decisions felt that insufficient funds was a minor or nonex- 

related to their work in 63 percent of the cases. istent factor in the project's success. 



Except in emergency situations, 56 percent of 
the respondents observed that goals were usually 
established through group participation. Thirty- 
one percent responded that their goals were set 
or orders issued after discussion with staff about 
problems and planned action. Half of the group 
felt that their goals were overtly accepted but at 
times met with some covert resistance, while the 
remaining half noted that the goals were ftilly 
accepted both overtly and covertly. 

Forty-four percent felt that there was wide- 
spread responsibility for review and control, with 
lower units at times imposing more rigorous re- 
views and tighter controls than top management. 
A moderate downward delegation of review and 
control, with the lower and higher levels feeling 
responsible, was noted in 38 percent. Forty-four 
percent sensed that an informal organization 
may be present and may either support or par- 
tially resist goals of the formal organization. 
Where informal and formal organizations were 
one and the same (50 percent), the feeling of 
support from al! social forces in achieving the 
organization's goals pervaded. 

Project Evaluation 

Project Effectiveness 

When asked on a scale of 1 to 7, ranging from 
not effective to extremely effective, the majority 
of the projects (63 percent) rated themselves a 5, 
with 94 percent falling between 5 and 7. 

Barriers to Project Success 

Two factors were seen consistently as barriers 
to the project's success — more time was needed 
to educate key community leaders, and employ- 
ing qualified American Indian/Alaska Native pro- 
viders was difficult. Seventy-five percent or more 
reported no problem with the following potential 
barriers: laws that hinder prevention or treat- 
ment; input from staff is not encouraged; little or 



Ways to Improve Project 

The actions thought to be greatly to all impor- 
tant for improving the project were the imple- 
mentation of better working relationship with 
client's family (61 percent); the provision of suf- 
ficient time to explain program's philosophy to 
the community (56 percent); and the implemen- 
tation of special programs to support open com- 
munication across all levels of project operations 
(56 percent). One action was viewed by 88 percent 
of respondents as being unimportant in improv- 
ing the project — influencing legislators to allow 
drinking on the reservations. 

Project Evaluation Designs 

Fifty-six percent of the programs had designed 
both process and outcome evaluations. One- 
quarter planned only process analysis. Both qual- 
itative and quantitative measures were part of 
the evaluation plan in 81 percent of the projects. 
Evaluations by individuals from both within and 
outside of the host agency were planned by 75 
percent of the projects. 

Client Outcome Measures 

Most projects did not have specific plans about 
how to measure outcome behaviors and knowl- 
edge areas but had definite ideas about what they 
wanted to measure. Seventeen percent did not 
respond to this question. Improved self-image, 
positive peer interaction, and positive family in- 
teraction were each indicated by 69 percent as 
changes in behavior they would like to see in 
their measurement of project participants (see 
table 7). Sixty-three percent listed the acquisition 
of skills to become a peer leader and 61 percent, 
reduced alcohol use/abuse. Participants' in- 
creased interest in pursuing higher education 
and acquiring job skills was indicated by only 13 
percent of the respondents as a desired outcome 
variable. This was notable because one of the 
factors identified as a barrier to the success of the 



50 



42 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



Table 7. -Outcome measures 


Percent of projects using 
Measure In-project evaluation 


Client Behavior 




Positive peer interaction 


69 


Positive family interaction 


69 


improved self-perceptions 


69 


Acauired skills to be a Deer leader 


63 

WW 


Reduced alcohol abuse 


56 


Academic progress 


56 


Reduced alcohol use 


50 


Developed ways of spending time in a positive manner 


50 


Reduction of depression, anxiety, fear, and 




feelings of inadequacy 


44 


Overall health improvements 


44 


Gain in sense of personal control 


44 


Fewer instances of acting out in school 


44 


Acquired skills to develop mutual-helD and 




self-help groups 


44 


Abilitv to form iono or short term aoais 


WW 


Interest in comoletina hiah school 


31 

W 1 


Less negative perceptions of school environment 


25 


Improved eating habits 


25 


Pays more attention to self-appearance 


17 


Improved weight gain or weight loss 


17 


Client feeling of ownership from community 


17 


interest in pursuing higher education 


13 


Acquired job skills 


13 


Other 




Reduced drug abuse 


6 


Increased cultural participation 


6 


Client Knowledge 




Awareness of community resources 


75 


Physical and emotional effects of alcohol/other drugs 


69 


Peer pressure and decision making 

* W 


69 


Effective communication 


69 


Risks to children of alcoholics 


69 


Values and attitude clarification 


63 


Self-awareness and culture identity issues 


56 


Family bonding and enrichment 


56 


History of alcohol and other drug problems 




among Native Americans 


50 


Fetal Alcohol Syndrome prevention 


50 


Effective parenting 


50 


Single parenting activities 


25 



o 

ERIC 



51 



Telephone Survey 



43 



projects was difficulty in hiring qualified 
Indiana/Natives. 

Changes in the following areas of knowledge 
were viewed as important outcome measures: 
awareness of community resources (75 percent); 
risks to children of alcoholics (69 percent); effec- 
tive communication (69 percent); peer pressure 
and decisionmaking (69 percent); physical and 
emotional effects of alcohol/other substances (69 
percent); values and attitude clarification (63 
percent); self-awareness and cultural identity is- 
sues (56 percent); family bonding and enrich- 
ment (56 percent); history of substance abuse 
among American Indians/Alaska Natives (50 per- 
cent); fetal alcohol syndrome prevention (50 per- 
cent); and effective parenting (50 percent). 

Project Outcome Measures 

Again, it is important to note that most pro- 
jects did not have specific plans about how to 
measure project and community changes but had 
definite ideas about what they wanted to mea- 
sure. The number of clients that satisfactorily 
completed the project was the major outcome 
variable indicated by 75 percent of the supervi- 
sors (see table 8). Other indicators of dialed 
change were reduced alcohol/substance abuse, 
creation of a folio wup project, creation of health 
promotion/disease prevention activities, number 
of clients that unsatisfactorily completed project, 
increased participation in outreach projects, and 
provision ox* workshops/training for community. 
The projects desired to reduce the rates of the 
following alcohol/substance abuse-related prob- 
lems: teenage pregnancy (38 percent), family vi- 
olence (31 percent), child abuse/neglect (31 
percent), and suicide (31 percent). 

Site Visit Reports 

The programs that were selected for a site visit 
represented a cross-section of situations that can 
be found where Indians and Natives live. Their 
catchment areas included rural and semirural 
reservation areas, reservation border towns, and 
urban settings. Together, they represented inter- 
ventions targeted at all ages and illustrated the 
implementation of a variety of strategies. 



The site visitors followed the key informant 
strategy for obtaining information about the pro- 
jects selected. Wherever possible, the reviewer 
interviewed the project director, a front-line non- 
administrative provider, a community leader, an 
adult consumer, and/or a youth consumer. The 
topics discussed generally followed the outline of 
topics contained in the telephone survey: (1) the 
philosophy upon which the project is based, (2) 
the goals of the project, <"3) successful outcomes, 
(4) barriers to success, and (5) recommendations 
for future programming. 

It was generally agreed that a large host of risk 
factors are present in the lives of most Indian 
youth, thereby rendering that age group particu- 
larly susceptible to alcohol and other drug use. 
Early intervention was seen as critical, but treat- 
ment and aftercare are also needed for those 
young people who have already adopted a drug- 
using lifestyle. Even a small but visible group of 
youth recovering from alcohol and other drug use 
can be extremely influential in closely knit 
communities. 

The consensus among most of the respondents 
across sites was that alcohol abuse is a serious 
community problem and that because Indian 
youth learn to abuse alcohol from family and/or 
community members, all facets of the community 
and the home environment need aggressive inter- 
vention. The respondents also underscored that 
the belief system to which the youths adhere 
(Indian, non-Indian, or bicultural) should be in- 
corporated into their treatment and prevention 
situations. Finally, the responses to the inter- 
views revealed a firm belief in the development of 
a long-term relationship between the prevention 
team and the Indian community. At every point, 
from planning through evaluation, the preven- 
tion team needs to be highly aware of the impacts 
of the prevention activities on every part of the 
community system, even those that are perceived 
to be underfunctional or nonfunctional. 

Summary and Synthesis 

A synthesis of the literature review and the 
multidimensional analysis of the American In- 
dian and Alaska Native OSAP demonstration 



52 



44 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



Table 8. -Project outcome measures 



Measures Percent used In 

project evaluation 



Number of clients that satisfactorily complete project 75 

Reduced alcohol/substance abuse 69 

Good followup project instituted 63 

Creation of health promotion/disease prevention activities 63 

Number of clients that unsatisfactorily complete project 56 

Increased participation in outreach projects 56 

Conducted workshops/training for community 50 

Project developed good relationship with client's family 44 

Increased school attendance 44 

Good working relationship with staff and client 38 

Reduced truancy 38 

Decreased disciplinary problems 31 

Client not back in the juvenile system 25 

Increased number of high school graduates 25 

Reduced Fetal Alcohol Syndrome/Effects 1 3 

Quick recovery time for client 6 
Reduced alcohol/substance abuse-related problems 

Teenage pregnancy 38 

Family violence 31 

Child abuse/neglect 31 

Suicide 31 

Accidents 25 

Arrests 17 

Trauma 17 

Acute episodes of hospital/clinic admission 1 3 

Homicide 13 

Cirrhosis 6 
Other 

Number of volunteers involved 6 



projects reveals that the OSAP projects are con- 
sistent with the current state of the art in alcohol 
and other drug use prevention among American 
youth in general. Although this is an encouraging 
conclusion, it is important to keep in mind that 
the general "state of the art** is still very much in 
the testing phase. Many programs nationwide 
are proceeding on untested assumptions and are 
not using rigorous evaluations that measure the 
outcomes of their interventions. 



The deliberations of a recently convened Task 
Force on Prevention, Promotion, and Interven- 
tion Alternatives in Psychology (American Psy- 
chological Association) are reported in a book 
entitled 14 Ounces of Prevention: A Casebook for 
Practitioners (Price et ai. 1988). After identifying 
and describing 14 model prevention programs, 
the following list of common denominators of 
success was developed. With the exception of the 
role of rigorous evaluation, the OSAP-funded 



53 



Telephone Survey 



45 



Indian/Native demonstration projects show mod- 
erate to strong adherence to these factors. 

1. The successful program is targeted. The 
focus is shaped by a reasonable under- 
standing of the risks and problems en- 
countered by the target group. 

2. The successful program is designed to alter 
the life trajectory of the people who 
participate in it. It is aimed at long-term 
change, setting individuals on a new devel- 
opmental course, opening opportunities, 
changing life circumstances, or providing 
support. 

3. The successful program gives people new 
skills to cope more effectively and provides 
social support in the face of life 
transitions. 

4. The successful program strengthens the 
natural support from family, community, 
or school settings. 

5. The successful program has managed to 
collect rigoff is research evidence to docu- 
ment its success. 

The research literature on adolescent alcohol 
and other drug use and abuse displays strong 
agreement about the influence of peers in the 
decision to use or not to use substances. The 
research by Oetting and Beauvais has shown that 
this applies equally well to Indian youth. (Actu- 
ally, the family seems to play a slightly larger role 
for Indian youth than for non-Indian youth, al- 
though the influence of peers is very powerful.) 
In light of this, it is surprising that the peer 
dynamic receives little attention in most preven- 
tion programs. This appears to be the case in the 
Indian/Native OSAP projects. The most one usu- 
ally sees in these programs is the mention of 
developing a cadre of peer counselors. Whereas 
peer counseling represents one important strat- 
egy in positively affecting the peer culture, other 
strategies may prove more effective and deserve 
close attention as well. 

The best prevention programs are those with 
the broadest application; that is, they do not have 
to be tailored to each individual community, nor 
do they depend on a charismatic leader for suc- 



cess. The Indian and Native OSAP projects apply 
a wide range of curricula and approaches that are 
being used in a variety of communities across the 
country. If these approaches can be shown to be 
effective for Indian youth, our understanding of 
the general dynamics of alcohol and other drug 
use will be greatly enhanced. The cultural con- 
tent of these proven curricula and approaches 
may have to be changed from location to location, 
but the base will reflect what works for all youth. 

Despite the fact that we are still in the process 
of identifying the essential elements of effective 
alcohol and other drug use prevention with 
American youth, there are indications of progress 
toward this goal. Drug use rates among Indian 
and Native youth, as among other youth, are 
continuing to drop; the rates are still unaccept- 
ably high, but they are declining. 

At this time, we do not have a clear under- 
standing of this phenomenon, and many explana- 
tions are put forth to account for this reduction. 
It is often attributed to the success of formal 
prevention programs, such as are represented by 
most of the Indian and Native OSAP demonstra- 
tion projects. However, other viable explanations 
deserve discussion. It may well be, for instance, 
that the tf/op in rates is strictly a function of 
changing attitudes toward drugs, including alco- 
hol, and a willingness on the part of the adult 
community to forcefully communicate antidrug 
values. Large antidrug demonstrations have 
been held recently in many Indian and Native 
communities. In the summer of 1989, the eight 
reservations in Montana and Wyoming con- 
cluded their seventh annual campoutcelebrating 
sobriety within families and communities. Eigh- 
teen tribes recently held a drug free festival on 
the Hualapi reservation in Arizona. A number of 
tribal councils have recognized the need for so- 
briety among their ranks before major changes 
can be expected at the community level. Powerful 
messages are being sent to Indian and Native 
youth by these types of activities. It could be that 
direct programming for youth alone is not as 
effective as programming directed at community 
awareness and attitude change; or it could be 
that a combination of the person-entered strat- 
egy and the system-directed approach is optimal. 



9 

ERIC 



Recommendations 



The findings of this study are encouraging. 
Clearly, prevention programs in American Indian 
and Alaska Native communities have employed a 
variety of strategies based on sound theory and 
research. Nevertheless, unanswered questions in 
several key areas suggest several topics for fur- 
ther study. 

• Not enough is known about the conditions 
that lead to the long-term survival of pre- 
vention programs in Indian/Native com- 
munities. What are the political, social, 
funding, and other structural elements 
that support or hinder programs? 

• The relationship of traditional culture to 
drug use is another area for study. Many 
programs seem to be based on the assump- 
tion that anything cultural is good, but 
what are the specific elements within cul- 
tural activities that have either a positive 
or negative impact on drug use? 

• Mechanisms need to be considered to en- 
sure that every project does a rigorous eval- 
uation. There is a particular need for 
longitudinal impact studies. 

• Much remains to be learned about the re- 
lationship of peer interactions and the use 
or nonuse of drugs, including alcohol. Can 
"peer clusters" be effectively targeted in 
prevention programs? Are there cultural 
concepts that can be used to enhance the 
positive influence of peers among Indian 
youth? 



• The question of whether a prevention pro- 
gram can be effective in the absence of a 
more general community development ef- 
fort needs to be explored. Even if short- 
term gains can be demonstrated with a 
particular prevention component, can 
those gains be sustained without an aware 
and supportive community environment? 
What are the critical parts of the commu- 
nity that need to be involved? 

• Many programs are moving toward more 
comprehensive approaches. Nevertheless, 
the role of economic and broader environ- 
mental risk factors is rarely addressed. 
Projects that look more into political and 
economic risk and protective factors and 
environmental solutions should be 
encouraged. 

• Progress has been made in changing com- 
munity norms regarding the use of chemi- 
cal substances. More focus should be given 
to how this is accomplished and how to 
sustain it. 

These issues and others can be addressed in the 
near future if an effective partnership is devel' 
oped among community members, practitioners, 
and researchers. There can be no doubt that 
many Indian and Native communities are weary 
of the expenditure of human and fiscal resources 
on chronic care of alcohol and other drug prob- 
lems and are open to this kind of partnership. 



46 



References 



Abelson, HJ.; Fishburne, P.M.; and Cisin, I. National 
Survey on Drug Abuse: 1977. Princeton, NJ: Re- 
sponse Analysis, 1977. 

Albaugh, B J. "Ethnic therapy with American Indian 
alcoholics as an antidote to anomie." Paper pre- 
sented at the meeting of the Professional Associa- 
tion of the U.S. Public Health Service, Phoenix, 
AZ, 1973. 

Albaugh, B J., and Anderson, P.O. Peyote in the treat- 
ment of alcoholism among American Indians. 
American Journal of Psychiatry 131(11):1247- 
1250, 1974. 

Austin, G. Substance Abuse Among Minority Youth: 
Native Americans (Prevention Research Update, 
No. 2). Portland, OR: Western Center for Drug- 
Free Schools and Communities, 1989. 

Back, W. The ineffectiveness of r'cohol prohibition on 
the Navajo Indian Reservation. Arizona State Law 
Journal 4:925-943, 1981. 

Beauvais, F., and Laboueff, S. Drug and alcohol abuse 
intervention in American Indian communities. 
The International Journal of the Addictions 
20U):!39-171. 1985. 

Beauvais, F.; Oetting, E.R.; and Edwards, R.W. Trends 
in drug use of Indian adolescents living on reser- 
vations: 1975-1983. American Journal of Drug 
and Alcohol Abuse ll(4):209-229, 1985a. 

Beauvais, F.; Oetting, E.R.; and Edwards, R.W. Trends 
in the use of inhalants among American Indian 
adolescents. White Cloud Journal 3:3-1 1 19856. 

Beauvais, F.; Oetting, E.R.; Wolf, W.; and Edwards, 
R.W. American Indian youth and drugs, 1976-87: 
A continuing problem. American Journal of Public 
Health 79:634-636, 1989. 

Beiser, M., and Manson, S.M. Prevention of emotional 
disorders in Native North American children. 
Journal of Preventive Psychiatry 3(3):225-240, 
1987. 

Bergman, R.L. Navajo peyote use; its apparent safety. 
American Journal of Psychiatry 128(6):695-699, 
1971. 

Berlin, I.N. Prevention of emotional problems among 
Native American children: Overview of develop- 
mental issues. Journal of Preventive Psychiatry 
l(3):319-330, 1982. 

Berlin, LN. Prevention of adolescent suicide among 
some Native American tribes. In: Feinstein, S.C., 

47 



ed. Adolescent Psychiatry: Developmental and 
Clinical Studies. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1985. pp. 77-93. 

Berlin, I.N. Suicide among American Indian adoles 
cents: An overview. Suicide and life-Threatening 
Behavior 17(3):218-232, 1987. 

Bobo, J.K. Preventing drug abuse among American 
Indian adolescents. In: Gilchrist, L.D., and Sch- 
inke, S.P., eds. Preventing Social and Health Prob- 
lems Through Life Skills Training (Monograph 
3). Seattle, WA: University of Washington, Center 
for Social Welfare Research, 1988. pp. 43-54. 

Bobo, J.K.; Gilchrist, L.D.; Cvetkovich, G.T.; and 
Schinke, S.P. Cross cultural service delivery to 
minority communities. Journal of Counseling Psy- 
chology 16:263-272, 1988a. 

Bobo, J.K.; Cvetkovich, G.T.; Trimble, J.E.; Gilchrist, 
L.D.; and Schinke, S.P. Development and imple- 
mentation of culturally sensitive mental health 
programs in minority communities: The Indian 
drugprevention model. National Institute on Drug 
Abuse Report, University of Washington and West- 
ern Washington University, 19886. 

Carpenter, RA; Lyons, C.A.; and Miller, W.R. Peer- 
managed self-cortrol program for prevention of 
alcohol abuse in American Indian high school stu- 
dents: A pilot evaluation study. The International 
Journal of the Addictions 20(2):299-310, 1985. 

Dinges, N. Mental health promotion with Navajo fam- 
ilies. In: Manson, S.M., ed. New Directions in Pre- 
vention Among American Indian and Alaska 
Native Communities. Portland, OR: Oregon 
Health Sciences University, 1982. 

Dinges, N.G.; Yazzie, M.; and Tollefson, G.D. Develop- 
mental intervention for Navajo family mental 
health. Personnel and Guidance Journal 
52(6):390-395, 1974. 

Dozier, E.P. Problem drinking among American Indi- 
ans: The role of sociocultural deprivation. Quar- 
terly Journal of Studies on Alcohol 27(l):72-87, 
1966. 

Ellinaon, J.; Josephson, E.; Zanes, A.; and Haberman, 
P. A Study of Teenage Drug Behavior. New York: 
Columbia School of Public Health, 1973. 

Fleming, C. Alternative community-based mental 
health prevention programs. Listening Post 
4(l):16-20, 1981. 



56 



48 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



Fleming, C. The emergence of culture lased mental 
health service for Native Americana. Listening 
Past 4(4):17~29, 1983. 

Four Worlds Development Project. Four Worlds Devel- 
opment Project Overview Paper. Alberta, Canada: 
University of Lethbridge, 1983. 

Fox, J.; Manitonabi, D.; and Ward, JA An Indian 
community with a high suicide rate - five years 
after. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 29(5):425~ 
427, 1984. 

French, L.A., and Hornbuckle, J. Indian stress and 
violence: A psycho-cultural perspective. Journal of 
Alcohol and Drug Education 25:36-43, 1979. 

Gilchrist, L.D.; Schinke, S.P.; and Trimble, J.B. Skills 
enhancement to prevent substance abuse among 
American Indian adolescents. The International 
Journal of the Addictions 22(9):869-879, 1987. 

Goldstein, G. The model dormitory project. Psychiatric 
Annals 4(9):85-92, 1974. 

Goldstein, G.S.; Oetting, E.R.; Edwards, R.; and 
Garcia-Mason, V. Drug use among Native Ameri- 
can young adults. International Journal of the 
Addictions 14(6):855-860, 1979. 

Green, B.E. Psychiatric consultation to an Indian 
tribal court. In: Manson, S.M., ed. New Directions 
in Prevention Among American Indian and 
Alaska Native Communities. Portland, OR: 
Oregon Health Sciences University, 1982. pp. 
253-264. 

Hall, R.L. Alcohol treatment in American Indian pop- 
ulation: An indigenous treatment modality com- 
pared with traditional approaches. In: Babor, T.F., 
ed. Alcohol and Culture: Comparative Perspectives 
from Europe end America (NIAAA Monograph 
Series). Rockville, MD: NIAAA, 1983. 

Hammerschlag, C.A. "Identify groups with American 
Indian Adolescents."* Paper presented at the An- 
nual Meetings of the American Group Psychother- 
apy Association, New York, 1974. 

Harvey, E.B.; Gazay, L.; and Samuels, B. Utilization 
of a psychiatric-social work team in an Alaskan 
native secondary boarding school. Annual Prog- 
ress in Child Psychiatry and Child Development 
24:693-710, 1977. 

Haven, S.A., and Imotichey, P.J. Menta* health ser- 
vices for American Indians: The USET program. 
White Cloud Journal l(3):3-5, 1979. 

Ishisika, H. American Indians and foster care. Cultural 
factors and separation. Child Welfare 57(5):299- 
308, 1978. 

Jilek-Aall, L. Alcohol and the Indian-White relation- 
ship. Confinia Psychiatrica 2 1(4): 195-233, 1978. 

Kahn, M.W., and Delk, I.L. Developing a community 
mental health cliric on an Indian reservation. In- 



ERLC 



ternational Journal of Social Psychiatry 
19<3):299-306, 1973. 

Kahn, M.W.; Lewis, J.; and Galvez, E. An evaluation 
study of a group therapy procedure with reserva- 
tion adolescents. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research 
and Practice ll(3):239-242, 1974. 

Kahn, M.W.; Lejero, L.; Antone, M.; Francisco, D.; and 
Manual, J. An indigenous community mental 
health service on the Tohono O'odham (Papago) 
Indian Reservation: Seventeen years later. Amer- 
ican Journal of Community Psychology 1(K3):369- 
379, 1988. 

Kleinfeld, J. Getting it together at adolescence: Case 
studies of positive serializing environments for 
Eskimo youths. In: Manson, S.M., ed. New Direc- 
tions in Prevention Among American Indian and 
Alaska Native Communities. Portland, OR: 
Oregon Health Sciences University, 1982. pp. 
341-365. 

LaFromboise, T.D., and Howe, W. Skills training for 
bicultural competence: Rationale and application. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology 30<4):589-595, 
1983. 

Lefley, H.P. Self-perception and primary prevention 
for American Indians. In: Manson, S.M., ed. New 
Direction in Prevention Among American Indian 
and Alaska Native Communities. Portland, OR: 
Oregon Health Science University, 1932. pp. 341- 
365. 

Levy, J., and Kunitz, S. Indian reservations, anomie, 
and social pathologies. Southwestern Journal of 
Anthropology 27(2):9? 128, 1971. 

Manson, S.M., ed. New Directions in Prevention 
Among American Indian and Alaska Native Com- 
munities. Portland, OR: Oregon Health Sciences 
University, 1982. 

Manson, S.M.; Tatum, £.; and Dinges, N.G. Preven- 
tion research among American Indian and Alaska 
Native communities: Charting future courses for 
theory and practice in mental health. In: Manson, 
S.M., ed. New Directions in Prevention Among 
American Indian and Alaska Native Communi- 
ties. Portland, OR: Oregon Health Sciences Uni- 
versity, 1982. pp. 11-64. 

Mason, E.P. Progress report. Project Catch-up: An 
educational program for junior high students of 
American Indian, Mexican and Caucasian ethnic 
backgrounds. Psychology in the Schools 5:272- 
276, 1968. 

Mason, E.P. Project Catch-up: An educational pro* 
gram of socially disadvantaged thirteen and four* 
teen year-olds. Psychology in the Schools 
6:253*257, 1969. 

57 



References 



49 



May, PA Arrests, alcohol and alcohol legalization 
among an American Indian tribe. Plains Anthro- 
pologist 20(68):129-134, 1975. 

May, PA "Alcohol legalization and Native Americans: 
A sociological Inquiry." Unpublished doctoral dis- 
sertation, University of Montana, 1976. 

May, PA Alcohol beverage control: A survey of tribal 
alcohol statutes. American Indian Law Review 
5:217-228, 1977. 

May, PA Substance abuse and American Indians: 
Prevalence and susceptibility. International Jour- 
nal of the Addictions 17:1185-1209, 1982. 

May, PA Suicide and self-destruction among Ameri- 
can Indian youths. American Indian and Alaska 
Native Mental Health Research l(l):52-69, 1987. 

May, PA Alcohol abuse and alcoholism among Amer- 
ican Indians: An overview. In: Watts. T., and 
Wright, R., Jr., eds. Alcoholism in Minority Popu- 
lations. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas Pub- 
lishing, 1989. 

May, PA, and Hymbaugh, KJ. A pilot project on fetal 
alcohol syndrome among American Indians. Alco- 
hol Health and Research World 7(2):3-9, 1983. 

May, P. A, and Smith, M. Some Navajo Indian opinions 
about alcohol abuse and prohibition: A survey and 
recommendations for policy. Journal of Studies on 
Alcohol 49<*):324-334, 1988. 

May, PA, and Hymbaugh, KJ. A macro-level fetal 
alcohol syndrome prevention program for Ameri- 
can Indians and Alaska Natives: Description and 
evaluation. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 16:218- 
244, Sept. 1989. 

McBride, D.C. Adolescent Indian substance abuse: 
Ecological and sociocultural factors. Youth and 
Society ll(4):475-492, 1980. 

Mohatt, G.V., and Blue, AW. Primary prevention as it 
relates to traditionaiity and empirical measures of 
social deviance. In: Manson, S.M., ed. New Direc- 
tions in Prevention Among American Indian and 
Alaska Native Communities. Portland, OR: Ore- 
gon Health Sciences University, 1982. 

Navajo Health Authority. "Navajo alcohol abuse and 
education project.'* Report prepared for IHS, Win- 
dow Rock, AZ, 1979. 

Neligh, G. Secondary and tertiary prevention strate- 
gies applied to suicide among American Indians. 
American Indian and Alaska Native Mental 
Health Research 1(3):4-18, 1988. 

Oetting, E., and Beauvais, F. "Epidemiology and Cor- 
relates of Alcohol Use Among Indian Adolescents 
Living on Reservations." Paper present id at 
NIAAA conference, Epidemiology of Alcohol Use 
and Abuse among U.S. Ethnic Minority Groups 
Bethesda, MD, 1985. 



Oetting, E.R., and Dinges, N. "Evaluation of the Toyei 
Model Dormitory Project." Final Report to the 
Office of Mental Health Programs, Indian Health 
Service, Rockville, MD, 1972. 

Oetting, EJt, and Goldstein, G.S. Drug abuse among 
Native American adolescents. In: Beschner, G.M., 
and Friedman, AS., eds. Youth Drug Abuse: Prob- 
lems, Issues, and Treatment. Lexington, MA: Lex- 
ington Books, 1979. 

Oetting, EJt; Edwards, R.; Goldstein, G S.; and Gar- 
cia-Mason, V. Drug use among adolescents of five 
southwestern Native American tribes. The Inter- 
national Journal of the Addictions 15:439-445, 
1980. 

Getting, E.; Beauvais, F.; and Edwards, R.W. Alcohol 
and Indian youth: Social and psychological corre- 
lates and prevention. Journal of Drug Issues 
18:87-101, 1988. 

Oetting, E.R.; Edwards, R.W.; and Beauvais, F. Drugs 
and Native American youth. Chapter in Drugs and 
Society, in press. 

Ogden, M.; Specter, M.F.; and Hill, C A Suicides and 
homicides among Indians. Public Health Reports 
85(l):75-80, 1970. 

Owan, T.; Palmer, I.; and Quintana, M. School/Com- 
munity-Based Alcoholism/Substance Abuse Pre- 
vention Survey. Rockville, MD: Indian Health 
Service, 1987. 

Pascarosa, P., and Futterman, S. Ethnopsychedelic 
therapy for alcoholics: Observation in the peyote 
ritual of the Native American Church. Journal of 
Psychedelic Drugs 8(3) :2 15-221, 1976. 

Pascarosa, P.; Futterman, S.; and Halsweig, M. Obser- 
vations of alcoholics in the peyote ritual: A pilot 
study. Annals of the New York Academy of Sci- 
ences 273:518-524, 1976. 

Price, R.; Co wen, E.; Lotion, R.; and Ramos-McKay, J. 
Model prevention programs: Epilogue and future 
prospects. In: Price, R.; Co wen, E.; Lorion, R.; and 
Ramos-McKay, J., eds. 14 Ounces of Prevention: A 
Casebook for Practitioners. Washington, DC: The 
American Psychological Association, 1988. pp. 
187-191. 

Query J.M.N. Comparative admission and follow-up 
study of American Indians and whites in a youth 
chemical dependency unit on the N. Central 
Plains. The International Journal of the Addic- 
tions 20(3):489-502, 1985. 

Red Horse, Y. American Indian community mental 
health: A primary prevention strategy. In: Man- 
son, S.M., ed. New Directions in Prevention Among 
American Indian and Alaska Native Communi- 
ties. Portland, OR: Oregon Health Science Univer- 
sity Press, 1982. 



53 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



Bobbins, M. Project Nak-nu-we-aha: A preventive in- 
tervention in child abuse and neglect among a 
Pacific Northwest Indian community. In: Manson, 
S.M., ed. New Directions in Prevention Among 
American Indian and Alaska Native Communi- 
ties. Portland, OR: Oregon Health Sciences Uni- 
versity Press, 1982. 

Schinke, S.P.; Schilling, R.F.; Gilchrist, L.D ; Berth, 
RP.; Bobo, J.K.; Trimble, J.B.; and Cvelkowvich, 
G.T. Preventing substance abuse with American 
Indian youth. Social Casework - The Journal of 
Contemporary Social Work 4:213-217, 1986. 

Schinke, S.P.; Orlandi, MA; Botwin, G J.; Gilchrist, 
L.D.; Trimble, J.E.; and Locklear, V.S. Preventing 
substance abuse among American Indian adoles- 
cents: A bicultural competence skills approach. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology 35<l):87-90, 
1988. 

Schottstaedt, M J\, and Bjork, J.W. Inhalant abuse in 
an Indian boarding school. American Journal of 
Psychiatry 134(11):1290-1293, 1977. 

Seattle Indian Health Board. Indians from across the 
nation form NANACOA. Healing Our Hearts 
Newsletter 20:5, Apr. 1988. 

Shore, J.H. American Indian suicide— fact and fan- 
tasy. Psychiatry 12:8886-91, 1975. 

Shore, J.H., and Keepers, G. Examples of evaluation 
research in delivering preventive mental health 
services to Indian youth. In: Manson, S.M., ed. New 
Directions in Prevention Among American Indian 
and Alaska Native Communities. Portland, OR: 
Oregon Health Sciences University Press, 1982. 

Shore, J.H., and Nicholls, W.M. Indian children and 
tribal group homes: New interpretation of the 
whipper man. American Journal of Psychiatry 
132(4):454-456, 1975. 



Shore, J.H., and Von Fumetti, B. Three alcohol pro- 
grams for American Indians. American Journal of 
Psychiatry 128(1 1):134-138, 1972. 

Shore, J.H.; Bopp, JJF.; Waller, TJL; and Dawes, J.W. 
A suicide prevention center on an Indian reserva- 
tion. American Journal of Psychiatry 128:1086- 
1091, 1972. 

Stewart, O.C. Questions regarding American Indian 
criminality. Human Organization 23:61-66, 1964. 

Snyder, R. The first offender program: Children and 
our future. In: Berlin, I.N., ed. The International 
Year of the Child 1979-1980. Albuquerque, NM: 
University of New Mexico Press, 1981. 

Tower, M. An American Indian community adolescent 
suicide epidemic. American Indian and Alaska 
Native Mental Health Research l(3):38-47, 1988. 

Trimble, J.E. Drug abuse prevention research among 
American Indians and Alaska Natives. White 
Cloud Journal 3(3):22-34, 1984. 

Wallace, A.F.C. Handsome Lake and the great revival 
in the West. American Quarterly 4(2):149-165, 
1952. 

Wallace, AF.C. The institutionalization of cathartic 
and control: strategies in Iroquois religious psy- 
chotherapy. In: Opler, M.E., ed. Culture and Men- 
tal Health. New York: The MacMillian Co., 1959. 
pp. 1959. 

Ward, J A Preventive implications of a native Indian 
mental health program: Focus on suicide and vio- 
lent death. Journal of Preventive Psychiatry 
2(4):371-385, 1984. 

Welte, J.W., and Barnes, G.M. Alcohol use among 
adolescent minority groups. Journal of Drug Is- 
sues 14(2):313-336, 1987. 



59 



9 

ERIC 



American Indian and Alaska Native 
Demonstration Projects 



Division of Demonstrations and Evaluation, OSAP 



"Comprehensive Demonstration Project High Risk 
Youth** 

RURAL ALASKA COMMUNITY ACTION 
PROGRAM 

731 E. 8th Ave., Box 200908 

Anchorage, Alaska 99520 

(907)279-2511 

Contact Person: Doug Modig 

"Targeted Prevention for High Risk Alaskan Village 
Youth" 

TANANA CHIEF'S CONFERENCE, INC. 

1302 21st Avenue 

Fairbanks, Alaska 99701 

(907)452-2446 

Contact Person: Michael Graf 

"Comprehensive Adolescent Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
Grant" 

KODIAK COUNCIL ON ALCOHOLISM, INC. 
EO. Box 497 
Kodiak, Alaska 99615 
(907) 486-3535 

Contact Person: William G. Herman 

"Comprehensive Student Assistance Program" 
NORTH OLYMPIC ALCOHOL AND DRUG 
ABUSE PROGRAM 
315 East 8th 

Port Angeles, Washington 98362 
(206) 452-2381 

Contact Person: Gayle L. Swagerty 

"Comprehensive Community Development and 
Support Project 
for High Risk Youth" 

CALIFORNIA DEPT. OF ALCOHOL & DRUG 

PROGRAMS 

20 North Dewitt, Suite 8 

Clovis, California 93612 

(209)299-4834 

Contact Person: Michael Isaac-Son 



"Native American Health Center 
Prevention Project" 

SAN FRANSISCO COMMUNITY CLINIC 

CONSORTIUM 

1520 Stockton Street 

San Fransisco, California 94133 

(415) 391-9686 Ext. 273 

Contact Person: Carroll Johnson 



"Rocky Boy CAT Team's PRIDE Project" 

CHIPPEWA CREE TI 3AL BUSINESS 

COMMITTEE 

Box 620, RB Route 

Box Elden Montana 59521 

(406) 395-4291 

Contact Person: Sybil Sangrey 



"A Comprehensive Proposal for the Blue Bay 
Healing Center" 

CONFEDERATED SALISH AND KOOTENEI 

TRIBAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT 

RO. Box 278 

Pablo, Montana 59855 

(406) 676-2770 

Contact Person: Anna Whiting-Sorrell 



"Early Intervention for Indian Children" 

SHOSHONE-BANNOCK TRIBAL SCHOOL 

PO. Box 306 

Fort Hall, Idaho 83203 

(208) 785-2080 

Contact Person: Gary Browniy 



"Standing Strong: Targeted Prevention for Indian 
Youth" 

ARIZONA DEPT. OF EDUCATION 
1535 W Jefferson 
Phoenix, Arizona 85007 
(602)255-4391 

Contact Person: Kathryn Stevens Begaye 



51 

BO 



American Indian and Alaska Native Youth 



52 

"Comprehensive Prevention, Treatment, and 

Rnhnlwlltoitin n 

Demonstration Project: The Nueva Vida" 
SANTA FE GROUP HOMES, INC. 
EO. Box 5739 

Santa Pa, New Mexico 87502 

(505)983.9521 

Contact Person: Carl Boaz 



"Friendly PearSuasion: Targeted Substance Abuse 
Education** 

RAPID CITY GIRLS CLUB OF AMERICA 
C/0 GCA National Resource Center 
441 W. Michigan Street 
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202 
(317)634-7546 

Contact Person: Dolores Wisdom 



"Calling All Kids Project" 
SAC AND FOX TRIBE OF INDIANS OF 
OKLAHOMA 
Route 2, Box 246 
Stroud, Oklahoma 74079 
(918) 968-3526 

Contact Person: JoAnna Coser 

"Indian Youth Group Home" 
FOND DU LAC RESERVATION 
Human Services Center 
927 Trettel Lane 
Cloquet, Minnesota 55720 
(218)879-1227 

Contact Person: Phil Norrgard 



"Soaring Eagles: Targeted to American Indian 
Youth" 

INDIAN HEALTH BOARD OF 

MINNEAPOLIS, INC. 

1315 East 24th Street 

Minneapolis, Minnesota 55404 

(612) 721-3765 Contact Person: Eliie Webster 

(612) 721-7425 Contact Person: Norine Smith 



"Qjibwa TRAILS." 

BAD RIVER BAND OF LAKE SUPERIOR 
EO. Box 39 

Odanah, Wisconsin 54861 

(715) 682-5852 

Contact Person: Mary Bigboy 



"Prevention of ADO A Problems in Tau^ ted Indian 
Families'* 

LAC DU FLAMBEAU BAND 
Family Resources Centec Box 398 
Lac Du Flambeau, Wisconsin 54538 
(715) 588-3371 
Contact Person: Sonny Smart 



"Cherokee Challenge Early Intervention Project" 
CHEROKEE CENTER FOR FAMILY SERVICES 
Acquoni Road, EO. Box 507 
Cherokee, North Carolina 28719 
(704) 497-9101 Ext. 37 
Contact Person: Gilliam Jackson 



61 



Appendix A 

Summary of Prevention Activities from the Literature 



8 



6 



Promotional intervention 


£ 




"herapyl 




action J 




c 
o 


ction J 


c 
o 


CO 




ation | 


program 


§1 
Q) § 

(D Jc 


it 

«m m 
— K 


Group 1 


Self Hel 


Social / 


Registe 


S 
-o 

Ul 


Legal A 


Recreal 


Cultural 
Activitie 


Special 
Facility 


ConsuH 


Handsome Lake Cult and False Face Society of the 
Iroquois 




















X 






Native American Indian Church 




















v 

A 






Ghost Oance Movement 




















v 
A 






The Sweat Lodge Ritual 








X 












X 






The Sun Dance Ritual 




















X 






Alaskan Village Spirit Committees 










X 










X 






Child Development Course for Pregnant Women 














X 












Early Intervention Program for All New Mothers 
and Their Infants 






X 








X 












Developmental Task Framework Project 














X 












Preventive Mental Health Program for Indian 
Boarding School 










X 




X 










X 


Toyei Dormitory Model 














X 






X 


X 





a 



Promotional Intervention 


3 






Q> 
X 

it: 
5 

CO 


c 
o 




c 


c 

s 


c 
o 






c 
o 


Program 


Referral 
Therapy 


Individu; 
Therapy 


Group T 


Social A 


Register 


Educatic 


Legal Ac 


Recreati 


Cultural 
Activities 


Special 
Facility 


Consults 


Chemawa Indian Boarding School Recreational 
Theraov Proa ram 


















v 

A 








Rough Rock Demonstration School Project Eaote 














X 












St. Mary's Boarding School 




v 

A 










X 












Mt. Edgecumbe Dormitory Project 














X 












Inhalant Abuse Intervention in an Elementary 
Boarding School 










X 




v 

A 










y 
A 


Support Group for Achieving Female Adolescents 
in a Boarding School 




















X 




X 


Chevak Village Youth Association 














X 




X 


X 






The Acoma-Canoncito-I aouna Teen Center 














X 




X 




X 




DARE 














X 












Mescalero Health Fairs Hopi Health Fairs 














X 








X 




Mtecosukee Culture Program 














X 




X 


X 







65 



9 

ERIC 



66 



67 



Promotional Intervention 


o 


(0 ^ 


'herapy | 


Q. 


c 
o 

"3 




Education | 


c 
o 

"is 


c 
o 


CO 




c 
o 

'% 


Program 


Referral 
Therapj 


Individu 
Therapj 


Group 1 


Self Hel 


Social /j 


Registe 


Legal At 


Recreal 


Cultural 
Activitie 


Special 
Facility 


Consult 


Tiospaye Project 














X 




X 


X 




X 


WIDO-AKO-DA-Dh-WIN 














X 






X 






rdiiiiiy fvi&nicii riMiiiii r ruyiaiii uruan 

Housing Project 














X 




X 


X 




X 
















X 












Multi-dimensional Prevention and Intervention 
Program on the Manitoulin Island Indian Reserve 














X 




X 


X 




X 


Papago Community Mental Health Clinic 














X 






X 




X 


USET Program - Coushatta & Chitimachi Tribes 














X . 












Community Resoonsa to Suicide Eoidemic 

WVI 1 II 1 IUI Illy 1 1PJUV1 Iww IV WUtwIUv kWIUVIIllv 














X 




X 


X 






Altornatit/a f^nmmiinitw-R^KAH MaiMa! Health 

Milt?) 1 icUIVC? wUIUI 1 IUI Illy DOgvU rVldllCU llvCXIUI 

Prevention Program 














X 






X 






Cultural Therapy Program 




















X 






1 Four Worlds Development Project 










X 




X 






X 




X 



9 

ERIC 



Primary Intervention 




IS ^ 


Tierapy| 


Self Help | 


c 
o 

f> 


t 


Education | 


c 
o 


c 
o 


en 




c 

.9 

ts 


Program 


Referral 
Therapy 




Group T 


13 

8 

CO 


Registei 


Legal A< 


Recreat 


Cultural 
Activities 


Special 
Facility 


Consult* 


Native American Indian Church 








X 












X 






Indian Shaker Church 




















X 






Prohibition 
















x 










The Sweat Lodge 








X 












X 






The Sun Dance Ritual 




















x 






Alaskan Village Spirit Committees 










X 










y 






.•V Intervention Program for All New 
Mothers and Their Infants 






X 








X 












High School Pregnancy Program 














X 












Child Care Training for At Risk Adolescent Females 














X 












vv nipper ividin i nudi oruup nunitf 




A 


X 
















X 


X 


Alternatives to Foster Care Program 




X 










X 






X 


X 





69 



oo 



71 



Primary intervention 


42 


1 

"I >, 


'herapy 1 


Q. 


c 
o 

1 




Education | 


ction | 


c 
g 






c 
o 

% 


Program 


<D x: 
DC K 


■o 8- 

> £ 
~ CD 


Group 1 


SelfHel 


Social/ 


Registe 


Legal A 


Recreai 


Cultura! 
Activitie 


Special 
Facility 


ConsuH 


Preventive Mental Health Program for Indian 
Boarding School 












X 












X 


Mt. Edgecumbe Dormitory Project 




X 










X 








X 





Inhalant Abuse Intervention in an Elementary 
Boarding School 




Y 




















X 


Support Group for Achieving Female Adolescents 
in a Boarding School 






X 




















First Offender Program for Alcohol- and Drug- 
Abusing Adolescents and Their Parents 






X 




















Grade School Depression Project 




X 


X 




















Papago Indian Reservation School Group Therapy 
Program 






X 




















Project Catch-Up 






X 








X 




X 








Aooiesceni moian i nerapy uroup 






X 




















Assertiveness Skills Training for Bicultural 
Competence 














X 













0» 

5 
© 

> 
o 



a 



72 



9 

ERIC 



Primary Intervention 


5 




Group Therapy | 


Self Help | 


c 
o 

1 


* 


c 


c 
o 


o 


Cultural § 
Activities 1 




Consultation 1 


Program 


Referral 
Therapy 


IndMdu 
Therapy 


Social A 


Registei 


Educate 


Legal A< 


Recreat 


1 Special 
Facility 


Life Skills Training with Adolescents 














X 












Peer-Managed Self-Control Prevention Program 




X 










X 












Mt. Edgecumbe Comprehensive Alcohol Program 
(ICECAP) 




X 










X 








X 




The Acoma-Canoncito-Laguna Teen Center 




X 






















Fort Hall Medical Detoxification Center for 
Adolescents 




X 


















X 




WIDO-AKO-DA-DE-WIN 




X 






















Family Mental Health Program-Urban Housing 
Project 




X 










X 






X 


X 




Project Nak-nu-we-sha 




X 










X 








X 


X 


Multi-demensional Prevention and Intervention 
Program on the Manitoulin Island Indian Reserve 




X 










X 








X 


X 


Papago Commi iity Mental Health Clinic 




X 










X 










X 



9 

ERIC 



74 



/.J 



o 
o 



75 



rrimary interveniion 


a 


at ^ 


herapy | 


Self Help | 


iction | 




Education | 


e 
o 

n 


§ 


CD 




c 
o 


Program 


Referral 
Therapy 


Indivldu 
Therapy 


Group 7 


Social A 


Registe 


Legal A< 


Recreat 


Cultural 
Activitie 


Special 
Facility 


Consult 


Psychiatric Consultation to Tribal Council 
























X 


USET Program — Seminole Tribe 




X 
















X 






USET Program — Miccosukee Tribe — Department 
off Community Mental Health & Alcoholism 




X 






















USET Program - Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians 
Mental Health and Alcoholism Program 




X 






















USET Program - Coushatta & Chitimachi Tribes 




X 












X 






X 


X 


Community Response to Suicide Epidemic 




X 


















X 


X 


Alternative community-Based Mental Health 
Prevention Program 




X 


X 








X 






X 


X 




Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Pilot Project 


X 








X 




X 






X 




X 


Klatinnal IrtHian PAtal A l/^nhnl Qun/lrnino Pr/viAft 

iMaiiondi inuian roicu rvvunvi oynuiuiiw nwjw^i 










X 




X 






X 




X 


National Association for Native American 
Children of Alcoholics 








X 


X 




X 






X 




X 



© 

I 

O 

o 

3 



Q. 



76 



ERIC 



0) 



Secondary Intervention 


Referral for 1 
Therapy 1 


IndMdual 1 
Therapy 1 


Group Therapy | 


Self Help | 


Social Action | 


Register | 


Education | 


Legal Action | 


Recreation | 


&s AT 

££ 
o< 


Special 1 
Facility | 


Consultation I 


Program 


Native American Indian Church 








X 






X 












Inhalant Abuse Intervention in an 
Elementary Boarding School 


X 


X 






















Support Group for Achieving Female 
Adolescents in a Boarding School 






X 














X 






First Offender Program for Alcohol- and Drug- 
Abusing Adolescents and Their Parents 






X 




















Fort Hall Medical Detoxification Center 
for Adolescents 




X 


















X 


X 


Multi-dimensional Prevention and Intervention 
Program on the Manitoulin Island Indian Reserve 




X 










X 












Community Response to Suicide Epidemic 




X 








X 










X 




Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Pilot Project 


X 


X 


X 



































































































si 

c 
© 



9 

ERIC 



77 



78 



?5R 



O 

to 



79 



Tertiary intervention 


3 




herapy | 


a. 


ction | 




Education | 


c 
o 


c 
o 


Cultural 1 
Activities | 




c 
o 


Program 


Referral 
Therapy 


Individu 
Therapy 


Group T 


Self Hel 


Social A 


Registei 


Legal A< 


Recreati 


Special 
Facility 


Consult* 


Handsome Lake Cult and False Face 
Society of the Iroquois 




X 


X 














X 






Native American Indian Church 








X 












X 






The Sweat Lodge Ritual 








X 












X 






Cheyenne and Arapahoe Lodge Gourd 
Clan Group 






X 














X 






Alcoholics Anonymous 








X 












X 






Child Care Training for At Risk 
Adolescent Females 








X 












X 






Whipper Man Tribal Group Home 






X 














X 


X 




Preventive Mental Health Program for 
Indian Boarding School 




X 






















Inhalant Abuse Intervention in an Elementary 
Boarding School 




X 






















Papago Indian Reservation School Group 
Therapy Program 






X 





















0 
cr 

© 



LI) 



9 

ERIC 



it?iiiaiy inwrvGiiuun 


a 


«>» 


tierapy 1 


CL 


c 
o 

Q 




c 


c 

•I 


a 

.o 






c 
o 


Program 


Referral 
Therapy 


£i= 


Group T 


SeifHel 


Social A 


Registei 


Educati( 


Legal A< 


Recreati 


ii 
il 

o< 


Special 
Facility 


Consult. 


Adolescent Indian Therapy Group 






X 




















Fort Hall Medical Detoxification Center 
for Adolescents 




v 
A 




















X 


Youth Chemical Dependency Center at 
North Dakota State Hospital 




X 


X 
















X 




Mescatero Health Fairs - Hopi Health Fairs 




X 


X 
















X 




Papago Community Mental Heath Clinic 




X 
















X 






Community Response to Suicide Epidemic 




X 


















X 




Alternative Community-Based Mental Health 
rreventiori rrogram 




x 


















x 




ft ft a ^tm *i Aft ■ ft* ft A . « * 1 1 » A 

Ute Tnbe Alcoholism Information and Counseling 
Program on the Uintah and Ouray Reservations 






X 
















X 




Jlcarilla Apache Alcoholism Program 






X 
















X 




Nevada Inter-Tribal Council Alcoholism Program 






X 
















X 




Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Pilot Project 


X 


X 


X 






X 


X 






X 




X 



ERJC gj 



82 



Appendix B 

Summary of Prevention Activities from Proposals 



83 



8 



84 



Promotional Intervention 


C © 

n 

Eqc 

It 

< co 


sj ^ 


lierapyj 


Self Help | 


ction | 


ft 


Educat'on | 


Legal Action | 


c 
o 






c 
o 

33 


3 
o E 


Program 




Group T 


Social A 


Registe! 


Recreat 


Cultural 
Activitie 


Special 
Facility 


Consult) 


Econom 
Develop 


Rural Alaska Community Action Program 










X 




X 






X 




X 




Tanana Chiefs Conference, Inc. 










X 




X 




X 


X 




X 


X 


North Olympic Alcohol and Drug 
Abuse Program 














X 














Confederated Salish/Kootenai Tribal 
Health Department of the Flathead 
Reservation (Blue Bay Project) 










X 




X 




X 


X 








Chippewa Cree Tribal Business Committee 


X 








X 




X 




X 


X 


X 






Santa Fe Group Homes, Inc. 










X 


















Sac and Fox Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma 










X 








X 










Inciuin Health Board of Minneapolis, Inc. 


X 








X 




X 




X 


X 








Lac Du Flambeau Band 




















X 








Bad River Band of Lake Superior 


X 












X 




X 


X 









I Primary Intervention 


sment j 
Referral| 




Therapyj 


CL 


Action | 


Register | 


c 

p 


Action | 


c 


Cultural | 
Activities | 


Special 1 
Facility 1 


Consultation | 


Economic 1 
Development 1 


> 

Program 


go 

Is 


Individ) 
Therap 


Group 


Self He 


Social i 


Educat 


Legal/ 


Recrea 


Rural Alaska Community Action Program 










X 




X 






X 




X 




Kodiak Council on Alcoholism, inc. 


X 




X 


X 


X 




X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 




North Olympic Alcohol and Drug 
Abuse Proaram 


X 


X 




X 






X 










X 




Shoshone-Bannock Tribal School 




X 


X 


X 


X 




X 




X 


x 








Confederated Salish/Kootenai Tribal 
Health Department of the Flathead 

Reservation fRIiiA Rax/ Prfttartt 


X 


X 




X 






X 






X 


X 






ChiDoewa Cree Tribal Business Committee 


X 


X 


X 




X 




X 










X 




Arizona DenartmAnt of Education 














X 






X 




X 




Santa Fe G ratio Homes Inc 














X 






X 




X 




Sac and Fox Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma 


Y 
A 


X 


X 


X 


X 




X 












X 


Indian Health Board of Minneapolis, Inc* 


X 


























Fond Du Lac Reservation 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 




X 




X 


X 


X 




X 


Lac Du Flambeau Band 








X 


X 




X 




X 


X 




X 




Bad River Band of Lake Superior 


X 






X 


X 




X 




X 


X 




X 




Rapid City Girls Club of America 














X 




X 










Cherokee Center for Family Services 














X 


X 


X 


X 




X 





87 

o 8G 

ERIC 



Secondary Intervention 


Assessment 1 
and/or Referral | 




Group Therapy J 


CL 


c 
o 

1 


Register | 


c 


c 

i 


c 
o 


Cultural I 
Activities | 




c 
o 


Is- 
i § 

LLiQ 


Program 


§>» 

iS CD 

u 


$ 

X 

*= 
c? 


Social /> 


Educate 


Legal A 


*^ 
EC 


Special 
Facility 


Consult 


Rural Alaska Community Action Program 


X 


























Tanana Chiefs Conference, Inc. 


X 


























Kodiak Council on Alcoholism, Inc. 


X 




X 


X 










X 


X 








North Olvmoic Alcohol and Drua 
Abuse Program 


X 


X 


X 






















Shoshone-Bannock Tribal School 


X 


X 


X 


X 




















Confederated Salish/Kootenai Tribal 
Reservation (Blue Bay Project) 


X 


v 
A 


X 


v 

A 












X 




X 




Chippewa Cree Tribal Business Committee 




X 
























Sac and Fox Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma 


X 


X 


X 


X 





















88 



i Miliary inif?rv6nifun 


Assessment 1 
and/or Referral 1 




herapyl 




c 




c 


c 

-2 


c 


Cultural 1 
Activities 1 




c 
o 




Program 




Group T 


Self Hel| 


Social A 


Register 


Educatk 


Legal Ac 


Recreali 


Special 
Facility 


Consults 


c $ 


Rural Alaska Community Action Program 




X 


X 


X 




















Kodsak Council on Alcoholism, Inc. 






X 


X 










X 


X 








North Olympic Alcohol and Drug 
Abuse Program 


X 


X 


X 






















Confederated Salish/Kootenai Tribal 
neann uepanment ot tne riatneao 
Reservation (Blue Bay Project) 


X 


X 


X 


X 






X 






X 


X 


X 




Chippewa Cree Tribal Business Committee 




X 


X 






















Santa Fe Group Homes, Inc. 


X 


X 


X 


X 














X 


X 




Sac and Fox Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma 




X 


X 








X 














Fond Du Lac Reservation 


X 


X 


X 


X 













































































90 



91 



Appendix C 
Telephone Survey 



92 



1 2 3 
(sequence) 



OSAP Demonstration Project Survey 



TO ALL OSAP GRANTEES: 

This survey will allow us to better understand the state-of-the-art prevention 
activities that are currently being undertaken in American Indian and Alaska 
Native communities. These communities are very diverse in nature and 
availability of resources; and yet, all share the common vision of reducing the 
devastating impact of substance abuse on Indian and Native people. The ulti- 
mate goal of this research is to identify those factors which contribute to 
successful prevention and disseminate this information for others to use. 

This survey addresses five major dimensions: 

I. Philosophy and Beliefs; 

II. Descriptions of P' eject Characteristics; 
m. Descriptions of Specific Project Strategies; 

IV Organizational Structure and Management; and 

V Project Evaluation. 

Your experience, insights and observations are extremely valuable to this 
effort. Please feel free to answer exactly as you feel. 

Thank you for your participation in this exciting research! 



ERIC 



72 



I. PHILOSOPHY AND BELIEFS 



IN THIS SECTION, WE WANT TO UNDERSTAND THE PHILOSOPHY ANl I BELIEF SYS- 
TEMS THAT HAVE GUIDED THE DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF YOUR 
PROJECT. WE TOLL BE ASKING FOR YOUR VIEWS ON HOW SUBSTANCE ABUSE 
DEVELOPS IN INDIAN AND NATIVE COMMUNITIES, HOW INDIVIDUALS AND COM- 
MUNITIES ARE PROTECTED FROM THE DEVELOPMENT OF SUBSTANCE ABUSE, 
AND WHAT IS THE BEST WAY FOR INDIAN AND NATIVE COMMUNITIES TO MAKE 
THE CHANGE TOWARD HEALTH. 

1. Factor* Which Place An Indian Person At Risk for Substance Abuse/ 
Dependency: 

From your experience in Indian and Native communities, hoi 7 significant do you think the 
following factors are in placing an Indian person at risk for substance abuse/dependence? 
Using the scale below, please circle the number to the right of each factor that best describes 
your belief. 



12 3 4 

Not Somewhat Moderately Greatly 

Significant Significant Significant Significant 



History of: 



— multiple home placements: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— previous suicide threat or attempt: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— abuse/neglect: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— sexual abuse as child: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— recent death of relative or friend: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— poor academic performance: 1 


2 


3 


4 


—physical handicap/illness: 1 


2 


3 


4 


—negative boarding schoolexperience: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— family disruption or conflict: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— poor and inconsistent family management 








practices: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— parental divorce: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— parental alcoholism: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— person's early substance use: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— emotional/psychological difficulties: 1 


2 


3 


4 


—delinquency/crime: 1 


2 


3 


4 


—criminal behavior in parents or siblings: 1 


2 


3 


4 


—personal physical assault: 1 


2 


3 


4 


—substance use by friends and peers: 1 


2 


3 


4 


—school drop out: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— high absenteeism: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— poor self esteem: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— poor or undefined racial identity: 1 


2 


3 


4 


—poor relationships with family members: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— low socioeconomic background: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— low commitment to education: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— alienation from social values of White culture: 1 


2 


3 


4 


—alienation from social values of Indian culture: 1 


2 


3 


4 




73 



94 



1 

Not 
Significant 



2 

Somewhat 
Significant 



8 

Moderately 
Significant 



4 

Greatly 
Significant 



— lack of attachment to neighborhood: 
—community disorgan ization: 
— frequent moves (residential mobility): 
— depressed autonomic & central nervous 

system arousal: 
— attention deficit disorder & hyperactivity: 
—inability to metabolize alcohol efficiently: 
—sensation seeking: 
— risk taking: 

— inadequate healthy recreational activities: 
— high unemployment in community: 
— cognitive deficits: 

— other (specify): 



2 
2 
2 

2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 



3 
3 
3 

3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 



4 
4 
4 



4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 



2. Protective Factors: 

From your experience in Indian and Native communities, how significant do you think the 
following factors are in protecting an Indian person from the negative effects of substance 
abuse/dependence? Using the scale below, please circle the number to the right of each factor 
that best describes your belief 



1 

Not 
Significant 



Somewhat 
Significant 



Moderately 
Significant 



4 

Greatly 
Significant 



A. Personal Factors: 

— Person holds strong, positive values for 

academic achievement: 
—Person is able to act independently when 

appropriate: 
— Person is able to know when it is appropriate 

to depend on others: 
— Person has a defined religious or spiritual 

belief system. 
— Person acts according to healthy social norms: 
— Person has positive self-esteem: 
— Person is able to make decisions based on 

internal beliefs: 
— Person has a strong commitment to doing 

what is correct and appropriate: 
—Person values positive relationships with others: 
—Other (specify): 



2 

2 

2 

2 
2 
2 



2 
2 



3 

3 

3 

3 
3 
3 



3 
3 



4 

4 

4 

4 
4 
4 



4 
4 



74 



95 



12 3 4 

Not Somewhat Moderately Greatly 

Significant Significant Significant Significant 



B. Environmental Factors: 



■Person perceives hb/ahe has respect and support 



from parent(s): 1 


2 


3 


4 


— Parent's value system is dearly & consistently 








communicated: 1 


2 


3 


4 


—Parent clearly and consistently set limits 
for child s behavior: 1 








2 


3 


4 


— Parent models appropriate and healthy behavior: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— Friends/peeis model appropriate and healthy 








behavior: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— Parent demonstrates positive interpersonal 








skills: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— Friends/peers demonstrate positive interpersonal 








skills: 1 


2 


3 


4 


— Society's expectations for healthy & appropriate 








behavior are clearly communicated: 1 


2 


3 


4 


—Other (Specify): 










2 


3 


4 



8. Philosophical Influences. To what degree have the following concepts or approaches 
influenced the development of your project's philosophy about how u> change 
self-destructive behavior and attitudes? Please circle the number associated with the 
phrase that beet describee your answer 

CHILDREN OF ALCOHOLICS: 

12 3 4 

No Little Moderate Substantial 

Influence Influence Influence Influence 

0 = Never heard of 

THE 12-STEP TRADITION (AA, NA, ALANON, ETC.): 

12 3 4 

No Little Moderate Substantial 

Influence Influence Influence Influence 

0 = Never heard of 

FOUR WORLDS (UNIY OF LETHBRTDGE, ALBERTA, CANADA): 

1 2 3 4 

No Little Moderate Substantial 

Influence Influence Influence Influence 

0 = Never heard of 



75 



ALKALAI LAKE (BRITISH COLOMBIA): 

1 2 



No 
Influence 



little 
Influence 

0 » Never heard of 



Moderate 
Influence 



Substantial 
Influence 



THE RED ROAD (VERMILLION, S.DAKOTA): 

1 2 



No 
Influence 



Little 
Influence 

0 = Never heard of 



Moderate 
Influence 



4 



Substantial 
Influence 



LOCAL TRIBAL BELIEFS: 

1 



No 
Influence 



3 



Little 
Influence 

0 =a Never heard of 



Moderate 
Influence 



Substantial 
Influence 



4. Intervention Goals: The following list contains general goals that are articulated by 
many prevention projects. Please check all the goals that apply to your project's mission 
statement 



Promoting mental health 

Promoting physical health 

Influencing legislative actions 

Improving socioeconomic situation 

Recognizing risk factors 

Limiting access to means of self-harm 

Alleviating situations of risk 

Improving educational opportunities 

Increasing/enhancing program or community resources 

Promoting cultural identity 

Intc grating family into client's treatment 

Other<Specify): 



9 

ERIC 



76 

97 



n. DESCRIPTION OF PROJECT CHARACTERISTICS 



IN THIS SECTION, WE WANT TO KNOW SOME OF THE OVERALL 
CHARACTERISTICS OF YOUR PROJECT. SPECIFICALLY, WE WILL BE ASKING YOU 
TO DESCRIBE THE PROVIDERS WHO ARB DELIVERING THE PREVENTION 
SERVICES OF YOUR PROJECT, TO WHOM THE SERVICES ARE DIRECTED (THIS 
GROUP WILL BE REFERRED TO AS THE "TARGET POPULATION**), AND IN WHAT 
CONTEXT THE SERVICES ARE OFFERED (WHEN AND WHERE). 

& Project Responsibility: Who is primarily responsible for implementing your prevention 
project? Please check appropriate box(es). 

[ ] Tribe [ ] Other federal agency 

[ ] State [ ] PrivaWnonprofit corporation 

U IHS [ ] Municipality/City or County 

[ ] BIA [ ] OtherCSpecify): 

ft In Addition to OSAP Funds: Check other funding sources. 

[ 1 Tribe [ ] Other federal agency 

[ ] State [ ] Private foundation 

[ 1 IHS [ ] Program revenues/insurance company 

[ ] OtherfSperify): 

7. Setting of Prevention Activities: Please check appropriate box(es). 



[ ] 


Home 


Human service agency: 






[ ] a. Child welfare agency 


School: 


[ ] b. Court/Legal agency 


[ 1 


a. Preschool 


[ ] c. Other(Specify): 


[ 1 


b. Elementary 




[ 1 


c. Jr. High 


Outpatient Clinic: 


[ 1 


d. Sr. High 


[ ] a. Medical health clinic/program 


[ 1 


e. Community College 


[ ] b. Substance abuse clinic/program 


[ 1 


f. 4 Year College 


[ ] c. Mental health clinic/program 



[ ] Hospital 

[ ] Community (Specify): 

[ ] Other (Specify): 

8. Duration: Please check the box(es) below that best describe the length of you? prevention 
activities. 



[ ] Crisis only 

[ ] Predetermined number of sessions/classes (number = ) 

[ ] Indeterminate number of sessions/classes 



77 

> 98 



Schedule: Time of the day and week that prevention activities ate offered: Please check 
appropriate box(ee). 



[ ] Daytime, weekdays 
Hours: 

[ ] Evening, weekdays 
Hours: 

[ ] Night, weekdays 
Hours: 



[ ] Day time, weekends 
Hours: 

[ ] Evening; weekends 
Hours: 

[ ] Night, weekends 
Hours: 



10. Languages Utilized in Program Activities: Please estimate the percentage of time 
in whkh the following languages are used in your project and indicate your answer on 
the graph below each language group. 



English Language: 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 

I 1 1 1 1 I I L_J L 

Indian/Native Language: 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 
I 1 1 I I I I 1 I I 



100% 



100% 

-J 



Other Language (i.e., Spanish, Chinese, etc.): 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 
I 1 1 I I I | I I I 



100% 

-J 



Target Population: Please think about the people for whom your intervention activities are 
directed and check all the descriptors below that apply to them. 



11. Sec [ ] Male 



[ ] Female 



12. Age: [ ] Infants (0-3 years) 

[ ] Preschool (4-5 years) 

[ ] School (6-12 years) 

[ ] Adolescents (13-19 years) 

[ ] Young adults (20-35) 

[ ] Middle-age adults (36-55) 

[ ] Elders (56 and older) 



13. Ethnicity of Your Target Population: Please estimate the percentages which describe 
the ethnic categories of your target population and indicate on the graph below: 

American Indian / Alaska Native: 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100% 
I 1 I I I I I I I I I 

List major tribes represented: 




78 



99 



Other Minority Non-Indian (i.e., Black, Asian, or Hispanic): 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100% 

1 I I I I I I I i i I 

Non-Indian: 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100% 

1 I I i I ! I I I I I 

14. Residential Status of Your Target Indian Population: Please estimate the percent- 
age of the Indian population whose residential status falls in the following categories 
below and indicate on the graph below: 

Indian persons who primarily live on a reservation or in an Indian/Native community: 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100% 

1 I I ! I I I I i I I 

Indian persons who primarily live in an urban setting: 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100% 

1 i i I I I I I i I I 

Indian persons who migrate between Indian reservation/community and urban setting: 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100% 

1 I 1 I I I I I I I I 

15. Referral Mechanism: How are participants referred to you? Please check all that apply. 

[ ] Self referral t ] Court referral 

[ ] Family referral [ ] In-house referral 

[ ] Other agency: [ ] Other(Specify): 



16. Number of Participants: Please supply the number that best answers the followi ng 
questions: 

What is the current number of participants in your project? 



What is the total number of participants since the beginning of your project? 

Provider Characteristics 

Please think of the people who deliver the prevention services in your communities. These pro- 
viders may be volunteers from your communities and/or salaried workers paid from OSAF or 
other funding sources. 

17. Employment Status: How many of the individuals who provide services of your preven- 
tion program fall in the categories below? 

Full-time paid staff •> Part-time paid staff ■ TOTAL 

Full-time volunteers + Part-time volunteers ■ TOTAL 



79 

100 



18. Sex and Age: How many of the individuals who provide services for your prevention 
program (both paid and volunteer providers) fall in the categories below? 

Male Female 

Adolescents (13-19 yrs old) 

Young adults (20-35 yrs old) 

Middle-age adults (36-55 yrs old) 

Elders (56 yra or older) 

+ - Total 



19. Educational Characteristics: How many of the paid providers have achieved the 
following levels of formal education? 

High school or less 

„ College, partial or AA 

College, BA/BS/BSW 

Graduate School, MA/MS/MSW 

Graduate School, MD/PHD/EDD 

Specialized training (please specify) 



20. Ethnicity: How many of your providers identify with the following ethnic categories? 
Paid Volunteer 

. American Indian/Alaska Native 

Other Minority Non-Indian, (Black, Asian, Hispanic) 

Non-Ind*an 

Totals 



80 101 



HI. DESCRIPTION OF SPECIFIC PROJECT STRATEGIES 



WHEREAS, YOUR ANSWERS TO THE PREVIOUS SECTION DEALT WITH "WHO, 
WHEN & WHERE" QUESTIONS, THE FOLLOWING SECTION FOCUSES ON "WHAT 
AND HOW* QUESTIONS. SPECIFICALLY, WHAT ARE YOUR INTERVENTIONS AND 
HOW CAN WE BETTER UNDERSTAND HOW YOU DEVELOPED THOSE PARTICULAR 
ACTIVITIES FOR YOUR COMMUNITIES? 



21. Family Involvement. To what extent is your project designed to involve families? 
Please circle the number over the phrase that best describes that involvement. 



1 2 3 4 5 

No Some Moderate Great Exclusive 

Involvement Involvement Involvement Involvement Involvement 

Please give examples: 



22. Community Involvement. To what extent is your project designed to involve "the 
community"? Please circle the number over the phrase that best describes your project's 
involvement with community system . 

1 2 3 4 5 

No Some Moderate Great Exclusive 

Involvement Involvement Involvement Involvement Involvement 

Please give examples: 



23. Cultural Involvement. To what extent is your project designed to involve aspects of 
Indian/Native culture? Please circle the number above the phrase that best describes 
your involvement with Indian and Native culture. 



1 2 3 4 5 

Avery A little Some A great A very great 

little extent extent extent extent 
extent 



Please give examples: 



9 

ERIC 



81 

102 



Type of Intervention That Is School-Based: Check all that apply to your project. 

[ ] No school-based intervention 

[ ] Referral for counseling/psychotherapy 

[ ] Individual counseling/psychotherapy 

[ ] Group counaeUng/psychotherapy 

[ ] Self-help groups (e.g., AA, ALATEEN, etc.) 

[ ] Social action groups (e.g., Students Against Drunk Driving) 

[ ] Special register (e.g., suicide register) 

[ ] Education/training using established curriculum (e.g., Here's Looking at 
You, Sacred Tree, driver education, etc.) 

[ ] Education/training not using established curriculum (e.g., special topic 
workshops, lectures, etc.) 

[ ] Legal intervention (e.g., banning sale of glue to minors) 

[ ] Recreational activities (e.g., Outward Bound, Run For Sobriety, etc.) 

[ ] Cultural activities (e.g., spirit camp) 

[ ] Special facility (e.g., medical holding room; foster care; detox center, shelter) 

[ ] Case/program consultation 

[ ] Other (Specify): 



Type of Intervention That Is Community-Based: Check all that apply to your 
project. 

[ ] No community-based intervention 

[ ] Referral for cxjunseling/psychotherapy 

[ ] Individual counseling/psychotherapy 

[ ] Group counseling/psychotherapy 

[ ] Self-help groups (e.g., AA,ALANON, etc.) 

[ ] Social action groups (e.g., Mothers Against Drunk Driving) 

[ ] Special register (e.g., suicide register) 

[ ] Education/training using established curriculum (t g., Chemical People, 
Sacred Tree, driver education, etc.) 

[ ] Education/training not using established curriculum (e.g., special topic 
workshops, lectures, etc.) 

[ 1 Legal intervention (e.g., banning sale of glue to minors) 

[ ) Recreational activities (e.g., Outward Bound, Run For Sobriety, etc.) 

[ ] Cultural activities (e.g., spirit camp) 

[ 1 Special facility (e.g., medical holding room; foster care; detox center, shelter) 

[ ] Case/program consultation 

[ ] Other (Specify): 



82 

1C3 



20. Type* of Curriculum Used: From the following list of commonly used curriculum in 
sc hool s and communities, ptesse chock these which Are in use by your project. 



[ ] BEGINNING ALCOHOL AND ADDICTIONS BASIC EDUCATION 
STUDIES (BABES): 

Number of sessions 

_____ Number of participants 



Frequency: Weekly 

Bi-monthly 

Monthly 

Other 

Has this curriculum been modified in any way for your target 
population? [ ] YES [ ] NO 

If yes, please describe the modification: 



b. [ ] PROJECT CHARLIE: 

Number of sessions 

Number ot participants 

Frequency: Weekly 

Bi-monthly 

Monthly 

Other 

Has this curriculum been modified in any way for your target 
population? [ ] YES [ ] NO 

If yes, please describe the modification: 



c. [ ] DARE TO BE YCU: 



Number of sessions 
Number of participants 



Frequency: Weekly 

Bi-monthly 

Monthly 

Other 

Has this curriculum been modified in any way for your target 
population? [ ] YES [ ] NO 

If yes, please describe the modification: 



ERLC 



83 

104 



HERE'S LOOKING AT YOU, 2000: 



, Number of sessions 
. Number of participants 



Frequency: Weekly 

Bi-monthly 

Monthly 

Other 

Has this curriculum been modified in any way for your target 
population? [ ] YES [ ] NO 

If yes, please describe the modification: 



TESTING REALITIES AND INVESTIGATING LIFE STYLE.? < TRAILS): 

Number of sessions 

Number of participants 

Frequency: Weekly 

Bi-montbJy 

Monthly 

Other 

Has this curriculum been modified in any way for your target 
population? [ ] YES [ ] NO 

If yes, please describe the modification: 



CHEMICAL PEOP1JE: 



. Number of sessions 
. Number of participants 



Frequency: Weekly 

Bi-monthly 

Monthly 

Other 

Has this curriculum been modified in any way for your target 
population? [ ] YES [ ] NO 

If yes, please describe the modification: 



84 

105 



g. [] CIRCLE OF LIFE (MICHIGAN): 

Number of sessions 

Number of participants 

Frequency: Weekly 

Bi-monthly 

Monthly 

Other 

Has this curriculum been modified in any way for your target 
population? [ ] YES [ ] NO 

If yes, please describe the modification: 



h. [ ] CHILDREN ARE PEOPLE, INC.: 

Number of sessions 

Number of participants 

Frequency: Weekly 

Bi-monthly 

Monthly 

Other 

Has this curriculum been modified in any way for your target 
population? [ ] YES [ ] NO 

If yes, please describe the modification: 



[ ] PARENT EFFECTIVENESS TRAINING: 

Number of sessions 

Number of participants 

Frequency: Weekly 

Bi-monthly 

Monthly 

Other 

Has this curriculum been modified in any way for your target 
population? [ ] YES [ ] NO 

If yes, please describe the modification: 



ERIC 



85 



106 



j. [ ] POSITIVE INDIAN PARENTING: HONORING OUR CHILDREN BY 
HONORING OUR TRADITIONS: 

____ N umber of sessions 
Number of participants 

Frequency: Weekly 

Bi-monthly 

Monthly 

Other 

Has this curriculum been modified in any way for your target 
population? [ ] YES [ ] NO 

If yes, please describe the modification: 



k. [ J WALKING WITH GRANDFATHER AND GREAT WOLF AND LITTLE 
MOUSE SISTER (POUR WORLDS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT): 

Number of sessions 

Number of participants 

Frequency: Weekly 

Bi-monthly 

Montuly 

Other 

Has this curriculum been modified in any way for your target 
population? [ ] YES [ ] NO 

If yes, please describe the modification: 



L [ 1 THE SACRED TREE (FOUR WORLDS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT): 

Number of sessions 

Number of participants 

Frequency: Weekly 

Bi-monthly 

Monthly 

Other 

Has this curriculum been modified in any way for your target 
population? [ ] YES [ ] NO 

If yes, please describe the modification: 



9 

ERIC 



86 

107 



m. [ ) OTHER (PLEASE SPECIFY): 



Number of sessions 

Number of participants 

Frequency: WBekly 

Bi-monthly 

Monthly 

Other 

Has this curriculum been modified in any way for your target 
population? [ ) YES [ ] NO 

If yes, please describe the modification: 



n. [ ] OTHER (PLEASE SPECIFY): 

Nu mber of sessions 

Number of participants 

Frequency: Waekty 

Bi-monthly 

Monthly 

Other 

Has this curriculum been modified in any way for your target 
population? [ ] YES [ ] NO 

If yes, please describe the modification: 



o 

ERIC 



87 

108 



TO ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE AND MANAGEMENT 



IN THIS SECTION, WE WOULD LIKE TO KNOW WHO ASSISTED YOU IN THE FOUR 
STAGES OF DEVELOPING YOUR PROJECT: THE PLANNING STAGE. THE 



— ' — ******** Tf « rumy ill AIMnw A£L/ LPIDUUVC^UTiU' WHU X viUK 

COMMUNITIES COULD HAVE BEEN A PARTICIPANT; WHO SHOULD HAVE BEEN A 
PARTICIPANT; AND WHO ACTUALLY PARTICIPATED IN THE STAGES. IN ADDITION 
WE WOULD LIKE TO KNOW HOW YOUR PROJECT IS ORGANIZED AND MANAGED. ' 

27. Planning Stage; We want you to focus on the planning stage of your project. 

a. Length of Planning Stags: Since the inception of your project, how many months 
have you spent in pinning activities? 

Months 

b. Participants in Planning Stage: For each possible representat: ve below, please circle 
the one (1) if that representative could have been available (i.e., the representative is 
available in your community to be involved in this stage). 

Circle two (2) it' the representative should have been involved (i.e., the representative 
is available in your community but for some reason or another was not a participant 
in this stage). 

Circle three (3) if that representative was actually involve! lie, the representative is 
available in your community and did participate). 



Could have 
been 
involved 



Representatives from: 

—Substance Abuse Program 
-—Mental Health Program 
-Social Services Program (i.e., ICW) 
—Medical Clinic or Hospital 
-Schools (Head Start-High School) 
— Collegea/Universitier 
—Johnson O'Malley Program 
—Job Corps 

—Parent Groups (i.e., PTA) 
— Self-Help Group (AA, etc.) 
— Courts 
— Churches 
—Tribal Council 
—City Council 
— County Government 
—State Government 
-Adolescent Population 
—Adult Population 
—Elder Population 
—Vocational Rehabilitation 



Should have 
been 
involved 



2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 



Actually 

was 
involved 



3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 



ICQ 



c. 



For those situations above in which a representative from a community sector was 
available but not involved, (should have been involved), please state why. 



28. Outreach/Recruitment Stage: Please think about the period in which your goal was to 
identify and attract potential project participants from your target population. 

a. Length of Outreach/Recruitment Stage: Since the inception of your project, how 
many months have you spent in outreach and recruitment activities? 

Months 

b. Participants in Outreach/Recruitment Stage: For each possible representative below, 
please circle the one (1) if that representative could have been available (i.e., the 
representative is available in your community to be involved in this stage). 

Circle two (2) if the representative should have been involved (i.e., the representative 
is available in your community but for some reason or another, was not a participant 
in this stage). 

Circle three (3) if that representative was actually involved (i.e., the representative is 
available in your community and did participate). 

Could have Should have Actually 
been been was 

involved involved involved 



Representatives from: 



— Substance Abuse Program 1 


2 


3 


— Mental Health Program 1 


2 


3 


—Social Services Program oe., ICW) 1 


2 


3 


—Medical Clinic or Hospital 1 


2 


3 


—Schools (Head Start-High School) 1 


2 


3 


— CoUegesAJniversities 1 


2 


3 


—Johnson O'Malley Program 1 


2 


3 


—Job Corps 1 


2 


3 


— Parer-t Groups (i.e., PTA) 1 


2 


3 


—Self-Help Group (AA, etc.) 1 


2 


3 


—Courts 1 


2 


3 


— Churche*! 1 


2 


3 


—Tribal Council 1 


2 


3 


—City Council 1 


2 


3 


— County Government 1 


2 


3 


— State Government 1 


2 


3 


— Adolescent Population 1 


2 


3 


— Adult Population 1 


2 


3 


—Elder Population 1 


2 


3 


— Vocational Rehabilitation 1 


2 


3 



c. For those situations above in which a representative from a community sector was 
available but not involved, (should have been involved), please state why. 



9 

ERIC 



80 

I 110 



29. Project Implementation Stage: Please think about the implementing period of your 
project in which representatives from your community organizations were involved. 

a. Length of Project Implementation Stage: Since the inception of your project, how 
many months have you spent in implementing the project's prevention activities? 

Months 

b. Participants in Implementation Stage: For each possible representative below, please 
circle the one (1) if that representative could have been available (i.e., the representa- 
tive is available in your community to be involved in this stage). 

Circle two (2) if the representative should have been involved (i.e., the representative 
is available in your community but for some reason or another, was not a participant 
in this stage). 

Circle three (3) if that representative was actually involved (i.e., the representative is 
available in your community and did participate). 



Could have 

been 
'nvolved 



Should have 
been 
involved 



Actually 

was 
involved 



Representatives from: 



—Substance Abuse Program 
— Mental Health Program 
—Social Services Program (i.e., ICW) 
—Medical Clinic or Hospital 
—Schools (Head Start-High School) 
— Colleges/Universities 
—Johnson O'Mailey Program 
— Job Corps 

—Parent Groups (i.e., PTA) 
— Self-Help Group (AA, etc.) 



2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 



3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 



— Courts 

— Churches 

—Tribal Council 

— City Council 

— County Government 

— State Government 

—Adolescent Population 



—Adult Population 
— Elder Population 
—Vocational Rehabilitation 



c. For those situations above in which a representative from a community sector was 
available but not involved, (should have been involved), please state why. 



90 

111 



30. Evaluation Stage: Please think about the period in which representatives from your 
community were involved with this stage. 

a* Length of Evaluation Stage: Since the inception of your project, how many months 
have you spent in evaluation activities? 
Months 

b. Participants in Evaluation Stage: For each possible representative below; please circle 
the one (1) if that representative oould have been available (i.e., the representative is 
available in your community to be involved in this stage). 

Circle two (2) if the representative should have been involved (i.e., the representative 
is available in your community but for some reason or another was not participant in 
this stage). 

Circle three (3) if that representative was actually involved (i.e., the representative ia 
available in your community and did participate). 

Could have Should have Actually 
been been was 

involved involved involved 



Representatives from: 



— Substance Abuse Program 1 


2 


3 


— Mental Health Program 1 


2 


3 


— Social Services Program (i.e., ICW) 1 


2 


3 


—Medical Clinic or Hospital 1 


2 


3 


—Schools (Head Start-High School) 1 


2 


3 


— Colleges/Universities 1 


2 


3 


— Johnson O'Malley Program 1 


2 


3 


—Job Corps 1 


2 


3 


—Parent Groups (i.e., PTA) 1 


2 


3 


— Self-Help Group (AA, etc.) 1 


2 


3 


— Courts I 


2 


3 


— Churches 1 


2 


3 


—Tribal Council 1 


2 


3 


— City Council 1 


2 


3 


—Vocational Rehabilitation 1 


2 


3 


— Couaty Government 1 


2 


3 


— State Government 1 


2 


3 


— Adolescent Population 1 


2 


3 


—Adult Population 1 


2 


3 


— Elder Population 1 


2 


3 


— Vocational Rehabilitation 1 


2 


3 



c. For those situations above in which a representative from a community sector was 
available but not involved, (should have been involved), please state why 



91 

erIc 112 



31. Administrative Characteristics of Project: How true are the following statements 
about the administrative aspects of your project? Using the scale below, please circle the 
number to the right of each statement that best describes your belief. 



1 

Not 
Descriptive 
At AU 



Somewhat 
Descriptive 



Moderately 
Descriptive 



4 
Very 
Descriptive 



6 

Perfectly 
Descriptive 



—The cost of our project is understood. 

— Materials needed to perform the job are 
available. 

—Clearly stated goals and objectives for the 
program are available 

—Action plans needed to meet the objectives are 
understood and followed. 

—The amount of work each person must do to 
meet schedule is understood by all the 
people in our project. 

—The layout or arrangement of our office or 
work space helps us to get our job done. 

—Support people such as secretaries, 
receptionists, and supply clerks help us 
get the job done. 

—Changes in methods of doing the job are 
madeeffecUveJy. 

—Everyone helps set goals for the project. 

—Employees have plenty of freedom on the 
job to use their own judgement. 

—Outstanding performers are given special 
recognition for their contributions. 

—Achievement is a source of individual 
gratification. Results are attained because 
people are committed to getting them, not 
because they are pushed. 

— Outstanding performers are usually given the 
opportunity to handle more responsible jobs. 

—Supervisors feel a responsibility to 
help individuals develop and grow 
with the organization. 

—Employees know how their work fits in 
with other functions to at win the overall 
project objectives. 

— Outstanding performers are recognized by 
levels above their immediate bosses, 
because supervisors keep their superiors 
fully informed of key contributors. 



2 
2 

2 

2 



2 

2 

2 
2 



3 
3 

3 

3 



3 

3 

3 

3 
3 



4 
4 

4 

4 



4 

4 

4 
4 

4 



5 
5 

5 

5 



5 

5 
5 

5 

5 

5 



3 4 



3 4 



3 4 



3 4 5 



3 4 5 



9 

ERIC 



92 



113 



Organizational and Performance Characteristics: 



SSL Leadership Processes Used: What follovre are characteristics describing how a project 
can be organized and managed. For each net of characteristics, please circle the number 
above the statement that best describee how your organization operates. 

a. Extent to which supervisors have confidence and trust in staff. 



1 

Extent to which 
you have trust 
in staff 



2 

Extent to which 
you have conde- 
scending confi- 
dence & trust 
such as master 
has to servant 



3 

Extent to which 
you have substan- 
tial but not com- 
plete confidence 
& trust; still 
wishes to keep 
control of decisions 



4 

Extent to which 
you have complete 
confidence & 
trust in all 
matters 



b. Extent to which immediate supervisor in solving job problems generally tries to get 
staff ideas and opinions and make constructive use of them. 



1 

You seldom get 
ideas & opinions 
from staff 
in solving 
job problems 



2 

You sometimes 
get ideas & opin- 
ions firomstaff 
in solving job 
problems 



3 

You usually gst 
ideas & opinions 
and usually tiy 
to make construc- 
tive use of them 



4 

You always gat 
ideas & opinions 
and always try 
to make con- 
tiveuseof them 



33. Character of Motivational Forces: 
a. Manner in which motives are used. 



Fears, threats, 
punishment, & 
occasional 
rewards 



Rewards & some 
actual or poten- 
tial punishment 



3 

Rewards, 
occasional pun- 
ishment, & some 
involvement 



Economic rewards 
based on compen- 
sation system 
developed through 
participation; 
group partici- 
pation & involve- 
ment in setting 
goals, improving 
methods, 
appraising 
progress toward 
goals, etc. 



9 

ERLC 



93 

114 



b. Amount of responsibility felt by each member of project for achieving project's goals. 



High levels of 
management fed 
less; rank and 
file feel little 
and often wel- 
come opportunity 
to behave in ways 
defeat organ- 
ization's goals 



Managerial 
personnel usually 
feel responsi- 
bility; rank 
and file usually 
feel relatively 
little responsibility 
for achieving 
organization's 
goals 



3 

Substantial pro- 
portion of person- 
nel, especially 
at high levels, 
feel responsibil- 
ity and generally 
behave in ways to 
achieve the organ- 
ization's goals 



Personnel at 
all levels 
feel real 
responsibility 
for organiza- 
tion's goals 
and behave 
in way to im- 
plement them 



34. Character of Communication Process: 



a. 



Direction of information flow. In this section we would like to know how information 
and communication is processed. 



Downward 



Mostly 
Downward 



Down & up 



4 

Down, up, & 
with peers 



b. Extent to which downward communications are accepted by staff 



Viewed with great 
suspicion 



May or may not 
viewed with sus- 
picion 



Often accepted but 
at times view with 
suspicion; may or 
or may not be 
openly questioned 



Generally accepted, 
but if not, openly 
and candidly ques- 
tioned 



c. Accuracy of upward communication from project staff to you. 



1 

lends to be 
inaccurate 



Information that 
boas wants to 
hear flows; other 
information is 
restricted 
and filtered 



3 

Information that 
boss wants to hear 
flows; other in- 
formation may be 
limited or cau- 
tiously given 



4 

Accurate 



ERIC 



04 



d. Psychological closeness of supervisors to staff (e.g., How well do you know and 
understand problems faced by project staff?) 



Has no knowledge 
or understanding 
of problems of 
staff 



Has some know- 
ledge and un- 
derstanding of 
problems of staff 



3 

Knows and under- 
stands problems 
of staff quite 
staff 



Knows and un- 
derstands pro- 
blems of staff 
very well 



35. Character of Interaction-Influence Process: 
a. Amount of cooperative teamwork present. 



None 



2 

Relatively 
little 



A moderate 
amount 



Very substantial 
amount through- 
out the 
organization 



36. Character of Decision-Making Process: 

a. At what level in project organization are decisions formally made? 



Bulk of 
decisions 
at top of 
organization 



2 

Policy at 
top, many 
decisions 
within pre* 
scribed frame- 
work made at 
lower levels 



3 

Broad policy 
and general 
decisions at 
top, more 
specific deci- 
sions at lower 
levels 



Decision mak- 
ing widely done 
throughout or* 
ganization, 
although well 
integrated 
through link- 
ing process 
provided over- 
lapping group 



b. To what extent are decision makers aware of problems, particularly those at lower 
levels in the project organization? 



Often are 
unaware or 
partially 
aware 



2 

Aware of some, 
unaware of 
others 



Moderately 
aware of 
problems 



Generally quite 
well aware of 
problems 



ERLC 



95 

116 



c. lb what extent are staff involved in decisions related to their work? 



Not at all 



2 

Never involved 
in decisions; 
occasionally 
consulted 



3 

Usually are 
consulted but 
ordinarily not 
involved in 
the decision making 



Are involved 
fully in all 
decisions re- 
lated to their 
work 



Character of Goal Setting or Ordering: 
a. Manner in which usually done 



1 

Orders issued 



2 

Orders issued, 
opportunity to 
comment may or 
may not exist 



3 

Goals are set 
or orders issu- 
ed after dis- 
cussion with 
staff of pro- 
blems and plan- 
ned action 



4 

Except in emer- 
gencies, goals 
are usually 

established by 
means of group 
participation 



b. Are there forces to accept, resist, or reject goals? 



1 

Goals are 
overtly accepted 
but are covertly 
resisted strongly 



2 

Goals are 
overtly accept- 
ed but often cov- 
ertly resisted to 
at least a moder- 
ate degree 



3 

Goals are overt- 
ly accepted but 
at times with 
some covert resis- 
tance 



4 

Goals are fully 
accepted both 
overtly and 
and covertly 



Characteristics of Control Prooees: 



a. Extent to which the review and control functions are concentrated. 



1 

Highly con- 
centrated in 
top management 



2 

Relatively highly 
concentrated, with 
some 

control to middle 
and lower levels 



3 

Moderate down- 
ward delegation 
of review and 
and control 
processes; low- 
er as wallas 
higher levels 
feel responsible 



4 

Quite widespread 
responsibility for 
review and control, 
with lower units at 
times imposing 
more rigorous 
reviews end tighter 
controls than 
top management 



96 

1 



17 



b. Extant to which there is an informal organization present and supporting or oppos- 
ing goals of formal organization* 



Informal organi- 
zation preaent 
and opposing 
goals of formal 
organization 



2 

Informal 
organisation 
usually present 
and partially 
resisting goals 



3 

Informal organi- 
zation may 
be present and 
may either support 
or partially resist 
goals of formal 
organization 



Informal and 
formal organi- 
zation are one 
and the same; 
hence all social 
forces support 
efforts to achieve 
organization's 
goals 



97 118 



V. PROJECT EVALUATION 



IN THIS SECTION WE WILL BE ASKING YOU TO ASSESS YOUR PROJECT'S 
EFFECTIVENESS AT THIS POINT IN TIME. ADDITIONALLY, WE WOULD LIKE YOU 
TO INFORM US ABOUT THE BARRIERS THAT HAVE COME UP DURING YOUR 
PROJECTS LIFETIME AND TO LEARN YOUR IDEAS ABOUT HOW TO IMPROVE 
YOUR PROJECT'S IMPACT IN THE COMMUNITIES. LASTLY, WE ARE INTERESTED 
IN KNOWING HOW YOU MEASURE CLIENT AND PROJECT OUTCOMES. 



39. Project Effectiveness: On a scale of 1 to 7, ranging from not effective to extremely 
effective, circle the number that best describes how successful you believe your project to 
be. 



1 

Not 
Effective 



Moderately 
Effective 



Extremely 
Effective 



40. Barriers to Project Success: Please think about the factors that may serve as barriers 
to your project's success. Circle the number to the right of each statement that best 
describes to what degree that factor is serving as a barrier in your intervention project. 



3 



client's family: 



Not a Minor 
Factor Factor 


Moderate 
Factor 




Large 
Factor 


—Rivalry between tribes targeted for services: 


1 2 


3 


4 


— Political leadership is non-supportive and/or 


1 2 


3 


4 


is negative: 








— Political interference: 


1 2 


3 


4 


—More time is needed to educate key community 


1 2 


3 


4 


leaders: 








— Insufficient funds: 


1 2 


3 


4 


— Difficulty in employing qualified providers: 


1 2 


3 


4 


—Difficulty in employing qualified American 


1 2 


3 


4 


Indian/Alaska Native providers. 








—Disorganization in project's host agency: 


1 2 


3 


4 


—Personnel conflicts: 


1 2 


3 


4 


— Little or no community support: 


1 2 


3 


4 


— Laws that hinder prevention or treatment: 


1 2 


3 


4 


—Poor communication throughout project 


1 2 


3 


4 


and/or host agency: 








—Input from staff is not encouraged: 


J 2 


3 


4 


—Little or no support or positive feedback 


1 2 


3 


4 


from management: 








—Philosophy of project is unclear: 


1 2 


3 


4 


— Poor training: 


1 2 


3 


4 


—Little or no involvement with 


1 2 


3 


4 



98 



9 

ERIC 



119 



1 2 


o 




4 
4 








1 i hi i > i 

LmTgB 




r actor 




rector 


— Little or no support from client's familv: 


1 2 


3 


4 


—Physical totting not adequate or 








appropriate: 


1 2 


3 


4 


— Racial tension between Indians and 








non-Indians: 


1 2 


3 




— Other (please specify): 










1 2 
1 2 


3 
3 





41. Ways to Improve Project: How important do you believe the following actions would 
be to improving your project? Please circle the number at the right of each statement 
that bast describes how important you believe that action is in improving your project 



1 2 3 4 5 

Not Somewhat Moderately Greatly All 

Important Important Important Important Important 



•Implement better working relationship with 



client's family: 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


— Implement better working 
relationship with the community: 




2 


3 


4 


5 


— Organize fundraisers, (i.e. raffles, etc.): 




2 


3 


4 


5 


— Improve the relationship between tribes 
targeted for services: 




2 


3 


4 


5 


—Improve training plan for providers of 
service: 




2 


3 


4 


5 


— Provide sufficient time to explain project's 
philosophy to project staff: 




2 


3 


4 


5 


—Provide sufficient time to explain project's 
philosophy to community: 




2 


3 


4 


5 


—Broaden employee search to a wider area, 
i.e regional or national: 




2 


3 


4 


5 


—Organize extracurricular events for staff, 
i.e. teambuilding: 




2 


3 


4 


5 


— Influence legislators to prohibit drinking 
on reservation/catchment area: 




2 


3 


4 


5 


—Influence legislators to allow drinking on 
reservation: 




2 


3 


4 


5 


—Influence legislators to increase drinking 
age to 21: 




2 


3 


4 


5 


— Broaden key community leader's knowledge 
of project services: 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 



09 

ERIC 120 



1 2 3 4 5 

Not Somewhat Moderately Greatly All 

Important Important Important Important Important 



—Implement program to improve relationships 1 2 3 4 5 

among staff: 

—Implement special program to support 
open communication across all 1 2 3 4 5 

levels of project operations: 

— Create a job training program for clients: 1 2 3 4 5 

—Other (please specify): 

1 2 3 4 5 

1 2 3 4 5 



42. Project Evaluation Designs: Please mark the design that best fits your evaluation 
plan from the choices below: 

a. Does your evaluation plan include: 

[ ] process evaluation only? (Process evaluation is a thorough description of 
the various aspects of a project: the target population, the personnel 
operating the project, the services delivered, and the utilization of resour- 
ces for project components.) 

[ ] outcome evaluation only? (Outcome evaluation is an attempt to determ- 
ine if the project has met its objectives in producing changes in per- 
ceptions, attitudes, behaviors, or other effectiveness indicators among its 
targeted client group.) 

[ ] both process and outcome evaluation? 
[ ] no evaluation plan? 

b. Does your evaluation plan require: 

[ ] qualitative measures? (These are measures which reflect subjective value 
judgements about the nature of the intervention, i.e., a client reports 
that the intervention was "usefiil and fun".) 

[ ] quantitative measures? (These are measures which reflect numerical 
valuations about the nature of the intervention, i.e., the number of high 
school graduates.) 

[ ] both qualitative and quantitative measures? 
[ ] no evaluation measures? 

c. Does your evaluation plan require: 

[ ] evaluation by individual(s) from within your host agency? 

[ ] evaluation by individual^) from outside of your host agency? 

[ ] evaluation by individuals from both within and outside of your host 
agency? 

[ ] no evaluation plan? 

100 121 



43* Client Outcome Measures: How do you measure a client's successful completion of 
your project? From the following list of client outcome measures, please check those that 
are utilized in your project evaluation* 

a* Changes in These Behaviors: 
Academic progress 

Fewer instances of acting out in school 
Less negative perceptions of school environment 
Interest in completing high school 
Interest in pursuing higher education 
Ability to form longer short term goals 
Gain in sense of personal control 

Reduction of depression, anxiety feai; and fadings of inadequacy 
Improved self-perception 
Client feeling of ownership from community 
Positive peer interaction 
Positive family interaction 
Takes more attention to self-appearance 
Improved weight gain or weight loss 
Improved eating habits 
Overall health improvements 
Developed ways of spending time in a positive manner 
Acquired job skills 
Acquired skills to be a peer leader 
Acquired skills to develop mutual-help and self-help groups 
Reduced alcohol use 
Reduced alcohol abuse 

Other (specify): 

b. Changes in These Areas of Knowledge: 

History of substance abuse among American Indians/Alaska Natives 
Physical and emotional effects of alcohol/other substances 
Self-awareness and culture identity issues 
Values and attitude clarification 
Peer pressure and decision making 
Effective communication 
Family bonding and enrichment 
Risks to children of alcoholics 
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome prevention 
Effective parenting 
Awareness of community resources 
Single parenting activities 

Other (specify): 



101 



44. Project Outcome Measure*: How do you measure the overall outcome? of your project? 
From the following list, please check those project outcome measure* tliat are utilized by 
your project. 



[ ] Number of clients that satisfactorily complete project 

[ ] Number of clients that unsatisfactorily complete project 

[ ] Good working relationship with staff and client 

[ ] Client not back in the juvenile system 

[ ] Project developed good relationahip with client's family 

[ ] Good follow up project instituted 

[ ] Quick recovery time for client 

[ ] Creation of health promotion/disease prevention activities 

[ ] Increased participation in outreach projects 

[ ] Conducted workshops/training for community 

[ ] Reduced truancy 

[ ] Inc rea sed echoed attendance 

[ ] Decreased disciplinary problems 

[ ] Increased number of high ffchool graduates 

[ ] Reduced fetal alcohol syndrome/effects 

[ ] Reduced alcohol/substance abuse 

Reduced alcohol/s ubstanc e abuse related: 

I ] Accidents 

[ ] Arrests 

[ ] Family violence 

[ ] Child abuse/neglect 

[ ] Teen-age pregnancy 

[ ] Cirrhosis 

I ] Acute episodes of hospital/clinic admission 
[ ] Homicide 
[ ] Suicide 
[ ] Trauma 
[ ] Other: 

45* Person to contact for more information about program: 

Name(a) 

Titles) 

Mailing address 

Phone( ) 



THANK YOU FOR YOUR PARTICIPATION!! 



102 

123 

ERIC 



